Rating: 5/5

This 1982 book was stunning to me, the compelling way Galeano distills some turning points in Latin American history into visions and vignettes that march through pre-Columbian creation myths and the decades from the end of the 15th century to 1700. Two other volumes apply the same treatment from then up to modern times. Wikipedia tells me that Galeano, who died in 2015, was a leftist Uruguayan journalist and essayist who is respected for his 1971 historical critique of colonialism, “Open Veins of Latin America: Five Centuries of the Pillage of a Continent,” and that he wrote the Memory of Fire trilogy while he was in exile from the dictatorship of his country and that in Argentina. It’s not a casual read, but you can take it slow, piece by piece, and then see if, like me, you get captivated by its haunting, beguiling, and ever charming succession of 2-3 page pieces. In one way it is a compressed history, footnotes and all, but the way it is written makes it like a cornucopia, collage, or mosaic that includes: myths, tableaus like dioramas or time-machine windows; dramatic slices of lives of the invaders and colonizers, the natives they subjugated and the African slaves they imported to work in plantations and mines. It mostly sticks with the Spanish, but embraces comparable looks at stages in the Portuguese subjugation of Brazil and the British in North America.

Amid all the stereotypes of greed and violence among the conquerors and the abuses of slavery and economic repression of the peasants for agriculture and mining by the colonizers, other stories wend their way into the book with a much more hopeful outlook on the humaneness of humanity and hope for the future. Stories of conquistadors who meet a just fate or “go native.” Saints, priests, nuns, and missionaries who address the injustice in various ways, many of whom courageously face a bad fate with the Inquisition. Other stories delve into the lives of escaped slaves and rebels who find significant periods of freedom in the jungles or mountains. Still other stories tell of the power of love to cross boundaries of race and culture and inspire collaboration against tyranny. Despite the vivid, short declarative sentences Galeano wields, his narration brims with lyricism and elegance, showing that paradox of richness in spareness that a few other great writers have mastered.

We get the stories of the first encounters of conquerors like Cortes with the Aztecs and Pizarro with the Incas and follow up on the fateful outcomes. Cortes’ defeat of thousands by tricking his emperor host Monteczuma into believing he was a god and awing his opponents with armored horsemen and few cannons marks a seminal turning point for Central America. But what is the outcome in historical imagination of Malinche, the Aztec girl stolen by a Mayan chief in her childhood and given as a bribe to Cortes? Cortes made her his translator for his subterfuge with the Aztecs and then his woman, always loyal at his side for four years of conquests:
One glance from her black eyes is enough for a prince to hang on the gallows. Long after her death, her shadow will hover over the great Tenochtitlan [Mexico City] that she did so much to defeat and humiliate, and her ghost with the long loose hair and billowing robe will continue striking fear for ever and ever, from the woods and caves of Chapultepec.
 
Cortes and Malinche at the point of bamboozling Monteczuma.

As another example of special side stories in the arc of Latin American history, Galeano provides us the 17th century tale of Juana Inés through several segments on her at different ages. We get a window on a bastard mestizo girl of Mexico who gets a rare education through a kind grandfather and becomes a poet. She earns a placement in the court of the Spanish Viceroy, only to get in trouble by becoming the lover of his wife and offend the Catholic church with her feminist intellectual audacity. She escapes by becoming a nun, but still the local bishop brings the Inquisition down on her for seeing her own poetry and ideas as gifts from God. Despite the attempts to cut off her book supply and suppress her writing, she secretly defies them. Netflix sponsored a wonderful Mexican mini-series on her life in 2015 . In one of Galeano’s vignettes her Mother Superior mocks her attempt to study nature through cooking in her decade of assignment to the kitchen as the keeper of "The Royal and Pontifical University of Pancakes! The frying-pan campus!" She rises to the occasion: 

"If Aristotle had cooked, he would have written much more. That makes you laugh, does it? Well, laugh if it pleases you. Men feel themselves to be very wise, just by being men. Christ too was crowned with thorns as King of Jests."
"Really, my daughter, you scandalize God with your vociferous pride."
"My pride? (smiles sadly) I used that up long ago."

You can see from this example how challenging Galeano’s work is to classify. The author himself informs us in his preface:
I don’t know if it is a novel or essay or epic poem or testament or chronicle or …Deciding robs me of no sleep.
There is nothing neutral about this historical narration. Unable to distance myself, I take sides. …What is told here has happened, although I tell it in my style and manner.

Here he shares on his worthy purpose:
I was a wretched history student. History classes were like visits to the waxworks or the Region of the Dead. The past was lifeless, hollow, dumb. …
Perhaps “Memory of Fire” can help give her back breath, liberty, and the word.
I am a writer who would like to contribute to the rescue of kidnapped memory of all America, but above all of Latin America, that despised and beloved land: I would like to talk to her, share her secrets, ask her of what difficult clays she was born, from what acts of love and violation she comes.

For me Galeano’s coverage of a swath of significant events in Latin American history told in iconic compression was a valuable way to address my shameful ignorance. It is so daunting how many countries there are. I picked up some of a framework from Mann’s wonderful 1493 and some details from a nonfiction look at Paraguay and bits and pieces from historical fiction set in several countries. But the combined details are so sparse that my mind resorts to common themes in colonial history to represent the “truth” for all. One basic tale of European exploitation and decimation of peoples, the blending of races in time, the rise of local autonomy and revolt, the breakthrough to revolution and independence, all leading to home-grown dictators bred from the business oligarchy and the military (starting with Haiti in this volume). This book captures these themes while revealing significant variations, alternative paths of different peoples and tribes, sometimes horrific and sometimes inspiring. Through this book, individuals step on the stage with their unique stories, standing out before they blend into the background chorus. I agree with Goodreads member Adam who found that this book was like a cross between Howard Zinn and Borges, an artful kind of telling stories that stick in memory and clothe my skeletal knowledge. 

So many tribes of natives were wiped from the earth, often as much by diseases such as smallpox as from the invaders weapons. In Peru many of the Indians were worked to death in the vast silver mines of Potosi, a story that is well covered in “1493”. Here Galeano brings the situation to life in a few sentences:
On Monday mornings they are herded into the mountain and, chewing coca and beaten with iron bars, they pursue the veins of silver, greenish-white serpents that appear and take flight through the entrails of this immense paunch, no light, no air. There the Indians work all week, prisoners, breathing dust that kills the lungs, and chewing coca that deceives hunger and masks exhaustion, never knowing when night falls or day breaks, until Saturday ends and the bell rings for prayer and release.

A priest witnessing this scene complains:
“I don’t want to see this portion of hell.”
“So shut your eyes,” someone suggests.
“I can’t,” he says. “With my eyes shut I see more.”

Another man, Guaman Poma, spends decades on a 1,200 page letter to the king of Spain to stop the unjust exploitation, which never gets sent:
To write this letter is to weep….The Indians are the natural owners of this realm and the Spaniards, natives of Spain, are strangers in this realm. …Also, it is God’s punishment that many Indians die in mercury and silver mines. In all Peru, where there were a hundred not ten remain.

The voices of diverse native tribes are tapped in myth and song by Galeano, as here in this Incan war song:
We will drink from the skull of the traitor
And from his teeth a necklace make.
Of his bones we will make flutes,
Of his skin a drum.
Then we will dance.

Some flavor of the alternate mentality of certain tribes comes through when Galeano shares on their language:
The Guranos, who live in the suburbs of Earthly Paradise, call the rainbow snake of necklaces and the firmament overhead sea. Lightning is glow of the rain. One’s friend, my other heart. The soul, sun of the breast. The owl, lord of the dark night. A walking cane is a permanent grandson; and for “I forgive,” they say I forget.

Sometimes Galeano casts an historical scene into odd light by foreshadowing. In a chapter “The Chief’s Questions”, Chief Nicaragua in Central America tries in 1523 to comprehend the new masters from Spain:
Was the king elected by the elders of his community?
The chief also asks the conquistador to tell him for what purpose so few men want to much gold. Will their bodies be big enough for so much adornment?
Later he asks if it is true, as a prophet said, that the sun, stars, and moon will lose their light and the sky will fall?
Chief Nicaragua does not ask why no children will be born in these parts. No prophet has told him that within a few years the women will refuse to give birth to slaves.

Sometimes we get the pleasure of the conquerors meeting their just deserts. The story of one Pedro de Valdivia makes a great case. After a couple of years defeating the peoples of Chile and founding its capital with his lover Ines Suarez at his side (nicely portrayed in Allende’s novel “Inés of My Soul”), he realizes as a new governor he must end his relationship with her and send for his wife in Spain. Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned:
At dawn an undulating streak opens in the black mist and separates the earth from sky.
Ines, who has not slept, detaches herself from Valdivia’s embrace and leans on her elbow. …She feels for the dagger. She raises it. …The dagger hesitates in midair over the nude body.
Centuries pass.
Finally, Ines softly plunges the dagger into the pillow beside his face and moves away on tiptoe over the earth floor, leaving the bed woman-free.

Later we experience Valdivia trying to put down an armed rebellion by native Araucanians, during which his own trusted native page lays him low. He meets this fate as a captive:
The Araucanians open Vadivia’s mouth and fill it with dirt. They make him swallow dirt, handful after handful. They swell up his body with Chilean soil as they tell him: “You want gold? Eat gold. Stuff yourself with gold.”

Another lens Galeano sometimes plays with is that of history becoming legend. In the chapter, “The Poet Will Tell Children the Story of This Battle”, our window is of the conquistador Alvarado’s defeat of the tribal leader Tecum Uman in Guatemala as told to children of the future. 
He will relate that when the native troops had been destroyed, and when Guatemala was a slaughterhouse, Captain Tecum Uman rose into the air and flew with wings, and feathers sprouted from his body.
…The poet will point to the moving clouds and the sway of the treetops.
“See the lances?” he will ask. “See the horse’ hooves? The rain of arrows? The smoke? Listen,” he will say, and put his ear against the ground, filled with explosions.
And he will teach them to smell history in the wind, to touch it in stones, polished by the river, and to recognize its taste by chewing certain herbs, without hurry, as one chews on sadness.

Not all immigrants to Latin America are after exploitation of labor and riches. In the 16th century the bishop of Michoacán, Mexico, Vasco de Quiroga, established his version of the semi-communistic society propounded in Thomas More’s “Utopia”, one that blended European and native traditions to fulfill the ideal where “no one is master of anyone or anything and neither hunger nor money is known.” As a consequence,
..in times to come the Indians here will remember Vasco de Quiroga as their own—the dreamer who riveted his eyes on a hallucination to see beyond the time of infamy.

As a final example of the wonderful content to be found here, I share Galeano’s vision of a Catholic Inquisitor burning centuries of Mayan books in 1562. The tragedy of the loss is so eloquently rendered, and we come to understand how “The Memory of Fire” tries to fight the erasure of peoples and history:
Around the incinerator, heretics howl with their heads down. Hung by their feet, flayed with whips, Indians are doused with boiling wax as the fire flares up and the books snap, as if complaining.
With hog-bristle brushes, the knowers of things had painted these illuminated, illuminating books so that the grandchildren’s grandchildren should not be blind, should know how to see themselves and see the history of their folk, so that they should know the movements of stars, the frequency of eclipses and the prophesies of the gods and so they could call for rains and good corn harvests.
Meanwhile, the authors, artist-priests dead years or centuries ago, drink chocolate in the fresh shade of the first tree of the world. They are at peace, because they died knowing that memory cannot be burned. Will not what they painted be sung and danced through the times of the times?
When its little paper houses are burned, memory finds refuge in mouths that sing the glories of men and gods, songs that stay on from people to people and in bodies that dance to the sound of hollow trunks, tortoise shells, and reed flutes.

I sincerely thank Glenn Russell for guiding me to the genius of Galeano through his wonderful reviews.

 
Eduardo Galeano