Rating: 3/5

Nearly 50 years ago, in 1977, sisters Pam Young and Penny Jones were full-time harried homemakers with a combined six young kids, two frustrated husbands who apparently largely excused themselves from housework, and two chaotically messy homes. For a while, they tossed excuses between themselves of why they couldn't/didn't want to clean and organize, marveled at amazement and jealousy at their born-organized friends, wrote cringy poetry about their messiness, and kept getting sidetracked by seemingly everything decades before the dawn of the 24/7 news cycle and smartphones. One day, one of the sisters realized she could adapt a filing system from one her old jobs into a household management system, and voila, the sidetracked home executive system was born, leading to cries of joy that have resonated throughout the impeccably-polished marble halls of domesticity to modern-day tradwives and influencers who make tidiness part of their online brands.

I randomly stumbled on one such video a while ago and decided to track down the source material; I listened to an audiobook narration of the 2001 edition (apparently the last update), which extols the virtue of Lotus Notes for an online corollary to the traditional jumbo index card container version the sisters espouse. TL;DR: the system is basically Getting Things Done: The Art of Stress-Free Productivity for household management -- make a list of everything you need to do create a clean, well-maintained home that you don't already do as a force of habit, decide how often each task needs to be performed (daily, weekly, monthly, annually, etc.), realistically determine how long each task will take, and create a rolling weekly schedule and tickler file to automate when you will do each task simply by pulling that day's predetermined task list and getting to work. It's logical and forces you to break down unwieldy projects into discrete chunks that you can chip away at initially, then maintain more easily after that. Later chapters in the book delve into how to integrate children (but strangely not husbands) into the system, as well as a similarly systematic approach to go through your entire house and declutter room-by-room.

Obviously this book is quite dated, and has been followed by literally hundreds of home organization books that make similarly dated assumptions and take on attitudes of their eras. But I do think this is worth a read/listen for those with both needs and interests in this area. Despite being the primary household executive of my home (by default; I'm the only human present, and my attempts at charging my cats rent and sticking little sponges and swiffer pads on their paws have been unsuccessful, so they remain little freeloading messmakers), and being sidetracked by many things all the time (not the least of which is a full-time job and often unpredictable schedule), homemaking is neither an interest nor a passion of mine. Still, I work well with routines and habits, especially when I do them automatically at the same time each day/week and don't have to think about them. So for fellow creatures of habit, it may be worthwhile to brainstorm household projects, break them down into bite-sized chunks, and schedule/automate them in some capacity, either following this system, GTD, or whatever else works for you.

My statistics:
Book 321 for 2025
Book 2247 cumulatively