Rating: 2/5

The final entry in author Judith Kerr's trilogy of autobiographical novels exploring her family's experiences as German Jews before, during and after the Second World War - the first two were 
  When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit
 and 
  The Other Way Round
 - A Small Person Far Away is set in 1956, and follows Anna (a thinly disguised Judith) as she returns to Berlin to visit her mother, who had just attempted suicide. The events of the story occur over the course of a single week, with a chapter devoted to each day. As the Hungarian Revolution and the Suez Crisis unfold in the background, Anna must contend with the ghosts of the past, and the troubling after-effects of that most recent conflict, WWII. Her relationship with her mother is the focus here, although her brother Max, mother's boyfriend Konrad and husband Richard also feature, as does the memory of her father, who also committed suicide. The "small person far away," who is mentioned in the title, is Anna's childhood self, who occasionally surfaces in her memory, as she tries to make sense of what is going on with her deeply unhappy mother...

I was surprised to find, after enjoying the first two installments of this trilogy quite a bit, that A Small Person Far Away was so unappealing to me. It's not the darkness of the topic - after all, the prior books also dealt with some very serious realities - nor is it the greater maturity of feeling here, although I do think that this is not children's fiction, despite the marketing of the trilogy, and have changed my shelf designations accordingly. Rather, there is an unpleasant tone throughout, perhaps owing to the author's own conflicted feelings about her topic, that made for unpleasant reading. It's almost as if Anna (and through her Judith) is sneering at her own family's trauma. She refers to the events on a number of occasions as "corny," highlighting perhaps a sense of embarrassment at the fallibility (but also perhaps the normalcy?) of her loved ones. Perhaps being a family who quarrels over petty things, as so many families do, doesn't suit her sense of self as well as being a refugee? One feels so ordinary, while the other has more epic, historical implications. Or perhaps again, I am simply being unfair to Kerr and her character.

Whatever the case may be, although I was glad to read this one, both to finish the trilogy (what can I say? I am a terrible completist), and because it was a group reading project that enabled me to discuss it with my friends Gundula, Hilary and Lisa Vegan, in the end this one was a disappointment.