Rating: 3/5

"Acts of Love" opens with a short introduction to the characters: Julia &amp; Ali (daughters), Ted (husband), Sandy (sister) and Ann (main character). Almost as soon as you've met these people, their world is thrown into upheaval after Ted returns from a weekend trip with his daugthers, gets into a fight with his wife, Ann, and she ends up shot in the head and dead. 

Her eldest daughter, Julia, is 13 and is standing between 3 feet to 1.5 feet from Ted when the gun is fired. She claims Ted aimed and shot his wife while Ted claims that Julia jumped on him- to stop their arguing- causing the gun to misfire. 

This story is filled with back stories and also present tense court hearings. 
We are given a back story about Ann &amp; Sandy's relationship with their parents and thier ideas of what marriage is supposed to feel like. Ann believes it to be about passion and love and the giving of oneself to another. Sandy believes that you should always keep yourself separate from someone else, to keep yourself whole on your own. 

We learn how Ann &amp; Ted met, what their relationship is like. We learn about the girls and their feelings toward their parents' separation a year prior to the "accident". We learn about many deep, dark secrets. 

I liked the idea of the story. The delivery was a bit... wanting. I didn't care for the characters. Even the ones that I was rooting for in the beginning, I ended up not caring for in the end. Every single person was hiding something. I lost myself within the pages, trying to uncover who was telling the truth. 

There isn't much showing of remorse. The only struggle is within Sandy, and it's almost non-related to the entire dramatic event itself. 

There were chunks of the book that should have been left out completely. And as stated in a few other reviews, there was no one that I ended up LIKING by the end of the book. It's tough to love a book if you don't like any of the characters. 

It was a good effort, and wasn't COMPLETELY bad. If you can struggle through it, it actually has a few redeeming qualities- hence the 3 star review.