Rating: 4/5

$1.99

With so many books to read and so little time to do so, it is rare that I read a book a second time anymore. This needed to be the exception, especially when I got such a good deal on it for my Kindle. It had been a long time since I had read this story, and I wanted to see whether it would touch me in the same way as it had before.

Most people have heard of "The Elephant Man" but I would be much happier if he was called by his given name of Joseph Carey Merrick. He was born in 1852 and he didn't start showing signs of deformity until about age five. This book says that his mother, and later on a younger sister, were also crippled that we know nothing more about them other than that his mother died when Merrick was 11. A younger brother had also passed away leaving his father to look after two young children with disabilities.

It wasn't long before he remarried and the proverbial wicked stepmother made Joseph's life unbearable. You might not think that he was educated but he was, and after reaching a certain age, each person in Victorian London was expected to contribute to their well-being. There were few exceptions. Joseph did his best but through no fault of his own, people were so frightened of him that after he failed to contribute to the family income, his father turned him out. After work failing, he admitted himself to the "workhouse" for those who will not work, cannot work, or were unable to work.

After being here for some time, he checked himself out and met Tom Norman, a freak show operator. This seems unspeakable in our day and age, but yet he begged not to be sent back to the workhouse. He wanted to make his own way and not be a burden on society.

During this time, the shop was set up across the street from London hospital, and he soon became a curiosity to a number of people in the medical field, most notably Dr. Frederick Treves. It is recorded that he became friends with Joseph Merrick, and while he looked after his well-being until the end of his life, it doesn't seem to me that he knew a lot about Merrick other than what he observed during his time with him.

There are chapters in this book that drag on about Dr. Treves and a few other people came across Joseph Merrick, and while he may have retained a quiet dignity about him after finding "acceptance" in a tucked away room, the fact remained that he never come true acceptance or friendship for a place to belong where he could be himself.

I can't imagine such an existence, and I wondered how he would be treated today. We treat him any better? Unfortunately I don't think so, but perhaps life might have been a wee bit easier since we have made much progress in the medical field, but I keep questioning the mental and emotional trauma that he suffered, just as others do today.