Rating: 2/5

I'm not sure what I was expecting from this book. Knowing de Sade's reputation I assumed Justine would be controversial and an interesting insight to the late 18th century life. Yes, I can see how and why it was controversial and yes, it was a sort of an insight to a late 18th century deviant's mind, but interesting? Not so much.

I think I expected more substance and depth to the story from Justine as a reading experience. It took me months to read it, mostly because I couldn't understand any of the characters, I strongly disagreed with many of the "philosophy" rants in the book and I suppose I was already too jaded for the shock value to have any effect. I do see why de Sade was and has become such a debated author and philosopher, but I doubt he'd get a following if he lived and wrote in today's world. You have to switch your brain a couple hundred years back before you can really see a point to this book.

Justine is basically about good and evil, virtue and sin, good guys vs. bad guys. It's all very well, but it gets tiring after a while. The same scene gets repeated so many times that the reader (me at least) gets frustrated with all that obviousness. The heroine (possibly the dumbest chick ever to appear in a book) gets assaulted, imprisoned, raped and abused so many times and in so many ways that in the end you just don't care anymore. Justine is de Sade's personification of the perfect believer - she's virtuous and blindly faithful to her God, naive and easily manipulated, always willing to help others and never learning from her mistakes or past experiences.

The so-called bad guys, on the other hand, are twisted and sadistic atheists, to them it's all about having their own pleasure with any means necessary and not giving a crap about anything or anyone else.

And therein lies my biggest problem with the book. It seems that in de Sade's mind atheism is not so much about denying the possibility of God, but hating him. The abusers do monologues that last for pages, advising Justine to practically stomp on God and embrace the hedonistic lifestyle they all seem to be rooting for. She's like a creep magnet, finding every perv in France! Anyhow, I'm not impressed by the way de Sade insinuates that if you're not a virtuous believer, you have no morale. I think he failed to see the concepts of religion and morale in a bigger context and made a few rash conclusions based on his own experience.

All in all, I think Justine was pretty much a collection of de Sade's own fantasies disguised with a few bits of philosophical debate.