Rating: 3/5

Coming of code blue emergency to this was really a god send . MC was clearly more likeable than tra chat ever was . The character lioren is a surgeon than did accidental genocide on the people of cromsag , while being impatient for a "cure" from thornmaster , who instead of running it on a select batch , ran it on everyone and killed them.

this is the setup for the story and lioren altho cleared by the tralan court insisted to be court martialed and punished for his sins with omara defending him. He wanted to be killed instead. fleet commander dermod ( loved that he made an appearance again) , ruled that he was to be confined to the hospital instead and was assigned to work as a trainee psychologist under omara's care because his skills were too valuable. 

lioren went around three different species , mannen , khone ( love that he was here too ) and lastly i forgot the species and name but a small cutter interacting with them and exploring various themes

this book was heavily themed based , about forgiveness of one self , humility , religion etc etc . There is too much to get too and went way over my head . is not that i don't like scifi with such a heavy emphasis on themes but out of the past 7 sector general books it was always a backdrop to the story . 

although this book was good , my 3.5 star rating leans towards 3 because it's not expected when the book the series has always been a light reading , so go so deep into it's themes and meandering explanations especially with khone. 

also i think the parent's were fucked up in a sense their motivation for telepathically asking for the monitor corp to pick it up was due to wanting it to die , or experience life outside of the planet. 

omannen's not liking himself is actually something that was quite unexpected as he confided that he only liked himself because of the multiple personalities that hid himself away from the bitterness of himself , compared to seldal who made friends with his tralthan personality to improve his flaws. 
the big surgery in the end was really cool too fun read.