Rating: 4/5

Diana the Huntress, is the fifth book in the Six Sisters series. Again the plot is fairly original. Diana is as beautiful as her other sisters, but she is original in that she loves hunting as much as her father, the Reverend Armitage. And of course, hunting is as inappropriate for her as it is for her father. However, Daphne, the fourth sister, made her father promise at the end of book four that if she married the wealthy Mr. Simon Garfield (who she truly adored), her father would let Diana hunt. He feels he must keep his promise; however, since the rest of the people in the vicinity would be shocked, her father makes her dress up like a boy to participate in the hunt. All goes well, until one cold late day Diana leaves the group to hurry home and change, but it is wet and cold and dark and she loses her way. Finally she finds a light and rides toward it. The place she finds has been rented by an icily blond Lord Mark Dantrey, who invites her in and lets her spend the night. In fact, he invites him/her to go to London with him to show him the sights. Diana leaves before the rest of the house is awake and manages to beat her father home, who had been in a similar position, but managed to find the home of his best friend, Squire Radford. Her father never knows what she has done.
In the meantime the Wentworth mansion (if he is gone, his house still is the lair of a villain) was also rented by a dark haired, handsome card shark by the name of Jake Emberton, who having heard of the rich marriages of the older sisters, decides to raise his fortunes by courting Diana, instead of just playing cards. Since a gypsy fortune teller had told Diana to forgo blond men for the true love of a dark handsome husband, Diana is inclined to see Mr. Jack Emberton, but she still doesn't want to get married. She decides instead to accept Lord Dantrey's invitation to see London--dressed as a boy. However, she has trouble carrying it off and finally Lord Dantrey sees through her disguise and saves her from a truly horrible fate. Diana goes to Lady Godolphin and is quite content to remain a girl, the activities of men in London being too viscious for her.
Now both Lord Dantrey and Mr. Emberton become off again, on again suitors, Diana favoring Emberton, thinking he fulfills the "fortune" she was given, and neither she nor her father realizing that in fact Emberton is a true fortune hunter, unlike the Armitages who merely look for money but don't try to trick anyone to get it.
After many misfortunes and apparent problems, including Diana pretending to sail for America, she realizes what Jack Emberton really is and also how wonderful Lord Mark Dantrey is.