Rating: 5/5

see comment explanation below

Have now re-read the first of these three novels (A Question of Upbringing, A Buyer's Market, The Acceptance World), on the way (hopefully) to re-reading the whole series. The twelve volumes of Powell's Dance was really one of the reading highlights of my life.

I've written a few words to review Powell's first season of the dance, Spring, more than once. The earliest version had a personal note in it, something like the reconstruction of it as I now recall, which occasioned Comment 1 below:

About ten years ago I was in the process of reorganizing the books in my library. I ran across the four seasons of Powell's Dance, didn't really know what they were, but just put them in the place they should be and continued on. I think I figured they were just more novels I'd acquired at some point and never read, like many others.

After joining Goodreads a few years later, I happened to see Manny's review of Powell's masterpiece. Not too long after I read "Spring". What impressed me immensely about those first three novels was Powell's idea of bringing out the way in which, as we dance our way through time, we only gradually come to know more and more about friends and acquaintances, often in very curious circumstances - a flash of insight caused by someone's casual remark. This struck me as such a beautiful comment on the way people go through life.

A bit later, I got curious about how I had got the books. I offhandedly said something about them to my wife, and she said that they were her books, and that she'd read them. I was stunned. Right now, relating this late at night, with her asleep upstairs, I can't ask - and I can't imagine when she would have read twelve novels by Powell. It seemed utterly out of character for her. She was a scientist, hardly ever read books (novels) for pleasure, read newspapers, scientific journals, but novels??? Twelve by one author?

And, I should point out, at that time we'd been married at least forty years, and I'd known her since we were five years old. That was the experience that occasioned comment #1 below.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Previous review: City David Macaulay
Random review: Invitation to the Dance that's this dance!
Next review: Pablo Picasso A Retrospective

Previous library review: A Dance to the Music of Time the whole thing
Next library review: At Lady Molly's #4 in the series