Rating: 4/5

First of all thank you, Jasprit, for insisting I read this one. A couple of days ago I was sick and in bed all day. I had just finished another book and was wondering which book to start next. I saw this on my Nook and remembered you said it's her best book. This book really made me feel better when I was under the weather.

Emma is 25 and has been through many jobs. She has had a job in marketing for over a year now, and although she does okay, she's not exactly moving up the corporate ladder. She lives with her bff Lissy and has a boyfriend that she thinks is almost too cute and perfect. One day on a terrifying plane crash she turns to the man next to her and starts blabbering every random secret she has to the stranger next to her. She tells him everything including several things that could get her in trouble at work. A few days later when this stranger walks in her workplace and she's made aware that he is the founder of her company she is mortified. Can he keep her secrets?

I've gotten to the point where I feel like if you have reviewed one Sophie Kinsella book you have reviewed them all. The same things always apply. Laugh out loud humor, a loveable but usually quite clueless heroine, some barely there romance, and a picture perfect ending. They also usually include a subtle message from which the character learns something important about life. The fact that you know what you're getting when you go into one of her books can be a good thing or a bad thing. For me I like it. I know what to expect and she never lets me down. Note: I have read a few of her singles, but still haven't gotten to the Shopaholic series, so don't hold me to that.

My only complaint and reason for giving this 4 stars instead of 5 is because of the predictability. See how I said it could go both ways? I like knowing what to expect, but I would also like a bit of surprise with the ending. This one had a formula that seemed so similar to "I've got Your Number" in regards to the boyfriend factor. Why bother giving the heroines a boyfriend at the start of the book? We always know how that's going to end. I know Sophie Kinsella has it in her to write something more original and unique for the chick-lit genre and when she does that's when I will give her my 5 stars.

Fans of Kinsella will not be disappointed with this one, and I agree with Jasprit. This is her best that I've read so far.