Rating: 4/5

What Made Me Read It They had me at a locked room mystery death in a virtual world setting with a strong Japanese theme.

The Good "Tea from an empty cup" is a mix of cyberpunk and mystery noir short novel, with a focus on Japanese culture, traditions and philosophical symbolism. Told from the alternating points of view of the two main characters, each chapter is named after its respective plot - Yuki's search for her missing friend titled "Empty Cup" and Konstantin's murder case "Death in the promised land". The two plots start out seemingly independent from one another but are weaved together throughout the story, connecting by the end of the book.

The novel focus on the way people interact with computers and virtual reality and how technology affects our perception of personal, social and cultural identity. Although written in the late 90s, the author has a spot on understanding of the nature of the internet and online community, predicting a grim future where technology is used for morally dubious entertainment purposes, profit oriented with saturated ads and product placements, and so addictive internauts keep returning to experience new levels of sensation.

We don't get a sense of what the real world is like, other than mere references of a dystopian future where the Japanese nation has been destroyed due to natural catastrophes and the survivor's struggle to find and retain a sense of national identity. The world building is focused mainly on the virtual world and gaming community of "Post-apocalyptic Noo Yaw Sitty". The plot can be confusing at times, specially if you're not a gamer - secret levels, avatars, icons... all the technical aspects and vocabulary of the gaming community can be difficult to grasp. But the story is about the alternate realities of a VR world  so, for me, the fact that it doesn't always make sense fits my expectations - after all, anything is possible in this reality, "it's all in what you perceive".

Read the full review on: https://literaryportals.blogspot.com/...

Final Rating 4 of 5 stars "Tea from an empty cup" is a mix of sci-fi and noir murder mystery novel, set in a dystopian future and focused on the gaming community of a virtual reality. Recommended for those who enjoy the cyberpunk subgenre, gaming and Japanese philosophy and culture.