Rating: 4/5

Langewiesche is an author, pilot, and journalist-correspondent. He is also a gifted storyteller. At first glance Inside The Sky appears to be a collection of seven essays on different aspects of aviation, each independent of the others and capable of being read and understood individually. It becomes clear to the reader early on that these are not mere essays, however, but rather personal devotionals to Langewiesche’s true love—flight. 

	The author’s style is reminiscent of Ernest Gann, particularly as Gann displays it in Fate Is The Hunter. Flight for both authors transcends gravity and the mundane lives of those who have never experienced the spiritual, perspective-broadening aspects of sojourns through the lower heavens. The essays introduce the reader to odd and attractive eccentrics, like John Jackson. Born to wealth and privilege, Jackson served honorably in combat in World War II, eventually settling in La Cienega, New Mexico. There he divested himself of privilege, wrote, worked menial jobs and generously gave of his time and money to the community. Flight for him was an awakening of the spirit, essential for understanding his fellow human beings and the wonders, and limits, of modern life. 

	Throughout the book Langewiesche’s storytelling style, combined with the subject matter, pleasurably and thoughtfully engages the reader. Not surprisingly there are bouts of the flight life sprinkled with catastrophe and fear, but the author is clear—on balance flying is liberating and not inherently dangerous. In the essay entitled “The Turn” he meticulously shows, for example, that the natural human reaction to poor visibility is to become disoriented and crash rather than rely on instruments to drive the flying. Ultimately this lesson is learned over time after much experimentation, the development of new technologies, and loss of life. Though still threatened by human hubris and disbelief, faith in technology over instinct in this instance has given humans the ability to fly in most conditions of visibility. 

	In “Inside An Angry Sky” Langewiesche best describes the joy of flying as he and his friends purposefully chase bad weather across the United States in a small private plane. Common sense, pre-planning and weather research make this type of flying exciting and not insurmountably dangerous, as one might first surmise. 

	The last two essays are devoted respectively to the man-made deficiencies found in the regulatory model that drives U.S. aviation and the tragic results of systems failures. In the first, the FAA is depicted as an overly bureaucratic, efficiency-driven political entity that values safety only slightly ahead of the condition of the carpet down a commercial airliner’s port aisle. In the second essay, the consequences of airline, human, FAA, and complex system failures lead to the May 1996 loss of ValueJet flight 592 and 110 souls—needlessly. This loss at first seems to be the result of obvious human mistakes that should have been avoided—mismarking hazardous materials and failure to follow simple maintenance procedures. Closer scrutiny reveals that the complex systems operating airlines are ‘complex’ beyond human understanding and control and therefore vulnerable to unpredictable events that may lead to destructive, unanticipated conditions. Every situation cannot be regulated or anticipated in the interest of flight safety—or any other ‘master’ be it efficiency, comfort, or profit. Individual common sense, curiosity, competence, loyalty to one’s responsibilities, and the instinct to survive are the most effective and ultimately the likely difference between flight catastrophe and survival. 

	Throughout these essays, Langewiesche’s love of flight remains undiminished. His effort to educate the reader about the beauty and inherently safe nature of flight are mostly successful. Despite the hard facts of the ValueJet incident, this book brings the uninitiated into the inner sanctum of flight. The prose flows smoothly and the author’s unshakeable optimism in the importance of flight for every person is convincing. Inside The Sky is a short, pleasurable journey into the world of flight and is just about the right length to be fully read and appreciated during a transcontinental flight.