Rating: 4/5

Goldman's unofficial official sequel to THE LION IN WINTER is a beautifully written, fast-paced historical romance that presents the life of the tortured and unloved Prince John, now king, but as petty and insecure as ever- what Goldman essentially argues is that he may have had much reason to be, and like all human beings is complex beyond the legacy he leaves. Contrasted with John is William Marshall, considered England's greatest knight, and one of the most beloved figures of medieval history, whose existence effortlessly over-shadows John's and whose legacy is as celebrated as John's is reviled, but whose strong sense of duty and adherence to conduct codes often renders him emotionless and cynical, even cold. The third protagonist is John's half brother, also named William, a cheerful optimist and charming warrior prince who strives for popularity and worldly recognition and achieves both in his lifetime, but of the three, ends up the one we least remember, sidelined to B-celebrity status in the end by the brother he betrays to stay on the winning side, the court that witnesses it, and the Queen, with whom he is having an affair. Of the principals Isabelle is the only woman, no other woman in the book appears for more than a scene or two, but Goldman gives us a dynamic lady of the times, living in the shadow of Queen Eleanor (whose haunting presence almost constitutes a supporting role) and desperately trying to figure out her own place in a world where women have great power or no power, but rarely an equal place at the table. Beautiful and intelligent, Isabelle is also manipulative, enabling, and frequently ignorant of the greater implications of her actions, the product of a world that doesn't want her in the room that she progressively demands a place in. The antagonists, FitzWalter and Lord Stephen, are both intriguing characters as well but noticeably less developed than the principals because the novel is much less about the events of John's reign as it is about the things which drive him and motivate the reactions he has to opposition. What they do well, though, is help us better sense the narrator, Geraldus, and provide us with a better understanding of who he is through an examination of his own conflicted feelings over these two men who want to limit the power of the King- FitzWalter out of vengeance, Lord Stephen out of humanist idealism. The novel moves with tremendous speed and is never every musty and dusty history, but there are times you feel events and situations are reported on or just glimpsed, not really experienced by the narrator, even though he is present. This of course supports the whole premise (given in the title) for the book, but it can result in a distancing effect that renders what should be dramatic moments as interesting instead compelling. Still, a powerful and satisfying read for people interested in the period and the figures of the time.