Rating: 2/5

Very well written, but it seemed that the author was biased towards Christianity; IMO, his tone was rather acidic when describing the Templars, Dee and most of all, Crowley.

This is where my bias becomes evident. 

Crowley was never a Satanist or a Devil Worshiper, and in fact, despised them. When he stated that, "...I have been accused of being a 'black magician.' No more foolish statement was ever made about me. I despise the thing to such an extent that I can hardly believe in the existence of people so debased and idiotic as to practice it.", he realized  after he had learned how to utilize this 'short cut' to the art, that he proved to be a rather good Black Magician, that short cuts do not make long lasting changes. 

Crowley desired no followers, claimed to be no hero, and opened his life on paper which any aspiring magician should do. He was rare in that he documented his successes and failures. While it's true that he loved attention, he did very little to dissuade anything written about him, much of the John Bull crap was just that: Bull. 

Enough of me standing on the Aleister Crowley soapbox.

The names of the Christian God are invoked as the source of the only true power, making the book appear to be stating (in the writers opinion) the obvious: Jesus, YWVH, God, The Holy Spirit, etc are the only sources of power that you should cling to, for they are the only ones that will keep one out of Hell AND are the only real power that exists. The very title of the book indicates that Hell is the final stop for those daring enough to partake of some of the rituals described within. The problem is, Hell as an eternal place of punishment, is only a terrible place of suffering (which the loving Christian God created) within the contest of very few faiths (Christianity, Muslim and to a lesser extent, Judaism. 
Furthermore, the term pagan, Satanist and Devil worshiper are used interchangeably, though not quite as bad as ANYTHING written by Bob Larson, but way too close for an informative and open book. Pagan is simply an umbrella term used by those that are pagan to separate themselves from the "Ready made in a can" faiths, and it is also used as a term by non-pagans to describe anyone who does not think like 'they' do. On one hand, it is merely a generic and harmless title, on the other it is an insult, intended to defame the person assigned.

He touched briefly on the idea that demons were originally spiritual helpers and teachers, spiritual beings that had a mischievous streak, but were beneficent none the less. 

Overall, it does make for an interesting read, but keep in mind that much of the arcane writings were written metaphorically, and if a person that wishes to commune with a deceased loved one can do so WITHOUT lying in an open grave, wearing grave clothes, obtaining the head of a corpse, etc. 

Sigh.