Another book I hadn't meant to talk about, but I think it is important to bear in mind what someone reads before and after the other books; everything is connected *small smile* 

*sigh* so, I finally got a Chesney romance, another one lauded as the best thing since sliced bread, I mean Heyer. And I'm glad that at least one person once said it's insane to compare these two writers ... even though most of Chesney's fans find Heyer boring ... did I mention I'm never going to understand the world?

See, I came to loathe this writer through her two later series, the "comedy" crime novels by M.C.Beaton *belatedly realises the MC initials* I had bought those series also in bulk, since it's a fact books go OOP quickly, but she makes me sick. 

All her books have nothing but unpleasant characters, and I'm saying this as a person deeply opposed to sugary sweetness and idealistic families and unrealistic portrayals of humanity. But never was there a writer who so relentlessly delights in showing nothing but despicable characters being mean to each other - again, I'm not demanding Dickensian morality lessons, nor do I believe that everyone gets their due in life, and am all for showing how complex, contradictory and usually shocking all our thoughts are, but her books are actually amusing, nay, delighting thousands, and they are just so - nasty? *looks unhappily at weak word*

In that later series, the mature woman Agatha Raisin is repeatedly reviled and humiliated, yet we are supposed to see her as brash and rude and deserving of her constant suffering. I loathe her "lover", whatshisname and was glad when she got that pretty young Lord, only she is of course being used and abused by him as well. So - I know MC's current "anti-romances" and I wish I could meet her before she dies and gets lauded as the only one daring to write them, because they are all quickly thrown out descriptions of her own life with some humiliation added. 

They also all have the cyclical nature of ending and beginning the same way over and over again - they are like those toys on office desks, the silver balls hanging from chains, and if you bump them they keep whacking at each other until they run out of momentum. I like that comparison - it is so apt. All romances have many of those flaws, but MC is the most relentless in just aimlessly letting her characters hit each other until she reaches the required page count. And then resets the non-perpetuum mobile.

Erm, back to this book. I nearly gave it three stars because of having read Kleypas right before it, as I had gleaned from summaries, it had a hero like I rarely find these days, a man pretending to be dumb and shallow and being smart and sarcastic underneath, and of course worthy and hot and all that. 

But the heroine has to suffer the same humiliations as all of MC's women (serious issues? it's more than simply anti-romance) and realise she's not (even) intelligent (basically, they never have anything going for them, so we're back to looks, even though her sister Daphne will then get disabused of that in her own book) so it's really the same as with Agatha. The difference is that in those older/romance novels, girl does get her man, AND the man is the only likable character in the book! He's interesting and intriguing (attractive etc. too) so that's the big difference to her later anti-romances ... ? (here Chesney is melding Heyer's Freddy and Ajax etc.) 

ETA: if every single hero is like that, I'll hate them from book 2 onwards, because it's patronising and just putting down women of course. But I'd love a good book to have men like this explored and loved on in more detail, without the need to define them as "beta-males" and similar ready-made categories *gag* or turn them into identical every-bodies after a while.

I lowered the opinion to 2 stars when she even ended this book verbatim like Heyer ended one of hers, but then decided to stop doing the star system because everything lately is just crap. I still wish to read her other Six Sisters (and Poor Relation) books to see if she really has all her couples identical as well (as most romance authors do) or if she at least has some different traits and dynamics - from the view of the older two sisters, they had to have been very different, but then they are also painted so unflatteringly that it's hard to imagine.

Oh, and the sex - I think she could actually write it? But she doesn't. Genre-convention, but perhaps also the inability to show closer intimacy and emotion? Leaves me personally USTy, because Harry Desire and his devious biting of Deirdre seemed like a beginning.

Hope this helped someone - and remember - don't believe the amazon reviews.

ETA: it is NOT true that she has lots of great period detail - MC inserts blobs of copy-pasted description at some points, but her staccato style makes the placement random and the listing of clothing, food or toys just that - randomnly inserted lists *gets angrier whenever reading reviews :)*

ETA-THREE: 
- there is absolutely no reason for Desire to play the fool, no motivation :/ and the summary of the Daphne book makes it sound like all MCs romance heroes get to lecture/straighten out the heroine
+ there are two instances in this nearly cracky novel that were startlingly true, when Deirdre was characterised as liking to sit on stairs, between rooms, and how she punishes herself by eloping with a man she dislikes. MC should have tried to write like Highsmith, but since she couldn't she moved to crime novels. Hm. 

NOTE TO SELF:
-&gt; I caught myself wanting to get some more books from her! ie. "Quadrille", since it's supposedly "racier" -&gt; has actual sex, I think - but then so does Agatha Raisin, and that Hugh in "Quadrille" sounds dangerously like Agatha's men, or MCs men: starting out like interesting appealing characters to be bodysnatched by the author and replaced by brutal boors/bores that hurt their women. Must not forget her delight in mean and callous people after only one day!