Rating: 3/5

The book does not dive into how to overcome the impostor phenomenon, and the writing does get sort of repetitive. That quite removes a lot of appeal for the book honestly. But it does have a lot of examples, which is useful because:
1. it makes it easy to identify and empathize with instances of impostor phenomenon. For instance, I did not even realize that sometimes I felt like an impostor in social settings. The way that the book brought it out was not through asking me to think deeply about some questions, like a therapy session might. Instead, a few examples discussed the situation in which these impostor feelings came up for the subjects and elaborated on what emotions + thought processes were prevalent during those anxious moments.
2. it gives a sense of what an appropriate response should be for both the sufferer and well-wishers when impostor-ism strikes (I made that word up). These are simple but effective tools to use. So even though I did not learn how to overcome impostorism, I learnt tools on how to manage it, at least in the moment.

I liked the tone of the book as well. It's not written like a self-help book, in which the narrative is directed towards you and infused with so much positivity that it seems unreal and fake. No, it's more like "Susan did this ..." and "Adam did that ...". That makes it a bit impersonal in a way, which makes it easy to empathize with examples which make sense to you, and more importantly, pick the actions/tools which seem the best for you. In contrast, when it's a "you" narrative, there's so many things to keep track of that sometimes fogs the best course of action.

Surprisingly, but not so much in hindsight, the book also talks about child rearing, specifically pointing out well-intentioned common-place actions that parents do which can cause feelings of impostor phenomenon to develop over time. It relates to the way we praise children, the way we help them confront fears and so on: very insightful and practical in my opinion.

The book also has a lot of references (both for the layman and the scientist) to look up once you're done with the book. This includes a reference on the intersection of impostor phenomenon and child rearing.

And as a last point, the book also have a test for gauging how much intense impostorism is for you. I scored between 61 and 80, which means I frequently have impostor feelings. On the mark, I would say.

My advice on how to read this book would be: read Part 1. Read Part 2 only as much as you want to - there's nothing insightful in it so pick and choose whichever ones make sense to you. Or read the whole thing with speed, if you're unsure. Read Part 3.