Rating: 4/5

This book is one of the very last that Lofts wrote. And it is long in page count for her "house" books. But it starts in the 4th century with the Roman's camp in Mala, Britain- so there is much of dozens of generations to tell. And Paulus, the first character in this book, IMHO, is one of the best characterizations that Lofts ever did. Down to his donning his helmet and cape at his final reveal.

It's filled with memorable characters from the most ambitious to the least changeable and for every gradient of learning and erudite desire. There are devious, dramatic, lazy, uninterested, calm, and nothing but workhorses in harness within the residents of the One Bull. Excellent emotive studies and myriads of work process and art inclusion in this one too. Loved the sections under Cromwell, and the Victorians! And it twice just barely misses obliteration as a building or a venue concern by the minutia of minutes. 

But the last 2 sections lost a star for me. Lofts did NOT do modern times as well as the other. IMHO, she was too close to home. War, attachments, that style of mid-century flattens the characters to generic types without much individuality. Maybe myopic to her own time's decision making for war roles and the sobering personnel choices most made? At times it seems that particular message overcomes the more usual Lofts of far deeper characterizations. And the result, regardless- it seemed to put too much melodrama into the 1939 and 1975 groups. Melodrama without getting to "know" these 4 youngest offspring. 

This is the book that begins with Mithras and ends with a religion that is merely some quasi-traditional ritual to create a funeral service. Mallow in England! Come join the pub in Suffolk. 

BTW, the cover pictured here has absolutely nothing to do with the copy. This is not a romance, or a bodice ripper in any sense. Not even in a singular description. It must have been a marketing technique of the 1980's? Regardless, St. Cedric's and the One Bull Pub are the central stars of this one.