Rating: 4/5

"Reflex" by Dick Francis is a camera lens term, so add that to the standard jockey hero, whose natural passivity is activated by honest integrity, and asserts justice without officialdom. Narrator Philip Nore 30, was abandoned "just till Saturday" by his mother Caroline, dead from heroin addiction, to be raised by a series of friends. Samantha he tracks down. Charlie taught him photography and willed his equipment. 

Helping injured rider Steve Millace with his crashed dead dad George's negatives leads to exposure and developing puzzles, blackmail, beatings on top of corruptly instigated horse falls. Earnest solicitor Jeremy Folk 25, more intelligent than his fumbling manner lets on, "with office-coloured skin" p6 forwards dying estranged grandmother's request to find hitherto unknown half-sister Amanda, and suffers assassination attempt targeted on Nore. Break-ins, burglary, arson, blackmail. Total surprise (only after do I remember I read this before) are the "alternate suggestions", hidden for hundreds of pages (p350). Bruises, blood, danger and suspense. 

Nore finds kind welcoming Samantha and her lovely lively daughter Clare. "It began in friendship and progressed to passion. Ended in bretathlessness and laughter, sank to murmurs and sleep. The best it had ever been for me." p431 Second run "A tingling, fierce, gentle, intense, turbulent time." p433. Overall, from feelings of familiar comfort to coming home. Adult content does not have to be explicit or crude (my x-rated).

Francis has a knack for conveying sophisticated technical information easily, unique turn of phrase description, dropping hints, stringing along. A man's photograph is identified, but 17 pages till we learn the villain p452. The author is an expert director of character and action. We cheer for growing demonstrations of Nore's heroism. 

"One thing my haphazard upbringing had given me was an almost limitless capacity for waiting. Waiting for people to come, who didn't; and for promises to be fulfilled, that weren't." p13 
"Survival for so many years had been a matter of accepting what I was given ... I had taught myself for so long not to want things that weren't offered to me that I now found very little to want."p58
"Doing nothing was weak and wrong. If I learned all George's secrets I would have to accept the moral burden of deciding what to do about them ... and doing it." p288

Typo:
p396 "He won't did." for die