Rating: 4/5

Richard Feynman’s reputation as one of the 20th century’s great physicists is secure, and he was noted as one its foremost explainers and teachers. His reputation as a person, however, has taken some hits in recent years: misogyny, cruel practical jokes, and contemptuous dismissal of people he considered his intellectual inferiors. If you wish to hold his memory in high regard, you should avoid reading the things he says about women in his autobiography, and when he joined the committee investigating the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster the other members found him arrogant and difficult to work with (see: https://www.nytimes.com/1986/06/07/us...).

Nevertheless, his reputation rests on his physics work, and several generations of physicists have been inspired by his famous three volume Feynman Lectures on Physics from 1963. Six Easy Pieces collects six of those lectures, ones covering subjects that could be described mostly with analogies and anecdotes rather than relying on advanced math.

The first three chapters, Atoms in Motion, Basic Physics, and The Relation of Physics to Other Sciences, are excellent, informative, and make good use of examples. This is where Feynman makes one of his most famous analogies: “if an apple is magnified to the size of the earth, then the atoms in the apple are approximately the size of the original apple.” (p.5) But of course, atoms are mostly empty space, and later he explains that “If we had an atom and wished to see the nucleus, we would have to magnify it until the whole atom was the size of a large room, and then the nucleus would be a bare speck which you could just about make out with the eye, but very nearly all the weight of the atom is in that infinitesimal nucleus.” (p. 34)

Even people who have no interest at all in physics would enjoy these chapters for the insights they shed on the basic stuff of the universe, of everything that exists, including you and me.

The other three chapters, on the Conservation of Energy, the Theory of Gravitation, and Quantum Behavior, go a little deeper into the fundamentals of physics but are also illuminating, although I thought his discussion of the famous two-slit experiment got too far down in the weeds with its explanations of all the various permutations and the interference patterns.

The book is starting to show its age in some areas, and it is best when it sticks to timeless basic principles. Reading it made me think of Edward O. Wilson’s Consilience, which makes the point that today all science pivots on an understanding of basic physics: biology, chemistry, geology, cosmology and the others are incomprehensible without a thorough grounding in first principles. Feynman would have understood and endorsed this point, for he could see through surface appearances and down into the fundamental forces that bind the universe together.