Rating: 5/5

Cristóbal unborn.

Mexico is a country of sad men and happy children. So starts this massive tome on Mexico. 

In fact it opens with a couple (Ángel and Ángeles) having sex on a beach in Acapulco and conceiving their child (Cristóbal). The entire story is told from the view of Cristobal, the unborn. He points out that when a child is born, it is actually nine months old. So little Cristóbal is aware of everything and so becomes our storyteller. 

Disaster strikes Acapulco and the parents head for DF (Mexico City). Mexico in 1992, when the story takes place, is a dismal place. The country is unstable, the Americans send in the military in Veracruz to protect oil installations (protecting their national interests), the north is a wasteland where American helicopter patrols pick up and detain immigrants (this book was published in 1987.... wow, sound familiar?), a social insurrection is brewing, and Makesicko (Mexico) City is drenched with acid rain. In fact things are so bad that the epic murals of Diego Rivera in the National Palace will be sold to the Chase Manhattan Bank as a partial debt payment and hang in the Rockefeller Center for the next fifty years.

In short, a very bleak setting for a child to be born.

The characters are a mixture of good and bad or indifferent. The father Ángel is a cad. He hits on, not one but several women, including a fifteen year old, Penny Cruz. The mother is, well, an angel. She puts up with the father to a point but when things get bad, she heads for her native Oaxaca. There are two uncles, Homero and Fernando. They are polar opposites. A couple of old maid aunts. Dead parents. A collection of the most odd characters (and those are their friends).

Then there are the politicos. The Mexican president, Jesus Mary and Joseph Paredes (I just love that name), Mamadoc his wife, the Secretary of State Federico Robles Chacón, a pro-American Ulises López (father of Penny) and his slutty wife, the fundamentalist Ayatola Matamoros Moreno (a former writer...ah those anarchists) and his Chilean woman Concha Torro, who learns that a massive earthquake destroyed her homeland and what’s left has been taken by Peruvian revolutionaries. Yep. Pretty darn crazy!

So I know what you are saying, how can you believe a story as told from the point of view of an unborn child? Little Cristóbal needs someone to put his words into a novel. Why not use Carlos Fuentes? I hear that Fuentes is good with words. Actually he is great with words. 

Need a great opening line? How about “I remember when my father taught me about making ice just as I am facing the firing squad?” Wait a minute. Wasn’t that the first line of “One Hundred Years of Solitude by Fuentes’s good friend, Gabriel Garcia Marquez? Yes. Steal from everyone. Leave nothing untouched.

This book plays completely with language, literature, history and just about everything in between. The play between Spanish and English is amazing. Word play at its best. Everything of the past 500 years has been brought up, played with, turned inside out. The book is poetic in scale. The nine months pregnancy is a journey. Cervantes in mind; Homeric in tone; Joyce in scale. Wow. That is asking a lot for a pregnancy. But what if this pregnancy takes place on the 500th anniversary of the founding of America by Cristóbal Colon (his real name). And a prize will be awarded for that first baby in 1992. That is a lot of drama. A lot to ask for, isn’t it?

So is it good?

Hmmm.. I have read most of Fuentes’ most of his novels and the shear scale of word play, his over the top dynamism and heroic aspects pushed the boundaries of his writing. The epilogue sums this book up as a letter written to Cristóbal by Carlos Fuentes himself. He had just won the Cervantes prize, the biggest award in the Spanish language. So how do you top such an award? By going over the top in one of the most unique stories I have read to date.

Some will hate this, be baffled by it or just give it up. At times I though this is either the worst Fuentes’ book that I have ever read. Or the best. 

I think you know where I put my money.