Rating: 5/5

Read this book. If you're divorced, read it. If you're thinking about getting divorced, read it. If you're the child of divorced parents, read it. If you're married to a child of divorced parents like I am, read it. Honestly, if there's one issue that looms like an 800 lb gorilla in our culture today, it's the way marriage and family has fallen apart, been shifted, reassembled and redefined. The ramifications of the social upheaval of the family absolutely underlie *everything*. I honestly believe everyone should read this because somehow, in some way, divorce has touched your life, even if it wasn't your own or you're not a child of divorce!!!

I picked up this book because I wanted to understand the journey my husband has been through in his life. I am the product of an extremely happy, intact marriage that is still literally sending out waves of love today. I am totally blessed. But coming from this position of privilege, it has been extremely hard for me to understand what my husband's childhood was like and how the divorce experience still affects the way he experiences and processes life to this very day. This book helped take me there and begin to understand parts of his experience from the moment his parent's marriage ended to intervals of 5, 10, 15 and 25 years post-divorce. It's an enlightening, heartbreaking, enraging read and I think it firmly upends the notion that the kids will be "okay" after the divorce. Some will, many more will not and all will have some sort of psychic scars that appear to last a lifetime (guess we'll have to see if this study gets extended to 35, 45 and 55 yr intervals?)

I think the researcher and her team did an excellent job presenting the material fairly, acknowledging that sometimes divorce is inevitable, but still showing that many of the platitudes and beliefs we, as a society, hold about divorce are just not true. Overwhelmingly, the evidence shows that children of divorce are major collateral damage and so often, their thoughts, feelings, concerns, opinions and so forth are not on the table for discussion. Even when the splitting couple seems to be advocating for the child's best interests, the long term developmental needs of their children aren't factored into the equation. For example, the visitation arrangement for a parent and 5 year old should evolve to the needs of the child over time, not a one-size-fits all arrangement that is expected to equally fit the needs of a 15 year old. 

While the researchers did not use a control group per se, they did use a comparison group for the 25 year check-in with their original subjects. This I found fascinating too, especially when viewed through the experiences of children who came from a marriage that wasn't happy and could have resulted in divorce but didn't. Want to know more about that? Read the book! (Slight spoiler: these kids fared better than their peers who lived through a divorce.)

I took out this book from the library but in retrospect, I wish I owned it. I took notes throughout and would have loved to highlight insights that not only gave me compassion for my husband's experience, but have opened my eyes to the reality that so many children of divorce (whether they are still children or they are now adults) live with on a daily basis. Can't say enough good about this one - a highly recommended read.