Rating: 1/5

I think it is interesting to scientifically examine the well-known myths about how the East and the West think differently. However, the book fails (or neglects) to address that much of these myths were originated in the 19th century to justify European dominance in the world over the 'lesser' races in terms of racial and cultural standpoints (recommend reading Keevak (2011) Becoming Yellow). And indeed, the book reads very much like something written by a 19th century anthropologist. Interestingly, America was in a similar position (though not to the same extend, thank heaven) that the European powers were in, at the time when this book was published. 

For a start, what is the West and what is the East? It is not well defined in the book. Cultural differences between the Chinese, the Korean and the Japanese changed over time. And each of these countries differed to each other significantly, in terms of size, racial makeup, geography, etc in one way or the other, which led to different socio-economics. One can argue that Greek culture influenced the Western world significantly, but so was the many cultures that the West was exposed to; For example, European lost most of Ancient Greek discoveries during the Dark Age and only relearned them from the Islamic world, does that mean Europeans are also Islamic? Can Anglo-Amercian and Continental Europe be generalised in one single category?

The book claims from the start Westerners (whatever that means) are better at logical thinking than Easterners (again, whatever that means), because of the differences in socio-economics in ancient times. Then it starts comparing Chinese political thinkers from the Spring-and-Autume-period with Western philosophers, mathematicians.... *facepalm* It is true that ancient Chinese inventors, philosophers, mathematicians and logicians were not highly celebrated for their work, but that does not mean that they didn't exist nor inferior to their Western counterparts. For example, a mathematical book written in China between 200BC-100AD already discussed squaring, squared roots and quadratic equations. As another example, during Jin dynasty, Chinese mathematicians discovered the Pythagorean theorem and the Pi number to the 7th decimal place. Arguing that point would need a more comprehensive review of ancient Asian scientific work than what is offered in the book. But that would require a high level understanding of classical Chinese, which I don't think Nisbett possessed. 

The experiments mentioned in the second part of the book are mostly, anecdotal psychology nonsense that cannot be replicated or have problems in selection bias and simply small samples amongst other things. For example, can you generalise East Asian languages? Written Chinese is not phonetic, Japanese and Korean are. And how do you compare these languages to Western languages, which language is the most representative of Western culture? Or indeed, how do you even ensure that it is only cultural differences that drove the results? How could one use a sample of 30 people from a class in America and argue that it represented an entire population of billions!

I really don't think it is a book to be taken seriously, I think it is overly ambitious and fails in every discipline it tries to use to justify its point. In terms of history, it is not comprehensive; a chinese primary school pupil could give stronger evidence than this book does. In terms of psychology, the motivation is unclear and doesn't seem to justify making the argument. In terms of research methodology, it is really lacking, it doesn't define the parameters well, experiments do not seem to be scientific at all.

I think this book is really great if your table or chair has a leg that is shorter than the rest, or if you really can't find anything else put in the book shelve and your friends are not serious scientists, or the inevitable nuclear winter has finally come and you have to burn something to keep warm.