Rating: 5/5

He comes back from the edge! 

"Grant was so filled with the pleasure that ferreting out information always provided for him, that they were running through the outer suburbs of Scoone before he remembered that he was in a car. That he was shut into a car..."

This is a sensational read and my absolute favorite Inspector Alan Grant mystery. It also happens to be the final Inspector Grant mystery and Josephine Tey's final book, having been found among her papers and published posthumously. While not as technically perfect as Daughter Of Time, that's of no consequence at all... In my opinion The Singing Sands is one of Tey's crowning achievements, certainly concluding her body of work on an impressive high note. 

The Singing Sands is more than a police procedural, though it also is that. It's a police procedural conducted by an experienced, acclaimed detective driven - in spite of himself, and in spite of all official pronouncements - to investigate an accidental death as a crime. For anyone who's ever read an Inspector Alan Grant mystery and complained that Grant's character is one-dimensional - this final Inspector Alan Grant novel is for you. It's a detective story, and a phenomenal one at that, but, oh, it's so much more... 

Here the inimitable Inspector Alan Grant is on a medically mandated leave. He's taking "involuntary vacation" from detecting, so we get a rare chance to see him far from his vocational element: back in the Highlands stomping ground of his Scottish childhood, hip deep in waders fishing the lochs, in the bosom of family and old friends - all while grappling with a crippling and humiliating case of potentially career-ending claustrophobia. The typically unflappable Alan Grant is a mess... And, as Grant begins his leave, while exiting his train he happens upon a dead man in Compartment B Seven. Something in the face of the man affects him deeply, haunting him. The death is determined accidental, and yet... A clue. 
The beasts that talk, 
The streams that stand, 
The stones that walk, 
The singing sands . . . . 
That guard the way To Paradise. 

In this book, Alan Grant embarks on a voyage of self-discovery, and the reader is gifted a front-row seat, with access to an Alan Grant whom Tey has never before revealed: the inner man's memories and perceptions, his hopes and fears, loves lost and found, new loves presenting themselves to him. Grant examines and second-guesses himself and the course of his entire life, but because he IS Inspector Alan Grant of Scotland Yard, it seems he needs "a case" to serve as a vehicle for this process of self-examination; he simply doesn't know any other way to BE. "Who Grant IS" is inextricably enmeshed with "how he works." So we follow Grant as he conducts his unofficial investigation into the death of the man in Compartment B Seven, simultaneously undertaking a parallel journey to uncover the answers to some important personal questions - questions which Alan Grant, detective, knows no other way to ask or answer. What an amazing journey it turns out to be.

In one of my favorite parts of the book, Grant, spending a week following up a lead in his Compartment B Seven death inquiry, stays at The Cladda Hotel in the Western Isles of the Outer Hebrides of Gaelic Scotland - the gateway to Tír Na Nóg, The Country of the Young, or Gaelic heaven. There, he discovers those islands to be a place far closer to hell than heaven, especially in the "off" season. He also discovers that this particular version of hell seems to suit him rather well; doing wonders for both his constitution and prospects, psychologically and physically! Quite simply, the longer Grant is there, the jollier and more resilient he becomes! This part of the book had me laughing so much, and so hard, I had to take a break. I found myself laughing SO out loud while reading, I felt like a barking seal...

The ersatz "case" which Grant pursues is, in fact, revealed to BE a case; his detective's instincts have not failed him even in this, his time of self-doubt. The death in Compartment B Seven proves, if nothing else, QUITE suspicious. To find out just how suspicious, you'll need to read the book. As this tale is gradually untangled, its complexity will make your head SPIN!!! 

And yes, in this Inspector Grant mystery all is revealed. If only I could give it more than five stars.