Rating: 5/5

The Jailing of Cecelia Capture, by Janet Campbell Hale (Coeur d'Alene), follows the difficult life of a Native woman grappling with her past and struggling to look to the future.
Cecelia Capture Welles is pursuing a law degree in San Francisco, living on her own hundreds of miles away from her husband and two children and managing her own life for the first time in more than a decade—but on her thirtieth birthday, she is jailed for drunk driving. As she waits to be released, Cecelia starts to reflect on her life and the things that have brought her where she is today. Told through a series of flashbacks and musings on her current circumstances, The Jailing of Cecelia Capture slowly reveals Cecelia’s troubled past, detailing her struggles as a Native woman dealing with abuse, racism, sexism, classism, and self-destructive decisions.
The Jailing of Cecelia Capture is not an easy read—and it’s really not meant to be. Cecelia struggles with PTSD and depression. Her self-reflection is not light-hearted; looking back at her life involves grappling with the effects of abuse, racism, and a slew of self-destructive activities. Even the narrative is difficult to follow at times—the story seems filtered through Cecelia’s own dissociative state, a hazy series of painful memories and muddled observations of her current circumstances. At times, Cecelia’s commentary seems detached and impersonal—and sometimes the narrative jumps to another character altogether for a few paragraphs.
Confusing as it was, this disjointed narrative was, in my opinion, the strongest part of the book, and it really demonstrated Hale’s capabilities as an author. As someone who has struggled with mental illness, including depression, I found this dissociation uncomfortably familiar. My life may look nothing like Cecelia’s, but the doubt and distance communicated by the narrative reminded me of the worst episodes I’ve had. This framing might be difficult to grasp if you’ve never gone through that kind of emotional apathy, but I thought it was an incredibly effective way of demonstrating the way Cecelia’s mental illness pervades her life without her realization—and it made her moment of clarity at the end of the novel that much more effective and poignant.
The Jailing of Cecelia Capture is admittedly a difficult read, but it’s an important one. Discussions on the intersection of mental illness and racism are necessary, and Hale’s novel handles the issue tactfully without pulling any punches.