Rating: 4/5

WHERE DO I EVEN BEGIN???

I'll start with what I said on my journal a couple days ago: This is so ridiculous and balls-to-the-walls insane, like a dumb Hollywood action movie but in book form. The reviews panning it for being cheesy and over-the-top are totally missing the point: it knows exactly what it is, and it's dumb and it's fun. If you come into freaking ICE STATION expecting a ~literary tour de force~ then you have gone gravely wrong, my friend. There are explosions and motherfucking homicidal killer whales and snappy one-liners and dramatic sunglasses-removal and Marines flying around on grappling hooks and I am having so much fun with it.

Things you can expect in Ice Station: ludicrous action, cool badasses, crazy science, absolutely implausible coincidences, unrealistic timing (2 SECONDS LEFT TO STOP THE BOMB!!), and stoic staring off into the distance. If you have a low tolerance for any of these aspects, you should steer clear.

If, however, you are like me, and deeply enjoy action rampage films from the 80s, then you might wanna give this book a try. I haven't really read thrillers before, but have now discovered that I really like them even when they're dumb! I don't entirely know why I loved this but took a dump on the writing in, say, The Da Vinci Code, but I think it has something to do with: 1) it seems to take itself less seriously than Dan Brown does, 2) I actually really like the female characters and thought they were strong and good, including the nerdy little girl and her freaking adorable pet seal, 3) it doesn't result in people gathering in hushed little corners to whisper about The Da Vinci Code in awe-struck tones and wonder how much of it is true. It's high-octane ludicrousness, and gosh, I am definitely going to read more Matthew Reilly now.

Everything is neatly tied up in a bow at the end, every last loose thread accounted for. There's just something to be said for occasionally turning off your brain and inhaling a story like this. I don't think I've ever read a crazier book. At some points I was just laughing out loud from the sheer LUNACY of what was unfolding on the page in front of me, but it was always in a fun manner.

Also, I can't get over the killer whale scenes, they were actually legitimately terrifying. I HAVE A THING ABOUT SEA CREATURES, THEY FREAK ME THE FUCK OUT.

My general rule of thumb when reviewing things: I'm not giving this 4 stars in comparison to other books which might be better-written and have more heart and depth and development etc; I'm giving it 4 stars in comparison to what it's striving to be, how well it hits that marker, and how enjoyable this was to read (which was a lot).

(SPOILERS FOR THE ENDGAME: Also, there are GIANT MUTANT IRRADIATED SEALS and all of the female Marines survive and they are awesome, so Matthew Reilly gets points in my book for all of that.)