Rating: 4/5

This was a story about childhood friends, sweethearts, what ifs, secrets, and sacrifice. Well written story line, keeps the reader interested to find out what happens next. Not a bunch of extra details to make it boring. This is about a mother's love and what she is willing to do and give up to protect her daughter. It is also about a mother's sacrifice at real love to marry someone who does love her, but also is controlling of her, their marriage, which causes her to remain submissive to him for over 16 years. The mother, Carly, becomes pregnant from a rape, which she tells no one about but her mother and a family friend at the time who was a deputy at the time. She doesn't tell the man she is in love with, David, because she doesn't want to ruin his life, his career, so she goes to another man, another childhood friend, tells him she is pregnant, which he assumes his best friend David is the father of. He and Carly marry, have the baby and she also goes on to have two more children, sons. Sixteen years later, the death of David's father brings him back home and back into the life of Carly. While Carly's husband, Ethan, is drunk one night, he "spills" the beans that the daughter he raised is actually David's. To keep up with the lies, Carly tells David that she is his and why she had done what she did all those years ago. Meanwhile, Andrea, the daughter, hears all this, makes the choice to go live with her dad in London. As time goes by, Andrea settles into a life there, meets a young man who she falls deeply in love with. While her mother visits her, Andrea begins to have nosebleeds and isn't feeling well. Reluctantly the mother returns back to the states and has David promise to take her to a doctor. Then, when she receives the call from him telling her that Andrea has leukemia and needs to start treatment right away. Of course, she goes there, against her husbands wishes. He feels she doesn't need to go be with her daughter because she has a family here to take care of and he tries to guilt her into staying. She goes anyway, Andrea starts treatment but seems to be getting sicker. Carly returns home, and makes a decision that will change everyone's lives to try and save her daughters life. The truth about who is actually Andrea's father comes out, no one believes it because they think Carly had "provoked" him into raping her by saying or doing something to make him do it. Carly then tells her husband about the who raped her and who is actually Andreas father. He did say he wished she had told him all those years ago, probably the most human thing he ever said, but he still was trying to control her and keeping her away from Andrea. Carly, finally after years of submission to this man, takes a backbone and stands up to him. She returns to London, defeated because she wasn't able to obtain a possible bone marrow donor for Andrea. While there, Andrea passes. She also confesses to David about the rape and why she chose to do what she did all those years ago. He too wishes she had told him, even though he wasn't sure what he would have done because things were so different for them all back then. Upon returning to the states, Carly leaves Ethan, the boys decide to live with her, they all move to Colorado and she also begins to paint again. The book ends with the boys telling her that David is in town for a book signing and her going there and they realizing they are to be together. This would make another good book, continuing on with them being back together after all they went through. Good book and I would like to read more by this author.