Rating: 3/5

This is a strange novel. I've never read anything quite like it although the atmosphere of the novel reminded me faintly of Wuthering Heights.

The winner of several Canadian awards for children's literature, Shadow in Hawthorn Bay is set in 1815 Scotland and Upper Canada. Fifteen-year-old Mary Urquhart sees visions from the future and hears voices. When she hears the voice of her first cousin, Duncan, calling to her from Canada, she leaves Scotland and makes the sea voyage to Canada to be with him. She wants to be with him the rest of her life, never separated again, but when she arrives in Canada, she discovers Duncan is dead.

Life in 1800s Canada is hard, and Mary longs to go back to Scotland but needs to earn money to pay for her return trip. The local people try to help her and themselves by hiring her for odd jobs. However, her constant stories about little people, fairies, goatmen, and so on set everyone on edge. The locals don't know what to make of Mary's "second sight" or stories. She doesn't understand how they can be so clueless about such things.

Despite her oddities, a local man, Luke, falls in love with her and asks her to marry him. Mary must choose whether to follow the continued calls of Duncan, return to Scotland, or remain in Canada and marry Luke.

As a modern-day reader, I couldn't help wondering whether Mary had a form of schizophrenia. The novel seemed well-researched and historically accurate, so maybe early Scottish immigrants really did believe in fairies, ghosts, creatures that were part-human and part-beast, and so on. I know my Norwegian ancestors similarly spoke of trolls and told the story, "The Three Billy Goats Gruff," so maybe it was common for some European groups to bring beliefs and tell stories that struck other ethnic groups as peculiar.

Whatever the case, the novel makes for an interesting historical read, especially with the sea voyage to Canada and the glimpse of life in Canada after the loyalists fled from the Yankees in the lower American colonies.