Rating: 3/5

I have mixed thoughts about this book. I do enjoy historical fiction, and this book presents colonial life in the east Florida colony of St. Augustine, starting a year before the American Revolution when Maria and her first husband,arrive from Cuba where he was stationed while the British fought the Spanish in Cuba. (Spain agreed to give Florida to the British in exchange for the city of Havana). There is some insight into the back and forth control of the City of St. Augustine, between the Spanish, then the British, then back to the Spanish. It does not give a lot of insight into the Revolutionary War or the pre-war happenings, except tangentially, through letters from Maria's father who heads to South Carolina and fights with the Patriots, ultimately dying without seeing his daughter again. The Stamp Act, the Dumping of the tea into the Boston Harbor, the Townsend Act are discussed through his letters. East Florida is little affected. 
 I liked the description of the settings in East Florida. I could "feel" the humidity, I could "see" the lush flora, I could "smell"the marsh, through the author's writing. I thoroughly enjoyed the descriptions of and references to the the Plaza, to the Castillo, to Maria's house on St. Francis Street. They brought the city alive for me - I have visited and walked most of St. Augustine, including a tour of the St. Francis Street house ("The Oldest House"), so I felt as if I was "in" the story. 
 What I feel were this book's weak points and drawbacks: it read too often like a romance novel, rather than historical fiction. The story is based on the real life of Maria Evans, an independent and resourceful woman by all accounts, however she is constantly referred to as an ageless beauty desired by men of all ages and all walks of life. Her physical beauty is spoken about and described too often, as if that were her defining characteristic, rather than her strength and resourcefulness. She marries three times.... again, the descriptions of her romantic yearnings take precedence! Everyone falls in love with her and wants to marry her. 😑 And tho go she is smart and independent, or so the author would want you to believe, (and I do believe she was) she is so blinded by her love for her third husband that all of her hard won holdings, real estate and land, savings, and reputation, came to ruin!!!! This seems oxymoronic. 
Finally, the book was too drawn out, many chapters lagged, and at one point, after my eager devouring of the first 2/3's of the book, I almost put it down for good. In the end, I am glad that I finished it, and do think it deserves the 3 ⭐️ rating that I am giving it.