Rating: 4/5

I wouldn't be surprised if Lysistrata was the first sex comedy (that's a genre, right?). Sex (or lack there of ) drives the plot and innuendos abound:

Lysistrata: But I tell you, here's a far more weighty object.
Calonice: What is it all about, dear Lysistrata, that you've called the women hither in a troop? What kind of object is it?
Lysistrata: A tremendous one!
Calonice: And long?
Lysistrata: Indeed, it may be very lengthy.
Calonice: Then why aren't they here?
Lysistrata: No Man's connected with it; if that was the case, they'd soon come fluttering along. No, no. It concerns an object I've felt over and turned this way and that for sleepless nights.
Calonice: I must be fine to stand such long attention.

On its surface this play is about the women of Greece withholding sex from the men to force them to make peace during the destructive Peloponnesian War. In truth I am pretty sure Aristophanes just wanted an excuse to make as many sexual innuendos and gender stereotypes as possibly.

Lysistrata: We must refrain from every depth of love... Why do you turn your backs? Where are you going? Why do you bite your lips and shake your heads? Why are your faces blanched? Why do you weep? Will you or won't you [join me in the sex strike]...
Myrrhine: No I won't. Let the war proceed.

~~~

Cinesias: Don't go, please don't go, Myrrhine [his wife and a sex striker]. At least hear our child... don't you feel pity for the child? He's not been fed or washed now for six days.
Myrrhine: I certainly pity him with so heartless a father...
...
Cinesias: You love me! Then dear girl, let me also love you.
Myrrhine: You must be joking. The boy's looking on.
Cinesias: Here, Manes, take the child home! ... There, he's gone. There's nothing in the way now. 

The women fret about their homes going to ruin while they are away. One even tries to fake a pregnancy:

Lysistrata: What nonsense is this?
Woman: I'll drop any minute
Lysistrata: Yesterday you weren't with child.
Woman: But I am today. O let me find a midwife Lysistrata. O Quickly!
Lysistrata: Now what story is this you tell? What is this hard lump here?
Woman: It's a male child.
Lysistrata: By Aphrodite, it isn't. Your belly's hollow, and it has the feel of metal... Well, I soon can see. You hussy, it's Athene's scared helm, and you said you were with child.

Some, however, are pretty damn good at messing with the mind's of their men:
 
Myrrhine: But how can I break my oath? 
Cinesias: Leave that to me, I'll take all the risk
Myrrhine: Well, I'll make you comfortable
Cinesias: Don't worry. I'd as soon lie on the grass
Myrrhine: No, by Apollo, in spite of all your faults I won't have you lying on the nasty earth... Rest here on the bench, while I arrange my clothes. O what a nuisance, I must find some cushions first.
Cinesias: Why some cushions? Please don't get them!
Myrrhine: What? Plain, hard wood? Never, by Artemis! That would be too vulgar
Cinesias: Open your arms!
Myrrhine:...Here the cushions are. Lie down while I - O dear! but what a shame, you need more pillows.
Cinesias: I don't want them dear.
Myrrhine: But I do... Why, you've no blanket.
Cinesias: It's not the silly blanket's warmth but yours I want.
Myrrhine: Never mind. You'll soon have both. I'll come right back... Would you like me to perfume you?
Cinesias: By Apollo, no! 
Myrrhine: By Aphrodite, I'll do it anyway!

etc etc etc 

(Sufficed to say, the oath was not broken, though I think the poor man's will was)

Aristophanes also takes plenty of opportunities to insert sexual innuendo because he can:

[after peace has been agreed upon]
Athenians: I want to strip at once and plow my land.
Spartans: And mine I want to fertilize at once.

~~~

Men's chorus: We must take a stand and keep to it, for if we yield the smallest bit to their importunity then nowhere from their inroads will be left to us immunity...And if they mount, the Knights they'll rob of a job,  for everyone knows how talented they all are in the saddle, having long practiced how to straddle...

In spite of all the sex and joking, the play does have a few good messages:

Lysistrata: You [men] wrack hellenic cities, bloody Hellas with deaths of her own sons, while yonder clangs the gathering menace of barbarians.

~~~

Lysistrata: It should not prejudice my voice that I'm not born a man, if I say something advantageous to the present situation. For I'm taxed too, and as a toll provide men for the nation while, miserable greybeards... contribute nothing of any importance whatever to our needs.

But mostly this was a play about sex and sex jokes that were shockingly modern in their convention (might have just been the translation). This was a quick and enjoyable read, just remember this was meant to be a bit of an absurdist satire so don't take the actions and decisions of the characters very seriously.