Rating: 4/5

I am of the opinion that most rock biographies are identical: From humble beginnings, the talented-though-unstable musician rises through hardship and adversity to the heights of stardom, where he experiences success and drugs/booze/women, and then falls gradually or swiftly from grace. "No One Here Gets Out Alive" does not much stray from that arc, but it is the energy and passion of the tale itself that makes it such a fascinating read.

Jerry Hopkins interviewed Jim Morrison for Rolling Stone several times during his brief life, and he and Danny Sugarman bring this first-hand knowledge to their thoroughly researched biography of one of classic rock's most fascinating yet most mercurial talents. Each chapter is told as if around a campfire, recounting not only the most sordid details but also the atmosphere, the personalities present, the emotions and the dangers and the triumphs that followed Morrison and the Doors on their meteoric rise into the rock pantheon. The epic drinking is here, as are the hordes of women and Morrison's notorious court cases, but so too is his little-seen humanity, his insecurity at being famous, his desire to be taken seriously as a poet, his aspirations to be more than just a car wreck spectacle for the public's enjoyment. 

The authors approach their subject with both a clear love for their young subjects as well as their music--they are far more interested in helping us to try and understand the mystery than in hanging out the dirty laundry. In that way, this is a far more classy affair than the multitudes of "unauthorized" music bios that have followed since. It reads not as a requiem, but rather a celebration--chastizing Morrison for his unacceptable episodes without also condemning. Terrific pictures accompany the text, showing Morrison's physical as well as pscyhological spiral. 

The book is a swift read, an absolute page-turner, and brings just a little bit of needed light to bear on America's foremost poet/musician, gone from us too soon.