Rating: 1/5

I should have seen the warning signs. Right from the beginning I found myself making excuses for the author because I wanted to like this book so much. I have been on a Tutor kick lately, and was really excited to read some different history about monarchs and their scandals because it is oh-so-fun.

I excused the author for abrasive language, thinking that maybe she was writing this way to be funny. This mistress is just a silly whore and that one is duller than a box of spoons. It's a good thing Mistress X was so pretty or else she would have been on the street. Or Mistress Y is so dumpy looking it must be her intelligence that makes up for that deficit. I felt like Herman had a love hate relationship with these women. It was as if she admired them, but their scandalous lifestyles made her uncomfortable with this adoration.

I even excused her choppy writing style, her disorganization and her tendency to leave out dates and repeat stories from previous chapters. I told myself that she was just trying to set this up in unique way to get away from the boring and predictable format of a chronological timeline, focusing instead on different aspects of a mistress's life and trying to draw parallels between a plethora of women all at once. I was willing to concentrate a little harder to keep them all straight, to keep Wikipedia open if I got confused.

But soon I started noticing some troubling trends. Herman kept referring to women as being "frigid". This term bothers me more than it should, I admit. But it seems to imply that there is something wrong with women who do not want to have sex all the time just to please their man. In the case of Madame Pompadour, it sounded like she had an actual condition that made sex uncomfortable. I think it is incredibly unfair to label her as "frigid" because of this. The use of this term over and over again made me feel that the author was sexist in her own way, that maybe she views the role of wife or mistress as soley to please the husband.

Herman also points out flaws in queens and mistresses but fails to point any fingers at the kings who use and abuse both of them. She seems to argue that if only the queen wasn't so frigid/ugly/nagging/jealous/stupid, maybe her husband the king would love her. 

And then there are these gems of quotes from the book that made me want to light the book on fire.

In regard to Madame Pompadour's role in the Seven Year's War, Herman writes, "The one case of a royal mistress holding true power in her smooth white hands ended disastrously." It sounds as if Herman is arguing that us women should leave all the real decision making to men, because history shows that women are incapable of making these sorts of decisions. Never mind that the French army was made of idiots instead of soldiers, that wars are complicated with countless variables and that were many other players involved. 

Another quote, this time in reference to kings marrying their mistresses:
"We find an almost biblical morality lesson in cases where the monarch made an unseemly marriage. Divine wrath was swift and sure. It was as if the Almighty did not approve of the king transforming fornication into the sanctified sex of marriage. For worse a sin than fornication was ignorance of one's proper place in teh scheme of things. When a mere pawn became queen in the chessboard of life, the game was forfeit."
WTF???? God is smiting kings who marry for love now?!?!? It can't be something much simpler, like the social constructs of the time allowed the king's subjects to raise hell for him if he married a woman they didn't like?? Are we really bringing god into this?!?!?

And last but not least:
"In the past century, we women have gained equal rights, showers, c-sections, and mammograms. As grateful as we are, we have, nevertheless, lost a large part of the beauty of women's lives."
Really? For one, I am not "grateful" for these things. I am glad I happened to be born in this time period instead of the past- but I cannot be grateful for things like equality (or striving for equality- I am not so naive as to believe we are completely there yet). These things that she is "grateful" for are things that should be given to everyone- freedom, access to adequate healthcare, and cleanliness. I will not grovel or thank the men of the world for "allowing" me to have them. These things should be unquestionably accessible for every man, woman and child living in our times, and no one should ever be made to feel that they do not deserve them for any reason. 
I just don't see what beauty we have lost as women. Our fashions are different- we do not have to wear restrictive clothing unless we want to. If Herman wants to wear the pretty gowns and dresses of times past, that is her perogative. There is nothing wrong with that, if that is what she wants to do. But don't lecture me on how ugly our lives have become because we can now wear jeans and t-shirts. It is silly and petty and makes me think that Herman is also.

Ok, I am done ranting. Maybe the joke is on me, but I doubt it. I couldn't bring myself to read the last chapter of this book.