Rating: 5/5

The presence of--&amp; intrepidly sudden breaks from--romantic conventions is what makes "Corelli's Mandolin" (alongside its romantic older brother, book two of his Latin American trilogy, the devastating love tale "Senor Vivo and the Coca Lord") one of the MOST ROMANTIC novels of ALL TIME. On par with "Gone With the Wind," &amp; other epics like "Cold Mountain" &amp; "The English Patient," it truly was, to this impressionable-though-selective reader, what is the equivalent of a wondrous trip to Adult Disneyland, where surprises loom ever-near, and whimsy runs amok.

But what makes this utterly brilliant is the prose (on top of an unpredictable and thrilling plot). The writer is this supernova de Bernieres (all 4 of his novels at this point are in my Must-Read List). Here, you realize exactly WHY you read. WHY people bother to write--if you are Louis De Bernieres you simply cannot not keep producing. The gift is almost mythical, and you are compelled to feel that the auteur has had the TIME of his LIFE writing this, writing and falling head-over-heels in love with his creation which, indeed, depicts LOVE and is, itself, wholly a product of love--the love of beautiful prose.

In "Corelli", the tricks and poetics already explored in the often-lauded Latin American trilogy, collaborate once more to make a solid work of art. As is customary, just as this tale takes one of its manifold dark turns, when times in the Greek island are dire, desperate and almost-hopeless, the titular character appears &amp; drives the darkness away. This, as if a gift from the Greek gods themselves. Or the gift from a master to his drooling spectator.

This, his fourth (amazing!!!) concoction, puts in evidence the fact that not ALL magic realism belongs to sir Garcia Marquez. Louis de Bernieres' brand is all his own: humorous, unpredictably playful and savagely biting. The effect lasts outside of the book; the novel is a rotund success. My favorite of Louis de Bernieres (so far).

I devoured Corelli's Mandolin like some bon vivant living in the 20th century. Like a character in one of his novels, in fact. I became for a full two days, a blissful accomplice, just grateful to be nothing but a hoodwinked voyeur.