Rating: 1/5

I can’t believe this is happening but here I am, my first ever DNF.

I DNF’ed this book somewhere around 60% and because of that I will still give this book a rating, my second 1 star rating; the first one was for Uprooted by Naomi Novik. 

This is an extremely unpopular opinion and I know a LOT of people loved this book, so please keep in mind that this is just my honest opinion. At the time of posting this review, there are less than 200 readers—including me—who gave it a 1 star rating, out of 15.7k ratings, don’t let this review alone be a sign for you to not try the book if you’re already interested in it.

GGK fans usually recommend either Tigana or The Lions of Al-Rassan when asked on which GGK’s book to start with, this is not the first time I read GGK’s work, I’ve read Tigana and I love that book, I gave it 4.5/5 stars, but this book for me is a far cry from that. 

Where Tigana was more of a fantasy, The Lions of Al-Rassan is my first experience with GGK’s historical fiction books and after this, I have to remove tons of his books from my TBR. Throughout my time reading, I can’t help but feel that knowledge on Medieval Spain—which I knew next to nothing about—is crucial in order to love this book. GGK didn’t spare any moment in explaining the meaning behind each terminology or names, I also expected the religions to play a lot of part in the story but they didn’t. The analogy to Christian, Jews, and Muslim weren’t as important as I thought it would be, they were just there.

The worst part of the book for me, however, was the characters. Even by 60% mark, I still don’t care about any of the characters, literally none. I have no idea how this book ends, but considering how I feel about the characters, if at the end they all die I would still feel nothing; I would prefer to continue watching Stranger Things season 2 on Netflix &lt;-- Genius product placement Petrik, bravo. 

Sex scenes and romance are, as usual, cringeworthy. This seems to be GGK’s trademark, it happened in Tigana too but it’s just so much worse here. I really don’t like how GGK portrayed romance and sex scenes. Not only they’re pointless, the sex scenes are over the top and all the characters are written like a porn star with stunning sex prowess. Plus the matter of instalove and what seems to be a love triangle formed between the main characters, both are something that I highly dislike in the books I read.

GGK’s prose is beautiful and lyrical, no doubt about those as I loved reading his writing, especially in Tigana. Here though? His writing direction felt off. Prose changes to present tense for reasons I have no idea why, characters POV changed within the same or the next paragraphs repeatedly making my head hurt literally hurt and also, ended up making me feel so disconnected with the book.

These are all my interpretations from 60% of the book, all I know is, I can’t be bother to continue with this book unless I’m feeling masochist and willing to go into a reading slump. As you can see from my review, this book didn’t infuriate me as much as Uprooted did, it’s just extremely boring with no ambulance to save me from the reading slump emergency nearby. The Lions of Al-Rassan is definitely not for me and I can’t recommend this to anyone. 

If you want a fantastic historical fiction, go with Bernard Cornwell; if you’re interested in giving GGK a try, I recommend you to read Tigana. I will MAYBE still give Sarantine Mosaic duology a try, but I doubt I’ll be reading any of his works other than that duology considering that all of them are mostly historical fictions as well. Once again, this is an extremely unpopular opinion, the majority of readers love this book; some even claimed this is GGK’s best work and I hope you will love it too.

You can find the rest of my Adult Epic/High Fantasy &amp; Sci-Fi reviews at BookNest