Rating: 5/5

Every single story in this collection is amazing. It's been a few years since I last read this book and as I read each story I would realize it was another one that has popped into my mind occasionally as a really good story I remembered fondly or that tugged at my heartstrings - seriously, a short story that can make you cry? That's some major writing. Another thing I like about this book is that at the end of each story there is a little explanation about it from the author.

The Lottery by Lucy Sussex - 3 Stars
Interesting take on humans vs other species when both try to make sure they are the final product of evolution.

Face to Stony Face by Gary Crew - 3 stars
This is one of the stories I've remembered fondly - playful gargoyles...

The Battle of Leila the Dog by Rick Kennett - 5 Stars
This is the story that I've cried over each time I've read it. Beautiful and sad and even a space battle!

Long Live the Giant! by Isobelle Carmody - 4 Stars
The image of the giant's hand encased in a stone tower is one that has haunted me since I first read this...

The Blondefire Genome by Sean McMullen - 5 Stars
The fact that the author says this type of genetic experimentation was possible in the 80's is kind of scary considering things have probably advanced even further since then... And the revenge of zitgrass is just cool.

Everything by Mustafa Zahirovic - 3 Stars
This is another sad story, though it doesn't make me cry. The boy's whole life is one of desperation.

White Christmas by Sean Williams - 4 Stars
Another sad one that has popped into my mind quite a few times over the years. Aliens terraform our planet which leads to a very quiet apocalypse.

 by Paul Voermans - 2 Stars
This one is the one I least like of the stories mostly because I just don't buy the plausibility of the slugs... which is a weird thing to get hung up on considering what the story is about kids who can skate/surf intangibly through the universe, but ah well...

Circles of Fire by Sophie Masson - 4 Stars
It's odd, I didn't realize almost half the stories in this collection were kind of sad - because I find this one to be as well. Very interesting take on angels and crop circles and man's inhumanity to man.