Rating: 2/5

Fansite http://www.jimcarreyonline.com/
Jim Carrey overcame great hardship and poverty to transform his humor into millions, and an inspiration. In Canada, where our government is famous for soft-hearted protection of weak, he slipped through the cracks, in my nearby neighborhood. I loved his movies, and read a better big color bio that I cannot find, so substituted this kiddie edition available in my local library for now. 

The worst of reviewing books like this is this. (arg) Same as I easily assimilate funny expressions, foreign accents and new languages, I absorb unwanted yuck. Moral? Don't let people (books, TV, films) into your brain if you don't want them to stay. 

Pros? Essentials. Simple, short, straight-forward, fast read, mostly praises. By junior high school teacher from third-hand books or accounts, biographies mainly, inset shaded text around bw (black and white) photos 1/3 - full page size, mostly Archive, Corbis, Photofest. 

Cons? No direct quotes or interviews. Reminds me of those birds who predigest nestling pap. Relegated to J (juvenile) section, despite vocabulary "assailed .. surreptitiously .. anarchic .. fusion .. substantial .. analyzing .. ante" p60. Like school history classes that bored me, a list of names and dates, padded but not invigorated. 

Using long convoluted sentences, passive conditional verb tenses, substituting multi-syllable words for simple one-syllable versions, does not enhance or upgrade the result to quality literature. A thesaurus is invaluable. An automated spell-checker is fallible. 

Like most Carrey bios, this dates from the peak of Carrey's fame. This is not the tear-jerker I previously read, that emphasized his dropout impoverished youth, hungry jobless family crammed into a small trailer, his depression, double divorce, and had many color movie frames. Incomplete. Little on my favorite The Mask, fellow actors. Preview. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l37DBE... https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zwGxB... Omits my other favorite Grinch https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQV5P... Preview.

Little revelation of secrets. His mom constantly complained of illness until her family ignored her, yet died of double kidney failure (lupus?). For "Dumb and Dumber" film http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TRE7gI..., he removed cap from really chipped front tooth, combined "Spock from Star Trek with Jerry Lewis from The Nutty Professor p66. The Cable Guy might be good, but advertised as a comedy, guaranteed disappointment, to me for sure. 

Liar, Liar https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DGpS0... is fall-off-the-couch funny. Max 5, constantly let down by his lawyer dad, makes a birthday wish that he be unable to lie for just one day. Now listen to how boring wordiness dries out the excitement. 

"Carrey strings together a series of hilarious encounters in which he disturbs coworkers and passersby with his honest responses. Gradually Reede realizes how frequently he lies and how much of a disappointment he has been to his son .. He delivered a complex individual who laughs on the outside to cover the pain hidden inside." p80. Yawn. Snore. 

"Recent Projects" chapter inaccurately lists Fool on the Hill "a disc jockey who operates a radio station at a mental institution" and The Incredible Mr Limpet "will rely heavily on animation" p88, neither Carrey's. "Plans for the Future" being "onstage" p91 is an obvious guess. The Secret Life of Walter Mitty may still come out (2013 imdb), but not with Carrey http://www.jimcarreyonline.com/movies.... The Incredible Burt Wonderstone does not seem to stretch his abilities, comic or dramatic, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dwOf29... but what are those current abilities? http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24tE-V... interview with big feet and little wings