Rating: 4/5

Margot #4

Sometimes, art imitating life is just fun. 

Case in point. Somewhere around 1593-4, a British bloke named Will heard some gossip about the French royals. A Catholic princess Marguerite or Margot marries a Protestant king of someplace with a Spanish sounding name, Navarre? Yes Henri of Navarre, I believe. Their marriage, which was suppose to mend the country just made a mess of it. Are they in love? Did they have kids? Do they love others? Who do they really love? Gossipy kind of stuff.

It sounds like the start of a joke so this bloke named Will, who just happens to be a writer of the stage, writes a comedy. Better yet, a comedy about Love. Even better, the commission is by his queen, Queen Elizabeth I, who just happens to be Protestant, and she could use a laugh or two. You see Elizabeth has a problem with a girl named Mary. Heard of her, Mary Queen of the Scots. Those royals are in a pickle and it doesn’t matter what side of the pond you are on. So when times are tough, go see a comedy.

Assemble a cast. 
Start with King Ferdinand of Navarre (let’s not use the real name) and his lot of loyal lords: Berowne, Longaville and Dumain (they sound French). Add in the Princess of France (no name needed, let the audience guess) and her ladies: Maria, Katharine and Rosaline. Katharine? Dead give away. Well those ladies aren’t allowed to travel alone so add in some Lords: Boyet and Marcade (they sound so chic, no I meant French). Of course, we really need a Spaniard, Don Adriano de Armado and his loyal page, Moth. Of course, since it’s a comedy, we need a lot of extras, a curate Sir Nathaniel, the schoolmaster Holofernes (to correct the Latin, really don’t ask), Dull the constable and Costard a clown. The last two live up to their names and/or their characters. 

The Plot.
The three lords of the king swear off women for three years so they can finish their studies. No distractions, please. An oath is taken. However, rumour has it that the Princess and her cohorts are in the neighborhood and, well, men are men.

The device.
Spaniards, those great lovers, can write a love letters that tweak the interest of the ladies. His letter to a country girl called Jaquenetta, is sent to to the wrong person. The King falls for the Princess. His lords fall for the ladies! Oh no their oath is broken. No, they need a ruse. Let’s be Russians (really don’t ask)! As Longaville exclaims: Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France? Bien sûr!

The counterplot.
The ladies are told of their scheme by their French lords (I knew they had a reason for being there). They decide to exchange their clothes to deceive the eager deceitful lords. What follows is a comedy of errors. A lot of punning on light and dark makes for some great rebuttals. Women really are no fools. The men? Isn’t it obvious?

I am sure Elizabeth cracked a smile or two.