Rating: 5/5

When I started reading Alan Moore's Swamp Thing, I was unsure of what to expect. I had heard a great deal about this famous series and finally ran across a collected works of the venerable AM run. This first volume collects issues #20-#27. While 20 might seem an odd number to start volume one on, it makes eminent sense in the context of Alan Moore taking over the writing duties for this series.

His breathtaking vision for the "reboot" of the Swamp Thing made him famous. Moore changes the premise of Alec Holland being turned into the Swamp Thing, which had the simplistic feel of a typical monster story. This could be considered in keeping with the times, this was written in 1972, but Alan Moore showed his visionary style by taking the Swamp Thing and turning it into a vehicle for his then-radical ideas about nature, the environment and even just changing up the way comic stories were told. Moore's Swamp Thing wasn't a person (Alec Holland) who had been transformed into a plant, but rather a plant that had the consciousness of Alec Holland who was dead. Moore's Swamp Thing also seems to occupy a DC world that was contiguous to the "normal" world of Superman and Batman, but at the same time it seemed to have its own goings on.

The more common heroes such as the Justice League and Superman do make appearances at certain points, as do more esoteric (back then at least) characters such as John Constantine and Jason Blood (Etrigan). But the main brilliance was that, in essence, Swamp Thing was a plant that thought of itself as a having the thoughts of a human.

Alan Moore's true brilliance though is found in the dialogue and the prose that fills this volume. What a well written book. Even the annoying Etrigan (a rhyming demon) works out well in AM's skilled hands. The artwork was more than likely ground breaking for its time and surprisingly enough isn't wretched even in this day and age. Some of the full page splash scenes are rather stunning to this day and so seem to work with this world of his.

If you are interested in the Swamp Thing world or just enjoy the writings of Alan Moore, this is a great series to start with. Moore's writing is truly beautiful and the issues that he brings up- for example the Floronic Man and Swamp Thing's similarities and differences when they viewed Nature and humanity interacting. Moore was well ahead of his time with the environmental outlook his book stresses. It was also nice to see a story where the Justice League, while present, had little to nothing to do with the ending-as it was the Swamp Thing all along that was able to deal with the Floronic Man, while the JLA members including Superman were unable to do anything.

This is my first time reading Swamp Thing and I am glad I waited till I was an adult to fully appreciate and understand all the subtle brilliance required to pen a work of such substance. I truly enjoyed this volume and will continue on the Alan Moore run of Swamp Thing for as long as it continues. A great book -far, far ahead of it's time.