Rating: 4/5

Oh my goodness! I read this book when I was about eleven years old and I've been searching for it every since. No, really. You know those books you read as a kid that kind of stayed with you, but you can't remember the title? That was this book. I searched for it in the library, rooting through the orange coloured books. I scoured titles for something with "Wind" in it. That's all I could remember. 

And then, by some bizarre chance, a friend asked, "Did you ever read the Wind on Fire trilogy?" 
Me: "Never heard of it. What's it about?" 
She goes on to explain it, and I get more and more excited because It's the book. 

So, she lent it to me and I reread it, and now I have warm happy, fluttery things in my chest and stomach. It was as good as I remembered it, and left me with nostalgic fuzzies to boot!

Obviously, I'm a bit biased in this review. When it comes to my childhood... Well, let's say that while I'm usually not a romantic, (Well, I am kind of, I just like to pretend that I'm not half as much a romantic as I actually am) I tend to romanticize my childhood and almost everything that has to do with it now contains some sort of special aura around it that brings me happiness. And sadness. And pretty much the whole spectrum of feelings that one associates with their childhood. Anyway. This book was part of my childhood, albeit a very small part, and taking what I've just said, you can be pretty certain that this review will be kind of gushy and biased. 

I love it. The setting, the word, the richness of sand that I can practically feel, and the characters. I just get myself lost in the wonderful description and setting. It's like how I viewed the world of The Floating Islands by Rachel Neumier. The world had such charm, and character. Also, both worlds would make an awesome setting for a Studio Ghibli movie. 

The plot is exciting, and though a bit juvenile and lacking in a whole lot of controversy, it's easy to stay engaged in. The characters are charming, relatable, and, well, simply darling. They're characters that I really wanted to pick up in a big hug and squeeze and squeeze. Especially Mumbo. And Bowman. And Pinpin. And Kestrel. And almost everyone. 

I have little to complain about. Obviously, this is for younger readers, but I still enjoyed it now as a young adult. The characters weren't super deep, but like I said, they were sweet and likable. This is one book that I will definitely be purchasing and then forcing on the kids/younger teens of my acquaintance. So good.