Rating: 4/5

On one level, this book is part of Carlos Castaneda’s (1925-1998) twelve book series about his adventures as a sorcerer, beginning with his long apprenticeship to don Juan Matus (circa 1892-1972 – although Matus’ very existence has been called into question by critics). On another level, this book is a sort of manual on writing memoirs, a perennial genre that is currently in vogue.

It begins with don Juan telling Carlos that to become a sorcerer he must put together an “album” consisting of significant memories. Initially, Carlos comes back with the story of being jilted at the altar many years before. Don Juan points out that the story is self-centered, and Carlos neither loved this fiancée nor did she make a lasting impact on him; so this story is rejected. Don Juan explains that the kind of story he wants is about something beyond Carlos himself, even though Carlos should be in the middle of it as a participant. The stories that don Juan accepts are about other people, and some are also about journeys. In cases where the other person in the memoir is still alive, don Juan urges Carlos to go find that person and thank them, sometimes by making them a gift. 

At least one of the stories is about women that Carlos had cared about but had hurt. Once, he had two girlfriends simultaneously, and a male friend advised him to play with the affections of both women. This turned out disastrously. Carlos had to go away. Years later, he visits the women and, per don Juan’s instructions, offers each woman any gift that she wants. Don Juan advises that the gifts should leave Carlos penniless, and they do. (The first woman asks for a fur coat and the second requests a station wagon.) The important thing is that they both agree to forgive him. According to don Juan, the gifts abolish Castaneda’s obligations to these women.

Most of the memoirs deal with people from Carlos’ boyhood who are no longer alive: among them, a brave boy who went with Carlos through caves under a mountain, Carlos’ father, a grandfather, a grandmother, his grandfather’s worst enemy who became Carlos’ friend, his grandmother’s adopted son who might be described as a magnificent failure, and the man who introduced Carlos to don Juan but whom Carlos ignored when he most needed Carlos’ friendship. Not only does Carlos tell their stories, but he posthumously thanks them, especially at the end of his apprenticeship when he is about to say goodbye to don Juan and become a sorcerer in his own right.

Woven together with these stories is Carlos’ exposure to don Juan’s most advanced teachings. Once, don Juan revealed that the shack in the desert where Carlos always met him was not don Juan’s main residence but a place chosen because it was suited to Carlos’ spiritual poverty. In this book, don Juan finally allows Carlos to visit his real house surrounded by trees and in a mountainous region. Carlos receives revelations about procedures and events in earlier books in the series. For example, oftentimes when don Juan or don Genaro slap Carlos on the back, they are not kidding around but are manipulating the energy field around Carlos so that his consciousness will shift, allowing him to perceive the lesson at hand. Carlos also explores the special art of “dreaming” and learns to manipulate his own perception. In one chapter, he and don Juan have agreed to rendezvous in a particular Mexican town, but Carlos falls asleep. The next thing he knows, he is meeting with don Juan in that very town. He also is introduced to the most paranoid-sounding part of don Juan’s worldview: the flyers. The flyers are what don Juan has referred to on other occasions as “an alien installation” in the human mind. These are shadow entities that feed off of the aura of every human. They do much of our thinking for us, convincing us to ignore everything that casts doubt on consensual reality. It is like “The Matrix” without the technology and the humanoid enforcers. Carlos must battle the flyers by reclaiming his autonomy. (It is like taking the red pill, to keep up the “Matrix” analogy.)

Readers of Castaneda’s earlier book, “Tales of Power,” will be familiar with this book’s penultimate chapter in which Carlos and two fellow apprentices say good bye to don Juan and don Genaro and then leap from a precipice as their final initiation. I am struck by the utterly anti-Christian (non-Christian or counter-Christian?) messages here. For example, like Jesus at the Last Supper, don Juan says he is leaving this earth, but whereas Jesus urges his disciples to remember him and avows that he will remember them, don Juan tells Carlos not to think of him anymore, and don Juan declares that he will no longer think of Carlos. This seems to be because they are both about to change in profound ways and will no longer be the same beings.

In books subsequent to “Tales of Power,” Carlos and the other two apprentices reappear as sorcerers, none the worse for their plunge over the cliff, but without any explanation of how they survived. In this book, the final chapter offers an explanation of sorts, but it is a strangely inconclusive “sorcerer’s explanation,” explaining so little that it becomes clear why Castaneda has not discussed it before. He himself does not understand what happened. It is only possible for him to accept that it must have happened and that he is still alive, although much changed. This leap of faith – rather than the leap off the cliff itself – seems to be the more important step in becoming a full-fledged sorcerer.