Rating: 4/5

Writers usually have a few stories that bounce around in their heads for years. Some of them eventually make it to the page, while others just circulate and create occasional moodiness or anxiety behind the scenes. As a bonafide, ex-commune hippie... politically, a real "man the barricades" kind of guy, vague feelings of guilt over how I, and my generation, seem to have lost the ideals that seemed so important back then have been circulating for years. I want to sincerely thank George Martin for this book. He has saved me the trouble of trying to confront these issues myself on paper and deal with the fallout.

The Armageddon Rag is a fast-paced mystery, but also a well-tuned personal introspection as the main character sorts through his feelings of "where did it all go?". I identified seamlessly with Sandy, his writer/movement reporter, as he comes to terms with how he fits into the swirling emotions and lost friendships that twenty years can bring as well as a horrific murder. The author uses the device of music lyrics and the music scene of the time to create a plausible connection with occult power and ghostly hordes, driven towards a final battle. He has to make peace with his own demons in order to be able to confront the actions of the demons that may be forcing mankind into perpetual violence and anguish. As a musician, also, I've found myself ascribing earth-changing power to the songs I grew up with, just as Sandy does.

The release date for this book, in 1982, was also important for me in understanding the character's anger and confusion as well as cultural perspectives that only age can understand. The writer's gentle affection for the tortured souls he writes about here (and in all his later work as well),left this reader with a distinct sense of redemption at the end of the book. Peace and Love and Brotherhood weren't just buzzwords, and they haven't died. They're waiting to be picked up and dusted off.

In all, for someone who maybe close to or a bit past sixty, especially anyone who lived the counter-culture, this book will be an enjoyable read, and may also help to lay your own demons down.

Thanks, Man.