Rating: 4/5

There is trouble brewing in the important port of Canton in southern China the year 681 you can smell it in the air. Judge Dee now an influential member in weak Emperor Gaozong's court of the magnificent T'ang dynasty, however the power was in the hands of the able Empress Wu his wife. Now the top law enforcer in the land he takes a journey with his two loyal aids Chiao Tai the muscles and brainy Tao Gan. People are being slaughtered at an alarming rate and growing , the odor seems to originate from the foreign boats on the Pearl River flowing to the sea but not fast enough. The vessels are mainly arriving from Persia and the ever expanding Arab Caliphate. The mysteries are more political in nature than ordinary homicides thinks Dee. The key is a beautiful but blind woman who lives by...yes the truth...capturing crickets who fight against other insects of the same species while gamblers bet, the winners survive at least another day, apparently a popular entertainment then. The human race is quite weird. A motley group of suspects spreads thickly through the city, a sea captain, wealthy merchant, a soiled dove that everyone seems to strangely love, surprisingly this...
 includes Chiao Tai , government officials and the blind girl mentioned before. Maybe rebellion here which would rock the entire nation in convulsions and cause death and destruction to his beloved country. Assassins hit hard and often, no one is spared, a strangling, knives struck, poisons drunk the cloud like puzzle hide the guilty . He must leave soon back to the capital yet our man needs time to resolve the dangerous situation it is his job. Still the judge is getting old over fifty , ancient for the 7th century however duty must be done. Feeling in his bones that fact, friends are falling away they want to start their own families . Problems never cease , this is his last case, the future makes him... 
 the influential chancellor of the huge nation, nevertheless Dee is a servant of Chinese society. A wonderful visit to the long ago, if you like history this should fascinate, people with all their faults are interesting...this changes not.