Rating: 4/5

CRITIQUE:

Sexual Politics and the Arms Trade

With one exception, this novel was an authentic, convincing and stimulating thriller set in the world of American and Middle Eastern politics, national security, international arms trading (both authorised and covert), global capitalism, criminal justice, and investigative journalism.

The exception to which I refer concerns the titular "gun runner's daughter", who by the end of the novel has qualified as a lawyer and business woman in her own right.

What I found unconvincing was the description of Allison/Esther Rosenthal, as having "small breasts, a thin waist and a Star of David that was lowered into her breasts."

This description was repeated half a dozen times throughout the novel. 

It wasn't apparent to me (let alone would it be to a female reader) why a female lawyer and business woman had to be described in terms of the size of her breasts and her waist. Besides, it's well known that a predominantly male legal firm, faced with a choice between female honours graduates from Yale and Harvard, would choose the one with the biggest tits.

I don't mean this criticism to undermine the credibility, or desirability of reading, the novel. I found its prose well structured, really dynamic and enjoyable, though at times it was difficult to keep up with the many dimensions of the plot and Alley's almost male carnal appetite and activity. 

Perhaps this is just another example of male fantasy construction, either by the author or by one or more of his characters.

The Personal and the Public

Paradoxically, Neil Gordon explained his approach to teaching and fiction in an interview:

  

  
    "My courses, whether writing or literature classes, like my novels, focus on the intersection between individuals and the political history that surrounds them; on the representation of lived political and historical experience in fiction; on the mechanics of the sympathetic imagination; as well as on the forms of the literary, political, and cultural essay."
  
  

His characters live normal personal lives within the framework of public events that govern us all.

Small arms trafficking

SOUNDTRACK:

k. d. lang - "Constant Craving"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oXqPj...

Patti Smith - "This Is the Girl"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r4CSu...

Pretenders - "Talk Of The Town"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Kdt1...