Rating: 1/5

Incubus Dreams: Wherein Anita Gathers Superpowers Like Beads at Mardi Gras (and in much the same way you earn beads at Mardi Gras).

I tried to do live updates in the comments while reading this, but had to stop just over halfway through the book. I thought it would be fun, but it wasn't. At all.

I wish I could identify a plotline for you here; there's something about murdered strippers, but that can hardly count given it's only present for about ten pages at the start of the book and then a few chapters at the end. In between there's a vast plot wasteland where no one mentions the murders at all. AT ALL. You could be forgiven for forgetting it entirely. Halfway through the book we graze past Animators Inc for two totally unrelated mystery hooks, but then abandon both of them to return to nothingness.

But if the murders aren't the central plot, then what is? Horribly, we're left with Anita's internal monologue about her new "powers" and the multiple supernatural/sexual relationships she has with any number of worshipful, abjectly submissive men. I started reading this assuming that this would be bad, but I had NO IDEA it would be quite this bad. I absolutely hate prolonged unpacking of unearned emotional torment, and that's basically all that happens in this book. Much of it is spent justifying three-ways. Much of it chest-thumps about how manly Anita is, and how she wears the pants in all of her relationships and how her boyfriends are "wifely". Not subtly either - full-on conversations about it, repeatedly. And off we go, circling the drain indefinitely.

But how on earth do you fit so much tormented angst into one book? By ramping up "ardeur", of course! This piece of supernatural bullshit was introduced a few books ago, but now it goes into overdrive and forces Anita to basically go into heat every 6 hours. Which means lots of sexy opportunities to sleep with people and then dive into chapters of long, tormented, defensive thinking about the act. I guess you could say the central plot is Anita controlling that, but she doesn't really. She just flails, and we get eyeball-searing sex scenes and what I thought was going to be a bad but entertainingly outraging read turned into something that ended up feeling like an endurance test. I felt sick upon finishing this, I think because it was so much effort to keep reading when my brain was actively trying to shut down and throw me into a coma. You know the sickness you get when you stay up 72 hours in a row on a project, and by the end you're not sure if you're going to vomit or pass out? Felt like that.

Let's do a tour of the characters, shall we? Jean-Claude spends much of his time either talking to Anita on the phone or in her head, and I have to imagine this makes him a pretty useless Master Vampire if he's checked out for much of the day coaching his girlfriend on every single thing that happens to her. Nathan appears to have adopted Stepford Wives as his own personal bible. Micah is... there? Honestly, all of the men in this book just sort of trail after Anita, asking if she's okay, offering to sleep with her, chipping in with advice about pretty much everything and putting up with her frequent tantrums. Richard is the outlier, and that's because he continues to behave like a psychotic teenager who just had a growth spurt and has crazy impulse-control issues. The number of times Richard appears on the scene and should basically be shut down with "Not your business, turn around and get out" is infinite, but Anita never does, she just delves once more into his multilayered bullshit. He's been having the same issue for about ten books. This is boring.

Before I head into spoiler territory, let me just note that Laurell K Hamilton appears to have discovered the word "spill" while writing this 12th (dear god!) installment in this series. It's used to describe anatomical features, to describe hair, to describe body parts emerging from pants, to describe candles falling into a bath. At one point I counted four instances on a single Kindle page. It only appears in sex scenes, and it can feel like it's the only verb used in those scenes. Totally weird, but given the uptick of simple spelling errors in the second half of the book, I'm guessing the editor stopped reading too soon to notice the problem. I'd usually say something like she should give back half her fee, but let's face it, the woman's suffered enough. Call it hazard pay and have done with it.

And now the details: WHERE DO I START. Well, Anita has sex with Damian and forms a "triumverate" (why the quotes? because Hamilton can't spell, that's why) with him and Nathaniel, who knows how or why. So much of what Anita does supernaturally happens by accident, which is ridiculous. In this book alone, she manages to gain healing powers, beautifying powers, clairvoyance, she somehow gets a new slave-vamp, there are more I'm not remembering - just throw the entire sink in there. She also has sex with a couple of club vampires. And Micah, of course. And... oh god, okay, my brain just cringed because I'd forgotten about the Richard/J-C spitroast scene, but that's in there too. Ugggh. And before that she has sex with Nathan while he is a catman. And then she buys him a frilly apron and pearls so he can cook biscuits in the kitchen. I've probably forgotten a few sex scenes but you'll have to forgive me because sometimes when I read something really bad, my brain tries to protectively wipe my hard drive. I'm hoping it takes care of that Richard/J-C scene soon, because I never want to recall that ever again.

Much of Anita's so-called problems are rooted in the fact that she never does any research, never wonders about the rules of her "powers", and shows about at much empathy as an eggcup. She keeps saying "I never thought of that" when someone's reaction is explained to her, but the fix for her dangerous ignorance is to actually pay attention to people on a personal level, and she can't do that. Because then she couldn't have a "realization" and waste another twenty pages of my time shuffling round talking to people in her head and resolving absolutely nothing.

There's also an over reliance on Hamilton's own mythology. You can't have it both ways - either you set firm rules for your worldbuilding and then have characters experience the consequences of their actions within those rules, or you loosely define the rules and make the discovery/exploration part of the story. But that's not what's happening here. Instead, we get new rules and powers thrown in as consequences of mundane actions, seemingly at random. That makes reading less like a journey, and more like a laundry list. It is unspeakably bad.

This is a nothing book. There is nothing there except sex scenes, and they are outside my wheelhouse. What does it for Hamilton emphatically does not do it for me, and I think at this point we can all agree that the border between what is Anita Blake and what is Hamilton is the finest of lines, so now I know waaaay too much about how Hamilton likes her men and sexual practices. They're pretty much the opposite of how I like mine - I do not like long-haired, effeminate, submissive men, so she strikes out for me with each and every scene. The descriptions are excruciatingly technical, and this isn't erotica because that requires the writing to be erotic. This isn't. It's porn.

If we were to consider this form of porn art, then this book does this for me:

I'm done. I like reading bad books for the outraged thrill, but this was too awful for enjoyment. I'm not up for reading any more of Hamilton's dream diaries. I'm out.