Rating: 3/5

The things that become certain throughout this book are 1) that meaning-making is still possibly the most eluding aspect of art, 2) that one must be obsessed with this in order to tackle it, 3) that not everyone is. 

Eco’s proposition of an “intentio operis” (intention of a text) clearly points towards a greater understanding of what texts can do, and, ultimately, what are they. He defines this intention as a text proposing “a semiotic strategy”, and while he admits that identifying what the “good” interpretations are is tricky, he is certain that one can distinguish some of the “bad” ones. Furthermore, he remarks that an “intentio operis” can invite the reader to multiple, if not infinite, conjectures that are all “correct”.

Opposed to this view we find Rorty’s frankly oversimplifying notion on texts. He postulates that texts have no inherent code and that they are simply noise until an interpreter finds a coherence to it. While he raises some very interesting points about the way a critic can use texts for their purpose against letting the text use them to change their views, his stance is pretty much an opposition to the very nature of the debate. How can we discuss the manner in which texts produce meaning if we refuse to believe they can do so?

Culler’s views are more modern, akin to what many schools might teach nowadays. To put it bluntly (and oversimplifying it) is a kind of “anything might be useful, especially paranoia”. He proposes to refer to “overintepretation” as “underinterpretation”, as he sees it more as a partial act of interpreting a text that doesn’t necessarily connect all the dots, but nonetheless can reveal something interesting about the text or about how texts work. He therefore underlines the importance of interpretative frameworks that stray away from the guidelines proposed by the “intention operis”.

Brooke-Rose talks about palimpsest history which is indeed a very interesting topic but that begs the question: why was it included in the book despite being only tangentially related to the main topic at hand?

Lastly, Eco’s response still holds that while “…a text can have many senses” he “refuse[s] the statement that a text can have every sense.” Overall, the book proves to be fascinating and funny despite straying away from the original questions put forwards in Eco’s initial chapters. What the code that differentiates interpretation from overinterpretation is, will probably be a mystery for a very long time. Probably the biggest omission of the book is that Eco never explains whether what he calls overinterpretation can be useful interpretations of a text, but later in the response he suggests he does think so and has in fact “overinterpreted” texts many times. The usefulness and differences of interpretation and overinterpretation are one of the most interesting aspects of this debate, but unfortunately, while alluded to, they are never the central question.