Rating: 3/5

welcome to...sigh...MAYBY-DICK.

this is my project long classics, in which i read a chapter a day or whatever of a really lengthy, really old book as an excuse to make a bad month-based pun and feel pretentious and superior.

in this case...i have never been less excited to begin an installment.

it's going to take more than 4 chapters a day.

bleh. let's get started.

CHAPTER 1
so there's this guy who's obsessed with water. call him ishmael.

CHAPTER 2
"no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling." is that...an atrocious pun i detect? herman, we're not so different, you and i.

CHAPTER 3
this innkeeper was like, i don't have any spare beds, but you can share this guy's. can you imagine? i don't care at all that ishmael had to bunk with a cannibal. i feel bad for the human-eater who'd already booked a room!

CHAPTER 4
ishmael and queequeg the cannibal harpooner spooned.

CHAPTER 5
ishmael spent the whole breakfast thinking about and watching queequeg. i sense a love story...

CHAPTER 6
if i can be vulnerable? sometimes i automatically assume old books are british. i'm stunned to find myself in massachusetts.

CHAPTER 7
went to look at graves right before his work trip specifically to get upset. ishmael is so real.

CHAPTER 8
quick church architecture analysis.

CHAPTER 9
sermon transcript.

CHAPTER 10
in case you think i'm making this up: "in our hearts' honeymoon, lay I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair." they're in love.

CHAPTER 11
i can't put the sweet, snuggly nature of this middle-of-the-night sojourn between two lovers fully into words.

CHAPTER 12
queequeg and ishmael getting to know each other. in bed. forehead to forehead.

CHAPTER 13
queequeg just took his shirt off to save a guy's life. i get it, ishmael.

CHAPTER 14
wild that these prestigious massachusetts towns were ever home to anybody besides men in salmon shorts that match their alcohol flush.

CHAPTER 15
they still were obsessed with chowder, though. not everything has changed.

CHAPTER 16
we've found ourselves a whaling ship.

CHAPTER 17
ishmael caring for queequeg through ramadan.

CHAPTER 18
queequeg brought his own harpoon. the consummate professional.

CHAPTER 19
we've received an ominous warning about our boss captain ahab. 

CHAPTER 20
a little get ready with me from the ship's pov.

CHAPTER 21
more ominous warnings from the same weirdo as before.

CHAPTER 22
and we're off!

CHAPTER 23
intermission to mourn a different ship ishmael saw on his way. not our ship. just the concept of another one.

CHAPTER 24
now mourning the lack of due propers granted to whalers by the world.

CHAPTER 25
don't tell me that i have to respect whalers because the head-oiling that happens to kings and queens before coronations is sperm oil. that's the most antique sentence i've ever heard.

CHAPTER 26
meet our chief mate, starbuck. is that...the origin?

CHAPTER 27
stubb and flask are our second and third mates. unless they are the source of the names for little bits of stuff and/or containers with narrow tops their names aren't ringing as many iconic bells for me.

we're also being introduced to everyone else on the ship but i don't want to go through it all. except to say that one of them is from a town called Gay Head. 

CHAPTER 28
ahab has made his first appearance, and he has a massively badass face scar.

CHAPTER 29
ahab just called stubbs a dog, a donkey, a mule, AND an ass within the span of like 45 seconds. toxic work environment.

CHAPTER 30
ahab quits smoking.

CHAPTER 31
stubbs is having ahab-themed anxiety nightmares.

CHAPTER 32
15 pages on how no previous whale literature even approaches the expertise of the pages before us. i can't disagree — i know nothing about whales.

CHAPTER 33
historical context from ishmael: harpooners used to be co-captains. so...queequeg for president.

CHAPTER 34
flask has to be last one seated and first one up at every dinner. new diet idea.

CHAPTER 35
whaling ships are forced retreats from all global updates. which sounds amazing right now.

CHAPTER 36
we have just been introduced to the concept of a white whale named moby dick. at this point, here from the perspective of 200 pages in, i had completely forgotten about the concept of this book.

CHAPTER 37
yeah so moby dick ate ahab's leg and he's still pretty worked up about it.

CHAPTER 38
starbuck kind of bemoaning his fate, expressing regrets, etc.

CHAPTER 39
stubb smiling and laughing through it all.

CHAPTER 40
suddenly working with a new cast (international sailors), a new form of media (screenplay), but the same topic (big ol white whale).

CHAPTER 41
all this hatred and sworn revenge and no one even daring to question what ahab was up to when he got chomped. what was he wearing? maybe he was asking for it.

CHAPTER 42
"What the white whale was to Ahab, has been hinted [he just wrote 12 pages about it]; what, at times, he was to me, is yet unsaid [it is a) not unsaid and b) mostly amounts to 'he is scary and also white.']"

CHAPTER 43
this whole chapter is just that someone may have heard a cough.

CHAPTER 44
i miss queequeg and ishmael's love story.

CHAPTER 45
more background on whale stuff.

CHAPTER 46
ahab is wondering if starbuck truly loves and is passionate about his job (whale revenge). i feel like i'm writing a cover letter.

CHAPTER 47
finally we get a moment between ishmael and queequeg and it's interrupted by whale sighting. now i feel about ahab how he feels about moby dick.

CHAPTER 48
well, it turns out ahab is trafficking guys. hence the cough.

CHAPTER 49
ishmael just going up to guys like "surely that whale battle wasn't normal, right? we don't try to do whale stuff usually on this whaler?"

CHAPTER 50
more ahab analysis.

CHAPTER 51
they're in the cape of good hope? damn. how long have i been reading this?

CHAPTER 52
i need my boy herman to stop bringing up rime of the ancient mariner. the influence is too clear already.

CHAPTER 53
i thought i was having a good time reading this...but after 3 days off, i can confirm i have a better time not reading it.

CHAPTER 54
20+ page story that moby dick shows up in 90% of the way through. seems to be a theme here.

CHAPTER 55
basically a bibliography.

CHAPTER 56
continued.

CHAPTER 57
i did not know how common it was to get chomped up by a whale.

CHAPTER 58
all my life i've heard whales are relatively peaceful, chill guys, except for jonah from veggie tales and ishmael swearing up and down that they are monsters to be feared and dreaded.

CHAPTER 59
squid sighting.

CHAPTER 60
ishmael is describing rope as beautiful and blonde. get my guy off this boat and back into the loving arms of queequeg.

CHAPTER 61
jesus. these whaling scenes are really violent.

CHAPTER 62
ishmael's like: "new chapter. of course you're wondering how the physics of the whale boat oar/harpoon system comes into play." i have never wondered anything less.

CHAPTER 63
"new chapter. the answer is the crutch. naturally, now you're wondering about the mechanics of that. it's a notched stick..."

CHAPTER 64
after arduously tracking down a whale, and then gruesomely killing it, and then dragging its immense self back to the main boat with the use of three others...ahab is just like "not the one i wanted." i would begin sabotaging the whole endeavor at this point.

CHAPTER 65
a brief history of the consumption of whale.

CHAPTER 66
when they catch a whale, the ship workers leash it outside of the ship and go to bed. except for alternating people on "beating away sharks trying to feast on its corpse" duty. this marks the 900th aspect of the whale trade that would indicate to me we should call off the whole thing.

CHAPTER 67
901st example: how they chop it up.

CHAPTER 68
ishmael wants you to know he's sorry he hasn't yet spent enough time describing whale skin. hopefully this entire chapter makes up for it.

CHAPTER 69
they've released the whale's body into the ocean, and now ishmael is trying to make me feel bad about it. buddy, i've been against all this from the jump!

CHAPTER 70
"by the way, we also cut its head off." ENOUGH!

CHAPTER 71
the gang runs into another whaling ship and immediately ahab is all "HAVE YOU SEEN MOBY-DICK?" what happened to hello? how are you? my name is?

CHAPTER 72
ishmael interrupting the chopping-up-a-whale rundown he resumed out of nowhere to note that queequeg is looking fine in a shirt and socks. now this is what i'm here for.

CHAPTER 73
they're going after another whale while the decapitated head of the first one is still hanging off the side. the type of greed they talk about in the bible.

CHAPTER 74
more on the aforementioned loose skull.

CHAPTER 75
now a description of the new whale's head.

CHAPTER 76
continued.

CHAPTER 77
and so on.

CHAPTER 78
i haven't read this in days, for two equally important reasons: one, i'm going through some stuff, and two, i don't want to.

CHAPTER 79
okay, back to the skulls.

CHAPTER 80
i am not kidding: we are still stuck on skulls.

CHAPTER 81
i'm rooting for these whales to start taking some guys out with them.

CHAPTER 82
some quick references to mythology and fantastical creatures and other stuff more interesting than our story.

CHAPTER 83
we briefly name-checked jonah (of whale fame) in the last chapter, so of course now we need an in-depth exploration of why some people don't believe that happened.

CHAPTER 84
the things these whalers are doing to the whales...jail for a thousand years.

CHAPTER 85
breaking: whales have spouts. i feel like this also counts as skull talk.

CHAPTER 86
moving on to "The Tail."

CHAPTER 87
they are chasing down sperm whales one after another. it's like a big ol creature every city block.

CHAPTER 88
info on whale friend groups (aka schools).

CHAPTER 89
ishmael is generously giving us the definition of fast-fish. it's a fish that's fastened.

CHAPTER 90
so i guess in england the king gets the whale head and the queen gets the whale tail (lol) and then there's nothing left. so for me, at that point, i would stop whaling.

CHAPTER 91
pulling up alongside a ship towing two decaying whale corpses just to ask about moby-dick. we still haven't seen him. it's 448 pages in.

CHAPTER 92
the ambergris chapter. i prefer bob's burgers on the subject.

CHAPTER 93
these people are so goddamn evil.

CHAPTER 94
disturbed to share that this sperm-squeezing description made me want to take a bubble bath.

CHAPTER 95
i don't want to hear about queequeg's idol. it's only a painful reminder that i'm not hearing queequeg's love story.

CHAPTER 96
take out dry lectures on the whaling industry and stunningly racist asides and this would be 90 pages long.

CHAPTER 97
they burn the hell out of their oil harvest. seems like bad business. getting high on their own supply, etc.

CHAPTER 98
ishmael claims this is the final part of the description. with 40 chapters to go i find that hard to believe.

CHAPTER 99
ahab is reading everyone's horoscopes. that's real.

CHAPTER 100
ahab just met a fellow captain who also had a limb chomped off by moby-dick. okay meet cute!

CHAPTER 101
ishmael wants us to believe there's an old whaling company that's barely less historically intriguing than the tudors AND the bourbons. please be serious.

CHAPTER 102
oh jesus. we are now applying the level of informative detail previously seen with the skull to the skeleton.

considering its size...i cannot imagine how long we will be stuck in this topic.

CHAPTER 103
more on skeleton.

CHAPTER 104
whale science (fossil version).

CHAPTER 105
various points on how there is just no way that whales are any sort of newfangled thing called "endangered."

CHAPTER 106
one time ahab stabbed himself in the d*ck with his own fake leg.

CHAPTER 107
the idea that we're being introduced to new characters from the vantage point of 107 chapters in is insane. whatever the carpenter's deal is, we're going to have to do without it.

CHAPTER 108
format change. this is now, of course, a short play about the aforementioned woodworker.

have i completely lost my mind?

CHAPTER 109
the girls (starbuck and ahab) are fighting.

CHAPTER 110
queequeg almost died, but now he's fine. plus he has this awesome coffin for storage.

CHAPTER 111
pacific fan letter.

CHAPTER 112
tragic backstory on some blacksmith. sure, why not. we're only 84% done.

CHAPTER 113
ahab got an extra special weapon. i wonder who it's for.

CHAPTER 114
they're all in love with the ocean.

CHAPTER 115
this chapter is titled "The Pequod Meets The Bachelor." now this is a crossover i never would have anticipated.

CHAPTER 116
they just killed four whales. see above re: greed, bible.

CHAPTER 117
ahab has now claimed immortality. surely that's not some kind of foreshadowing.

CHAPTER 118
just described eyes as "orbs." a 13 year old with a tumblr account in 2013 could have written moby dick but herman melville never could have written harry styles fanfiction.

CHAPTER 119
they're surrounded by creepy white light that ahab is claiming leads the way to moby-dick. what the hell is this whale's deal?

CHAPTER 120
okay. we're back to stage directions.

CHAPTER 121
stubb is a criminally bad hang.

CHAPTER 122
this chapter is a stage direction and a paragraph of dialogue. 1 out of every 6 words is "um." maybe i could write a book.

CHAPTER 123
starbuck holding a gun and monologuing about killing ahab. don't threaten me with a good time.

also they called the musket a "death-tube." come on.

CHAPTER 124
compass stuff.

CHAPTER 125
things aren't going great.

CHAPTER 126
they just turned a coffin into a life-buoy. you think that signifies anything?

CHAPTER 127
ahab is talking to himself about harbingers of death. seems like everything's going to be fine.

CHAPTER 128
The Rachel — a ship, not the haircut — has spotted moby dick.

CHAPTER 129
damn are these guys loyal.

CHAPTER 130
a bird stole ahab's hat.

CHAPTER 131
they just discovered a wrecked ship previously known as "the delight." classic. anyway moby is the one who did it.

CHAPTER 132
ahab's crying, but it's not about the hat. i'm pretty sure.

CHAPTER 133
we found moby. he immediately bit a boat in half and made a kind of whirlpool of its inhabitants.

CHAPTER 134
it's crazy that lenin gets any flak for his farming descriptions at all when this book exists.

CHAPTER 135
everyone died.

EPILOGUE
well, except ishmael.

OVERALL
someday, i'd love to love something as much as herman melville loves the concept of whaling.
rating: 3