Rating: 4/5

I have been meaning to read Gould for years, and only just now found both time and resolve. I was not really sure where to start amongst his voluminous works, but feel extremely pleased with my choice. ‘The Lying Stones’ is a fantastic collection of essays, each one informative and thought-provoking. The evolutionary biology is perfectly pitched for someone like me with a science background yet lacking detailed knowledge of this field. But it is Gould's learning and culture that really adds life to this work, and elevates them to a higher plane. He beautifully communicates both awe for the natural world and the humbling truth for us humans that science is a historical enterprise adjusting to our shifting concerns. 
In the earlier sections, we are treated to biographical essays on luminaries in biology and geology such as Buffon, Lavoisier, Lamarck and Lyell. The author has a deep knowledge of the history and philosophy of science, and is able to explain in convincing style why the work of these figures is important. Although the middle sections express the character of Gould the man, I can understand if the reader is put off by unexpected diversions into music and baseball. Hold on though for the final sections, which is Gould at his most polemical, and includes some of my favorite essays in this collection:
In "A Tale of Two Work Sites", Gould criticizes the extreme positions of "Soapy Sam" Wilberforce and Social Darwinists like Herbert Spencer. He says "The evolution of our species should fill us with notions of glory for our odd mental uniqueness, and of deep humility for our status as a tiny and accidental twig on such a sturdy and luxuriantly branching tree of life".
In "The Internal Brand of Scarlet W", Gould finds several convincing reasons to oppose reductionist explanations of the human condition. "We cannot define discrete, separable, specific traits within the complex continua of human behaviors."
And, in the concluding "Room of One's Own", Gould tells us why extreme scientific realism is misguided. "Facts cannot be denied, but facts might be scale dependent, and the perceptions of one world may have no validity or expression in the domain of another."