Rating: 3/5

3.75 🌟 

Bernice Rubens is an author of considerable force. If her books were placed in front of a psychiatric medical licensing board she'd be a certified MD by the time they turn the last page on her Booker Prize winning debut "The Elected Member ". When I read that two months ago I was immediately floored by the interiority of her characters, each of them burdened by a host of complex neurosis that made them read like flesh. Yet again she pulls of that trick on her odd chronicling of middle-age. 

Revolving around a mentally disturbed pensioner , Miss Jean Hawkins who is planning to end her life until a well meaning gift forces her to live. Jean Hawkins is an elderly former orphan who's abusive militant upbringing drained her life of color or suprise. She is a lonely subservient shell of a woman at the mercy of others laws or cruelties. Retirement presents a new sort of horror as all the guard rails of work routine are off. She'll be left with just herself and all the nothing she'd acquired. Her suicide feels reasonable, like clocking off at the end of a long shift . But this routine that kept her consistent all these years is detailed by a day planner she follows religious. Her suicide aligning with its last entry , that is until she receives a new 5 year journal as a gift. A gift shes resigned to obey for 5 more years . 

What could've been a fun heartwarming "the bucketlist" type of novel where these added years see her perspective and life changed are rudely dispelled by Rubens striking realism. Cynicism permeates through each choice Rubens makes for her characters. "A Five Year Sentence" lingers on the odorous flaws one can nuture over a life time, exploring the weight our childhoods hold in anchoring our growth. The past appears as a character interrupting brief instances of joy or warmth with cold cruel recollections. This is where the novel thrives. When it focused on the trauma the characters carried and how that played a part in their dysfunctional relationships. For most of this book I was convinced I was reading a really good 4 star , (4.75 even ! ) but then in its final two chapters the quality drops precipitously. Melodrama takes the wheel crashing into time jumps that introduce new details without the work necessary to establish them. Felt like two different books. Ir better, the same book written by two different writers. As if Bernice died before it completed and a ghost writer slipped in as a last ditch attempt to salvage the story (they failed). Though I liked the darkness of that final sequence the way in which it occurred was so rushed I couldn't believe it. It felt like "Requim for A Dream" came on while she was writing and she accidentally wrote in Ellen Brystn's characters ending. 

With that said the writing for majority of the book was astounding. Took my breath away in a Clarice Lipspector meets Beryl Bainbridge kind of way. Dry ,acerbic asservations on loneliness. Such a shame it declined the way it did.