Rating: 5/5

Not just vintage Wolfe but classic Wolfe. Aside from being a first-rate murder mystery, this novel from 1938 is remarkable for its handling of issues of racial prejudice. The setting is a resort hotel in South Carolina where the waiters and cooks are black, though the managers and guests are white -- all perfectly typical for America in the 1930s. However, invisible as the service staff would ordinarily be, merely assumed as part of the social landscape, in this story our attention is drawn to them first because the hotel detective describes them with the racial epithet "nigger," jarringly offensive to the modern reader; but then this gaucherie is gently undercut by our narrator Archie Goodwin (irrepressible sidekick to genius detective Nero Wolfe) who just a bit pointedly uses the term "Negro," certainly polite in 1938 even though "African American" may be preferred today.

The intention is clearly one of mutual tolerance and understanding, though the follow-through is odd to the modern ear. Archie himself refers to "dagoes" and "shines" as the story progresses, racial characterizations that may have seemed witty in the past but certainly would not pass muster today.

Nevertheless the approach Wolfe takes when he needs a witness from among the waiters and cooks is man-to-man and turns into quite a discourse on mutual respect. From here comes the statement, if you delve deeply into the Wolfe canon (and by all means you should), that he'll hear quoted back to him in a later novel.

But the moment that flipped this story, excellent in so many ways, from a 4-star to a 5, for me was when Archie has a quick conversation with one of the switchboard operators at the hotel. She's working for a living in a low-status job, and she knows it and he knows it, but they have an exchange of witty repartee that establishes the mutual respect of man to woman, despite the status divide, just as persuasively. The scene is more convincing because it seems incidental, not staged.

Rex Stout was a great writer because he gave us great, believable characters -- not just the villains and the leads, but switchboard operators, too. And of course these great mysteries and the wonderful tricks to solve them gotten up to by Nero Wolfe and Archie Goodwin. This is a great series and Too Many Cooks is one of its high-water marks.