Rating: 5/5

5+ stars. Among the best Civil War epics ever written.

It is 1865 and the war is over. The Confederate soldiers are going home at last, among them Gawain Harper. He has made it through the war with the daguerreotype of Morgan Rhea in his pocket, but he does not know if she is waiting for him and he is afraid that the women he will find at the end of this journey will not be the woman he left behind. Indeed, he knows not one person in this world is the same, especially not himself. 

Bahr, who, in his first novel, The Black Flower: A Novel of the Civil War, offered the most realistic picture I have ever known of the Civil War, now gives just as stark and compelling a picture of the days after the war and the struggle of the living to rejoin life and determine their places in it. We walk the road with these men and feel how foreign everything in life is to them. Even after returning home, something as normal as sleeping in a bed seems impossible. Much of the town they knew is burned to the ground and, even worse, they are in an occupied territory. The hatred of the soldiers has virtually evaporated, but the hatred in the town and among the “rangers”, who never went to war but have ruled in the absence of the men, is hot and palpable. Like most wars, this one has claimed some of the best men and left behind some of the worst.

If you have ever had a romantic notion of what war or reconstruction is, Howard Bahr will steal that from you and leave you gasping at how raw and real war and its aftermath can be. His own experiences in Vietnam no doubt inform his clear understanding of the horrors and consequences of war. His ability to convert that knowledge into the world of the 1860s is impressive and unparalleled. 

I shall never forget Gawain Harper or Capt. Harry Stribling. They are so realistically depicted that I felt as if I were reading about a fore-father and as if their stories were a part of my own past. After reading this book, I took a walk down into the countryside to a small cemetery plot that is now buried in a tangle of weeds on the far side of a field that is only temporarily free of crops. In that graveyard (which is an old-time family plot from the 1800s), there is a marker for a soldier by the name of Whitfield Moore from Co. F of the 40th VA Infantry, C.S.A. I placed flowers there and said a prayer for the soul of this man who must certainly have suffered much of what Bahr writes of and whose greatest luck might be that he found a final resting place back at his home place. Perhaps he is out walking that long road with his fellows still. There is a reason history should be remembered, not the least of which it that all of these young men were real.

The title of this book is the name of a Civil War song, written in 1862 and heard here as it would have been sung then. https://youtu.be/Lalt29JmeC8