Rating: 3/5

So, let’s talk about toxic relationships. I’m beginning to think that, much like romantic attraction, a reading experience might also come down to biology (chemistry and hormones) and psychology. Why is it that I can’t bring myself to love a perfectly well-rounded, “good” book, yet fall head over heels for a chaotic, maddening one that gives me anxiety?

On a serious note, this was painful. Painful because I know I should like this. I really should, and I just… don’t. Worst of all, I can’t fully explain why.

It had all the makings of a great read:

🌱 a Bildungsroman (coming of age), 
👑 a hero you’re meant to root for,
🖋 great writing (I mean it’s Dickens), 
🏆 a rags-to-riches arc, 
🤵🏻💍👰🏻 love and marriage, 
🌍 community,
🍀 a happy ever after, 
📕 and a sprawling 975-page timeline to settle into.

I also kept wondering just how much of Dickens’s own life made its way into this novel, especially since it’s often described as semi-autobiographical.

David Copperfield follows the life of an orphan from birth through adulthood. We see his childhood, his schooling, his experience with child labor, his work as a proctor, his marriage, and finally his rebirth as a writer.

The blurb got me really excited because it reminded me of A Tree Grows in Brooklyn, a book I absolutely adored. Unfortunately, while the two stories may look similar on the surface, I found David Copperfield criminally boring. My excitement didn’t even survive the first fifty pages.

Beyond the boredom, I struggled to empathise with David as a child. Not to compare suffering, but I’ve read accounts of children from the same period enduring far worse. That doesn’t mean suffering needs to be extreme to deserve empathy, but something about David’s view on his own suffering didn’t sit well with me. At the risk of sounding harsh, young David often came across as classist. It is impressive that even as a child, he is aware of his place in the world and refuses to accept anything less. However, it’s one thing to mourn wasted potential, but when he insists that he shouldn’t have to endure hardship or long hours of work because of his superior education and social standing, I just want to shake him. David, my good man, NO CHILD should be working those hours. Period.

Ultimately, these feel like petty objections when weighed against the many strengths of the novel and its characters. But the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, and I simply couldn’t connect with David or with the story as a whole.

I also think it was a mistake to read this in one day. Some classics, regardless of length, move quickly and suck you in from the very first page. Others are slower and quieter, demanding to be read in measured doses, a few pages at a time. These kinds of novels need to be savored. David Copperfield firmly belongs to the latter category.

Gone with the Wind, for instance, never made me feel as though I was trudging through its pages despite its length. David Copperfield did.

That’s why I think I’ll try again in a few years. Maybe time will grant me a different perspective.

Lastly, Dora did both David and the reader dirty by asking David to call her his “child-wife.” If I had to read that phrase one more time, I would’ve bitten my own tongue.

I rated this book three stars because, objectively, it 
  is
 good. I’m just the problem.

Updates while reading ༄˖°.☕️.ೃ࿔📚*:･

I usually like Charles Dickens's writing but I don't know how I feel about this...

-ˋˏ✄┈┈┈┈. ݁₊ ⊹ . ݁˖ . ݁°❀⋆.ೃ࿔*:･༄˖°.🍂.ೃ࿔*:･

My last classic for the month! I read the blurb, saw the page count, and thought NOTHING, ABSOLUTELY NOTHING COULD BE THAT SERIOUS, 975 pages?!

I've got 1 day and I don't want to take this into the new month, so a readathon it is. I'm excited!