Rating: 2/5

Finished, finally.

Some books are swallowed in one gulp and others seem to drag indefinitely. This one belongs to the latter kind. Considering its shortness, that's quite an amazing achievement.

So what do we have here? One mediocre tiny story of little interest (this is obviously an intentional choice of the subject matter) told in many (much too many!) different ways. Actually, at the beginning I felt quite enthusiastic about the idea. But as I trodded through the numerous "exercises", an interesting idea quickly degenerated into its own parody. If anything, this word acrobatics is mostly the profanation of the idea of style.

Romain Gary writing in the voice of Emile Ajar is all about style; Raymond Queneau having fun with Exercices de style has little to nothing to do with style, and a lot with the Emperor's New Clothes.

Some quotes from the different "stylistic" retellings of the story about the infamous bus encounter:

Télégraphique

BUS BONDÉ STOP JNHOMME LONG COU CHAPEAU CERCLE TRESSÉ APOSTROPHE VOYAGEUR INCONNU SANS PRÉTEXTE VALABLE STOP QUESTION DOIGTS PIEDS FROISSÉS CONTACT TALON PRÉTENDU VOLONTAIRE STOP JNHOMME ABANDONNE DISCUSSION POUR PLACE LIBRE STOP QUATORZE HEURES PLACE ROME JNHOMME ÉCOUTE CONSEILS VESTIMENTAIRES CAMARADE STOP DÉPLACER BOUTON STOP SIGNÉ ARCTURUS

So this one is a telegram, well, reasonably funny and illustrative. But then there is this:

Permutations par groupes croissants de mots

Jour un midi vers, la sur arrière plate-forme un d'de autobus ligne la j'S un aperçus jeune au homme trop cou qui long un portait entouré chapeau un d'tressé galon.

Words' permutations! Like "jour un midi vers" instead of "Un jour vers midi". Seriously? Aka, "let's see how much of my bullshit my readers can take."

Author (read by me between the lines): Ok, so they are still reading, these obstinate readers? How about this one then:

Ensembliste 
Dans l'autobus S considérons l'ensemble A des voyageurs assis et l'ensemble D des voyageurs debout. À un certain arrêt, se trouve l'ensemble P des personnes qui attendent. Soit C l'ensemble des voyageurs qui montent; c'est un sous-ensemble de P et il est lui-même l'union de C' l'ensemble des voyageurs qui restent sur la plate-forme et de C'' l'ensemble de ceux qui vont s'asseoir. Démontrer que l'ensemble C'' est vide.

Author: And this one, a nice Greek word by the way, let them look it up in a dictionary (epenthesis: the insertion of one or more sounds in the middle of a word):"

Epenthèse 
Uon jouir vears mirdi, suir lea plateforome arrièare d'uin autoibus S, joe vois uin homime aiu conu troup loung quai poritait uin chaipeau enotouré d'uin galion tresasé avu lievu die ruaban.

Author: Still not done reading? Ok, another Greek blow -- they won't be able to claim they've learned nothing here! (paragoges: the addition of a sound to the end of a word):

Paragoges 
Ung jourz verse midir, surl laa plateformet arrièreu d'uno autobusi, j'aperçuss uno jeuneu hommeu aux coux tropr longg ett quie portaito ung chapeaux entourée d'ung galong tressés aux lieux deu rubann.

Author: No getting out of ideas for me! Take this: 

Par devant par derrière 
Un jour par devant vers midi par derrière sur la plate-forme par devant arrière par derrière d'un autobus par devant à peu près complet par derrière, j'aperçus par devant un homme par derrière qui avait par devant un long cou par derrière et un chapeau par devant

Author: And how about a bit of Latin added into the mix: 

Macaronique 

Sol erat in regionem zenithi et calor atmospheri magnissima. Senatus populusque parisiensis sudebant. Autobi passebant completi. In uno ex supradicti autobibus qui S denominationem portebat, hominem quasi junum, cum collo multi elongato et cum chapito a galono tressato cerclaro vidi.

And so on, and so forth... OK, enough quoting.

The more of these "stylistic" gimmicks I read, the more I found myself wondering about additional variants of the dreadful story:

"Bored out of my mind" style
"Emoticons" style - but of course! 
"C++" style
"C" style
"Java" style
"Python" style
"Ancient Egyptian" style -- and why not?
"Biblical" style
"Comics" style

You see how quickly it becomes absurd and unbearable? All these additional retellings of one little dreadful story definitely could be written, but what's the point? To try the reader's patience? To get a book out? To "exercise" your style? To finally learn how to spell "exercise"? Whatever...

Read in 2021.