Rating: 5/5

4.5 stars

  ... and already it felt like something consigned to a past era, something I need not remember if I did not wish to. 

A superbly crafted narrative that is elliptical and opaque (is that why is has so many so-so reviews?) but which I also found profoundly emotive and deeply knowing about issues of loss, self-delusion (both personal and national) and denial. There are numerous mentions of memory and recall - in fact the book is structured through a series of recollected moments when the narrator comments on something in the present then goes back to reconstruct what led up to it - but, as the opening quotation shows, these are not necessarily passive memories but active ones constructed and denied at will: 'something I need not remember if I did not wish to'. 

On the personal level, this makes Christopher, the narrator, a fascinating character study in self-fashioning; on a national level, this almost couldn't be more timely when there is so much public debate about the repressing of what constitutes 'history' and the excavation of different perspectives and voices that are both deeply entwined with, yet also refocus, orthodox narratives. There is a moment when a Japanese army commander in the invasion of Shanghai comments obliquely on the Western narrative of Japanese brutalities: 'But if Japan is to become a great nation, like yours, Mr Banks, it is necessary. Just as it once was for England.' And later themes of shame, acknowledgement and apology are as meaningful on the national stage as in the intimacies of personal relationships. It's Ishiguro's great accomplishment to have wrapped up such portentous issues in the ostensible story of a man who has never really faced up to the realities of his past. 

Banks is a slippery narrator who allows us to see the extent to which he is rewriting his life as he lives it and in its telling - and one of the most anxious moments is at a wedding when a guest apologises for the way he has been mocked and insulted while Christopher himself waves the incident away claiming it was just a joke - we never know what actually happened (just as we never know whether his great detectives cases are real) but the intimation is clear. And it's to the credit of the book that we remain acutely sympathetic to this man who lives shrouded in active and adolescent delusions that he is fighting evil in the world, that he is the latest in a long line of superlative detectives, that even his return to Shanghai can - somehow - avert the great crisis leading to WW2... 

Towards the end, there is a clue to at least one of Ishiguro's literary precedents: 'My allowance,' I said quietly. 'My inheritance...' - and the link to the revelation scene in Great Expectations helps to both focus the story and also clarify how it differs from Dickens' tale of another life lived under the burden of misconceptions and self-deception. 

Oddly, while it's satisfying to learn the outcome of the central 'mystery' that drives Banks, it's also strangely unsatisfying to have the details pinned down - I think I would have preferred the ambiguity of an elusive ending though I suspect Ishiguro knew exactly what he was doing in subverting the 'detective story'. 

Overall, then, a subtle, clever, profound book - it's less obvious than The Remains of the Day and moves from a subtext of personal and political responsibility to something more nebulous but, for me, deeper.