Rating: 2/5

Sutherland is back with 34 more puzzles, and opens with some of his own errors, so here's my mine: Frankenstein is not a Victorian novel. Whoops. He extends the subjects somewhat out of his wheelhouse into modern and even more pre-Victorian novels. Overall I found he was getting a bit into the weeds here, and I don't think I'll go out of my way to find the third volume. 

"Where does Fanny Hill keep her contraceptives?" is more of a summary than a puzzle, but it does contain the sentence "It was Victorian folklore that all idiots had massive penises," and speculates that two minor characters in Dickens novels may have been references to Fanny Hill.

"Slop slip" covers a truly mindbending "error" in Tristram Shandy. I'm not even sure if reading the actual novel would make this any clearer. Or just having read the essay, how to even go about explaining it. So I won't.

"How vulgar is Mrs Elton?" concerns a character in Emma's use of the Italian endearment caro sposo. Used to show that she's out of fashion with polite society, Sutherland asks whether editors correcting cara sposo/a from earlier manuscripts might not be overcorrecting an intended error. He dives deep to come to the conclusion that yes, they were probably right to do so, and given the character, the drama and the situation, caro sposo is probably the correct level of not-with-it-ness.

"How good an oarswoman is Maggie Tulliver?" and "How good a swimmer is Magwitch" examine some oddities of Victorian novelistic hydrology. Since Victorians just weren't that into swimming or boating at the time, neither authors nor audiences would have noticed or cared if things were a bit off, so both George Eliot and Dicens end up committing some impossibilities when it comes to human capabilities in water.

"What is Elfride's rope made of?" covers exactly the same sequence from A Pair of Blue Eyes as Aldiss did in Trillion Year Spree, leading me to believe that this literal cliffhanger scene must be the main draw. The basic answer is clear in the text (her underwear), but given the sheer quantity of underwear Victorian women wore, there's somehow more to unearth here.