Rating: 3/5

A little while ago I read the second collection of John Mortimer’s interviews from the early 1980s, so I decided to add this earlier group.

In the first half of the book there’s a great deal on the subject of Christianity. Mortimer’s subjects include Archbishop of Canterbury Robert Runcie as well as Cardinal Hume of the RC Church. Graham Greene is in there, as is Malcolm Muggeridge. By the 1970s Muggeridge, a one-time Marxist, had become a puritanical Christian best known for campaigning against sex and violence on TV, and during this ultra-permissive time was considered a ridiculous figure by young people. In recent years I have learned more about his early life and gained more respect for him, but I found the views expressed in his interview to be odd. Mortimer also interviews James Anderton, whose existence I had forgotten about. He was a Chief Constable of Greater Manchester and another evangelical Christian. In these interviews Mortimer tends to focus on the philosophical problem of why a benevolent and omnipotent God allows evil. Even I know this is an issue that has been well chewed over by theologians, so I don’t think Mortimer’s interviews added much.

Away from religion, one of his subjects is Arthur Scargill, at the time the President of the now defunct National Union of Mineworkers and a political figure from the hard left. Mortimer refers to Scargill’s office containing “a big, rather good oil painting of the young leader making a speech.” It was interesting to read Mortimer’s low key reaction. I remember reading of a Labour MP who described that painting as an indication of Scargill’s megalomania, a view I agree with. Mortimer is generally kind to all his subjects.

There’s a better interview with Ken Livingstone, who in electoral terms is probably Britain’s most successful politician from the hard left. Mortimer’s piece is subtle but does reveal a fair bit about Livingstone, even if he was unaware of his rather tangled personal life, which Livingstone succeeded in keeping under wraps until the early 21st century. A variety of other politicians of the era feature, with mixed results.

Speaking of a tangled personal life, there is a chapter on Georges Simenon, though he was open about his. I know Simenon was a Francophone Belgian rather than a Frenchman, but his considerable appetite for women and wine meant he came over as a sort of hyperbolic version of the stereotypical Frenchman. Actually the various pieces on writers were, for me, amongst the best. These included Angela Carter, Dick Francis, Frederick Forsyth, Catherine Cookson, and Shirley Conran. There’s an interesting period piece on an executive with the computer company ICL, carried out right at the start of the IT revolution, when terms like “software” had to be explained to the reader.

There’s one feature when Mortimer, a lawyer, travels to Florida to assess the impact of the introduction of TV cameras into U.S. courts. In this discussion he features something which has always astonished me, which is the length of prison sentences handed out in the U.S. “sentences of as much as thirty years on youths guilty of second offences of burglary, the sort of sentence which was only considered appropriate in England for plotting to hand over the vital secrets of our defence to a hostile power.” There’s a thoughtful discussion on the issue of cameras.

Although I found some individual pieces good, taken as a whole I didn’t enjoy these interviews quite as much as the earlier collection. Perhaps the novelty of them had worn off a bit, although I also wondered whether Mortimer was still refining his technique at this stage.