Rating: 4/5

Anytime over the last few years I came across a reference to this book I would inevitably read how it was one of the underrated books of the American canon. After reading it I would have to agree that it is a telling, biting picture of the underclass in America in the days of the depression. Will Music is on his way home in 1931 after two years of riding the rails around the country trying to find his way. He had left his parents farm in Virginia, feeling their disappointment, and thus has hesitated to return in the shame of not finding success. 

Still, as the story begins he is hopping boxcars back east headed for home after coming to the conclusion while looking for food in a trash can that returning home might be a better option. 

The story has a brief prologue in 1977 when an aged Will Music is asked by his grandsons about a youthful experience when he had shot two mine guards in a strike action at a coal mine. Not wanting to, or feeling prepared even now to share the feelings of that experience we see him ponder age and memory “ Oh, he knows well enough he could account for his age as a man might for an extraordinary amount of money he finds has slipped through his fingers. Sure, he could think back and satisfy himself that nothing was lost, but merely spent. Yet the odd notion persists, that if just knew how to do it, he might shake himself awake and discover that he is young after all and had only dreamt otherwise.” 

If you can find a better description of the feeling of age on a person who still feels youth in his veins I do not know what it would be.

As he makes his way across country Will seeks shelter in a haystack for the night only to wake up with a gun pointed at him and a dog licking his face. The man, gruff but not really meaning harm, turns out to be a mine guard for the local coal mine. Kentucky mines are in a hotbed of fear of potential unionization. Within thirty six hours Will is living with Regus T Bone on his hardscrabfle farm, eating real food, and has a job making three dollars a day as a mine guard. Will is never comfortable with his role and as the threat of union activity increases he eventually convinces Regus of the wrongness of their position. 

The lives of coal miners, the corruption of both the union and the mine owners leave these men no safe harbor. The story is fairly predictable in its path. The two major, and really only, female characters, Regus’ Mother and Music’s love interest are more than just window dressing and offer the book more depth than it would have otherwise. 

This is a hurtful book, it’s hard to read in its bleak descriptions. It’s a good primer on the mindset of the coal miners today still clinging to whatever windmill promises they and theirs salvation that will never be delivered once the votes are counted. 

Late in the book, in a postscript where the aged Music thinks of the past and those gone forever contemplates the meaning of home we have another quote that strikes home. “ He suspects home is not a place after all, but simply a time, and when it’s gone, it’s gone forever. “ 

It seems to me this is true. Recently in another story I read someone talk about memory and nostalgia and how often it isn’t for a place or thing remembered so much as a feeling of different, potential, or multiple outcomes. Simply the feelings of youth that cannot be replicated. 

A very strong book.