Rating: 3/5

The story is brutal; the first fifty or one hundred pages walk the reader through bodies like detritus. Parents taken, killed, siblings shot and buried in gardens, suicide by poison, death by disease. Walking through the streets in escape, attempting a passive face while stepping through the massacre. 

For me, the connotation of the word "family" has changed in the past several years, and this is the lens through which I read literature. When a decade ago, I could have read this passively, as an account of history, something to be taught as a lesson, I now read as a person who thinks of circumstance, of participation, of there-but-by-the-grace-of-god.

Bagdasarian minces no words and creates no lens through which we could read this young adult / teen novel: this happened, then this, then this. In some ways, it's a perfect example of the journey narrative. The protagonist stops in various locations, and by luck or by clever choice, he survives. (We know that he has to, if we read the jacket copy, as the story is based on a great-uncle--there has to be family left to tell the tale.) 

I found myself wanting something more, craft-wise. But what I would have done as a writer (I consider the idea of magical realism, or some trope to bring us to the imagination in order to survive experience) would have made this a different book, a different project. Bagdasarian seems to have wanted to simply retell an against-all-odds story, which consists of a great deal of: "OK, so is this where he is going to settle down and survive? Is this where he reconnects with humanity? Oh, no: another character or characters is taken away from him, often in (quiet) brutal ways." At what point does the reader become numb? At what point does the reader give up hope that something will work out, that he will be a part of a family again? I don't think I ever did--become numb or lose hope for this protagonist--and that's because the author doesn't let us. This happened, but let's not linger, let's move to the next thing and see where it comes out.