Rating: 3/5

Re- One Chance At Love - CM brings us an extremely fluffy romance with a seekritive h and an H who has some surprises of his own. He also wears glasses and dresses in old tweeds with a pipe, but somehow he just doesn't have the adorableness that Rachel Lindsay's glasses wearing H conveyed.

The story starts with our free roaming h being dragged to her manipulative and interfering best friend's rescue at her uncle's castle. She wants the h to come and convince the uncle that the BF is the most reliable person around, especially when compared to the h, whom she plans to present as the most irresponsible person on the planet. The h is to pretend to be a distant acquaintance mooching off her old skool friend's generosity, sort like a traveling house guest, and this act is supposed to convince her uncle to release her inheritance when she is 21 in a month rather than making her wait to she is 25.

 (Like pulling off such an improvisation is going to make her seem really reliable and able to manage a large amount of money. Really? I did not get the urgency here, the woman is an actress in drama school and has been living in London for years on her own, I am sure she had some kind of allowance as London isn't cheap and she did not have a regular job, yet all the sudden she needs her money immediately. It is HPlandia so I guess we just go with it.)

The h duly presents herself at the castle, but walking along the path to the place, she comes across a lake with a very attractive blond nude male swimming. The h is definitely enjoying the view and after a bit of oogeling, she wanders up to announce herself as the BF's guest, all ready to meet the fusty, dusty uncle of the BF. Except that the uncle isn't fusty or dusty at all, he is Greek God the h was drooling over in the little lake. 

 The h is overcome with a strong surge of passion, but the BF gives the impression to the uncle that the h is the most moochingest fly by night of indeterminate origin ever. The uncle is a history professor and he dresses like it, but still he makes efforts to be hospitable to the h. He shows her his prized paintings of a famous artist that include a little girl imprisoned in a nursery and a very Gothic foreboding house that the h really doesn't like. 

It turns out she has good reason to loathe both the paintings and the artist. The artist is her mother who abandoned her to the care of her MP father who resented her existence and locked her in her room and sent her to boarding school at eight and then never let her come home. The landscape painting is of her father's house and if it hadn't been for her BF's parents, the h would never have had anywhere to go over holidays and things. Who her parents are is a closely kept secret, her father completely disapproves of her and ignores her existence and her mother has never tried to contact her since she abandoned her. The h has a small group of close friends and spends a lot of time travelling for her work, but she is 21 and has never been kissed and doesn't think that relationships are for her. She has a hard time with trust.

The H doesn't really approve of the h, he thinks she is sleeping with a guy named Harry, who is actually a dog and there are various other scrapes the h has innocently gotten into that don't look quite proper when they are talked about. The h also has an insatiable appetite for pilchards, which are large sardines, and quite a lot of the book is devoted to the h's continual questing for them as she doesn't sleep well and pilchards at two in the morning help send her right off to dreamland. 

On her first night in the castle, the h is on a midnight pilchard hunt and runs into the H, they are both wearing the same stripped pjs and there is an almost kissing moment. The next morning the h finds a little girl crying in the kitchen. She is the cook's granddaughter who is staying temporarily while the girl's mum is in hospital from appendicitis. The little girl keeps crying for Melissa, and the h quickly figures out that the little girl wants her doll. So to demonstrate both the h and her BF's innate kindness and compassion and general HP h worthiness, we all trek to town 30 miles away to get the doll and the little girl is happy and the H yells at them for not telling him about the little girl's distress - thus proving that he is a nice HP H and worthy too.

The attraction between the H and h is growing and the H brings the h a little middle of night snack, (but he couldn't face the pilchards at two in the morning,) and it ends in a big kissing moment. The kissing stops when the little girl has a nightmare and the H and h run to help her and the h winds up sitting with her the rest of the night. Reinforcing how HP h worthy she really is. The H's turn comes the next morning when he apologizes profusely for taking advantage of a guest under his roof, and he promises it won't happen again. The h is thoroughly pleased at how the H took all the responsibility for passionate kissing and never once said she was a tramp or a tease.

The h knows the next move is up to her, and with the BF's encouragement and after the H takes them both to dinner and they share a convivial after dinner moment, the h decides to tell the H the truth. She goes to find the H in his lake the next afternoon, but sadly he is wearing swimming trunks. There is more kissing and the h explains the deception. The H somehow thinks that the h was using their mutual attraction to manipulate him in the matter of the BF's money and he kicks the h out, especially after finding out who her parents are but he also adds that he had no intention of not giving the BF her money. 

The h goes back to her studio and has a big mopey moment. The h is halfheartedly photographing a couple for her next romance cover, (she does the big romance cover illustrations and makes a lot of money at it as she is in big demand.) She is miserable and debating what to do about her unfulfilled love for the H. Then the BF shows up and the h is bewailing her loss on her shoulder. The phone rings at the height of the bemoaning and it is the h's publisher. The h has gotten the cover artist assignment of her dreams for her favorite historical romance author. The BF rushes her off to the publisher's office and the H is waiting for her there. 

The H is the h's favorite historical romance author and he wants the h to do the cover and marry him too, cause he loves her madly. The h agrees after some major kisses and the h's first name is sorta explained. The h is called Dizzy after her initials DC, that is what the kids at school called her and she hates her first names of Delilah Cleopatra, so she only answers to Dizzy. The H is determined that she will never have to worry about her parents again, cause he loves her enough for twenty people and they marry after a statement that the lurve clubbing has happened. 

The epilogue is three months later when they are both skinny dipping at the lake and the h knows she is preggers cause she can't stand the sight of pilchards and the H is ecstatic that his lurve club mojo hit the target for the HEA. 

This one is okay, but not CM's best, it was supposed to be zany and fluffy, but the usual CM spark was missing - tho both the h and H were very nice people I am sure. There was lot more time devoted to the BF and her beauty and character, so I couldn't help but think that CM was more interested in the BF's upcoming story than she was about this one. Read this if it is there, but if you skip it, you won't be missing a lot.