Rating: 3/5

After being hugely entertained by the first two Tim Winton books I read, this one just didn't click with me. We meet the Scully family in Ireland; first just the father, preparing an old cottage for his wife and daughter to share with him. The wife and daughter have stayed behind in Australia to sell the house, pack their things and prepare for a new life on the other side of the world.

These early scenes are the best in the book. Scully makes a friend, works his tail off, and transforms a rundown wreck of a fungal heap into an actual home. There are little hints that all is not well in the Scully kingdom, though, and this segment ends in a beautifully-written scene of magic realism.

Beautifully written, yes; but for me, jarring and completely out of place. But Winton is a fleet writer, so I pressed on, curious how this element would develop throughout the story. There is then a long, sad search from one extreme of Western Europe to the other. We are reminded that Winton is a peerless observer of people stuck in situations well beyond their ability to manage.

There are, of course, two journeys being described here -- the physical journey north by northwest, and the interior journey of family members' minds, and their responses to stress. Ultimately, three things worked against the story here: First, the magic realism portion cropped up a few more times, but never really led anywhere satisfactory; second, the characters seemed to be driven by the demands of the plot rather than from a realistic unfolding of their personalities; and finally, this part of the book was just too long and repetitive. There were magically-written scenes, but they were widely separated, nearly lost within the reader's sense of deja vu. The latter two-thirds of the book came to feel like a long, cold wet march in the rain.

This was only Winton's third published book, and I cannot hold it against him that he wanted to try something different. The other, later books of his that I've read were tougher, leaner, and more affecting as a result.