Rating: 4/5

Dystopian Bildungsroman Tale of A Young Man Growing Up Amid Religious Parochialism, Yearning to Fly, Finding Love, Lured into the Seedy Theatre Life of NY, and Selling Himself for His Art
This story is most definitely autobiographical in inspiration, if not in plot details. Daniel Weinreb is a dentist's son growing up in deeply religious and totalitarian Ames, Iowa, in a near-future US beset by poverty, hunger, social collapse, and division. It's not a happy place, and despite his sensitive nature, Daniel finds himself unjustly thrown into jail just for delivering a prohibited newspaper. Jail life is truly oppressive, as they don't even feed prisoners enough to survive without resorted to help from outside, with the idea that prison should be so unpleasant that nobody will seek it over life outside, to prevent recidivism and dissuade repeat offenders.

In prison he hears the angelic voice of a man who sings so beautifully that he decides then and there that his one ambition is to become a singer in the big city, and in this world singing with the aid of a special device can actually transport you out of body into an ephemeral but blissful existence as a fairy, free to roam the world and indeed outer space, often never to return to your desiccated body again. 

He finds love with the daughter of a wealthy businessman who truly believes that wealth comes to those that earn and deserve it, and that the poor are to blame for their failure and misery, a classic Republican meritocracy and anti-welfare attitude. 

He later finds himself in New York, full of tawdry glitz, theater glamour, and loads of powerful people happy to exploit young and naive young men and women lured to the city. He finds work at a theatre, bringing him closer to his beloved music, but the escape through song remains every out of reach, and tantalizing. He also becomes the catamite of a famous singer, changing his appearance drastically in the bargain, again hoping that selling himself this way will bring his dream closer to reality.

This bittersweet story has some very powerful allegorical elements that map well to an aspiring writer who is also homosexual, living in NY, ever striving to achieve recognition and greatness, but also having to face the reality that he needs to sell himself (not so literally) in order to survive, perhaps writing SF that is not his true passion, and also being exploited by those more powerful and ruthless. It is brutally honest about how the world is an unforgiving place for dreamers, but the one difference and SF conceit is that you literally can escape from the material world and find eternal bliss as a fairy, if only you can find that perfect song to transport you. The tragedy of course is that the author never did find this song, as he failed to achieve financial success as a SF writer, and much later produced some horror-themed books instead, and after his partner died he later committed suicide, suggesting that he never achieved that longed-for dream and was painfully aware of it.