Rating: 3/5

I’ve tried reading Algis Budrys once before with Rogue Moon, regarded as a classic of the SF genre. I was so unimpressed I actually quit about halfway through. Which I mention because when I came across this 1977 novel in a second-hand bookstore a couple of years ago, I’d forgotten this was the same guy who wrote Rogue Moon – and I didn’t remember that until after I’d already bought it. So it goes. Anyway, the premise is interesting: in the year 2000, Laurent Michaelmas is a world-famous TV journalist with his own secret sentient AI assistant, Domino, that has access to every computer network on Earth. Together, they secretly run the world by spinning big news events to keep conflict to a minimum, particularly between the US and the USSR, who are now cooperating to explore the solar system under the United Nations Astronautics Commission (UNAC). 

However, all of that is put in jeopardy after Reuters reports that Walter Norwood – the US astronaut in charge of a planned UNAC mission to Jupiter who was killed in an accidental shuttle explosion before the novel starts – has turned up alive in a sanatorium run by the famously brilliant Dr Limberg, who claims to have healed him. Michaelmas and Domino don’t believe it’s the real Norwood, but if it’s not, then who is he, where did he come from and how? With a Russian astronaut slotted to take Norwood’s place, Michaelmas must find out fast before Norwood’s reappearance wrecks the UNAC alliance.

It sounds like a straightforward techno-thriller, but it’s not. The book relies heavily on expositional dialogue between Michaelmas and Domino, interspersed with inner monologues and ruminations about the power of news and how it is presented to us – and yet Budrys manages to be so subtle about what’s actually happening that you really have to pay attention (or re-read earlier chapters) to keep up with what’s going on, which slows things down considerably. That said, the pace picks up about halfway through, and while Budrys doesn’t exactly stick the landing, the eventual explanation is mind-bending enough that I’ll give him credit for swinging for the fences. I don’t think I’ll be reading Budrys again (except by accident, maybe), but this was better than I expected, and at least I finished it, so there’s that.