Rating: 3/5

In between the time I purchased Victor Pelevin's Omon Ra and the time I started reading it, I skimmed an article somewhere that claimed Pelevin was inspired by and indebted to Mikhail Bulgakov. This was not good news. The Master and Margarita by Bulgakov is one of my most hated novels of all time. If I can't easily articulate what it is I hate about it so passionately, I feel that if anyone were to ask me, 'What kinds of novels don't you like to read?' I could point to a ready-to-hand copy of The Master and Margarita and say, 'That kind.' Whether it was the overbaked symbolism, the dull narrative, the Jesus crap, or just the talking cat (or all of the above) that set me off, I will leave for you to decide.

But this review is about Pelevin, not Bulgakov. I can in fact confirm there is a kinship between the two authors, but more as uncle-and-nephew than as brothers. Pelevin is less obviously pining for Goethe than Bulgakov was; his short novel is rooted very much in the modern world, in all its particular and peculiar manifestations. How can it not be? After all, the title character Omon is a Soviet youth who dreams of being a cosmonaut. The first third of the novel is set up as pretty much a standard coming-of-age yarn with few eccentricities to speak of. I kept glancing at the cover blurbs: 'Unsettling' (The New York Times), 'comedy as black as outer space itself' (Tibor Fischer—whoever that is), and 'propulsively absurd' (The New Yorker). Huh? Really? I better keep reading...

Well, it's true. The novel eventually—I want to say suddenly—becomes an unsettling, absurd black comedy, but I just don't know how I feel about it. Sections of it, particularly the end in which Omon embarks upon his 'mission' with all its existential implications, might very well be brilliant. But some other parts are dull, unintelligible, or completely unsatisfying. In fact, there is a twelve page section (pp. 79 to 91 in the New Directions edition) that I skimmed because I just didn't really get it; it's a bewildering, ellipsis-filled monologue delivered by Omon's friend Mitiok that I am either too dense or too insensitive to appreciate. You might think that twelve pages isn't all that much, but it's actually 8% of this little book. 

Omon's dream of being a cosmonaut becomes a nightmare! That's my cheesy, film-trailer voiceover for the novel. He enters a training academy where the bizarre truths of the Soviet space program are gradually revealed. I can't tell you much because it would ruin the only real reason there is to read this book—and that is to be startled by grim (and, yes, absurd) revelations. I'm not sure all of the satirical implications of life in the Soviet Union are apparent to me, but the novel's still serviceable to laymen (and women) anyway. I can't exactly celebrate Omon Ra by shouting from the rooftops, like a Booknerd Gone Wild!, but I won't dissuade you either. (Also, the cover is attractive and waxy-feeling.)