Rating: 3/5

The time from 1902 to about 1914, the place around New York City an its prosperous suburb New Rochelle, New York, the Ragtime Era, Scott Joplin lively, syncopated music has swept the nation ( if you ever seen the film The Sting, you will recognize the sounds). A wealthy family, they make fireworks and American flags, living contently in all appearances outside the city, Father, Mother, Mother's Younger Brother, Grandfather and the little boy...yes... no proper names given here, kind of quirky to be sure. The author E.L. Doctorow to mix things up, has an abandoned newly born black baby, found and saved by the unnamed family near their home. Sarah a naive teenager, who left her child on the ground to die, is very depressed, a broken love affair, the reason and taken in as a housekeeper, they feels sorry for her. Coalhouse Walker Jr. the unfazed lover, a musician and superb piano player locates Sarah, after a search, visits every week, the backdoor of course, ironically at first she will not see him, or even care for the unwanted infant. Mr. Walker, a native of St. Louis, is a proud man and doesn't take insults from anyone, the color of his skin has not made him feel inferior, quite the contrary. Showing the impressed family how great a pianist, in their out of tune piano, that embarrasses the head of the house. So when he is harassed by the volunteer firemen led by racist chief Will Conklin, jealous of Walker's Model T Ford, passing the station, the well dressed and soft spoken black man, demands justice, when his car is damaged by them. Not receiving satisfaction from the uninterested local authorities, he reported the incident to, and takes justice into his own hands...which causes much destruction , more than the fireworks family ever imagined; to the usually quiet, small town , no justice, no peace the writer seems to say . Terror permeates the whole municipality, making national headlines as the destruction spreads. Nevertheless how far can this be taken without injuring innocent people? This question can never be answered properly and it isn't here...Historical figures materialize in the novel continuously, Harry Houdini, Henry Ford, J.P. Morgan, Emma Goldman, Evelyn Nesbit etc. , they spice up the narrative. A fun aspect of this book, one of many. This a short but important and thought- provoking, prizewinning work, for readers who dig underneath and discover the truth, everyone wants respect... no matter the race they are born into...people are just people...