Rating: 3/5

Reread 2020: Dropping this from 4 stars down to 3 stars, but I actually like it more the second time through. My opinion of it had faded in time; I remembered it as the depressing Tornor book, the one where fulfillment in non-normative relationships/societies is dangled before the protagonist (and reader)—but denied. And all of that is there on reread, but knowing to expect disappointment turns it into a subdued study of why we can't always get what we want—of what needs and limitations lie in the way of fulfillment, even while undergoing personal growth; it makes that growth more real.

It was less than a month and a half. Yet in that time they had gone from winter to summer to winter again, juggling between north and south--and now it was spring in Tornor.

This is still the least enjoyable of the series, but I'm curious how it will compare to my reread of The Northern Girl, because I suspect I may actually like this more.

First read 2013: When Tornor Keep is captured by southern raiders, Ryke must become one of the new Lord's guardsmen in order to protect the life of the Keep's overthrown Prince--until both can find an avenue of escape. Watchtower has a terse, staccato, repetitive style that gives it deceptive speed and simplicity, but at its heart it's a deeply personal tale. This is fantasy without magic: a familiar but foreign setting, intricately realized and intensely problematic; the conflict between worldviews that arises within it is predictable but the depth of those experiencing it give it new life and bring with them subtle, fraught, affecting interpersonal relationships (and fairly diverse ones, especially for the book's release date). Ryke is a standout character whose repressed inner monologue exposes a difficult and conflicted man; his core companions are also strong, although characters grow increasingly archetypal the further they are from the heart of the story. All in all, a good book but not a great one, but it hits just enough of my favorite notes to keep me engaged. This book stands alone, and I moderately recommend it; I will probably try out the next in the series.

(The Ace trade edition I read is chockablock full of typos.)