Rating: 3/5

Average rating: 3.68/5 stars

A diverse collection of George R. R. Martin’s fantasy and science fiction (mostly) from the 80s. With most of these stories, Martin has developed himself into a functional prose stylist, abandoning the emo and rudimentary vibes you’ll find in his early work. Well, except those first two that were from the 70s.

Unfortunately, this collection had more in common with his weak Songs of Stars and Shadows rather than his amazing Sandkings. 

I found the middle of this collection to hold the best stories. Imagine a wagyu beef burger with moldy bread. That’s basically what you’ll find here. Though I’d especially recommend ”In the Lost Lands”, “The Last Super Bowl”, and “The Lonely Songs of Laren Dor” (which I had previously rated). 

If you’re into Martin because of A Song of Ice and Fire, then you should read “The Ice Dragon”, which was also very good.

The rest? You can probably skip them without any major issues.

Let’s break down each story’s rating:

”With Morning Comes Mistfall” - 3/5

A fine opening story. The theme seems like one that science fiction doesn’t usually follow: the positive side of myth over science. While science may solve the mysteries we have about the universe, man still needs some to ponder and grow. 

I feel like this story could’ve used more flavor to really make it pop. It’s missing the extra oomph to make it work. As it is, it’s a acceptable start to this collection.

”The Second Kind of Loneliness” - 3/5

If there’s one trope that George R. R. Martin loves, it’s the man who never got over the girl trope. Perhaps influenced by his own heartbreak early in his career, it’s a theme he recycles and recycles… over and over…

And it’s something he rarely writes effectively. 

This story has the benefit of an epistolary structure that reveals the growing madness of a man in the depths of space as he controls an interstellar spaceship portal. It’s not terribly interesting, but the eventual reveal was interesting enough that I didn’t give it the 2/5 I initially thought it deserved.

Oh, and I checked. My suspicions were right! “With Morning Comes Mistfall” and ”The Second Kind of Loneliness” were both written around the same time—the early 1970s—when Martin seemed obsessed with this melancholic, wistful feeling he repeated frequently. It also explains why the writing is weaker here and less refined.

”The Last Super Bowl” - 5/5

Full disclosure here. I’m not into sports. None of them.

Still, this story is able to capture a certain malaise that one gets as they get older: the feeling of nostalgia lost. A realization that the past is gone and you can’t—and never will—return to it. 

What’s clever about Martin is that he uses the Super Bowl to make this feeling applicable to nearly everyone. How could a massive event as eternal as the Super Bowl end? How could there be a “last Super Bowl”? The world changes. Society changes. And the bastions of culture don’t catch up.

It’s a well-written short story with a hell of a final line that’s an emotional gut-punch to the reader. Great job, Martin.

”The Lonely Songs of Laren Dor” - 5/5

I originally reviewed this story in an early collection from Martin called Songs of Stars and Shadows. While I rated that collection fairly low, this story was one of the only standouts. Here’s what I said:

I loved this story. While so simple of a vignette, there was something so captivating about this fantastic world and these two leads. Star-crossed romance with a dark brooding male lead, while the female lead is a sleek, world-hopping woman desperate to find her one true love. 

I am a sucker for fantastic/science fiction romance, so I was the target market for this story. 

And just like a good short story, it had me yearning for more. 

I’ve been wondering what the wide appeal of Martin is. This story showed me.

”The Ice Dragon” - 4/5

A solid fairy tale that reminds me of A Game of Thrones without the swearing, excessive sex, and heavy violence. Mind you, there’s still a lot of heavy themes—violence, war, assault. But it never overpowers the essence and vibe of the story Martin is telling. And he doesn’t waste time. He creates this fantastic world, then sends it all crash down in a cinematic climax that rivals any fantasy film.

The transformation of the main character is really well done. Sure, if you boil it down, “The Ice Dragon” can be accused of being a mere coming of age story, but oddly it feels fresh, unique, and engaging. I liked it and felt Martin was able to build a lovely world in the short time pages we had.

You might be as surprised as I was, but apparently this story isn’t in the same universe as A Song of Ice and Fire. In fact, it was written more than a decade before Martin started that (infamously) unfinished book series!

And yet, here you can see him beginning to toy with the general atmosphere, setting, politics, and war that his bestselling series is known for. It’s refreshing, if only by comparison. There’s a certain simplicity in this story that makes it feel refined and fresh. 

Clear as ice. 

”In the Lost Lands” - 5/5

Spectacular story! It feels like a modern fairytale, full of power and energy. 

This had, perhaps, one of the best character work I’ve seen from him. It’s an inversion of the usual. Our main character becomes the wish-giving crone from fairytales past. Not only is Gray Alys engaging, but she’s vivid and unique. She has a grim aspect that I absolutely loved.

The ending is wonderful too. It’s not necessarily an incredible twist, but it’s emotionally and thematically satisfying. Really loved this one.

”Unsound Variations” - 4/5

A decent time-travel story that felt a little too long. Martin spins a tale of a bunch of former chess teammates that went their separate ways and now meet years later. Slowly, the truth behind their reunion is revealed.

My biggest complaint is the repetition. Martin stresses the same facts multiple times, leaving us retreading the same facts—did you know, if the guy had done this move, he would’ve won the game?—did you know, they incessantly teased the antagonist?—did you know?—did you know? 

If Martin had trimmed a little of the fat around the edges, the story would’ve been better for it—as close to a perfect story as you could get. But that being said, it’s still a fine story with a pretty satisfying ending and moral: don’t wallow in your mistakes; keep going forward. 

”Closing Time” - 1/5

Is it unfair to rate a comedy story so low? Maybe. This story just bothered me on so many levels.

The black character’s accent. The punchline. Hell, even the concept was annoying to me.

The only positive is the restraint Martin used to make this only 12 pages long. 

”Under Siege” - 3.5/5

Good story until the ending.

We follow a mutant from the future who’s trying to stop the destruction of the world by having his consciousness travel to the past.

The prose itself is well-sculpted, using the rough-edged mutant’s perspective to tell it. I like the flavor he adds to the atmosphere both in the future and the napoleonic past. 

But once the ending comes around, it left me wanting. Every other setup had payoffs, but the way they finally decided to “fix” the past felt anticlimactic and not poignant enough. 

”The Glass Flower” - 3/5

This novella felt like it could’ve been cut in half and still accomplished what it hoped to accomplish. Not that it was a particularly good (or bad) story. 

There’s a lot of themes of life and death, the value of life itself. But it’s all done in a very vague way.

This story is apparently the last ever published story in the Thousand Worlds universe that Martin created. Many of these stories I’ve found to be lackluster, usually created in Martin’s early writing days. And while “The Glass Rose” was written later, it’s still lacking the depth that I hoped for.

It’s an interesting story, and the prose was well-written, but I especially hated the ending, leaving a bad taste in my mouth. It’s the kind of theme that I really dislike. 

Not more to say than—bleh.

”Portraits of His Children” - 2/5

I am shocked this won the Nebula. I can only guess because it spoke to its writer audience.

The concept of an estranged daughter sending portraits to her father as punishment for a later-revealed sin is weird. Add that these portraits of the father’s fictional characters come to life at night, and you’ve got the main thrust of the novella.

It never quite lives up to its concept, in my opinion. The gist seems to be that artists/authors create characters to fill holes in themselves. It’s almost like Martin is writing a fictionalized confession of his own works. But I never fully vibed with the story. There was nothing to call me in.

Don’t get me wrong; it is a unique idea. It just isn’t all that interesting, especially when weighed against other stories in this collection.