Rating: 2/5

Garfield, Odie, Jon Arbuckle, and even Lyman are back in Garfield Gains Weight: His Second Book, featuring every Garfield comic strip from January 23 to August 26, 1979. The evolution of Jim Davis's artwork is less noticeable from start to finish than in Garfield at Large: His First Book, but some refinement can be seen in Garfield's appearance. The tone of the comics isn't much different from the first half-year of Garfield: jokes about him loving food and loathing mondays, being grossly overweight, his rivalry with Odie as the dog learns to give as well as he takes. Garfield is almost purely comedy, so sit back and have a good time.

 A series of strips about Garfield's love of television starts the book. February 9 (page eleven) is a funny sight gag with Garfield aggressively hinting that Jon needs to turn up the thermostat, and February 17 (page fourteen) is a playful bit featuring a crossword puzzle. We're re-introduced to Garfield's teddy bear, Pooky (we meet him in the previous book) in a series of gags (February 24 [page seventeen] is my favorite). February 27 (page nineteen) is an interesting commentary about the times when we don't feel like giving or receiving affection ("Some days I'm just not in the mood to be adored"), and February 28 is humorous turnabout for Garfield over Jon, showing what he thinks of his owner's cutesy baby talk. March 7 (page twenty-two) comically shows that sometimes Jon takes it too easy on his cat, and March 17 (page twenty-six) is a rare affirmation of the truth that Garfield doesn't hate Odie, as much as he wants us to believe he does. March 18 (page twenty-seven) is a thoughtful Sunday comic, Garfield creating his manifesto on life, even if his paw print writing is indecipherable to Jon. That's okay; people are apt to misinterpret our take on life even if we write in their language. A brief interlude follows with Garfield as the Caped Avenger, wearing his blue blanket everywhere and posing as a defender of justice. Spring arrives, dominating dialogue for a week. April 11 (page thirty-seven) is funny, Jon preparing to tease an ill-tempered Garfield, but thinking better of it because he values his own life. Garfield's dour mood persists for a week's worth of comedy. In mid-May it finally happens: Garfield overeats so egregiously that his stomach bulges past his feet and he can't walk. He stays that way for a week, culminating in the hilarious May 17 (page fifty-three) strip. That has to be Jon's best line of the book.

 Humor featuring Jon's unimpressive love life starts with more frequency, then a week of Garfield reveling in his own laziness by never leaving bed. May 30 (page fifty-eight) is the week's most surprising and enjoyable punchline. After all, a comic-strip celebrity, even a cat, owes the fans something. Garfield and Jon go camping and run afoul of a porcupine, and June 19 (page sixty-seven) is a historic occasion: the first birthday of the Garfield comic strip. Jim Davis honors the milestone with a low-key two-day party: just Garfield, Jon, Odie, and a birthday cake for Garfield. Late June sees a taking-Garfield-to-the-veterinarian story, where Jon meets an attractive doctor named Liz. He tries to impress her with wit and a smooth demeanor, but Liz shuts him down every time. This isn't the last we see of her. June 28 (page seventy-one) is one of the week's funniest strips, Jon "discreetly" urging Garfield to exaggerate his symptoms to buy more time with Liz. June 29 is also amusing, Garfield smugly agreeing with Liz's medical advice until she prescribes the dreaded diet. Wacky comedy comes from the strict diet that Jon puts Garfield on, and the storyline carries over to Sunday, July 8 (page seventy-five), where Garfield spots a strange new food on the dinner table (is it a kind of crescent roll?) and decides to try it. The reveal of what the exotic "food" is delivers a hilarious punchline. Garfield gets stranded up a tree all the next week, crescendoing to a warm, humorous gag on July 14 (page seventy-seven). This sort of mini story is what I love about Garfield. In late July Garfield and Jon are back at the vet with Liz, and the storyline finale, July 28 (page eighty-three), is a memorable punchline. "Garfield's History of Cats" leads a tour through alternative history, focusing on important cats from the dawn of time through the modern day. The highlight is August 10 (page eighty-nine), an explanation of how Christopher Columbus's cat actually discovered America. An assortment of gags brings the collection to its end.

 Jim Davis tightened the formula somewhat by year two of Garfield, but there isn't a dramatic difference. The strip was good in 1978, 1979, 1999, and every other year it headlined the daily funnies. Garfield is an icon, beloved for decades as a friend to catch up with in the newspaper, whether one read the strip every day or rarely. The comedy appeals to young readers, making these books ideal children's literature, but everyone in the family can appreciate Garfield, and that's the best part. Like a certain cat and his lasagna, we can never consume too much Garfield. I hope to have another generous portion soon.