Rating: 4/5

The Interrupted Journey is one of the better books addressing claims of encounters with alien beings. It tells the story of Betty and Barney Hill, an interracial New Hampshire couple who spotted a UFO, piloted by sinister-looking humanoids, following their car home one night in 1961. After arriving back at their home and noting they'd experienced missing time, they began talking with friends and associates. They also started having strange nightmares in which aliens prominently featured. Soon they were in touch with the relevant researchers and UFO advocates. Eventually they found themselves a psychiatrist, who hypnotised them with a view towards identifying and healing the psychological issues triggering their fears and near-hysteria. It is in these hypnosis sessions that the full story came out. Not only did Betty and Barney Hill witness a UFO event, they were also abducted by aliens, who subjected them to a series of medical tests. One of the most famous alien abduction stories was born.

You don't have to believe that the Hills' story of being abducted by men from beyond the moon is true in order to enjoy The Interrupted Journey. Built around the hypnosis sessions they underwent, it does a great job of laying out their original story without neglecting alternate explanations such as that of their hypnotist, who believed their encounter and subsequent hysteria were a manifestation of paranoia and insecurity over the Hills' interracial marriage during the Civil Rights era -- in which Betty and Barney, good people, were committed activists. This approach has its drawbacks, of course. For example, it doesn't go into Betty Hill's second career as an especially silly UFO believer who eventually struggled to differentiate between streetlights and flying saucers. She wasn't crazy at the time her and her husband's abduction experience went public (against their wishes) but she wasn't all there by the end.

If you're looking for a book that addresses a famous case of alleged alien abduction without succumbing to sensationalism or silliness, The Interrupted Journey is a good option. It's grounded and sufficiently sceptical when compared to, say, 
  Captured! The Betty and Barney Hill UFO Experience
, written by the supremely smug Stanton Friedman and the Hills' piggybacking niece. Still one of the best books of its kind.