Rating: 2/5

Edmund White, as talented as he is, still sometimes writes as if he wants to prove to people that he did his research beforehand. His biography on Genet was exhaustively detailed – so much so that it took me months of picking it up and putting it down to get through it (I commented back then that I didn’t need to know about absolutely every piece of feces Genet was fixated on.) Fanny sometimes falls into this trap of overexplaining.

Fanny is based on fact, but it is fiction. Fanny refers not to one, but two women of the early 19th century. Fanny Wright was a Scottish heiress and Utopia adherent. At times she was free love; other times she was communist, and she ran her fortune to ground trying to start up her own commune and help others with their political fantasies.

Fanny Trollope was the mother of the famous writer. She writes, because her sick lawyer husband couldn’t keep the family finances together. (In fact, she’s narrating this “messy” account of her time with Wright; the book’s wobbly gimmick is that it was compiled from the old Trollope’s unedited manuscripts.) Trollope also fancied herself a “Utopianist.” 

There is some strong indication that these two Fannys knew each other; in White’s fictional novel (with a library of fact thrown throughout), Trollope became fascinated with Wright’s ideas and followed her around the globe, becoming a groupie until the commune plan fell apart and the writer became a bit of an adversary to the heiress.

Are you overloaded with fact yet? Wait until White throws in European aristocracy like Lafayette and American free love adherents like Robert Owen. Then, of course, we need to know about Continental class systems, American slavery, the setup of Cincinatti, the arrangement of Memphis, the levels of a typical Missippi steamboat, the birth of the Creole language, the start of Haiti, and other stuff.

Still, there is some fascinating storytelling going on here. White also knows that we cannot escape our time we live in, so he doesn’t let his women escape their era. Both Wright and Trollope are strong women in a world that still values men. Their ideas of race are still very parental and controlling. The protagonists’ battles for racial and social equality are hampered by their inabilities to see how they themselves constantly support the expectations of the class system. 

Throughout the novel, Trollope espouses equal rights while complaining that her hired servant girl doesn’t want to work. She has some nasty thoughts about black people, too. Finally, Trollope insults Wright for using her looks to influence situations, because both women are unable to see themselves as groundbreakers in 19th century society. One uses schemes and writing to keep her family from complete destitution; the other uses sex (Camille Paglia would be proud.)

Still, I wish the book – with its forays into descriptions of architecture and portrait painting and food – would’ve been shorter. White’s skill as a writer is undoubted; his skill as an editor is still in question.