Rating: 3/5

The Sword in the Stone is a novel by the English author T.H. White. It was published in 1938 as a stand-alone work, but it later became the first part of a tetralogy, called “The Once and Future King”. Although broadly categorised as Fantasy, in fact it is hard to define. The Sword in the Stone is very much one of a kind, and does not fit conventional genre boundaries. It has been called a “sui generis” work, and whether you like it or not is very much a matter of taste.

The classic work which tells the story of King Arthur is Sir Thomas Malory’s “Le Morte d’Arthur” of 1485, and many use this as their basis. However, T.H. White decided to write a fantasy about the boyhood of Arthur, which had not been covered by Malory. In The Sword in the Stone, the boy who will become King Arthur is tutored by Merlyn, to prepare him for the use of power and royal life. Following Malory, T.H. White places this loosely in Medieval England, of which he was very knowledgeable. Therefore much of the book describes medieval culture and pastimes, such as hunting, falconry and jousting.

There is no mention of Arthur at the beginning of The Sword in the Stone. Instead, we are introduced to “The Wart”, a young boy who is growing up in Sir Ector’s castle, which is situated in the middle of a wild English forest called the Forest Sauvage. Sir Ector has a son, Kay, who is his heir. Although both boys are taught chivalry and mathematics, it is Kay who will be instructed in the proper ways of knighthood. The Wart knows that because of his common birth, he can only ever be Kay’s squire, or servant. When Kay makes mistakes in his lessons, he is rarely disciplined, since he will one day be powerful, inheriting his father’s lands and title.

The story begins with whimsical humour. Sir Ector and his friend Sir Grummore Grummursum are in the process of getting very drunk on port wine. But rather than speaking in the language of the time, this tipsy and pompous pair of medieval knights conduct a drunken conversation in the speech of the post-World War I British aristocracy. Also, they don’t seem particularly intelligent. Having these two English aristocrats hemming and hawing while they drink port makes for a comic scene; very much at odds with what medieval knights would really have sounded and acted like.

Sir Ector and Sir Grummore decide to go on a quest to find a new tutor for the boys, since the previous tutor has gone insane. However, they cannot, since it is July, and Sir Ector needs to supervise his tenants while they put the year’s hay out to dry.

After Kay and The Wart finish helping the work in the fields, they go to practise their falconry. They take a tiercel goshawk called “Cully” from the Mews, and head out into the fields. The Wart is better at handling Cully, but Kay is proud, and aware of his station. He insists on carrying the hawk, and he releases him far too son, hoping that he will catch a rabbit. Cully, however has his own ideas, and flies into a nearby tree instead, perching there, glaring at them, before flying deeper and deeper into the forest. We see The Wart’s empathy contrasting with Kay’s arrogance, as The Wart worries about Hob, who takes care of the hawks. He knows that Hob will be disappointed to have lost Cully, but Kay does not care. He says that Hob is just a servant, and he storms off.

The Wart waits by a tree where Cully has perched, until it is quite dark. He is shot at by an unseen bowman, and The Wart runs deeper into into the forest, until he is quite lost. Then he meets a kindly, bespectacled man who says he is King Pellinore, on a hunt for a magical creature known as the “Questing Beast”. The Wart invites King Pellinore back to Sir Ector’s castle, in the hope that he will knows the way. However King Pellinore suddenly hears the Questing Beast, and runs off in keen pursuit.

The Wart eventually falls asleep in the dark forest. In the morning, he sets off again, and meets an old man, with a long white beard, dressed in a pointed cap and a gown with embroidered stars and signs. He is drawing water from a well outside his cottage, and introduces himself as Merlyn. Merlyn seem to already know The Wart’s name, and he invites him into his cottage, which is full of magical items and strange artefacts. Here The Wart meets a talking owl, called “Archimedes”. Merlyn frequently speaks of things that he has seen in the future. He explains to The Wart that he is a wizard, who lives backwards in time, and that he is to be The Wart’s new tutor.

Both leave together for Sir Ector’s castle, catching the hawk, Cully, on the way. When they arrive at the Castle, Merlyn demonstrates his magical powers, and although Sir Ector dismisses them as sleights of hand, he nevertheless hires Merlyn. Kay, predictably enough, belittles The Wart’s adventure. However Merlyn, becomes quite terrifyingly angry, and reprimands Kay. This makes everybody feel uncomfortable, and Merlyn seems to regret his bad temper, apologising to Kay and giving him a silver hunting knife.

We have now been introduced to the five main characters in the book: The Wart, Merlyn, Sir Ector, Kay, and King Pellinore. We can tell their personalities from T.H. White’s droll account of their actions and conversations. The novel continues, telling of the adventures of Kay and The Wart. The Wart always seems good-natured: a familiar staple of English literature, a marginalised stepchild, always behaving decently and being eager to please. He is not particularly courageous, but always does what is right, however frightened he is. Kay, on the other hand, haughtily behaves like the spoiled, selfish and angry child he is. He is so used to being told that he is superior, that he cannot stand to have his authority challenged. In a way though, he is a product of his position. It is only really when The Wart earns too much praise, that Kay begins to criticise and belittle him. We hope that as he matures, some of Kay’s selfishness may lessen.

As the story proceeds we see many magical adventures. Each one is designed by Merlyn to give the Wart a carefully calculated lesson.  For his first lesson, they are standing on a bridge above the castle’s moat. The Wart wishes aloud that he were a fish, so Merlyn turns him into a fish, and himself into a large, wise-looking tench, in the moat. A roach asks them to see a weak fish who is ill, and although Merlyn thinks she is making it up, he cures her all the same. Merlyn’s compassion toward the roach teaches The Wart that even the smallest creatures deserve help, however silly it might seem.

Merlyn then takes The Wart to visit the king of the moat, who is an enormous pike. The old pike epitomises absolute might; it is an unflattering portrait of power. The old and evil king lethargically answers some of the Wart’s questions, affirming that power and might are the only two things worth living by. But the king pike lunges for The Wart, trying to eat him. The pike’s many rows of teeth represent the sharp and cruel nature which always accompanies absolute power. The Wart manages to swim away in the nick of time and is promptly changed back into a boy by Merlyn.

Interestingly, T.H. White compares the pike, with its lean, smooth jaws, to “Uncle Sam”. In the late 1930s, when this book was written, “Uncle Sam” was the iconic image of the United States government. At this time, new superpower nations were emerging. 

Although The Sword in the Stone is geared more towards children and young people than the rest of the books in the “The Once and Future King” tetralogy, they all explores parallels between the Arthurian world and the modern one. T.H. White frequently tries to link its morals to contemporary events.

Although Kay is leaning how to joust, The Wart knows that he is destined to be Kay’s squire, and not a knight. Merlyn therefore magically transports him to a clearing in the Forest Sauvage, so that The Wart can watch Sir Grummore Grummursum challenging Pellinore to a joust. What follows is a ridiculous scene. After the two have insulted each other in the formal high language, they begin combat. But each knight is so weighed down by his armour that neither can hurt the other. They end up crashing into the trees, and Merlyn tells The Wart that when they wake up, they will be friends. Merlyn then transports the Wart back to the practice ground at Sir Ector’s castle.

In another lesson, Merlyn turns The Wart into a merlin—a hunting bird—putting him in the Mews for the night with the others. The peregrine falcon is the bird in charge of the Mews, and he asks The Wart about his ancestry. Then he challenges The Wart to prove himself, by perching within reach of Cully, the goshawk, until the other hawks have rung their bells three times. Cully attacks The Wart, who barely escapes as the bells ring for a third time. The birds hail him in chorus as “the King of Merlins”.

T.H. White is clearly paralleling a militaristic society. The birds all value lineage and ancestry above everything, and even refer to each other with military titles. Cully has been driven to the point of insanity. He is referred to as “Colonel”, but even his military discipline cannot prevent him from acting murderously. The Wart demonstrates his courage, but it feels like a hollow victory.

The boys’ lessons continue, although Merlyn pays more attention to The Wart. Kay is envious of this attention, and The Wart begs Merlyn to give Kay an adventure too. In one of their excursions, they meet Little John, who leads them to “Robin Wood” and Marian. They stay with Robin for a long time, and eventually meet a griffin, whom Kay kills, taking its head as a trophy. During the fight, the griffin breaks The Wart’s collar bone.

While The Wart is stuck in bed, Merlyn sends a spell through his bedroom keyhole to turn the Wart into an ant. As an ant, The Wart crawls into the ant farms in his room, and learns that ants think in binary terms of “Done” or “Not Done”. When The Wart is well again, Merlyn changes him into a badger. Another lesson is when The Wart is changed into a wild goose, who can fly so high that there are no country boundaries. This is clearly a pacifist message.

The years pass, and eventually Kay is ready to be knighted. Great preparations are made, and Sir Ector and his retinue travel to London. However, as Kay approaches the tournament field, he realises that he has left his sword behind, at the inn. The Wart is sent back to get it, but the inn is locked. The Wart finds a sword, stuck fast in an anvil on top of a stone in a churchyard. When he touches the sword, his senses heighten. He is still unable to pull it out, but as he tries again, he can hear voices encouraging him. These voices belong to all the animals, and friends he has made, and this reminds him of the lessons they had taught him. He tries for a third time, and this time the sword comes free, whereupon The Wart rushes to take it to Kay.

When Kay learns that The Wart had pulled the sword out of the anvil, he knows that this is the sword which will determine Uther Pendragon’s successor. At first he pretends to Sir Ector that it was he, Kay, who pulled it from the stone. However Sir Ector asks him to do this again, and Kay then admits that it was The Wart who had pulled it free. Astounded and frightened, The Wart finds that Sir Ector and Kay then bow to him as their King.

After he is crowned King, The Wart is given gifts from all over the world and from his friends—both animal and human. Sir Ector sends him a dunce’s cap, which magically transforms into Merlyn. Merlyn then explains what he has known all along: that The Wart is Uther’s son, and that his real name is Arthur.

Some readers may find that this story is very familiar, since it is a retelling of the traditional tales of medieval England—with a quirky modern touch. The Arthurian tradition is a body of stories and myths about a legendary king of Briton, which date back at least to early twelfth-century Britain and France.

The Sword in the Stone is classed as a “Junior” book, suitable for ages 9 to 12. This puzzles me. Perhaps it may have appealed to some youngsters of this age when it was written, especially the privileged prep school boys. But now, I wonder. I suspect it appeals more to adults. I first read it in my 20s, and again now. It has a quaint drollery, and is full of facts about medieval times, which some may become immersed in. It is a classic, and the tetralogy is unique. Perhaps this may be why of those of my friends who have read it, nearly all seem to have rated it at 5 stars, (although few have reviewed it).

When Disney hacked the story about and made it into a film in 1963, he concentrated on the humorous episodes, and the animal transformations. If you have a particular bent for the ridiculous, then the battle between King Pellinore and Sir Grummore Grummursum is hilarious. T.H. White is clearly poking fun at traditional notions of knighthood. The only reason for the joust is because this is appropriate for their social station. Each man is so heavily padded that he cannot hurt the other—or even see well enough to avoid running into a tree. The fact that both knights address each other in the most formal medieval English also encourages us to laugh at them. Knighthood and battles play an important part in “The Once and Future King”, but here these two knights are little more than buffoons, with T.H White mocking the formal address that is traditionally found in Arthurian tales.

I can see why the book has attained its status, but to me it is too quirky, and of its time, class and culture to be very appealing. It is perhaps the most self-indulgent book I have ever read, and peppered with anachronisms. Perhaps they are an hilariously inappropriate delight to scholars of medieval history, but for a general reader, they seem merely puzzling, and for a child, surely misleading.

Thus The Sword in the Stone, regretfully, must remain at my default of 3 stars.

“The best thing for disturbances of the spirit is to learn. That is the only thing that never fails. You may grow old and trembling in your anatomies, you may lie awake at night listening to the disorder of your veins, you may miss your only love and lose your moneys to a monster, you may see the world about you devastated by evil lunatics, or know your honour trampled in the sewers of baser minds. There is only one thing for it then—to learn. Learn why the world wags and what wags it. That is the only thing which the poor mind can never exhaust, never alienate, never be tortured by, never fear or distrust, and never dream of regretting.”