Rating: 4/5

One begins to read the introduction, and there's so much worth quoting one gives up and sticks to reading; and it's so much in accord with what one thought, whether to begin with or especially all the more so after various things, quoting would be preceded or followed by 'as one always thought', sounding silly after a couple of times. 

Meanwhile there is a mention of Ian Wilson, and one wonders why Colin Wilson isn't mentioned. One looks again, and realises why! 

Of course, if one began one's acquaintance with his works with The Philosopher's Stone, and didn't merely categorise it as another mystery or fight of fancy, it's bound to happen that one recalls his name as one begins this book, having forgotten why one bought it in the first place - not the monsters on the cover, but the name of the author! 

Why Amazon has so few of his works, or those of similar beloved authors of one over decades, is the real mystery. Fans and connoisseurs of James Hilton, Colin Wilson, or for that matter A. J. Cronin and more, would love to see - and buy - their collected works on Amazon, but even the World's End series of Upton Sinclair wasn't available until recently, and Agatha Christie works aren't yet available as a complete collection. 
.......

"In 1957 the science writer Jacques Bergier made a broadcast on French television that caused a sensation. He was discussing one of the great unsolved mysteries of prehistory, the sudden disappearance of the dinosaurs about sixty-five million years ago. He suggested that the dinosaurs had been wiped out by the explosion of a star fairly close to our solar system – a “supernova”. He then went on to make the even more startling suggestion that the explosion may have been deliberately caused by superbeings who wanted to wipe out the dinosaurs and to give intelligent mammals a chance. 

"Even the first part of his theory was dismissed by scientists as the fantasy of a crank, and the reaction was no better when in 1970 Bergier repeated it in a book called Extra-Terrestrials in History, which began with a chapter called “The Star that Killed the Dinosaurs”. But five years later an American geologist named Walter Alvarez was studying a thin layer of clay on a hill side in Italy – the clay that divides the age of the dinosaurs (Mesozoic) from our own age of mammals – and brooding on this question of what had wiped out whole classes of animal. He took a chunk from the hillside back to California, and showed it to his father, the physicist Luis Alvarez, with the comment: “Dad, that half-inch layer of clay represents the period when the dinosaurs went out, and about 75 per cent of the other creatures on the earth”. 

"His father was so intrigued that he subjected the clay to labouratory tests, and found it contained a high proportion of a rare element called iridium, a heavy element that usually sinks to the middle of planets, but which is thrown out by explosions. Alvarez also gave serious consideration to the idea of an exploding star, and only dismissed it when further tests showed an absence of a certain radioactive platinum that would also be present in a supernova explosion. The only other alternative was that the earth had been struck by a giant meteorite, which had filled the atmosphere with steam and produced a “greenhouse effect” that had raised the temperature by several degrees. 

"Modern crocodiles and alligators can survive a temperature of about 100 degrees C; but two or three degrees higher is too much for them, and they die. This is almost certainly what happened to the dinosaurs, about sixty-five million years ago. And that is why this present book contains no entry headed: “What became of the dinosaurs”? We know the answer. And we also know that Bergier’s “lunatic fringe” theory was remarkably close to the truth."

" ... In the article on spontaneous human combustion, I have quoted a modern medical textbook which states that spontaneous combustion is impossible, and that there is no point in discussing it. But the evidence is now overwhelming that spontaneous combustion not only occurs, but occurs fairly frequently."

"In 1768 the French Academy of Sciences asked the great chemist Lavoisier to investigate a report of a huge stone that had hurtled from the sky and buried itself in the earth not far from where some peasants were working. Lavoisier was absolutely certain that great stones did not fall from the sky, and reported that the witnesses were either mistaken or lying; it was another half century before the existence of meteorites was accepted by science.

" ... The inference is surely that it is more fruitful to be intrigued by the possibility of some prehistoric monster in the depths of Loch Ness than to dismiss it as a childish absurdity."

"Sceptical investigators all seem to make this same curious logical error. William James pointed out that if you want to disprove that all crows are black, you do not have to try and prove that no crows are black; you only have to produce one single white crow. So a bookful of cases of fraud or excessive gullibility proves nothing except that those particular cases are fraudulent. But one single case of a paranormal event for which the evidence is overwhelming does demolish the argument that the paranormal is, by definition, fraudulent."

"Consider a question raised by the zoologist Ivan Sanderson. On a moonlit night, on a dust-covered road in Haiti, he and his wife both experienced a curious hallucination of being back in Paris in the fifteenth century. (The story is told in full in “Time in Disarray” in this volume.) Gardner would declare that this is a question that should simply not be asked unless the answer is that Sanderson was either drunk or lying. But it is obvious that he was neither. Those who knew him (and I have a letter on my desk from one of them at the moment) agree that he was an honest man who was not remotely interested in the “supernatural”. It is also worth asking how Sanderson’s servants knew he had been involved in an accident – although it occurred in a remote and deserted spot – and that he would be home at dawn."

" ... Russian and American scientists have been experimenting with ESP as a means of communicating with submarines under the polar ice. ... "

" ... But then we come upon a case in which someone has clearly foreseen the future, and we know this is not simply a question of intuition. The notion that time has a one-way flow is the very foundation of western science; everything depends on it. If precognition is possible, then our basic assumptions need revising."

"Sanderson makes it clear, for example, that he believes that some of the Haitians he encountered possessed powers of “second sight”. One of these remarked to him after his “timeslip” experience, “You saw things, didn’t you? You don’t believe it, but you could always see things if you wanted to”. In short, Sanderson himself could have developed or perhaps simply rediscovered his paranormal faculties."

" ... In my book The Occult I have cited many cases that seem to illustrate the same point. For example, the famous tiger-hunter Jim Corbett describes in Man Eaters of Kumaon how he came to develop what he calls “jungle sensitiveness”, so he knew when a wild animal was lying in wait for him. ... "

Would that be the story I read decades ago and still recall so vividly that it makes one shiver with goosebumps, about the hunter stepping back barely a fraction of the moment before the cheetah he was laying in wait for sprang at him from above the roof instead of sauntering in directly in front of him from the forest along the only way it normally came? While the hunter was waiting in the dark in the doorway of the hut, obscured by dark in the brilliant moonlit night, his rifle aimed ready, the cheetah had been on the roof over his head, paused to jump on him - and the instinct that made the hunter step back for no reason, saved his life; he fired even as the cheetah leapt down at him, facing him. 

I believe Arthur Conan Doyle may have copied this in the final hunting down of Dr Moriarty by Sherlock Holmes. 

"If this book needs any justification, it is that it is a modest attempt to catch a few glimpses of the strangeness that lies on the other side of the curtain."
.......

Author discusses the legends around Arthur and Merlin, describing various histories and giving a very satisfactory account of reality of Arthur, and then going on to Merlin, again bringing the legends to a satisfactory order.

"So it is a mistake to think of a magician as a Walt Disney cartoon character wearing a tall conical hat with stars painted on it. Real sorcerers are closely related to modern “spirit mediums”; they assert that their power comes from spirits. Modern “magicians” – such as the notorious Aleister Crowley – believe that power can be obtained over spirits by the use of certain precise rituals, which must be performed with punctilious accuracy.

"The traditional role of tribal witch doctors and shamans is as intermediaries between human beings and the spirit world, and their chief function is to ensure good hunting or good harvests. Celtic druids belonged to this tradition. Druidism was a form of nature worship; it came to Britain around 600 BC with the Celts, but many older forms of nature religion had existed long before that: Stonehenge, for example, was a temple for such worship and is precisely aligned to the stars."

Further parts about Merlin aren't as satisfactory as those about Arthur. However, author concludes-

"The books by Nicolai Tolstoy and Norma Lorre Goodrich are rich and complex detective stories that will leave most readers in a state of “enlightened confusion”. The final picture that emerges is of a real King Arthur, who was one of the greatest generals of the Dark Ages, and of a real Merlin, a shaman and druid, who was Arthur’s counselor and adviser. Both were men of such remarkable stature that, even within a few decades of their deaths, they became the subject of endless legends. The legends have blurred the reality to such an extent that it is now virtually impossible to discern the outline of the real men who lived sometime between AD 450 and 550. But the outcome of all the detective work is at least a certainty that they actually existed."
.......

The chapter on Atlantis is mindboggling for anyone who knows little more than the germ of information, and is very detailed, but a tad disappointing to a reader of Colin Wilson, since not a shred of a conclusion is offered.

" ... Plato, writing about 350 BC, was the first to speak of the great island in the Atlantic Ocean which had vanished “in a day and a night”, and been submerged beneath the waves of the Atlantic."

" ... Solon, the famous Athenian lawgiver, went to Saïs in Egypt about 590 BC, and heard the story of Atlantis from an Egyptian priest. According to the priest, Atlantis was already a great civilization when Athens had been founded about 9600 BC. It was then “a mighty power that was aggressing wantonly against the whole of Europe and Asia, and to which your city [Athens] put an end”. Atlantis, said the priest, was “beyond the pillars of Hercules” (the Straits of Gibraltar), and was larger than Libya and Asia put together. It was “a great and wonderful empire” which had conquered Libya and Europe as far as Tyrrhenia (Etruria in central Italy). Deserted by their allies, the Athenians fought alone against Atlantis, and finally conquered them. But at this point violent floods and earthquakes destroyed both the Athenians and the Atlantians, and Atlantis sank beneath the waves in a single day and night."

" ... The Atlantians were great engineers and architects, building palaces, harbours, temples and docks; their capital city was built on the hill, which was surrounded by concentric bands of land and water, joined by immense tunnels, large enough for a ship to sail through. The city was about eleven miles in diameter. A huge canal, 300 feet wide and 100 feet deep, connected the outermost of these rings of water to the sea. ... "

"Isis Unveiled astonished its publisher by becoming a best-seller; it made its author a celebrity, and she went on to leave New York for India and to found the Theosophical Society. ... She also claims that the survivors of Atlantis peopled Egypt and built the pyramids about a hundred thousand years ago. ... "
.......

"The Baader-Meinhof Gang" begins by detailing a joint hijacking of an airliner by Palestinian and German terrorists together, demanding release of terrorists in prison in Germany. This failed, but another kidnapped German was subsequently murdered by their associates who'd demanded release of the same prisoners as ransom.

Wilson then goes on to describe the history of the gang. 

"Mahler now arranged for the group – which included Baader, Meinhof, Ensslin, and himself – to escape from Germany to the Middle East, where they were trained in terrorist tactics by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP)."
.......

"The Barbados Vault" is interesting enough.

"The Negroes obviously believed there was some kind of voodoo at work – some magical force deliberately conjured by a witch or witch doctor, the motive being revenge on the hated slave-owners. It sounds unlikely, but it is the best that can be offered."

Again, notice their opinion being not taken seriously.

Next one, The Basa Murder, is interesting - and satisfactory - in its reaching a conclusion of justice for the victim.
.......

"The Bermuda Triangle" is one of the best in this and on the subject; Wilson mentions various incidents, various writings on the subject, and theories explaining the vanishing of various flights, ships, and crews. In particular he mentions work of Adi-Kent Thomas Jeffrey,, titles The Bermuda Triangle, overshadowed by the far more famous one of same title by Berlitz, and leaves an impression that the former is far more worth reading. He speaks of magnetic lines of earth, and this he's written about more, elsewhere in a work describing Salisbury mound, chalk horses and more.
.......

The next chapter, Bigfoot, gives details of various incidents if Nortwest U.S. and Western Canada involving sightings and more, and goes on to speak of the Asian version, mentioning incidentally that the word Yeti is of a Central Asian language.

The word in Sanskrit and therefore in most of India means a monk who attempts attaining Divine while undergoing, consciously or otherwise, great physical and worldly travails and pains; the usage of this word for a species other than homosapiens perhaps was due to the creatures being seen rarely, singly, and in remote locations, in the same state that such a monk would be, long haired and unkempt, observing no worldly customs that belonged to human settlements.

"It was in January 1958 that Dr Alexander Pronin, of Leningrad University, reported seeing an Alma." 

Alma is the Russian name for the creature.