Rating: 5/5

"Once more into the breach" with the "Rumpole of the Bailey" series by John Mortimer (Horace Rumpole must be rubbing off on me)!

As we're reading all things Rumpole for this month's mystery discussion, this time I chose "Rumpole for the Defence," a collection by Mortimer featuring the self-proclaimed Old Bailey hack in seven stories, including the following:

"Rumpole and the Confession of Guilt," where the defense attorney stands ready to defend young black teen Oswald Gladstone on the charge of attempted murder against all comers, including the judge, the prosecution, the police, the public at large, Rumpole's own son Nick, and even the client himself, while the barrister also finds himself at odds with Nick over his chosen profession.
"Rumpole and the Gentle Art of Blackmail," in which Rumpole visits his old alma mater, St. Joseph's College at Oxford, while defending a gardener on the campus from a charge of blackmail against one of the college's professors, but, as always, all is not as it seems.
"Rumpole and the Dear Departed" finds the barrister in unfamiliar territory, instructing on a will case where the beneficiary claims to still be on good terms with her late benefactor via supernatural means.
"Rumpole and the Rotten Apple" has Horace Rumpole defending a police inspector, whom he has tangled with before, against a bribery charge.
"Rumpole and the Expert Witness" takes a page from Agatha Christie's "Witness for the Prosecution" to marvelous effect as a so-called expert witness appears to have it in for the defendant accused of the murder of his wife.
"Rumpole and the Spirit of Christmas," in which Rumpole asks the prosecution for a little Christmas charity in his defense of a young member of the London criminal clan, the Timsons, and receives some Christmas spirit, but not in the way he expects.
"Rumpole and the Boat People," the final story in the collection, features Rumpole taking the unaccustomed place of junior to leading counsel Guthrie Featherstone as they defend a woman against the charge of murder at sea.
Once again, Mortimer's stories are a delight, as Rumpole does battle with all manner of opponents, the most formidable of which is his wife Hilda, otherwise known as She Who Must Be Obeyed. As Rumpole observes near the end of the Boat People story, "Matrimony and murder both carry a mandatory life sentence." However, there a few instances in this book where Hilda stands ready to defend Rumpole, particularly against their son Nick in the Confession of Guilt story. The wily barrister doesn't always win, but he does learn from his mistakes in ways that other members of his Chambers, (such as Claude Erskine-Brown, Guthrie Featherstone and Sam Ballard) never will.

This collection gets five stars. Now I'm ready to read "Rumpole and the Penge Bungalow Murders."