Rating: 1/5

1 star. 

I said I'd never read another DP novel again. Well I broke down and read one more but mostly it was because I got it for free and for some odd reason thought that maybe this would be a little better. Well it really wasn't. 

Although not as bad as some of the previous DP novels I've read it still wasn't good. 

Cag was jerk, Tess was a doormat, and the brothers were idiots. 

Cag would insult, taunt, and be just plain rude to Tess. He flipped out over a birthday cake, throwing it at the wall. He'd kiss Tess, then ignore her and be cold to her and then he'd wonder why she would avoid him. He was so back and forth I was wondering if he was bipolar. 

Why Tess would be attracted Cag I have no idea. The guy kept calling her a child (she's 22, he's 38), he talks to her like she's an idiot (which she kind of is for falling for him), but none of these things would make me swoon, in fact they would ensure this guy had zero chance with me. The fact that Tess never stood up to Cag and called him on his crap annoyed me. The fact that she stayed there after all his insults just made me want to bash my head against the wall. 

The brothers were actually more irriating than anyone. First one of the brothers saw Tess shaking after her encounter with Cag and the cake, and instead of calling Cag out for his crappy behavior he explained it away. Cag would never lay a violent hand on you, he's always been like that. So it's perfectly ok to flip out like a crazy person because that's just their way? Then they continue to make excuses for his behavior, it got me worried that if Cag ever physically abused Tess they'd explain that away too. And finally the last irritating thing, after Cag stumbles into bed with Tess, they don't do anything because he passes out, they lie to Cag about it, saying he did sleep with her and they then told both of them they were to get married since they had sex. I looked at the date this was published, 1999, last I checked having sex with someone before marriage in 1999 was not a reason to be married. 

This time I absolutely mean it, no more Diana Palmer books, this one is going in the trash bin.