Rating: 3/5

Pinocchio's Ten Life Enriching Lessons for Grownups:

I normally read children's books during Christmastime. Not only to catch up with my Reading Challenge (I am behind by 10 books as of this writing), but also, most of children's books have life lessons that can be good reminders for the coming year. New Year always means new beginning, new hope. Do you remember when you were still in school and after reading a story in class, the teacher asked you what was the lessons you learned from it? So, in this year's series of children's books, I will try to list the ten lessons I was reminded while reading a certain book.

1) Experience is the best teacher. The best way to learn is to experience mistakes. It is costly and painful but the learning becomes unforgettable. Many companies allow, if not encourage, their employees to commit mistakes because to prepare them for higher positions later in their career. As parents, we should also always remember that we cannot forever shield our children from harm. At some point, they should experience pain to prepare them to fend for themselves not only when they become adults but more importantly, when we are gone.

2) Boys will be boys but they should still listen to their fathers. No parents mean any harm to their children. Boys are mischievous by nature and at some stage while growing up, children "challenge" the authority of their parents. As a parent, just be patient on this stage. Be firm with discipline and don't get emotions come in the way of instilling discipline. That stage, sometimes a make-or-break in good parenting, will pass but be careful.

3) Children are basically self-centered but they love their parents. Pinocchio defies his father, Geppetto but whenever he is facing a hard or difficult situation: hunger, pain, etc., he always cries out for his father and remembers the many sacrifices that his father has done for him. 

4) Don't be gullible. Trusting attitude is now becoming scarce in this world because of too much deceit and treachery. However, we still need to trust if we are to develop meaning and lasting relationships with other people. But don't give everything right away. Hold back some and give in little by little until the person earns your full trust. In other words, don't be too trusting.

5) Tell the truth. Surprisingly, I only thought of this at this point. (I type whatever comes in my mind; I don't write drafts for my reviews). Prior to reading this classic book by this Italian author, Carlo Collodi, I thought that this was all about telling lies and regretting it because every time Pinocchio tells a lie, his nose grows longer. However, in this book (complete and unabridged), his nose grows longer when he is stressed and telling a lie makes him nervous and panicky. If I did not read this book, that impression from the movies would not have been corrected.

6) If you have a medical condition, have a second or even a third opinion. There is a scene in the book when Pinocchio is laying and seems dead so the three doctors, the Crow, the Olw and the Talking Cricket comes. The Crow and the Olw both said that Pinocchio is dead. The Talking Cricket, knowing Pinocchio very well, knows how to make him wake up from "death."

7) Don't give in to peer-pressure. We all want to fit in especially when we are new to a certain environment. There is nothing wrong with that. But to do something against our own set of values? Think twice. In the book, Pinocchio has resolved to himself to be a good boy and he goes back to school and studies diligently. However, the boys there want him to go to the sea and spend the day away from school to despise the teacher. Being a Marionette, Pinocchio feels left out as real kids make fun of him so he gives in thinking that he will earn the respect of the boys. Wrong move.

8) Help others. Pinocchio is gullible because deep inside he has this yearning to help others. His heart is soft to those who ask for help. I think this is the most endearing traits that I saw in him consistently in the book. Well, aside from deeply loving his "father" Geppetto and his "mother," the Fairy.

9) Orphans can have real love from their guardians too. If your parent or parents die at your very your age, that does not mean that you will be forever deprived of the love of a mother or father. The love of another person, your guardian for example, can be enough for you to feel secured and transfer that "parental" love to your own kids. Love begets love even if you have different blood types.

10) Parent's love is always unconditional. Erich Fromm's once said that the love of a mother to her child is unconditional while that of a father is conditional. He said that a father feels love towards his child only if the child does something that makes him happy or if the child perhaps looks or talks like him. In this book, Geppetto gives his only jacket and endures the cold weather so Pinocchio can buy his A-B-C book that is needed to go to school. When Pinocchio is missing, he goes all around Europe (Collodi is an Italian) to look for him. He is even caught inside the mouth of a whale in his pursuit to find his missing wooden son. I do not believe you, Mr. Fromm. I would do the same to my daughter if she gets lost in this world despite that she neither looks like me nor acts and talks like me.

Another very nice classic read. My heart went up and down while reading the adventures of this wooden boy, Pinocchio. I love him when he cries out for Geppetto especially when he is in jail. If I could only go to that jail and rescue him. Crazy reader (me). But who cares? It's Christmas!