Rating: 4/5

look at that hilariously uninterested, put-upon expression on the heroine's face. the cover illustration really gets her.

the Regency Buck in question is Peregrine Taverner, heir to a fortune, feckless and prone to gambling and sport and falling quickly in love, and prey to a number of circumstances that look suspiciously like murder attempts. but this young buck is far from being the protagonist, or even a particularly interesting character. that interesting protagonist would be his older sister, the pugnacious and strapping Judith: an ambitious lass, but frequently irritated when having to deal with pretentious decor or people. perhaps this book should have been titled Regency Eyeroll.

forgive the laziness, but the following is just a copy &amp; paste of my comment in the fantastic group Georgette Heyer Fans. also, watch out - this is full of spoilers, so probably best not to read unless you have already read the book.

Really enjoyed this one! despite still being a relative newbie to Heyer (only a dozen books in, and none reread yet), I think a big part of my enjoyment was due to having read other books before this one and so instantly recognizing that Worth was worth putting up with. He's Heyer's kind of guy: super snobby and cutting while having a secret heart of gold. I think knowing that made me amused rather than annoyed at all of his very high-handed comments towards the siblings. He's definitely a dick, but since I understand &amp; really appreciate Heyer's templates, I never doubted that he would come through, even though we're never provided access to his thought process. His character was pure pleasure to me.

I wonder if contemporary readers of the novel were fooled and even thought that he had some slight chance of being the villain in the book. Or did they also already get Heyer? I think understanding the author's perspective on her characters could mean the difference between seeing the book as a mystery or as a slow-burning romance. For me, there was no mystery because Worth is like other Heyer heroes, and so of course the cousin is the actual villain. It was very enjoyable for me to see how Worth played his various secretly-altruistic schemes without letting the siblings in on who was actually behind all the murder attempts.

I also really enjoyed Judith. Maybe I'll see more of her type the more I read this wonderful author, but this is the first time I've seen a Heyer heroine who was this particular combination of canny &amp; reactionary. I loved both her understanding of how to make her mark in society by having certain eccentricities and her complete lack of understanding of Worth's true nature. Also really appreciated her loathing of small talk bullshit and her disinterest in ever kowtowing to society or society's current heroes. My kind of person!

Brummell was a delight, what a great person to actually read about as a character, rather than read about as a historical personage. Scattergood had a fantastic name and a few good moments (although I wish there were more). Peregrine was a lot of fun!

Unlike a number of reviewers, I thought this was a very humorous book. The dialogue was so effortlessly witty, I was smiling constantly. "Sparkling dialogue" is the phrase that came to mind a lot - I was reminded of particular movies from the 30s &amp; 40s directed by Howard Hawks and/or starring Carole Lombard.

Carol said in her review that this would be a good starting point for someone new to Heyer, and despite what I said about my enjoyment of Worth coming from having read other Heyer books, I really agree. I enjoyed all of the in-depth details of the milieu, it felt like an introduction to Regency London. And it was genuinely edifying - it led me to many Wikipedia searches, what with all of the name dropping and rich descriptions of both settings and couture. That said, I loved that she streamlined those sorts of details in subsequent books because overall that's my preference when it comes to info drops. Also, can't say I loved the cockfighting scene because I'm a soft-hearted animal lover and the idea of cockfighting is sickening to me.

This is probably heresy to say, but I did slightly prefer this to These Old Shades &amp; especially to Devil's Cub (really enjoyed both books though, and the heroines in both are fantastic). This one was just more of a pleasant experience - Shades &amp; Cub alienated me at times with their gender dynamics. I think I read somewhere that it will be clear in the 4th book how this one connects to the prior books.