Rating: 3/5

This book filled in a lot of knowledge gaps for me between nutrition facts that I sort of knew before, such as that people need plenty of serotonin and other neurotransmitters to maintain a good mood and that low-calorie diets usually backfire. I've tried some of the recommended eating patterns (less sugar, less refined flour, more protein, not worrying about fat) and I do seem to be feeling better. Hubby made me steak with vegetables and potatoes last night and I woke up this morning feeling more alert (after the first few minutes in the dark) and with a better appetite than I have in a while. Normally I would eat more wheat noodles or bread and less meat. In addition, after eating spinach and cheese omelets for breakfast for a few days, we went to a church potluck on Sunday and I was not tempted AT ALL to eat any of the desserts. I felt totally satisfied and my body hasn't been craving sugar like it sometimes would, although I haven't really been a sugar junkie for a long time--more of a wheat flour junkie.

That said, I do want to investigate the claim that eating tons of saturated fat is good for you. It sounds awesome, but it's difficult for me to shed the idea that saturated fat is evil. I also have not tried any of Ross' advice on supplements, which is mostly what this book is about (her food advice is apparently more fleshed out (haha) in The Diet Cure). I frequently feel like I have low energy, am unmotivated, lack enthusiasm, and sometimes can't stay focused. Vitamin D has helped me in the past and I'm still taking it, but I may try some of Ross' suggestions for low-serotonin-sufferers such as taking a 5-HTP supplement. I've also never taken Omega-3 fish oil supplements and I don't eat much seafood, so that's another consideration.

Overall, I found the structure of the book kind of confusing and overwhelming. When I'm reading this kind of thing, I really prefer more of a list-type format for things to try. Granted, I read the whole book through, and it seems like instead it's more meant for the reader to jump around in. There were some lists like the Master Supplement Plan that the reader could use to figure out what they would try and in what order, but I would have liked to have seen a master list of the bare bones content of everything she talked about in the book--more like an outline of what to try if you have which symptoms, in what dosage and how many times per day and WHAT time, in what order, and what to be cautious about right there on the chart. So, I may try some of the simpler, more harmless solutions and see what happens to me, but if I decide to go any further with it (which I probably won't because I don't have tons of time and money to devote to it), I would want to see a naturopath or a nutritionist.

Update 2/12/2014: I thought I'd update with a note that I did indeed try a 5-HTP supplement, but it was not a good solution for me. It caused me to snap awake in the middle of the night. The author did mention in the book that it does that to some people, though--I guess I'm in that minority.