Rating: 4/5

Sometimes you gotta read from a different era, no? I picked this up for $2 in a used bookstore, mostly because I liked the concept of an SFF book with a setting within Mayan archaeology. It also won the Nebula for Best Novel in 1987, so I thought I'd see what the fuss was about. 

"The fuss," such as it is, probably has a lot to do with the fact that this book mashes up a lot of different genres - women's fiction, ghost story, historical fiction - with a soupçon of timey-wimey goodness that has the main character, an early-50s archaeologist named Liz, in conversation with/haunted by a Mayan priestess. Who may or may not want her to sacrifice her adult daughter, Diane, who's joined them on a dig at Dzibilchaltún (a real place in Yucatan, Mexico).

That is a lot of story elements that it is not common to see, not even today, really. An older woman protagonist. One who suffers mental illness / has special powers (the narrative is coy about defining it either way). One who wanted to pursue a professional career rather than parenthood, way before that was a done thing. One who has to reconcile with her estranged daughter when they're both adults.

Tbh, I'm not sure all of the story elements came together flawlessly, but this book is certainly successful in creating a VIBE. The sense of place in Yucatan that Murphy creates with her writing is *chef's kiss*. The characters all seem very real. The interweaving of Mayan history and calendar info is well done. And there's a sucker punch of a plot moment towards the end of the book that caught me right in the feels. It still stings to think about it, but in a good-writing kind of way.

I have to say I kept tripping out on the timeline though. This book was published in 1986, and we are meant to assume it's contemporary, so that means Liz, a 51 year old woman, was born in 1935. She had her daughter Diane at 21, so in 1956. Diane's childhood and many of the past experiences that Liz and Diane reflect on all happened in the 1960s. I had to keep reminding myself of these eras as I was reading to properly put the events in historical context!

Overall, I enjoyed this book and will likely read more of Pat Murphy's stuff.