Rating: 3/5

Only for Hammett completists.

This compilation pulls together 19 short stories published between 1923 and 1934 plus ten chapters of an incomplete, early draft of The Thin Man. 

Not a few of the short stories feature a private investigator (Hammett's one-time profession) hired to handle cases such as missing persons, suspected workplace fraud, or mysterious death threats. Hammett's PI often works alongside the local police who, while perhaps not the sharpest of brains, share an interest in delivering justice. The cases, once resolved, typically involve small-scale criminality by individuals or couples lured by the promise of easy money (often grifters drifting round the country). Only one story features a corrupt cop, and he is an isolated bad apple among his colleagues. Similarly, only one case (the titular Nightmare Town, 1924) features mob-level criminality and, here, the scenario is too ridiculous to be plausible.

The value in these stories comes from the rich tapestry of criminality, both male and female, with their quirky physical and emotional characteristics. However, there is something self-defeating about crime fiction in a short story format. Tackling a full-length novel, the reader's pleasure involves absorbing the facts of the relevant mystery, following the gradual accumulation of new evidence, hazarding guesses as to the guilty party (usually wrong, misled by literary red herrings), and then absorbing the final denouement (often indicating the guilt of the least likely character). In Hammett's short stories, this progression is severely compressed to fit into perhaps fifteen pages. The PI gets the case, interviews those involved, follows up a lead or two, survives a blow to the head or a threatened shooting, and "boom" announces the case closed and explains in a page or two how the various pieces fit together. Indeed, one case works out so smoothly that the title, One Hour, refers to the entire period of the investigation. 

By the standards of the typical contributions to the pulp fiction mags of the 1920s and 30s (notably Black Mask), Hammett's work must have stood out for its realism, elegance, and innovation. Taken in isolation, however, these stories are somewhat underwhelming and the quality of the compilation definitely drops off in the last half dozen stories. The collection is best for Hammett completists and features a nice biographical summary by the author William F. Nolan.

My Dashiell Hammett reviews 
Nightmare Town: Stories (1923-34), 3*
The Maltese Falcon (1929), 5*
The Thin Man (1933), 4*