Rating: 4/5

With the centenary of Frank Sinatra's birth (12 December) approaching, I thought it about time to read something about him. I have always been an admirer of him as a performer (the first Count Basie album my favourite and 'Robin and the Seven Hoods' favourite film) and, of course, I knew something of his off-stage and off-screen exploits through the sometimes less than flattering press that his behaviour brought out. But here was the opportunity to read something more in-depth about him, even though Esme Hawes' biography is a short one; let me immediately say that it suffers nothing for being so.

Anthony Martin Sinatra does not sound quite as appealing as Francis Albert (perhaps because we have always known him as the latter) but they were his intended forenames. However, the Italian godfather (appropriate!) forgot what names he had been told and when the vicar asked for the child's names, this gentlemen gave his own forenames! So, Frank it was.

Frank was not a success at high school where he was expelled for 'general rowdiness' after just 47 days so his mother, a very dominant lady, made him get a job but this too was short-lived. By this time Frank was fancying himself as a singer but the local church would not let him perform on the premises due to his mother's reputation.

Not to be deterred his pushy mother bought him a PA system and despite the word being that his voice was 'terrible' the PA system and the fact that he had a car gave him a spot with The Three Flashes. But they would not let him sing - that is until his mother went down and played merry hell with them after which her son became the lead singer!

After a succession of minor gigs, Frank got an audition at a place called the Rustic Cabin that had a New York radio link-up. Frank failed the audition - that is until his mother got on the 'phone and he had the job at $15 per week.

He married Nancy Barbato but his lifestyle remained one of a bachelor for he was constantly away from home and his legendary womanising continued. Then Harry James heard him and Frank suddenly had a $75 per week contract with the James' band. On an engagement with second billing to the Tommy Dorsey orchestra, Frank was spotted by Dorsey who persuaded James to let him sign the singer for his own orchestra. Within a few months Frank had a number one record with 'I'll Never Smile Again' and the legend that became Sinatra was up and running.

He went on to huge success both singing and acting but it seems that his behaviour was far from perfect and the company that he kept was sometimes suspect, for he enjoyed mixing with gangsters. His marriage to Nancy broke up, he pursued and won Ava Gardner at a time when his career had hit rock bottom and it was only his persistence in pressing for a part in the film 'From Here to Eternity', which won him an Oscar, that brought him back.

The Gardner marriage broke up as did his marriage to Mia Farrow and he married the ex-wife of Zeppo Marx but by then Sinatra was a firm favourite and courted the friendship of John Kennedy. That did not last, for when Bobby Kennedy realised that Frank mixed with mobsters that ended abruptly; Sinatra was devastated. However, his career continued unabated and, despite a couple of premature retirements, he continued singing and was just as popular.

Esme Hawkes does an excellent job in presenting Sinatra, warts and all, but despite her best efforts the overall picture that comes across is one of a talented but not very nice man. Pity, for his singing was always so good.