Rating: 3/5

[7/10]

 His name was Sharpe, Richard Sharpe, and he was a British soldier.

The Bond, James Bond of the Napoleonic wars finally arrives at the culmination of his military career. He’s about to single-handedly win the battle of Waterloo for Wellington and his allies.
It’s been a twenty years journey for Sharpe, from the scorching plains of India to the back and forth of the Peninsular War, an unprecedented rise in the ranks from simple soldier to regimental commander and honorary Colonel. All due to his killer instincts and his peerless talent with sword, musket, rifle or bare knuckles. Similar to the 007 spy, Richard Sharpe has civilian talents aplenty, manifested mostly in the bedrooms of several ladies he met in his long journey.

It’s been a several years journey also for me, since I read  Sharpe’s Tiger  . My enthusiasm has known some ups and downs, with a slight feeling of exhaustion towards the end: as in I can’t wait to get this over with and start something else.
Cornwell’s ability to insert epitome of martial hero into all the important battles of the campaign, with some creative sleigh of hand and cavalier attitude towards documented facts is not something new. Nevertheless, the lengths he goes to make Richard Sharpe the key player all through the deciding moments of the battle of Waterloo is starting to get ridiculous. He is the first man to spot the surprise French crossing of the Belgian border, the first man to announce the attack at the ball in Bruxelles, the man who saved the defenders of Quatre Bas against overwhelming odds, he fought in the desperate defence of La Haye Sante and atop the hill he resisted the cavalry charges of Marshall Ney. Finally, he rallied the troops and stopped the most dangerous assault of the Imperial Guard when the battle was all but lost.
You get the idea. All this while he was at Waterloo just as an observer, an aide-de-camp for the allegedly incompetent [because nobody will be allowed to shine beside Wellington] Belgian Prince.

Cornwell’s incontestable talent in describing battle scenes and one-on-one duels made Sharpe’s improbable exploits easier to swallow, but the overall strong bias against the French and his hero worshipping of Wellington make this action filled volume one of the least reliable for actual historical details in the whole series.
After watching recently the Ridley Scott biopic of Napoleon, and now reading this skewed account of a famous battle, I am starting to lose hope of ever finding an English author who can bypass the national propaganda and the usual character assassination regarding the French and their Emperor.

 Sharpe had fought the French for over twenty years, yet he had never seen the Emperor and, all unbidden, a sudden and childish image of a man with cloven tail, sharp horns and demonic fangs stalked Sharpe’s fears that were made worse by the Emperor’s real reputation as a soldier of genius whose presence on a battlefield was worth a whole corps of men. 

This book could have been the best in the series – not a moment to relax, plenty of epic action and skilfully weaved in subplots like the some deadly fight between Sharpe and the man who had stolen his wife and his money. Probably I have my own francophone bias, because I was driven time and time again to fact-check Cornwell with other accounts of the battle of Waterloo online and he came up short, skewing everything to make the odds more impressive [the armies were actually pretty well matched initially, before the arrival of the Austrians] , painting Napoleon as a bumbling incompetent and moving the timeline to make it look like Boucher played an insignificant role in the final outcome.

My critical frame of mind made the passages where the author is glorifying the dismembering of the enemy really stand out in the text, leaving a bitter aftertaste in my mouth instead of inspiring awe and respect:

 the sheer joy of killing 

 They were drunk on the slaughter, drenched in it, glorying in it. 

 their voices ululating a paean to massacre 

I would have probably appreciated the book a lot more if I had read the series out of order and this episode earlier in my journey. Right now, I’m hesitating if it is worth the effort to read the last chronological novel, of Sharpe fighting spies in Paris after the war, or head out to greener pastures.