Rating: 1/5

I spent so much time reading it (10 excruciating pages a day) that I don't want to spend too much time reviewing this predictable but still disappointing mess. Toxic masculine world-view at its paranoid worst (with some neoliberal almost-feminism that turns out to be about providing background for the man after all). Also from a reader's exhaustion perspective there are not enough rest-spots. It's all cliffhanging action for 600 pages and he never gets to rest and he gets progressively beaten up but that never even slows him down (broken ribs?) because he is "the Scarecrow" the ultimate man, surrounded at the end by a bunch of women/girls/female seals and one geeky beta-male who also relies on him.

There is also the militarism and the political mayhem (countries behaving in an untrustworthy way is portrayed as a given of course) and the body count cannot even be made. The scarecrow doesn't have any problem with killing people individually or in huge groups but he does ask a little girl to close her eyes when he does it (are we meant to see that as sensitive?). There appears to be no correlation between this "Antarctica" and any factual Antarctica. Little as I have read about life in Antarctica this was not a believable setting (should possibly have made it another planet or something to make it more believable?). The idea of a little girl in an ordinary pink parka (no specialised gear even for her face?) running around in Antarctica is just silly as is the way they all plunge in and out of icy waters with no repercussions. Also if you are going to mansplain a word ("diurnal", p601) make sure your definition is actually correct or even approximates the correct definition.

I tried to read it as space-opera sort of (no one expects Star Wars to be believable) but Scarecrow is overly "alpha" to the point of absolute tedium. It was good that the romance was barely there but even that was just about his alpha status. 

Apparently this has brought many men "back to reading" (afterword). My question as always is whether reading is such a huge good that it doesn't matter what content is going in when someone reads? For a book worm I am pretty cynical about the supposed "anything you read is good for you" belief - seems like fetishism.

People will read this though, it's a best seller. Can we at least not believe such obvious drivel?