Rating: 4/5

"The secret language of statistics, so appealing in a fact-minded culture, is employed to sensationalize, inflate, confuse, and oversimplify. Statistical methods and statistical terms are necessary in reporting the mass data of social and economic trends, business conditions, 'opinion polls', the census. But without writers who use the words with honesty and understanding and readers who know what they mean, the result can only be semantic nonsense… This book is a sort of primer in ways to use statistics to deceive. It may seem altogether too much like a manual for swindlers. Perhaps I can justify it in the manner of the retired burglar whose published reminiscences amounted to a graduate course in how to pick a lock and muffle a footfall: The crooks already know these tricks; honest men must learn them in self-defense." (10-11)I never cared much for statistics; I slid through Methods &amp; Statistics 1, 2, and 3 relatively untouched, until the first time I did my own research and had to analyze the data I had so diligently collected. That was the point at which statistical analyses became meaningful to me—I had a theory and I was looking to see whether there was any evidence for it. The data itself means nothing, of course. Numbers do not mean anything on their own. What you do with the numbers, how you expose (non-)relationships between them, is when things get interesting. And tricky—as this little book sets out to show. 

Huff uses humor to show a variety of ways in which statistics may be – and examples of how they have been – misleading. The book is dated by now, basing its examples mostly on stuff from the '20s through to the '50s. This did not really bother me, however, nor did I feel it detracted from the main points—if anything, it makes the book feel quaint while at the same time highlighting the fact that little has changed in how statistics are (ab)used in contemporary society. If you have a background in statistics, How to Lie is unlikely to teach you anything new about them. However, it is still worth reading if only to underscore the need to pay attention to the pervasive presence and use of statistics.

I, as someone trained in psychology, like to think that they are mostly used for good. Much knowledge has surely been gained thanks to the insights that increasingly sophisticated statistical analyses have offered. But an analysis is only as good as the way in which it is conducted, and results only as good as the way in which they are conveyed. 

Huff closes his book on a more serious note, abandoning the burglar-revealing-his-trade spiel with five questions to ask when encountering statistical information (but don't worry, the chapter is still titled How to Talk Back to Statistics). They are worth listing and remembering:

1] Who says so?  Look for bias: who has an interest in the statistic?
2] How does he know?  Watch out for a biased/limited sample.
3] What's missing?  The absence of information, like the number of cases or which kind of average was used, can render a statistic virtually meaningless.
4] Did Somebody Change the Subject? Make sure that the conclusion follows from the type of raw data that was collected.
5] Does It Make Sense?  Think about what the statistic is supposed to mean/tell you, and ask whether it makes sense.