Rating: 3/5

this is just so sad. First you have a writer who doesn't explain WHAT she is talking about. especially now forty years later she's talking about pee chees [folders] == why not just mention folders? She seemed to not realize that books travel out of their author's states. 

THEN you have people within the book [particularly TEACHERS AND ADMINISTRATORS] who don't understand that if you have a problem within reading, other subjects involving reading WILL SUFFER. the reading difficulty only hinders understanding if you rely solely on reading for those other subjects.

THIRD: all writers are taught this one thing: WRITE ABOUT WHAT YOU KNOW. You can tell that Ms DeClements had NO idea about 'dyslexia [???]'. its the reversing of a b/d/q/p but also 6/9. The eyes see a 6 but brain switches it to a 9... Helen doing her 'dum' is not dyslexia or ANY DISABILITY. its lack of remedial reading to begin with. That's not discovered in 6th grade, try second or first! 

FOURTH: You have the criminal aspect of this. This weird uncle who takes her to get fire crackers without telling her that she should only light these with an adult... whatever. She sneaks it into school with matches and she lights one WITHIN THE BUILDING!!!! ridiculous! even back then that would have been a criminal offense -- regardless of the legality of the firework status. 

All her 'bad' behavior was not accidental or opportunity arose, this was premeditated. this had nothing to do with her reading troubles. 

the only thing I was OK with in the book was the RETARD thing [hear me out]. back then this was the 'reality' of the stigma of being put into special ed. in fact, back then, the only special ed was: mainstreaming or BOCES Boards of Cooperative Educational Services -- which is an on site facility where severely special needs children go to get schooled. so the fact that people didn't want to get tested because they will be labeled retarded IS a reality back then and WAS a stigma that people really did fear.