Rating: 5/5

🐬
 A few days ago I had a spell where I simply could not concentrate on reading. Just over three days. I know because I was keeping track in my journal! Since I read whenever I get the chance, it always throws me off when this happens. I caught up on some episodes of the TV show Heartland, which I love very much, but isn't quite the same. It took me a bit to remember, but generally when this kind of thing happens I reread a much loved book and it kind of restores my brain and gives me back my focus.
   Enter Jacqueline Wilson.

I've mentioned in quite a few reviews how much I love her, but I'm going to say it again. I love Jacqueline Wilson! I love her new books (there is usually at least one year, often more) and I also love returning to her older ones. The Illustrated Mum is one I especially adore (though I say that about all of them). Star and Dolphin's mother is clearly mentally ill, and as she enters into a manic (or perhaps hypomanic) state, things get quite scary. Star's at the point of disengaging with her mum. She is tired of being the mature and responsible one while Marigold reels from one disaster to another. Dolphin still reveres her mother, though eventually even she sees that things are getting out of hand.

Marigold is not a villainous figure, but she is a frustrating one. She rejects hospitals and treatment, traumatised by either past experiences or stories she has heard and absorbed. Both perhaps. This is understandable, but she also had two children in her care, and is often not a fit mother. Both Star and Dolphin are frightened of being put into care, especially because Marigold had such an awful upbringing, which included living in care homes.

When Star's father returns, thrilled to discover he has a daughter, dismayed at the state of Marigold, things change quickly, in ways both good and bad.

I love Dolphin so much. She is sweet and out of her depth. She is bullied at school, is dyslexic so finds the classroom challenging, and is trying to cope with a difficult situation. She manages to make friends with a boy called Oliver, and their friendship warms my heart.
    Star is at an age where she has realised that while their mothers illness is very real, her refusal to address or treat it is causing serious problems that might be avoidable. She is frustrated and upset and I can hardly blame her.

I love the way everything is portrayed in this book, and the way the ending feels both hopeful and realistic.