Let me confess to my heresies and now acknowledge the truth. Ptolemy didn't go far enough. It is the USA that is the centre of creation. Las Vegas its navel where the divine and human realms meet with Hollywood the beating heart. How else can I begin to understand this odd book?

A collaboration between Jane Goodall and Dale Peterson this is a book that goes off in all kinds of directions. At one point it seemed as though a person traumatised in a distant war had stumbled into our midst and poured out a weirdly unbalanced, skilful at the sentence level but amorphous tale of loss and sadness. In retrospect it reminds me of the tales of nervous students who focus on one word in an exam question and vomit up all they know over four sides of paper.

There's no direction, or structure, or purpose to the book as a whole. Each part is entire of its own and the whole is less than the sum of the parts. I had the sense that for Petersen there was a line between humans and other animals, but because chimpanzees and humans were so similar that they should be drawn through to our side of the line in terms of their legal status and how they were treated. Goodall by contrast at least in her maturity sees us all as part of one ecology

We begin with environmental change in Africa and the loss of habitat for the Great Apes. Then we move on to the export of Chimpanzees, which leads into the bulk of the book an extended ramble through the use of Chimpanzees in the US entertainment business, as pets and psychological props and in animal testing. None of this is at a structural level but on a case by case basis. Each case is weirdly fascinating, unpleasant - the Orang-utan in the second "Every Which Way but Lose" film was apparently clubbed to death before the completion of filming by its handlers - Hollywood animal training, at least according to this book allegedly consists of beating animals - I suppose regression to the mean is taken by the 'trainers' to imply that this is a successful education method. Chimpanzees in the entertainment business typically have their front teeth removed and are 'retired' by age eight on account of adult chimpanzees beginning considerably stronger than equivalently aged humans Bubbles is mentioned in this context, one day he apparently pulled Michael Jackson to the ground after which he was whisked off to a life of retirement with multiple chimpanzees playing the part of a single animal over the years on particular shows. Peterson really sinks into the details - this isn't a book for the squeamish since being eaten is it turns out can be one of the least unpleasant of fates. 

I had the uncomfortable feeling that for Petersen there was a line between humans and other animals and because they are so human like that the great apes ought to be brought across this line and afforded better treatment. Petersen was also I suspect more than half in love with all his stories. He makes clear that many of them were historic - for example apes used in animal testing are now largely bred in captivity rather than imported from Africa yet judging from the narrative as a whole even if there was no export of great apes from Africa their native populations would still be endangered while whether they are endangered or not has no relevance as to whether they should be treated well or not when working in the USA.

It does strike me that there is a unifying argument, although neither author explicitly makes it. At one point they are describing the plight of chimpanzees in Zaire that were kept, generally chained up by the roadside, in captivity back in the Mobutu days. My initial reaction was along the lines of 'come on, give those people a break, they probably have enough to deal with'. After a moment my thought shifted, there's no taking a break from yourself, the one and the other behaviours are symptomatic of the whole, and I suppose if the authors and the US embassy staff were more moved to intervene over the plight of the chimpanzees than the people that was a situation that perhaps they imagined they could make a difference in, although its own complexities emerged over time.

Petersen suggests no ways forward, and his story telling style suggests someone overwhelmed by the trees and having no sense of the forest. Goodall suggests that we shop more carefully and hopes that tourism will finance conservation without causing a bunch of new problems. Avoiding companies that contribute to the destruction of the environment, political violence in Africa or elsewhere, development that is centred more on the providers needs than on the recipients. I'm not sure that's so easy either what with obscure supply chains and apparent choice masking that one or two companies that might dominate any particular market segment, and once you start to take in to account labour practises, environmental degradation, agricultural mono-cultures, unsustainable farming practises, ecological disruption and so on I'm not sure there is much you can buy in good conscience. Aren't most hard problems simple but not easy?