Rating: 5/5

4.75 stars (liked a lot)

I really liked this very well written, densely informative, and inspiring autobiography of how Booker T. Washington rose above his position as a slave child during the Civil War and went on to get an education and establish a school, The Tuskegee Institute, in Alabama.  He ultimately traveled the country giving speeches at the highest levels of business and academia and took an extended trip to Europe about which he shares his comparative impressions of people.  The goal of Washington's life was to encourage minorities to not view their race as an obstacle to success but instead gain knowledge and marketable skills in order to become self-reliant.  His intellgence, intuition, personability, positive attitude, patience, and high standards as well as his industrious approach to building success block by block (while including others in the process so they feel equally invested) is truly admirable.  He focused on the benefits of all races achieving universal understanding and recognized those who helped to advance his efforts regardless of their race.  He relays his step-by-step processes in creating the school and includes many anecdotes which make the book particularly endearing and insightful.  His spirit of approaching every new situation with openness and optimism is contagious.  The memoir successfully reinforces the concept that it is possible to build something great from virtually nothing.  His story reveals that he was both ideaological and pragmatic, yet always principled, in his ways.  In some sense, he was a man living far ahead of his time in that, if more of his views and approaches were in place today, there would be an even greater cohesiveness among all people.  At the end of the book, he mentions receiving a letter stating he was selected to be presented with a honorary degree from Harvard for his work, and further reveals his lifelong mindset when he writes:

 "As I sat upon my veranda, with this letter in my hand, tears came into my eyes. My whole former life - my life as a slave on the plantation, my work in the coal-mine, the times when I was without food and clothing, when I made my bed under a sidewalk, my struggles for an education, the trying days I had had at Tuskegee, days when I did not know where to turn for a dollar to continue the work there, the ostracism and sometimes oppression of my race, - all this passed before me and nearly overcame me.  I had never sought or cared for what the world calls fame. I have always looked upon fame as something to be used in accomplishing good. I have often said to my friends that if I can use whatever prominence may have come to me as an instrument with which to do good, I am content to have it." 

(Listened to Audible.com audio book narrated by Noah Waterman.)