Rating: 3/5

In his 1961 biography, author William L. Shirer recounts the life story of history’s most infamous villain in The Rise and Fall of Adolf Hitler. Taking care not to leave out any important chunks of the man’s life, Shirer begins the tale in 1889 with Hitler’s birth, following him through his rough father-son relationship, his days spent loafing and attempting to get an education in art, his years as a tramp in Vienna and his discovery of the National Socialist German Workers' Party- the very ragtag group that Hitler eventually led in one of the most and least successful conquests to ever spread across the face of Europe. Hitler was not able to do it without difficulty. Trials and tribulations blocked him at every turn, and only through backstabbing, treachery, propaganda, brutality and the cruel hand of luck did Hitler both come to be the most powerful man on the planet as well as the most egotistical, delusional and anemic leaders to ever do so. Despite his unthinkable feats of political and military cunning, Hitler was eventually his own undoing, going on a downward mental spiral that was the death of him, his wife, his armies, and his nation’s pride and power. In the end, it was not the attempts on his life from within and without his own Nazi party, nor the sicknesses and heartbreak that killed Hitler. It was the very same character, confidence, and charisma that had enabled him in the first place.
	In a lot of ways, William L. Shirer seems to be the perfect person to write an interesting and evocative biography about one of the most influential figures in all of history, seeing as he himself was the American correspondent in Berlin during the 1940s. Shirer also makes it clear that he aims to include Hitler’s own words and writing when appropriate - and both of these things do validate The Rise and Fall of Adolf Hitler as a historically accurate biography. The structure is befitting of a biography-style nonfiction book as well, being ordered chronologically and split into sections that align neatly with the different periods of Hitler’s life. As can be expected of most historical biographies, Shirer does do a deeper dive than most other books that recount something of Hitler’s story, and aided by his own firsthand knowledge of the war’s events, Shirer can, now and then, offer input and lightly theorize as to why Hitler acted in some of the ways he did. Shirer does not preach, though, and does a good job maintaining a professional and informative prose style even when his own opinion bubbles up throughout his retelling. Structurally and with regards its conventions, The Rise and Fall of Adolf Hitler is entirely solid and isn’t ever dry - it moves things along with the information and curiosities that are crucial in both understanding and critically considering Hitler’s life.
	Shirer’s tendency to keep things moving and his perpetual fear of sounding boring also has its flaws. Although The Rise and Fall of Adolf Hitler is ultimately a quick and enjoyable read for anyone even marginally interested in World War II history, it fails to give history buffs anything of note to chew on. Anyone who has taken a world history course will already know many of the book’s most central plot points, and while that can’t necessarily be avoided, The Rise and Fall of Adolf Hitler often seemed like it wasn’t able to or willing to stray too far beyond those well-documented points of historical note. Having been center stage to witness Hitler’s rise to and fall from power, Shirer offers excruciatingly little unique information that one couldn’t find somewhere else. He rarely mentions any events that he personally witnessed and doesn’t ever capitalize on himself as a primary source. The result is that, for a person who is already versed in the history of Hitler and his Nazi Party, The Rise and Fall of Adolf Hitler will not only be a snore - it will be altogether pointless. It may not be the kind of thing that everybody will enjoy reading, but I would have loved to see Shirer go someplace unexpected with his discussion of the Fuhrer. What did he like to eat? Did he have any pets? Did he have any odd tendencies that have gone unreported? These are the types of questions that, if they had been answered, would have added the variety and intrigue that Shirer’s biography so blatantly lacked.
	Although The Rise and Fall of Adolf Hitler hits all of the highlights of the demented man’s life story and does it with good organization, style, and structure, the biography ultimately fails in going above and beyond to create a book that is compelling for readers who know their way around some World War II history, and even a general audience reader is not going to want to leaf through its pages more than once. For folks who are interested in delving into the psyche of history’s most infamous genocidal dictator, The Rise and Fall of Adolf Hitler works fine as a diving board, but you’ll have to find your pool somewhere else.