Rating: 3/5

Re Law of Attraction - Penny Jordan brings us the after effects of the 1992 British Recession in this quiet little story of solicitors in love.

(I put a little explanation of the British Recession at the end of this review here. But PJ, like Carole Mortimer in Hunter's Moon, makes the effects much more up close and personal.)

So the book starts with the h deeply, deeply bitter and unhappy. She worked hard, put up with a lot chauvinism and then manage to establish herself with a boutique law practice all her very own in London. She got herself a nice little London property too and also managed to find a wheeler dealer sorta fiance.

Then the The Day they Broke the Bank of England hit and the h lost everything. She, like so many other middle class business people had to sell out and almost declare bankruptcy. That lands her back at her home village, moving in with her parents and accepting a job at the local country solicitors office, working with a man who has been hailed as a legal genius.

For the first part of the book, the h is very, very unhappy and a lot of readers are not going to like that. I got it tho, the h is the typical PJ h. She is struggling hard in a very sexist occupation and because she listened to the bad advice of her former sorta fiance and did not trust herself enough to judge her own risks, she got burned badly.

So it isn't just the fact that the economy went south and the h lost her legal practice and her London life, it is also that her former sorta fiance claimed she spent too much time on pro bono cases and refused to ambulance chase the bigger clients. The h likes the pro bono work tho, her feelings for the law are rooted in a deep sense of equal justice and her vision of herself as a solicitor and her personal identity is predicated on that.

But even worse, the h knows deep down she betrayed herself because she let her former flame dictate her options without putting the power of her own conviction behind them. In other words, the h is deep into the self hatred pity party mode because her instincts told her to do differently that what she did and she did the wrong thing anyways. 

 There is nothing like kicking your own self in the hiney when you messed up to make you down on yourself. So I had some empathy for the h as she grudgingly went to work for a man who seemed to have a great legal career and a big practice handed to him on a platter. 

 (The h is assigned to the H as his main assistant and the h feels that her every move is being put under a microscope and cross examined because of her past failures. The h has a lot of resentment about that.) 

I understood the h's resentment there too, because in a very real way, the H did get his life handed to him, like so many other privileged males in PJ's HPlandia. His great aunt was the one who started the law firm and it became her pride and joy. To the extent that the H's great aunt even locked marriage and love out of her life, as she felt that any kind of emotional encumbrance would hinder her legal career. 

 (The sad truth of the world in 1994 and earlier is that the H's great aunt was probably right. So PJ hits a highly relevant societal issue from the 90's and we are still trying to figure out the balance between work and family and time off for children even today. Tho to the modern world's credit, we understand that there is no one size fits all and everybody just does what they do.) 

Gradually tho, the h comes to see the H is really a great guy. He cares about pro bono work, his sense of justice and methods of the practice of law mirror the h's own and he is totally gorgeous and very charming to boot.

The H and h start spending more and more time together and the h is feeling the Lurve Force Mojo attraction. Then fate, gossip and the maybe OW step in. The h is starting to feel a real connection with the H and his kisses are outstanding in the knee weakening department. But the office gossip is that a wealthy lady client of his may not be just a client.

The h starts having the bad feeling that the H is messing with her while chasing the wealthy client on the lady buffet circuit. At first, it is easy to dismiss the h's feelings as her own insecurity and too much office gossip, but then the H interrupts a VERY Purple Personal Lurve Mojo moment to rush off to the OW and we all have to wonder just what the H's motivations are.

The the H's long time mentor dies too and the h feels badly for the H, she tries to be supportive, even as she is furious he might be playing her. When the H tries to make another date with the h, she does the PJ Approved h wards off the H speech of "it was only a little lurve mojo fondling and doesn't mean anything". The H gets angry and cold, cause the h tells him he was just subbing for her ex sorta fiance in the passion moment.

This makes the h miserable and she gets even more miserable when it is revealed that the H wasn't playing both ladies against the middle at all. He was trying to get his wealthy lady client to give the deceased husband's business to his child, as per the man's wishes. 

 Unfortunately the man died before he could sign his new will, so the H was being persuasive in getting the woman to turn the company over. Which he succeeded at in the end and everything was settled as the former client would have wished. (I do admit to some curiosity about HOW exactly the H got the woman to go along with the plan, but it is PJ and the H was nice, so I didn't question too much.) 

The h can't stand the emotional pain anymore and she is losing weight and looks and sleep and she finally seeks the H out after chatting it over with her sister. The h goes to the H and they have a big reveal of how the h lied about the purple passion not meaning anything and the H declares his love for the h.

The H fell in love with the h the very first time he saw her and that was why she got appointed to be his main assistant. The H did not want to be away from her and it had nothing to do with the h's competence as she originally thought. The H lets the h in on another seekrit too. He failed his law exams the first time around and his Great Aunt told him he was a misogynistic, entitled nematode who deserved to be humbled a little. 

The H learned his lesson and is now a better person and has great respect for the h, who had no problems passing her law exams. The H wants them to marry, partner up for legal work and kids and the enthusiastically jumps into his arms with a big affirmative YES for the PJ pink sparkly, unicorn's dancing HEA. 

This one was a nice little PJ HPlandia outing. The h may not be to everyone's taste. But I thought PJ did a good job on the kind of inner torment one might experience after a catastrophic life event fail. Not everyone is an entrepreneur or risk taker, so PJ gave me some empathy for people who might need more support when they leap into the brink - and PJ made that seem absolutely okay. 

The H was fabulous and kind and the HEA was believable, so when you need a little sweet romance with a mild amount of angst, you won't go amiss with this little HP outing.