Rating: 4/5

Umberto Eco wrote this short treatise 50-some years ago. It was re-released in the 80s (after the success of Name of the Rose, I hazard the guess?) in a new translation with a new, humble introduction by the author. It is still an engaging read for anyone interested in medieval art or the development, in general, of western aesthetics.

Like most medievalists, Eco writes of medieval thought as though he were defending its intelligence, complexity and dignity from virulent detractors. It has been a rarely-taught and poorly (or prejudicially) understood historical whipping boy for centuries. I'm not convinced this de rigueur combative stance is any less necessary these days. Every other period after the fall of Rome and before the industrial revolution seems to have joined the lonely Middle Ages in terms of representing (to the ill-informed modern imagination) all things backward, superstitious and hopelessly ignorant. In any event, the Middle Ages still gets wildly inaccurate and fanciful treatment in film and literature, and academics who do not explicitly study the Middle Ages tend to look at it as niche, useless to broader inquiries, or otherwise irrelevant to anything but the study of itself.

In this interesting brief volume, Eco traces the development of theories of aesthetics and art from the late Classical period through the high Middle Ages. In doing so, he depicts a people dwelling in an integrated world where "beautiful" and "useful" are synonymous and where man's creation is wan mimicry of God's creation which is, in turn, only a veil of seeming over God's even more perfect ideal. But he also depicts an intellectual world that, far from stagnant or over-determined by dogma, was capable of growth, of subtlety and of pure joy at contemplating physical (natural or artistic) beauty. In fact, he finds in the Middle Ages the seeds of artistic individualism, in art's move from the monastery or workshop to the autocrat's court, that would famously sprout into the effective cult status of Renaissance and later artists.

Medieval thought, on art and beauty as on everything else, was in answer to highly specific and Judeo-Christo-centric theological problems. For the most part, we are asking different kinds of ontological questions these days. But this fact does not make medieval answers to medieval questions any less reasoned or any more fallacious. In fact, their questions and answers might even prove enlightening to us if we, for a moment, imagine our own period as one that suffers from a lack of an idea taken quite for granted by medieval European culture - the integrative quality of art, life, creation and morality.

In any event, if we cultivate a modicum of knowledge about our medieval ancestors, it might be easier to realize when our own ignorance - not their illogicality or irrelevance - is the thing precluding us from a deeper understanding of them.