Rating: 3/5

So unknown to me when I initially started this book I had not realized this was book 2 in a trilogy, and I fully blame the publisher since they put no indication on the copy I have that this was the 2nd book in a series. Seriously publishers stop that.

What I can say though in regards to having read book 2 before book 1, is that this actually holds up really well on its own. It gives you just enough information to know what the titular event was in book 1 that you don't feel lost in the events taking place in this one. I have a pretty clear understanding of what happened and I can honestly appreciate that, that's probably one of my favorite things about this older huge series, you can enter them pretty much anywhere, and each book does really well as a standalone, even though it is part of a bigger series.

Now as for the story, this was definitely on the slower side and for being under 300pgs, that's for me kind of hindering. It really takes its time in building up the main event, I found myself in the middle of the story getting sleepy at times. But the story was interesting enough to keep me going, and I do think that if you are familiar with the Dragonrealm then staying interested will probably be easier, since this dives into the origins of the world. I'm not familiar with the world so everything was brand new to me. 

The story takes place around the Vraad making there way to the Dragonrealm. They are weak and losing their magic and they want to find a way to have it back, while also re-establishing their power in a new land. There is also a kidnapping of an important woman involved who becomes one of the main characters in the story. As well as what was my biggest draw overall, an unknown change that is happening to the Vraad. They don't know what is going on and for the most part they do their best to just ignore it, until it finally comes to a head in the final event of the book. Ultimately it was for me the most interesting, because I thought I knew what was happening but the actual outcome was slightly different then what I thought.

We follow a few different characters and honestly I wasn't really drawn to any, but I will say the final event with Barakas did hurt my heart and I managed to feel really bad for him. I love how Knaak made me go through this whole book hating this man, because his ego is so huge, but then managed to make me feel for him because he made this man truly love his wife and the events that transpire with them tugged at my heart.

Darkhorse comes back (I say it this way because I assume he was in the first book) I have to admit I liked him, but I was kind of bummed with how easy he was "removed" from majority of the story, considering how powerful he was suppose to be. 

I was actually really thankful that Knaak treated Sharissa like a human and not like a sex object, it was great seeing her described based on personality traits and intelligence. I will say her romance towards the end felt out of place, and honestly I think the book could have done with out it as it quite literally did nothing for the plot aside from creating tension with Reegan. (which I do kind of which we got to see more of him.)

Overall the story is very straight forward and stays to one plot majority of the book. There is a 'side' plot with Gerrod and honestly most of that was boring but I did like seeing him attempting to converse with creatures that didn't use words but imagery instead. It wraps up all the events but leaves a few smaller storylines open for more to be told in another installment.