Rating: 5/5

All aboard to the mystery!

  WILL THE REAL POIROT PLEASE STAND UP?

My visual memory of the famous fictional detective Hercule Poirot is the actor Sir Peter Ustinov, yes, I know, he doesn’t look like he’s described on books (and even according Agatha Christie’s daughter, he doesn’t behave on screen like the book detective) but when I was a kid, I’ve never read any Agatha Christie’s novels, meanwhile I have watched several of the theatrical films and TV movies made by Peter Ustinov and along with watching him in several Biblical movies, well, that image stuck in me.

Curiously enough, I remember watched the 1974’s adaptation to film of Murder on the Orient Express but I didn’t remember that Ustinov wasn’t in that particular adaptation but Albert Finney. As I told you, the image of Ustinov stuck quite deep in my memories.

I haven’t watched the recent work by David Suchet, that thinking about the actor, he looks indeed like it should be look like the fictional Hercule Poirot.

However, now in the incoming (November 2017) new adaptation where Kenneth Branagh will perform the famous detective, and while certainly he doesn’t look like Ustinov, Finney or Suchet, I trust in the great acting skills and carisma of Branagh to deliver an amusing new version of the Poirot.

  TRAPPED WITH A MURDER!

Not always, but it’s cleat that Agatha Christie enjoyed to find amusing ways to keep trapped her characters in a scenario where they were unable to leave the place and well knowing that a murderer is between them and even sharing space with the corpse.

You can find similar trap-like situations in other books like Death on the Nile (having Poirot investigating that case too) and the famous And There Were None, for example.

Here, in Murder on the Orient Express, the cast of characters are trapped in a train (The Orient Express, duh!) due a snowfall, in the middle of nowhere, so they can’t get out, and a murder is committed.

Due the crime is in 1934, they haven’t ways on the train to communicate with anyone asking for help (for the crime or the snowfall), and the responsibility to find a culprit for the murder is up to the famous Hercule Poirot, that coincidentally get aboard, in the last minute, on the equally famous Orient Express.

This is challenge to Poirot in the mental field, having to trust in the testimonies of strangers but...

...also he should do a balance between law and justice…

…since not all crimes need to be really solved…

…while other crimes deserved sharp justice.

  LYING MYSELF

When I watched the trailer of the incoming new adaptation (November 2017) of Murder on the Orient Express, I knew that it was about time to read the original novel finally, and before of the premiere of the new film.

I’d watched the 1974’s adaptation when I was a kid, sometime that a local TV station did a cycle of Agatha Christie’s mystery movies (theatrical and made-for-TV alike) and while I hadn’t remember many details,…

…well, the solution is so epic (don’t worry I won’t spoil it!) that it stuck in my head as deep as the image of Ustinov (not matter that he wasn’t in that particular adaptation!).

So, for reading this novel, I had to lie myself and keeping engaged at the speed of the developments in the book, without thinking how it was solved, and you know what?...

…it worked!

Since I enjoyed a lot the reading of the book, not matter that I had clear how it’d end (again, I won’t spoil it! Trust me! Geez!), I had fun analyzing the clues exposed, trying to figure out how Poirot would be able to come to his own conclussions.

This is an entertaining reading and rather quick to do.