Rating: 4/5

Eiseley in this autobiography writes," I who profess no religion find the whole of my life a religious pilgrimage." It at first seems an odd statement as Eiseley is not in any usual sense a conventional "religious" person. He is an anthropologist and writes evocatively and well of his youth , a difficult one and of his many excavations among the remains and ruins of people and civilizations which have receded into the past. But at the same time, he is never far from asking questions about the "meaning of it all."
	
It's these questions, I think, that lead him to see his life as a pilgrimage toward a meaning which is as he puts it, "I have come to believe that in the world there is nothing to explain the world. There is nothing in nature to separate the existent from the potential." He is an believer in evolution, and has written a scholarly work, DARIWN'S CENTJURY on Darwin's work, but as the same time, he simply cannot account for some of the life forms he has uncovered. The potential, in evolutionary terms, does not explain what actually exists. 
	. 
In a key chapter he describes the giant wasps who have an incredibly complicated way of killing and devouring their prey. General evolution does not explain the intricacy of their behavior - they go far beyond what would be a much simpler way of behavior, one normally accounted for by evolution. What explains this "potential," this unusual, and even baroquely flamboyant, way, of instinctual behavior? Eiseley doesn't know, and that captures the title of third section of the book, "Days of a Doubter." He is filled with doubt and what he calls ignorance and leads him to think that it is vain illusion to think that science will discover all there is know about the universe. He feels dwarfed by the immensity of time and the infinitesimally small amount of his knowledge, of humanity's knowledge, and these are certainly aspects of religion, ordinarily evoked by the concept of "God."
 
	
The first and second sections of the book, "Days of a Drifter" and "Days of a Thinker" build toward the darker last section. In "Drifter" Eiseley begins with a epigraph from THE ODYSSEY, "There is nothing worse for mortal men than wandering," and in this section Eiseley wanders through the Depression years, most in the west of the United States. He describes his deaf and unstable mother, his depressed father, various jobs he had, the catching of rides on freight trains, the hoboes he met, his illnesses, and at times what he felt was his dead-end life. He metaphorically thinks of these memories, especially his eight years of drifting, as being like the debris that pack rats gather and put into their nests. 
	
In "Thinker" Eiseley concentrates on his academic and professional career where he says he was always most at home in fieldwork where he was gathering specimens and doing excavation work of which always both excited and saddened him. Excited about what he would find, and saddened by the theft and pillage of spots which were at one time sacred. There is always a connection that Eisely says he felt toward outsiders, whether dispossessed humans from the past, or even animals that are taken for granted. 
	
One of the humans was Willy, a black garage man who lived in the basement of an apartment house where Eiseley once lived. He used to see him, a man who was dying and yet in his last days used to lean on a fence and look at the "lights of the world." Why does he remember him, a man whose last name he never learned? He sees himself in him, a writer whose words are briefly noted and then mostly forgotten, and yet they continue to watch and observe. 
	 
In a chapter "The Ghost World," he writes about the silence that envelops him when he lost his hearing temporarily due to a serious infection. When it returns, he thinks of his ghost world when he observed people walking and talking, but making no sounds. Another personal variation on the experience of Willy.
	
There's a sense of melancholy in this book, and maybe it was just me, but I didn't find it depressing because, I think, his descriptions are always surprisingly interesting and that outweighed the melancholy. One reader said of him, aptly, that he is a scientist who writes like a poet.