Rating: 4/5

Had been meaning to read this ever since stumbling on Bisclavret and loving it. (I mean: Werewolf story written in the 12th century that gives the werewolf a happy ending? Yes, please!). So I was delighted to accidentally stumble on this just sitting on a family bookshelf!

These fairy-tale-like stories are not all romances in the modern sense - but a majority do explore romantic love from a variety of angles and a morally nuanced perspective. For instance, while 'Equitan' condemns the king who betrays a trusted and hardworking senescal (who's pretty much running the kingdom for him) by sleeping with his wife, in 'Guigemar' the reader is clearly meant to cheer for the wife who is kept locked up and ignored by her jealous old husband to find happiness with the young knight who washes up on their shore. Which she does!

One thing I wasn't expecting was for Marie to gently satirize her own genre of poetry - but she does, TWICE. In 'Les Deus Amanz' (the two lovers), we have the trope of the king who sets an impossible task for his daughter's suitors...but the task is just to carry her up a mountain! She decides not to elope with the hero - which would obviously have solved the problem - but sends him to, not a witch, but a lady doctor in Salerno (yes, like in Mistress of the Art of Death) to be made stronger, while she goes on a crash diet to try and get lighter. But then of course he gets cocky and doesn't take the medicine, and their demise is just too goofy to be taken seriously. In 'Chaitivel' (the unfortunate one), Marie turns the trope of the poet supposedly praising his lady but actually making it all about himself on its head by making the tale about a lady with four admirers who cares more about the the flattery of being loved than about any of the men in question. When three die and one is wounded (probably castrated) through taking stupid risks in a tourney to impress her, her main concern is in how best to write a tragic ballad about it!

'Lanval' is the only story I've ever seen that contains the "magical being says 'I'll love you and give you all this good stuff but you can't tell anyone about me'" trope and still manages to have a happy ending - so that's fun! In 'Eliduc' I mostly felt bad for the weasels - actually a properly devoted couple! - and wanted to give the titular husband a thorough beat-down. Though I did like that nobody had to die to resolve the plot. Finally, I was quite surprised to realize that the story in Cubana: Contemporary Fiction by Cuban Women where the rich lady with a broken leg dreams that a bird knight comes to visit her was probably inspired by 'Yonec'. (Nothing bad happens to the bird in the Cuban version...but enough of the vibes were retained that I worried it would!).

This edition does not try to maintain the poetic character of the stories, but they are still pretty read-able. And I appreciated the extensive notes on each story that help put them in context!