Rating: 3/5

I picked this up at a bookstore sale that was going out of business for a dollar and for a dollar, it was worth it. But, like so many anthologies of this type, it's a mixed bag and the majority of the stories were okay at best. However, there were a few standouts. I'll run through a few as best I can remember. 

I read these out of order so it's interesting that I ended with the first and longest story, "Killdozer" by Theodore Sturgeon. It opens a bit slow, but then gets really interesting. Unfortunately, it then goes so deep into the machinery and how it worked, that I felt I needed a construction degree to understand what was happening. Fortunately, it's not too bad and I got the gist, but it did bog the story down a bit. The ending is a little bit of a cop out, but I must confess, the premise is pretty great -- a piece of construction equipment is possessed with a hatred of what disturbed it. Yeah, we've seen it done a lot since, but this was written in 1944! It's also interesting in that the job's foreman knows what's going on, but can't tell his crew because he knows they won't believe him. And by the time they do, it's too late.

"Alpha Ralpha Boulevard" by Cordwainer Smith is an interestingly bizarre tale. Very imaginative.

"Auto-Da-Fe" by Roger Zelazny is fun. I've been a fan of the author since I was a kid and I think I first read this story in the anthology Devil Car. But I reread it for fun and that's just what it is!

I love Philip K. Dick and was looking forward to "Second Variety." It certainly carried the PKD trademarks of paranoia and uncertain reality, but it wasn't one of his better works. Still, an above average story in this collection.

As a child of the 80s, I grew up seeing David Drake's "Hammer's Slammers" on every bookstore SF shelf. So I was curious to read "Under the Hammer" but found it rather dull. It felt like an early chapter from the book and out of context, I didn't enjoy it. It felt like, and I shouldn't be surprised, typical 80s action (yes, I know it was written in the 70s, but close enough).

"Lost Memory" by Peter Phillips is kind of a Twilight Zone-light story of sentient computers finding a rocket ship with a human inside and not understanding that the ship itself isn't sentient.

"Making the Connections" by Barry N. Malzberg is another kind of interesting story about a robot designed to kill humans, but uncertain of its instructions and programming. A few interesting notions.

"Steel" by Richard Matheson was made into a Twilight Zone episode, but not a favorite and despite my being a fan of Matheson, I found this story to be just okay.

"The Iron Chancellor" by Robert Silverberg was really fun! A family buys a robot and asks it to put them on a diet. Unhappy with the restraints, they try to tinker with it short circuiting it to even more disastrous results.

I've read other stories by Murray Leinster that I enjoyed. "The Wabbler" isn't one of them.

"The Cruel Equations" by Robert Sheckley feels like a 50s story so I was surprised to see it was published in 1971. It's kind of a robot logic puzzle that Asimov was so fond of, but just okay.

"Combat Unit" by Keith Laumer - I found this one forgettable.

I read "Fondly Fahrenheit" by Alfred Bester for a SF class decades ago, but so long I'd forgotten it. I'm glad I reread it. A homicidal robot and its "master" who has no other way to make a living is forced into poverty as he's forced to continuously go on the run whenever his robot goes haywire. and maybe he's going a little mad as well.

I also saw Fred Sabergagen's name all over the Berserker books in the 80s, but never picked one up so I was curious to read this story. Certainly entertaining.

So the standouts for me were: "Fondly Fahrenheit" by Alfred Bester and "The Iron Chancellor" by Robert Silverberg as the two best. After that, I enjoyed Zelazny and Sturgeon on my second tier. After that, a few okay stories, but I can't recommend this anthology. It's fine if you pick it up cheap and read the better stories, but they can also be found elsewhere.