Rating: 5/5

Molly Moon Stops The World is about Molly Moon, an orphan with mind - blowing hypnotic powers. She is able to induce people using a procedure called hypnotic induction. After learning how to hypnotize people all over the world, rescuing her pet pug Petunia from being dog-napped, you'd think Molly would have had enough adventures to last a lifetime. However, the evildoers of the world simply aren't done doing evil. Molly soon finds herself on a plane to Los Angeles, where she and her best friend Rocky discover that Primo Cell, a powerful, rich public figure, has been controlling celebrities - and has learned how to stop time! Of course, that is not enough for Cell. Now he wants to be President of the United States! When Molly, Rocky and Petula the pug meet him at the Oscars they make some astonishing discoveries. Can Molly’s mesmerizing eyes stop the most dangerous man in the world? 
 
 This book will take you on a heart stopping adventure filled with magical events. At the beginning of the book, it was quite boring as the writer describes too much about the characters of the book. The characters description was boring because they put too much adjectives in one sentence and I don’t think that is that good .Although,I think that they described Molly Moon very well in the start of the book. But other than that, once I really got into the story, I could not put the book down, I couldn't wait to find out how Molly saved the world. At first, I felt as if I knew what was going to happen but then the book took me on a roller coaster ride which changed my initial thoughts about it and it even kept me on the edge of my seat throughout.

The setting of the scenes in the book were quite interesting. I could picture every scene without a hitch due to the description of the book. I also think that the author’s writing was also quite good because I could understand the story really well and this book is also very understandable for young kids. It has an even amount of flowery words and simple words. After I finished the book, I had learnt about 30 new words from it. It’s always good to learn new things everyday and this book surely helped me increase my vocabulary! 
 
In conclusion, I really enjoyed reading this book and I would totally recommend this book to young readers, probably from the age of 10-15. Overall, its a good book and it is totally worth your time to read it. Georgia Byng is an amazing author and I am looking forward to read more books written by her!