Rating: 3/5

"The Haunted Hotel" is a novel by Wilkie Collins was serialised from June to November 1878. The full title of the novel is "The Haunted Hotel: A Story of Modern Venice." I'm not sure what was so modern about Venice, knowing almost nothing about it, and I'm also not sure if a book of only 200 pages or so is called a novel or a novella, but I'm calling it a novel, so far anyway. I suppose it would be called a mystery, it certainly was mysterious, or perhaps it is considered a ghost story, after all there is a haunted hotel. Perhaps it is a gothic novel, there is a ghost after all, and a creepy castle that unfortunately gets turned into a hotel, I suppose that would be considered modern, Some people disappear and others mysteriously die (or do they?), so I suppose it is gothic. 

 But for me it was mostly mysterious, and the most mysterious thing about it was the book itself. The pages of the book I mean. Every other page was different. By that I mean that one page would be typed out just like you would expect in a book, but the other one would be an obvious copy from a different book. It looked something like this:

I was confused about this the entire book. On the "copied" page the words are smaller and you can see the line down the page where the spine of the book would be, and part of the other page. I don't really care if it was copied or not, but why would you only copy every other page? It seems like it would have been easier to either type both pages or copy both pages, but that's not how it was done and the entire 200 pages were like this. Mystery number one.

My second mystery was the missing words. Sentences such as "Not one of the five...." was really "N t one of th five...." and because it bothered me I would carefully write in the missing letters. This also went on for the entire book. My husband asked me what I was doing and when I told him he looked at me like I was crazy, but he often does that.

OK, not clearing up the two first mysteries I'll move on to the story. In the first chapter one of our main characters "Countess Narona" goes to see a doctor because she thinks she is going mad. Now this doctor is just one of your regular physicians ( sorry to all the doctors out there I just called regular) he treats colds, sore throats, broken bones, that sort of thing. So I'm wondering why she would go to this type of doctor if she thinks she is going mad, but she does and he listens to her heart, and feels her pulse and asks her questions and finds nothing the matter with her, so she leaves very unsatisfied. I can't figure out why she went there at all, if I start going mad, or thinking I am, calling the doctor who gives me my high cholesterol medicine and migraine medicine wouldn't occur to me. Until now that is.

Anyway, now we have met the Countess and the doctor fades away from the story back to seeing his other patients I suppose. The Countess is about to be married to Lord Montbarry and no one wants this marriage to take place. As near as I can tell everyone in this novel hates the Countess and for most of the book I can't figure out why. She is going to marry a man who was engaged to another woman, a cousin of his, who as near as I can tell everyone loves. The Countess had no idea that Lord Montbarry was engaged when she agreed to marry him and as she says:

"I have innocently robbed her of her lover, and destroyed her prospects in life."

After finding out the truth the Countess tries to break the engagement:

"I implored him to release me from my promise. He refused. I declared I would break my engagement. He showed me letters from his sisters, his brothers and his dear friends - all entreating him to think again before he made me his wife; all repeating reports of me in Paris, Vienna, and London, which are so many vile lies. "If you refuse to marry me," he said, "you admit that these reports are true - you admit that you are afraid to face society in the character of my wife." What could I answer? There was no contradicting him - he was plainly right; if I persisted in my refusal, the utter destruction of my reputation would be the result. I consented to let the wedding take as we had arranged - "

Now everyone in the novel involved in any of this admits that the Countess knew nothing of his engagement, so why in the world do they all hate her? If they are going to be mad at someone then go be mad at the awful Lord. I'm also not sure what our good, sweet, much loved heroine loved about Lord Montbarry in the first place. The countess is called all sorts of awful names before they even have a reason to call her anything in my opinion. She is:

"that awful woman", "wicked", "False", "superstitious", "inveterately cruel" all sorts of things before anyone knows anything bad about her. Except she is crazy enough to marry into this family.

 But now the Lord and the Countess are married and go off to a very old castle in Venice described as a "damp, moldy, rambling old palace", and that's where the people disappear from, or run away from, or die in, before some more people come along and make the whole thing into a hotel. I didn't want the palace turned into a hotel, I hate when old houses and mansions are turned into businesses; lawyers offices, doctors offices, dentists, I hate when that happens. Just read what happens to the poor palace:

"The outside of the building, with its fine Palladian front looking on the canal, was wisely left unaltered. Inside, as a matter of necessity, the rooms were almost rebuilt—so far at least as the size and the arrangement of them were concerned. The vast saloons were partitioned off into 'apartments' containing three or four rooms each. The broad corridors in the upper regions afforded spare space enough for rows of little bedchambers, devoted to servants and to travellers with limited means. Nothing was spared but the solid floors and the finely-carved ceilings."

However, I guess if the place wasn't turned into a hotel there wouldn't have been all the different people coming to stay there to have all the awful things happen to. Insomnia, nightmares, horrid smells, all kinds of things, even this:

"Midway between her face and the ceiling, there hovered a human head—severed at the neck, like a head struck from the body by the guillotine."

OK, that's all I'm saying, the review will soon be as long as the book was. I read it in one day, so go ahead and read it, if you hate it you haven't spent that much time on it anyway. I didn't hate it, but I know it wasn't fascinating enough for me that I'll remember the story for long. Those pages will stay with me for quite a while though.