Rating: 5/5

This was a life changing story book for two people, my 10th grade biology teacher Bill and me whom he referred this book. Here's the amazing fact about this book. Fletcher made this trip in 1958. And the second fact is that it does not follow the Pacific Crest Trail. So I read this book about 12 or so years after Fletcher had authored his three major books this one (I own a hard bound), The Complete Walker: The Joys and Techniques of Hiking and Backpacking (Colin's now somewhat dated how-to book), and The Man Who Walked Thru Time (which I would read later for a college class, not quite my cuppa tea).

By this time Fletcher had put in TV appearances on National Geographic programs walking through the Death Valley in summer time (logistical support by buried 5 gallon jugs of water, now people, of course run marathons and over to Mt. Whitney). These stunts were more for the audience.

Colin's path was further East of the Pacific Crest, starting closer to Yuma, AZ, along the highest points of the White Mountains, and through Mojave (not necessarily during hottest periods). And finally cresting along the tops of the far NE CA in the more obscure Warner Mountains near Alturas. This is not a PCT through hike. Much of Fletcher's walking is along side roads. He turns down numerous offers for rides. American drivers clearly wondered whether this was an insane Englishman.

In decades past, after one attempt, while still in high school, to write Colin email, I'd visit the Whites, the Warners, the Mojave, and the very border crossing where Fletcher started. The gate has become a more beefed up station. A parking lot of the near-by Indian tribe casino and the gringos walking across for cheap dental and medical work have changed this historic area (All American Canal) which begat the Salton Sea.

Many people go up White Mtn Peak (for work), it has a road for the UC research station which I did a tiny bit of work, caused me to buy an Isuzu Trooper for its performance (my test drive of sorts; a great vehicle). Fletcher had to deal with logistics decades before the popularity of PCT through hikes and the support of the PCT Association.

The book's pace gets sparse the further North Colin goes. I, too have driven, walked portions of trails, and even overflown this area (ever land at Rivendale? I have). One town renamed itself Likely in 1987 (3 decades after Colin's walk. I had never even heard of the Warner Mountains until I saw distant alpenglow when driving some place SE of Mt. Shasta (the volcano not the town). I would finally screw up motivation to go visit it's county high point (that's someone else's book). A person can still live and visit portions, but not quite in the same way.

For me, it would be some time before Fletcher wrote a book again of this stature, River: One Man's Journey Down the Colorado, Source to Sea. Summer is a 5 star book for me for how it changed me. Sure, it's not for the urban interested person or up there with great literary works of say Steinbeck and Hemingway or J. R. Rowling.

That tree in the photo of Colin taking his starting steps is still there. And it's grown. That same tree. The more obscure Warner Mountains has to its farthest North limits, to the Oregon border at least, another tree where Colin carved his mark. This is a tree I've yet to see.

2021 note (See separate note on finish to Colin's trip). 2012 when I wrote the above was when Cheryl Strayed wrote Wild: From Lost to Found on the Pacific Crest Trail when I also did the Mt Hood PCT traversal (Strayed's PCT finish, not the Canadian border). Another popular hiking book is Bill Bryson's A Walk in the Woods which was also made into a movie (Robert Redford got the rights). I found Woods an annoying book and movie story (also annoying to a friend who did the AT at the same time as the movie came out). READ Fletcher INSTEAD. Strayed's movie is OK (I know most of the locations, mostly shot in OR except the parts near Mojave; e.g., Smith Rocks and the Bridge of the Gods).

net.wolverine