Rating: 2/5

I think it was Coleridge who said that in order to enjoy a work you have to be willing to overlook the artist's flaws. Deeping has two egregious flaws that take some effort to disregard. The first is that he's a crank. We're never in any doubt which characters we're meant to admire, because they won't have been long in the protagonists' lives before they will venture some opinion along the lines of how the socialists all want to wreck everything that's good, and they want everybody to be equal because they secretly resent their betters, and how even if their philosophy was honest it wouldn't work because the only decent people are individualists who disdain society and taxes and laws and just do what's right out of a sort of cavalier aristocratic sense of the aesthetic.

I don't mind an author being right-wing, even as crazily libertarian as old Deeping is, but the unforgivable crime is that he doesn't mind boring the reader with it. Holding Randian opinions and ranting them at other characters is the label that comes tied to every "good" character. Other hallmarks are that those characters are either handsome and athletic (if a natural gent) or ugly as a bulldog (if one of Deeping's few self-made working class good guys). Bad guys all look unhealthy, effeminate or somehow untrustworthy: little eyes, over-groomed moustache, oiled hair, that kind of thing. 

Meanwhile, the decent women are all calm and mystically wise, while the women we're to loathe are characterized as blowsy, if more than a certain age, and hard-bitten trivial party-goers, if young. The strange thing - or perhaps it's not strange at all - is that Deeping very vividly evokes the lascivious physical attractiveness of a young vamp to the immensely dull, priggish and slow-witted Mary Sue of a lead character. (He goes home and has a cold shower, never fear, and survives the encounter with a champagne hangover but virtue intact.)

Deeping writes pleasing prose, as pretty much anyone with a good Victorian or Edwardian education could - by which I mean plain, elegant English with touches of poetry, as opposed to the modern trend for overblown Bookerese. But (and here's his principal flaw) he is a terrible storyteller. Time and again he sets up a challenge for the hero. A bullying employer, a rival, a business on the verge of ruin, an infection that could mean amputating an arm. He'll even say how the hero is trying to think of a way to overcome this latest obstacle. And again and again, out of the blue, blind luck takes care of it. A new job comes along. The rival is fired after being caught with his hand in the till. Unexpected media attention turns a failing business into a thriving concern. The hero refuses amputation but recovers anyway. There is never one hard choice, never a single challenge that the characters must deal with for themselves.

A typical example: Sorrell Junior has found himself a girlfriend in London, and embarks on an affair despite being a ridiculous prude. But wait - she's working class, and he's a budding surgeon. How's that going to work out? Never fear. A handy car runs her down in Oxford Street, allowing our doltish lad to rush to her side for a tearful farewell before she conveniently expires. The whole book is like this. It almost demands to be rewritten by somebody who could actually think of ways for those plot threads to entangle and draw tighter, increasing the tension, allowing our heroes to shine by showing us what they're made of, rather than simply being told we must admire them by their creator.