Rating: 4/5

This is the third book by Sara Wood that I'm reading. I'm slowly making my way through the Expecting! Series of Harlequin and this is the second book. I've already read eleven other books from the series.

The story opens with Adam being late to his own engagement party because he glanced at the picture on his desk, a picture of three women together - his late wife Christine, his stepdaughter Petra, and Trish. And then he starts thinking about Trish. Meanwhile, Trish is getting ready to attend Adam and Louise's ceremony. To which her friend Petra has invited her. Ahem! Trish Pearce is worried about coming face-to-face with Petra's 'unfairly young stepfather' again. Especially after what happened between them four years ago, only two months after his wife's death.

He's thirty-eight to her twenty-two. Adam Foster runs his computer software business in London, to where he relocated a few years back from the small town of Truro. He is a hotshot who is working non-stop to save the world from the millennium time bomb. All hail the computer lord! Trish lives in Scilly Isles, which is practically a village with no proper roads even and where she runs a bed and breakfast. There are no proper shops there even. For a story written in 1998, it is so old school yet hilariously good, especially when Trish talks about computers in the terms which make it sound like alien technology.
Love seemed so wonderful in films. The truth was that it made you feel as if you were balancing on the brink of a precipice with uncertainties nibbling away at the edge.
Adam and Christine's son Stephen is nineteen. A fact Louise rubs in when she thinks that Trish is out to snatch her fianceé. Christine had died after suffering from cancer of the spine, and during her last days, Trish was staying with them while attending University and had kept Christine in high spirits. His and Louise's is a love arrangement, an extension of their business arrangement. Adam doesn't want to be emotionally vulnerable again and he thinks Trish would be better off with a man her age. Though he wants her, her exuberance, her everything ensnares him, but there's something in his past that is holding him back from confessing his love.

I didn't have any issues regarding their age gap but what really struck me was that the story squicked me out too, exactly like boogenhagen shelved the book as. Maybe it was because of the way it was written. Constantly referring to the age gap plus the toxic city compared to the idyllic island life!
I’m tired of pussyfooting about! I did my best to lure you into my bed and you turned me down!
I must mention again how funny this book is though. Adam chases after Trish like it's nobody's business! Trish is more than happy in her quaint island - Bryher, but she wasn't aware that there was a surprise coming in the form of Mack Rowe, yep, brilliant and hilarious wordplay, right there! She lives with her Granny there. And oh my, Granny Hicks is another funny character, a bright old horse. What laughs she gives.

I loved the way it ended, with the last few paras acting as an epilogue, giving a glimpse of their future on Bryher with their kids. But towards the end, the story fell flat. Trish's insecurity with Adam was a little irritating, especially considering her nature throughout the book.