Rating: 2/5

2 Stars

Eh, this had a solid plot but never quite delivered on the chemistry I expected the MCs to have nor the thrill of excitement from having the heroine hold the hero captive.

It was all so..tidy and polite, I guess. And how Sorcha went from having simple attraction for Ruari to being in love with him with hardly any reason was quite silly and shallow. Especially Ruari deciding to seduce her knowing she wasn't "worthy" to marry in his eyes. So romantic...🙄 And sure, Sorcha agreed to his offer of only passion but it was all so...boring. 

It had elements of humor but much of the good parts of the story get drowned in the endless excess of words. Whether those be extra scenes that didn't seem to serve a purpose other than to fill space to repetitive thoughts that reappear endlessly until the end.

See the "I love him but I don't know if he loves me in return so I must not tell him for fear he'll reject me!" Plot device and have it swing in both directions with both the MCs bemoaning this issue till the literal very end and just...sigh.

I really, really wanted to like this book. I adore historical romance and especially highlanders. This one in particular did the one thing I hate with Scottish based books and that was the awful heavy handed attempt at trying to capture the thick accent by spelling the words in such a way they're painful to read. I think certain choice words being used in that way to give you just enough to hear the accent in you head while reading it is lovely when done right and sparingly but to convert nearly the entirety of the English language to that style is and was just painful to read.

Overall a very forgettable read tbh. It dragged more often than not which required quite a bit of skimming to finish on my part. The characters were rather flat and just plain boring. The extra aspect with Sorcha's family and their curse of dealing and seeing spirits was pretty out of the box and weird tbh. It wasn't the dumbest thing in the book though so that speaks for itself.