Rating: 5/5

⋆✴︎˚｡⋆ “𝐼 𝒶𝓂 𝓃𝑜𝓉 𝒶𝒻𝓇𝒶𝒾𝒹 𝑜𝒻 𝓈𝓉𝑜𝓇𝓂𝓈, 𝒻𝑜𝓇 𝐼 𝒶𝓂 𝓁𝑒𝒶𝓇𝓃𝒾𝓃𝑔 𝒽𝑜𝓌 𝓉𝑜 𝓈𝒶𝒾𝓁 𝓂𝓎 𝓈𝒽𝒾𝓅.” 𓍯𓂃𓏧♡

꒰ 5 𝓢𝓽𝓪𝓻𝓼 ꒱ؘ ࿐ ࿔*:･ﾟ

 I love this novel so much. I mean, really love it lol. I can remember getting a new edition copy for several Christmases in my childhood and it will always be a story near and dear to my heart. 

˚₊· ͟͟͞͞➳❥ I really am, at my core a classics lover- although I lean more toward the gothic and macabre stories; This one is really just a fond and unforgettable memory from childhood.

Four sisters: Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy March, are part of a poor but loving family. With their father off to war they have only their mother left to encourage them to be the best version of themselves at all times. As they go through love and loss they truly do learn to become 'little women'.

ೃ⁀➷ ꕤ  Meg is the oldest, sixteen-year-old at the beginning of the story. She is pretty but swayed by material temptations. ೀ

ೃ⁀➷ ꕤ  Jo is a headstrong tomboy. She is fifteen years old when the story begins and she wants to be a writer. ೀ

ೃ⁀➷ ꕤ  Beth is shy, sweet, and a music lover. Her father calls her ‘Little Miss Tranquility’ for her sweet disposition. ೀ

ೃ⁀➷ ꕤ  Amy is the youngest, a little selfish but amiable, elegant, and an artist. ೀ

Though still young, and having a great deal in common, the sisters’ individual personalities are already very evident. Meg, the eldest at sixteen years old, dreams of a future of wealth and luxury and occupies herself as a nursery governess. Jo, a bookworm and aspiring writer is something of a tomboy and, much to her displeasure, spends her time as a companion to an elderly aunt. 

Beth, at thirteen years old is somewhat quiet and timid. A peacemaker in the family with a love of music, her shyness means she is home-schooled. While Amy, the youngest, is very ladylike, a ‘snow maiden’ with careful manners and an interest in drawing and art.

It’s impossible not to love the March sisters and to identify with at least one of them. I loved how different each of the sisters were from one another, how they complimented on another and how despite their differences and disagreements they loved one another and would do anything to make the other happy. 

While this book is universal and can be enjoyed by readers of any gender, I think it holds a special place in the hearts of sisters and those who have sisters. I don't lol. I actually have two brothers but I have two female cousins that I was very close with growing up. And we loved reading this story together.

Everything felt so real in the way the sisters interacted with one another, I feel that I haven’t read a realistic relationship of sisters in a long time and Little Women did it.

˚₊· ͟͟͞͞➳❥ But the heart of this book is really Jo, as she grows up and finds herself with her writing and finds love. Without spoilers, I must say that absolutely Jo made the right romantic decisions here! I can see why she’s such a popular character and role model, but I did enjoy all of the sisters very much.

There’s so much to this book, and it shouldn’t be dismissed as an old, unrelatable classic. There’s war and death, love and sadness, humor and escapades, romance and friendship, and on and on. 

˚₊· ͟͟͞͞➳❥ Little Women is as enjoyable as ever still and I definitely highly recommend it.

⋆ ˚｡⋆୨୧˚ “𝒟𝑜𝓃'𝓉 𝓁𝒶𝓊𝑔𝒽 𝒶𝓉 𝓉𝒽𝑒 𝓈𝓅𝒾𝓃𝓈𝓉𝑒𝓇𝓈, 𝒹𝑒𝒶𝓇 𝑔𝒾𝓇𝓁𝓈, 𝒻𝑜𝓇 𝑜𝒻𝓉𝑒𝓃 𝓋𝑒𝓇𝓎 𝓉𝑒𝓃𝒹𝑒𝓇, 𝓉𝓇𝒶𝑔𝒾𝒸 𝓇𝑜𝓂𝒶𝓃𝒸𝑒𝓈 𝒶𝓇𝑒 𝒽𝒾𝒹𝒹𝑒𝓃 𝒶𝓌𝒶𝓎 𝒾𝓃 𝓉𝒽𝑒 𝒽𝑒𝒶𝓇𝓉𝓈 𝓉𝒽𝒶𝓉 𝒷𝑒𝒶𝓉 𝓈𝑜 𝓆𝓊𝒾𝑒𝓉𝓁𝓎 𝓊𝓃𝒹𝑒𝓇 𝓉𝒽𝑒 𝓈𝑜𝒷𝑒𝓇 𝑔𝑜𝓌𝓃𝓈, 𝒶𝓃𝒹 𝓂𝒶𝓃𝓎 𝓈𝒾𝓁𝑒𝓃𝓉 𝓈𝒶𝒸𝓇𝒾𝒻𝒾𝒸𝑒𝓈 𝑜𝒻 𝓎𝑜𝓊𝓉𝒽, 𝒽𝑒𝒶𝓁𝓉𝒽, 𝒶𝓂𝒷𝒾𝓉𝒾𝑜𝓃, 𝓁𝑜𝓋𝑒 𝒾𝓉𝓈𝑒𝓁𝒻, 𝓂𝒶𝓀𝑒 𝓉𝒽𝑒 𝒻𝒶𝒹𝑒𝒹 𝒻𝒶𝒸𝑒𝓈 𝒷𝑒𝒶𝓊𝓉𝒾𝒻𝓊𝓁 𝒾𝓃 𝒢𝑜𝒹'𝓈 𝓈𝒾𝑔𝒽𝓉. 𝐸𝓋𝑒𝓃 𝓉𝒽𝑒 𝓈𝒶𝒹, 𝓈𝑜𝓊𝓇 𝓈𝒾𝓈𝓉𝑒𝓇𝓈 𝓈𝒽𝑜𝓊𝓁𝒹 𝒷𝑒 𝓀𝒾𝓃𝒹𝓁𝓎 𝒹𝑒𝒶𝓁𝓉 𝓌𝒾𝓉𝒽, 𝒷𝑒𝒸𝒶𝓊𝓈𝑒 𝓉𝒽𝑒𝓎 𝒽𝒶𝓋𝑒 𝓂𝒾𝓈𝓈𝑒𝒹 𝓉𝒽𝑒 𝓈𝓌𝑒𝑒𝓉𝑒𝓈𝓉 𝓅𝒶𝓇𝓉 𝑜𝒻 𝓁𝒾𝒻𝑒, 𝒾𝒻 𝒻𝑜𝓇 𝓃𝑜 𝑜𝓉𝒽𝑒𝓇 𝓇𝑒𝒶𝓈𝑜𝓃.” ಇ. ‧₊˚ ☁️⋅♡𓂃 ࣪ ִֶָ☾.