Rating: 2/5

Treasure of the Rubbermaids 4: The Sound of the Men Working on the Chain Gang

The on-going discoveries of priceless books and comics found in a stack of Rubbermaid containers previously stored and forgotten at my parent’s house and untouched for almost 20 years. Thanks to my father dumping them back on me, I now spend my spare time unearthing lost treasures from their plastic depths.

Even though it’s been over twenty years I remember why I bought this book. Back in the pre-Internet days if you didn’t live in a large city books didn’t get a lot of media attention. So when the nearest mid-sized city paper had an article about an author, and his book was described as new gory crime/horror series featuring an outlandish villain that had been endorsed by the likes of Stephen King and Harlan Ellison, it got my attention. If I remember correctly, the author was from Missouri, and it was getting treated as a local-boy-makes-good story so somebody was smart enough to stock his book at the local Waldens so I got a copy fairly easily.

Unfortunately, Rex Miller was ahead of his time. He created a character so gruesome and despicable that he would have fit in better in the torture porn that passes for horror these days. I don’t think the series ever really broke big the way it seemed like it would. I know I never read any of his other books because even my late teen self had better taste than that.

There’s a cop named Jack Eichord who is part of some kind of national task force that’s not well explained who is supposed to be a serial killer expert, and he’s come to Chicago to help find a lunatic who is cutting the hearts out of people. He meets the beautiful widow of one of the victims who was killed a few years before, and they instantly fall deeply in love. So he hangs around her and her kid. That’s about it. For being a cop, he seemingly does very little police work.

That’s because the main part of this book is about a 6’7” 450 lb. psychopath. (I think the author read Daredevil comics and based this guy on the Kingpin.) The psycho was called Chaingang when he was a one man killing machine in Vietnam because he likes to use a hunk of chain to crush the skulls of his targets when he’s feeling frisky. Not only is Chaingang completely shithouse rat crazy, he’s also brilliant. Because all serial killers in fiction are brilliant. Oh, and he also has a low level of precognition that warns him of danger. 

If Miller would have stopped there he might have been on to something. The idea of an oversized deranged murderer roaming around could have been a new twist on the serial killer, but he had to keep adding things to Chaingang to the point of where a suspension of disbelief is impossible. 

We’re supposed to think that a jumbo sized guy who can’t go fifteen minutes without raping and killing someone as he lugs around a giant duffel bag full of weapons and gear somehow manages to bounce around without getting noticed by the cops for years. Even with his psychic warning system that seems kind of unlikely. 

And not only is Chaingang brilliant we’re told that he’s a master con man who can talk a beautiful woman into a vehicle by pretending to be a movie producer. Seriously, what woman would look at a 450 lb. stranger in a piece of shit car filled with fast foot wrappers and jump in with him? 

We’re also supposed to believe that Chaingang is a master thief. Because who would notice a giant covered in blood and food stains walking around stealing shit?

So while Chaingang could have made an interesting and unique villain Miller pushed the concept way past the point of absurdity. Even for a schlock horror/crime novel there’s almost no logic to the plot. At one point, the Chicago police want to pin Chaingang’s murders on a copycat killer, and even though Eichord knows that the evidence won’t pass the simplest forensic tests he agrees to be their mouthpiece for the media to sell the story for no good reason even though he thinks the idea is stupid. Plus, the love story between Eichord and the widow is unbelievable and completely pointless except to add sex scenes to the story.

Overall, there was a halfway decent potential villain lurking in this book, but Miller spent too much time adding new unbelievable twists to his creation to come up with any plot for him or another interesting character in the whole book