Rating: 1/5

Here in Los Angeles you have organizations such as the Kimono Club who describe their function as displaying the wonder and beauty of kimono and Japanese culture. The displays of these organizations, however, largely involve showing the different types of kimono for women and one type of kimono for men. Some of these organizations even explain in the narration that this imbalance as just the way things are with kimono. With such a pitch why would a man (Japanese or otherwise) ever want to wear a kimono? It is one thing to have Japanese expats "promote" and make claims about kimono in this manner; it is quite another for Liza Dalby, an American trained anthropologist to do so. It is this problem and others that burdens Dalby's book.

The problem with Dalby's book are apparent in the first three sentences of the book. The kimono proclaims itself the national costume of Japan and is duly recognized as such throughout the world. Yet today the kimono is said to be dying, to be utterly too cumbersome for modern life, to be be elegantly anachronistic as the conservative old ladies or geisha who wear it. Kimono is the garment men discarded a century ago in the name of modernity and efficiency but in which women continue to enfold themselves for formal and official occasions. So let me begin with the first sentence. The kimono cannot proclaim anything about itself or anything else; it is an object incapable of speech. People are the one who do the proclaiming. This is something Dalby should know all too well having studied anthropology extensively. And yet she is doing the very thing the Kimono club and others do with ease and without concern: making a claim about kimono that seems natural and obvious. In the wake of Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities and Eric Hobsbawm's "invented tradition" (both of which came out around the time when the book first appeared), Dalby's claim and the entire book in general can be seen as participating in the expansion of the "imagined and invented tradition" of kimono. That is, the book and the claims Dalby makes in it, despite the amount information she presents, are not thought through critical and in regards of the context of the events that occurred.

The third sentence is a prime example of this. Dably claims that men discarded the kimono in favor of western attire but women did not. This claim is not true at all. Kimono was part of the discussions of the Meiji period and with the concepts of the "modern boy" and "modern girl" kimono was casted as not modern. But as there was a push for abandoning kimono for both sexes where exactly is the proof that men completely abandoned the kimono whereas women did not? There is no proof of this as even today one can find men wearing kimono and stores that sell men's kimono. So why exactly is Dalby creating a gender distinction? (And by extension, why do Japanese make a similar gender distinction in kimono by displaying only one form of kimono for men or saying that Japanese men hardly ever wear kimono?) It is broad statements such as this made uncritically by a woman who has a degree in anthropology that make this work so problematic.