Rating: 5/5

"Follicles! .. uttered in a whisper by a hairdresser" is the "favorite oath" of Lady Godolphin p 66, a poor chaperone for Minerva. Hunt-happy vicar Armitage sends his eldest daughter to restore the family fortune in a London season. Lady G stumbles over malapropisms, mistaking French military "fornications" for "fortifications", and overnights with married Colonel. Her "barrage of peculiar scents" are "from lead paint to a perfume called 'Miss In Her Teens', brandy, rose water, and sour sweat" p 64. Double-standard allows Armitage to bestow "hearty kiss" and "slap on the bottom" a floozy "lady of the town" p 43. At the end, his interference is a pleasant surprise.  Like in #1 The Travelling Matchmaker, the groom-to-be recognizes old-fashioned spidery penmanship and phrasing, but the girl does not. 

Hilarious when Minerva repeatedly falls atop handsome Lord Sylvester Comfrey 33, "out and outer" p 39, even "his nightcap at a rakish angle" p 45. His observant eye, quick reactions, and thoughtful care save her debut after she preaches at everyone, especially alienating two sets of Dandies whose bets nearly cause her doom. Her "repellent grey wool" garters slither downward p 72, a just response from Fate for her prim moralizing "too much rigidity" p 73. "Prinny might award .. the Order of the Garter if he but heard" p75.  He scoops her up, protecting her 'sprained ankle', and gives out that her rude 'honesty' was teasing funnery.  

The characters are best at their worst. Fancy dress details, hat feather to pointed toe, are forced, false, perhaps required by editors/ publishers who slotted books into "romance" niche? Negatives are the positives, author forté.

Neighbor "Lady Wentwater was a small, dumpy woman, like a lump of dough into which someone had pushed currants for eyes and a piece of cinnamon stick for a mouth. Her clothes were old and musty and smelled of some horrible things, two of which a lady was not suppposed to know about" p 31. Her nephew Guy trades in "black ivory" p 48  slaves  and woos second daughter Annabelle, setting up sequel. 

The more outlandish, the better. Every young miss knows not to take the darkened path in garden shrubbery. "'Oh, list and hist .. a little pussy cat in distress' .. Lord Sylvester was sitting on the low branch .. 'Miaow', he said conversationally" p 108. In a duel, one shot hits right down the other's gun barrel. TV "Museum Secrets" re-enacts possibility of French sharpshooter to the heart of Horatio Nelson amid mighty ship battle, surprisingly accurate. High school curriculum may prescribe Pride and Prejudice, this take on the same moral is much more lively. Minerva tries to read edifying poems to "wicked rip" Lady G, her "bedclothes .. heaped up around her in an untidy mountain" of Colonel Arthur Brian p 119, heading for "carnival knowledge", "carnal knowledge, I ain't had it yet" p 120.