Rating: 5/5

I read part of this in Jr HS, then all of it after I graduated from college; my Shakespeare teacher (38 plays in the full year course) asked me, as he read it, why so much reference to the "lee scuppers." For a beginning sailor like me, an easy answer: those are the drains that fill because of the heel of the boat away from windward. (By the way, sailor's usage for "going wrong," say gambling "blown hard to Lee.")
 I recall how Dana records the loss of their first crewman off South America; this, from a small crew, perhaps 9. As soon as they got on deck after the news, the sailor's clothes were auctioned. (No time for sentiment onboard, as RHD says.) Then I recall the great joy of their tea and molasses, or after reefing the topsail, some grog (with rum). The weather around Cape Horn was abysmal, with big seas and sleet and snow, but they were on their way to pick up hides dropped down from the high coast of Santa Barbara. Dana observes that if the Californians ever learn to make shoes, their services will no longer be required: shipping hides, taking them around Cape Horn to New England to be made into shoes, which are then shipped around Cape Horn to be sold to the Californians.
 Dana observes that Spanish/Californian culture is not workers: there are the upper class owners, then the servants and slaves of other ethnicities. (A century earlier, John Adams in Galicia observes that the only ones thriving are the clerics of numerous churches, convents etc.)
 The fear of the captain and mates, the appreciation of the cook and his tea, the hard work and danger aloft--these remain with me fifty years after reading Dana. I had a chance to sail on a square-rigger out of Mass Maritime, captained by a woman Master Mariner, my colleague at an NEH seminar at Brown University (headed by John Hattendorf and Felipe Fernandez-Armesto).
 On my only trip to the coast south of L.A., I did get down to Dana Point, CA where I was impressed how the mock-up of the brig Pilgrim was even smaller than I envisioned.