Rating: 3/5

The Conquering Family is the first of four books chronicling the Plantagenet Kings of England; and traces the origins of the family from the marriage of Matilda (granddaughter of William the Conqueror) and Geoffrey of Anjou. Since Henry I (son of William) had died without a male heir, he named his daughter Matilda successor, but not all in England were happy with this choice, and there was a period called The Anarchy which took place as Matilda and her cousin Stephen of Blois struggled for the crown. Eventually Matilda's son Henry (later to be known as Henry II) assumed control and founded the dynasty. This book ends with the death of King John in 1216.

So much of European royal history seems to me to be mired in a mixture of similar names and lists of place names and events that I have a hard time putting into context--I have difficulty affixing all these details firmly onto a timeline. When a particular king or count or battle is mentioned in another source, I often have trouble understanding its value since I have no idea of its place in the larger scheme of things. When I saw all four volumes of Thomas Costain's Plantagenet series on sale at a recent discard sale, I took a chance on it despite its original published date of 1949, rightly guessing that it would be a relatively easy and entertaining way of digesting a large chunk of English history that I was woefully under-familiar with.

While the book did exactly what I expected it to, it did take some time for me to get comfortable with Costain's style. It felt a bit as if I were running to catch a train that had already left the station and was picking up speed, but I did manage to get into the swing of things after the first couple of chapters. Probably the biggest hurdle to overcome was Costain's method of historiography--in my mind I pictured a man who had studied quite intensely about his subject, and then settled comfortably into his raconteur's chair to tell a good yarn. I was most reminded of Costain's contemporary, Harold Lamb, whose biographies of figures from the far east and the classical world also seem more like narratives than history.

What Costain and Lamb and others like them have going for them, in my mind, is a method that tends to stick. Have these historical personalities that they were writing about undergone reevaluation in the 60+ years since The Conquering Family? I can't believe they haven't, especially as there seems to be a whole industry devoted to reinterpreting and revising history that's sprung up in the last forty or so years. Costain is no slouch himself when it comes to imprinting his own opinions on the storyline, but in the end, while I might come away with a slightly skewed idea on some of the minute details, the larger picture falls solidly into place.

I believe that the time when Costain was writing also affects the narrative--were someone to try and cover this same period now (and writing in a 'popular' style), our contemporary sensibilities would no doubt influence what the author would feel was worthwhile to emphasize. I know that for myself, I seem to absorb these mid-century texts better than I do our modern ones--in my opinion I think they tend to be more in-depth, more interesting, and less worried about offending anyone. They also require a bit more effort from the reader, but, other than a bumpy beginning, I think Costain is very readable, and very entertaining. Looking forward to the remaining three books.