Rating: 4/5

4.9 stars, I enjoyed this a lot more than I thought I would! A LOT OF SPOILERS IN THIS REVIEW!!!!!! I loved all her struggles on this journey from being seasick, then homesick and feeling lonely and not feeling capable as a wife because her duties as a wife are not how she was raised. Then seeing her adjust and come to love her husband and his family. She still had her own views that differed from her husband which caused problems in their marriage. There was a war going on in the book and their political views were different. I loved that they fought but neither left. He had made the decision to leave and was gone for years, at one time about 2 years after he had left there was a time that she could have gone down to visit him. She was unable to because their was a disease going around that their son got and a lot servants were ill the responsibilities we're falling on her shoulders. When he got her letter saying he couldn't go he took it that she was still mad at him for leaving to go to war. He ends up cheating on his wife with a widow he was staying with and doesn't feel guilty for a while. Maybe a year later (I'm not really sure I don't keep the best timeline in my head while I read) she eventually goes down to see him where he is at war. Which is a risk but she has missed her husband so much and has gotten over and felt guilty over the fight they had before he left. Alan finds out that she really couldn't come see him and found out everything that had fallen on her shoulder and he felt guilty for his infidelity, he then find out that the widow Lucy became pregnant and his wife finds out about his infidelity and then there is another big fight because she is very hurt and he does gaslight her at first. But he knows he is in the wrong. I just had to say my favorite part of the books. I loved that they argued but never walked away. I would've totally understood if she left after him cheating but she was more worried about the land her children would inherit so she set her own feelings to the side.