Rating: 5/5

I thought it interesting to compare Radcliffe gothic to Fanu version. I loved both &amp; how he mentioned her book in his book. Her are romantic with all other aspects &amp; his seems to be more mystery related. Love them both. The man being murdered yet people said it had to be suicide because of being impossible. They were right to be leery of Uncle Silas. So much to think about here, that is why I loved it plus just reading something written in the past I came across the movie "Uncle Silas" in a blog which carries weekly older movies. Whenever I run across a older movie my first question I ask myself, is this a movie based on a book &amp; it was!I had run across Sheridan Le Fanu's Carmilla which is a vampire short story which I plan on reading next October but really was unaware of his works.This Irish writer's main genre was gothic horror &amp; mystery. He lived during the Victorian era &amp; was the leading ghost story writer of his time. Bram Stoker's Dracula was influenced by Fanu's Carmilla. Uncle Silas is a gothic mystery thriller.The Ruthyns are a prominent family at Knowl. Austyn &amp; Silas Ruthyn are brothers with a scandal that effects the name of Ruthyn. Besides Silas' gambling &amp; rake behavior, he was indicated in a murder at his home yet the impossibility of the murder deemed it a suicide. After Austyn's wife death, he lives in seclusion with his young daughter Maud. There life is akin to hermits except for some servants &amp; Austyn's religious friends. He lives his life trying to clear the family name &amp; all hopes rely on doing this. He enlists his daughter in his quest to clear her uncle's name. She has to decide who &amp; who not to trust. In this story, reforming from the past &amp; living a different lifestyle is it possible?Can you tell by looking at people who is leading the path to goodness &amp; avoiding the evil way in life? If something that is puzzling looks impossible, is it indeed possible if looked at in a different light &amp; mindset?Every time I thought I had the story figured out, it seemed to have a turn which made me rethink what was going to happen. It reach a point near the end that I was sure of all that would play out but still was surprised in the end.

❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌spoiler alert ❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌

I was amazed when Maud's father kept the Madame de la Rougierre for his daughter's governess. I was so perplexed by this &amp; could not understand how a father could do this especially if he had opened his eyes and saw through her ways. I was wondering if Maud was his child, but it seemed to be so in the end. He was so clouded by clearing up his family name, that he could not see the evil awaiting his daughter if she was to be dependent on his brother. How a father could be so blind. I liked Dr. Bryerly but was suspicious of him many times. Like I say below in my general review, many times I thought I had the story but then it was different. I thought many times that Uncle Silas was going to do something terrible right of the bat when Maud came but it seems like he was just into a opium addiction. Interesting how the book Opium Eaters was mentioned in this book. I knew a lot of trouble with that drug in that time which is surprising. I first came across opium in Dicken's Edmund Drood. I thought maybe Monica was Maud's mother &amp; Uncle Silas was her father until I noticed he did not care for her &amp; only her money. In the end Monica was just a wonderful person &amp; I especially loved the way she took Milly in to love too! It is funny that Dr. Bryely was ugly &amp; kind of evil looking but kind &amp; the uncle looked to be nicer looking but his kindness if any he has was superficial. His religion you knew right away was just words &amp; no action. His treatment of the girls &amp; his needs being taken care of to his satisfaction. He seemed to care more for his son in being a part of him. Even when he disappointed him he was looking to have him benefit. His son was like him but not polished. It also shows how a person can change of they have desire &amp; guidance. Milly under the loving care of Maud &amp; Monica benefited but even before she had a goodness that could shine through whereas Dudley had many bad examples &amp; inherent meanness. I was so happy that Maud finally saw the danger her way &amp; that her goodness to Meg had a friend for life. I could not understand why Maud saw goodness in her uncle while I saw selfishness &amp; greed. I suppose like her father she wanted it to be. Madame was such a wicked &amp; mean person that seemed insane. I was glad that it ended well but like Maud said it aged her mentally. The trip that brought her back to her Uncles had so much duplicity. It reminded me of Richardson's trip that was so planned to deceive. I thought it interesting to compare Radcliffe gothic to Fanu version. I loved both &amp; how he mentioned her book in his book. Her are romantic with all other aspects &amp; his seems to be more mystery related. Love them both. The man being murdered yet people said it had to be suicide because of being impossible. They were right to be leery of Uncle Silas. So much to think about here, that is why I loved it plus just reading something written in the past I came across the movie "Uncle Silas" in a blog which carries weekly older movies. Whenever I run across a older movie my first question I ask myself, is this a movie based on a book &amp; it was!I had run across Sheridan Le Fanu's Carmilla which is a vampire short story which I plan on reading next October but really was unaware of his works.This Irish writer's main genre was gothic horror &amp; mystery. He lived during the Victorian era &amp; was the leading ghost story writer of his time. Bram Stoker's Dracula was influenced by Fanu's Carmilla. Uncle Silas is a gothic mystery thriller.The Ruthyns are a prominent family at Knowl. Austyn &amp; Silas Ruthyn are brothers with a scandal that effects the name of Ruthyn. Besides Silas' gambling &amp; rake behavior, he was indicated in a murder at his home yet the impossibility of the murder deemed it a suicide. After Austyn's wife death, he lives in seclusion with his young daughter Maud. There life is akin to hermits except for some servants &amp; Austyn's religious friends. He lives his life trying to clear the family name &amp; all hopes rely on doing this. He enlists his daughter in his quest to clear her uncle's name. She has to decide who &amp; who not to trust. In this story, reforming from the past &amp; living a different lifestyle is it possible?Can you tell by looking at people who is leading the path to goodness &amp; avoiding the evil way in life? If something that is puzzling looks impossible, is it indeed possible if looked at in a different light &amp; mindset?Every time I thought I had the story figured out, it seemed to have a turn which made me rethink what was going to happen. It reach a point near the end that I was sure of all that would play out but still was surprised in the end.