Rating: 3/5

Agatha Raisin and the Wellspring of Death is the 7th book in the Agatha Raisin mystery series set in the Cotswolds by M.C. Beaton. I have tried to read the stories in sequence but there are some gaps in the books I own so it's not always possible. It's useful to try to do so, I guess, just to keep track of Agatha's on and off again relationship with neighbor James. (Not critical though)

This story finds Agatha angry and upset because of her failed wedding with James in an earlier book. Agatha is finding it difficult to enjoy her life in the village of Carsley and is just basically angry with everyone and with herself. She craves James (who is off on some sort of vacation) but at the same time questions whether they will ever have a relationship. Her ex-business 'partner' Roy, from London, tries to goad Agatha to take a PR job in a nearby town of Ancombe. A business venture, bottling water from a local spring, is starting up and wants to promote it. Reluctantly, Agatha agrees but immediately, she discovers a body at the wellspring.

This starts a new mystery in her life, even though she even seems to be finding difficulty motivating herself to get involved. Without her partner James helping her, she is frustrated and irritable. There are many suspects, all of the Ancombe town council in fact, and Agatha goes through the motions of questioning them, on her own, with some help from the newly returned James (James begins to investigate on his own), and even Roy.

Agatha continues to work on promoting the bottling company, organizing events. Her interactions with the locals of Ancombe introduce many irritating, unlikeable characters. Agatha begins a relationship with one of the owners of the bottling company, a man years her junior, to James' chagrin and also to Agatha's embarrassment. 

It's not a cheerful story in any way, unfortunately, although there are moments where Agatha manages to smile. Most of it, she is inconsolable and angry. Will her relationship with James resolve? Will Bill Wong, her friend and the local cop, solve the crime with Agatha's assistance? It's an interesting, if dark, wobbly tale. My favorite character is Agatha's best friend, Mrs. Bloxby, the vicar's wife; kind, level-headed, comforting. It was an interesting mystery, not perfect but still a nice, easy read. (3 stars)