Rating: 5/5

December 2024 — Gets richer every time, but man...there are parts that are just so uncomfortable to read, and they don't get any less so with repetition. I started this reread in October, but just couldn't handle it before the election. Decided to wait to finish it since it was the December selection for the CSL book group. I still skipped one scene, but overall it was easier after the election — made the results seem inevitable in retrospect. Compare "Even they must see that you cannot accept the challenge of the past by throwing down the gauntlet of the future" with "What can be, unburdened by what has been." The Belbury Babel was their downfall.

*****

August 2023 — I'd forgotten that last year I'd noted that I might want to skip over some Belbury scenes next time. I did skip some: most of the chapter titled Elasticity plus some other bits. I was so overwhelmed by anxiety last night before I turned off some gaslighting passage that I had trouble getting my mind calmed down enough to sleep. I'll have to be quicker to skip next time. Other scenes that delighted me again: The conversation between Mark and Dimble, with the latter putting up such a struggle to be charitable toward the young putz. The director having to tell MacPhee forty-leven times that he could not be part of the party going to fetch Merlin. Mark's repentance. The ladies dressing, each being the others' mirror. And always Mark's shirt sleeve carelessly draped over the windowsill.

*****

October 2022 — After finishing that last Grace Livingston Hill, I thought that perhaps I shouldn't read too many romances in a row. A surfeit of even such pure and wholesome stories as that can make the mind wander into temptation along emotional lines. So I turned back to Lewis. Well. If ever a book made me long to double the occupancy of my bed, the last chapter of this one does! Of course also in a perfectly pure and wholesome way, but in a fiercer, wilder way, as well. And the desire it stirs up isn't to sin. It's not a desire to take, but to give. The gift hasn't been called for by any mere mortal, but it can always be given to the One who gave it to me in the first place — a living sacrifice of obedience that could always use improvement.

I obviously couldn't stay away from the book as I'd intended. But I think I might skip some of the earlier Belbury scenes next time. The gaslighting of Mark is almost physically painful to endure, and, having read it often enough, I think I might elide it without injuring the rest of the story.

*****

June 2021 — I think I need to give this a break for a few years (I hope it won't be more than a few more years) till it's not so very, very current-eventsy. I find it very oppressive at places.

Oh, and I wanted to flag this great little sentence: "MacPhee, who had been carefully shutting up the snuff-box, suddenly looked up with a hundred Covenanters in his eyes." 

* * * * *

July 2020 — A few things that stood out this time through:

1) I love the little touches of history Lewis gives to the college and the wood. Just a few deft, matter-of-fact strokes make the reader feel that this is a real place.

2) The gaslighting Mark goes through at Belbury is stressful to listen to. Perhaps more so this time through because so much of that sort of thing is going on in our culture right now.

3) Mark is a consummate actor. He's constantly modulating his voice and expression in minute degrees to attempt to control the impression he makes on those around him. But I don't think (I'll have to pay stricter attention next time through if I remember to) Lewis actually uses the word acting till Mark starts to do it self-consciously...till he wants to deceive others, but no longer himself as well. It is finally a righteous deception; the skill he'd honed for the sake of petty self-interest is turned into a legitimate camouflage for the sake of battle. 

4) The scene where the ladies of St. Anne's are dressing reduced me to tears. Oh to be so transformed—sanctified, glorified, beautified. To have all my shabbiness and shame covered, replaced by a perfectly modest and un-self-centered graciousness and dignity. To be made truly feminine, truly woman, truly lovely.

5) Jane's and Mark's repentance brought tears again. The little touch of Mark's carelessness with his clothes—that bit of the ordinary in the extraordinary that has undone the ordinary—is so perfect.

I liked the reader better this time through. I think I was too critical of him last time.

May 2018 — This is one of those books I need to revisit regularly. One I'm sure I could glean more from every time. I think that I will mostly skip the first two in the he trilogy from now on and go straight here. There's so much that happens in the interim between the second and the third, none of which we're told, that this seems a whole other thing. I feel very stupid when I read it. Not so much intellectually as morally—the way Mark feels at the end. I think I have many of of his faults as well as Jane's. And less excuse for them. 

The quote near the end from "one of your modern authors" is from Charles Williams. I need to revisit him, too.

I'm not sure what should be on the covers of this series, but they always seem to go for the word "hideous" from this title and apply it liberally to all three. I'll grant that the art on the most recent edition, the illustration with the bear, is at least not ugly, but it doesn't suit. 

The reader was not terrible, but not great.