Rating: 4/5

Another male-lead Christopher Pike book I don't think I can handle this

I chose this one next in part because of the reference to it in The Star Group.

(After talking with the girl he likes, who was flirting with him):
"Mark left the campus feeling high.
The feeling did not remain. His mother was ill; she had advanced bone cancer."
That's a hell of a transition.

"He believed his infatuation with Jessa was an entity unto itself. It didn't matter that his mother's name was Jessica - that was a coincidence. There were such things."
Hahahaha help.
Only 10 pages in - maybe I haven't read all the best Pike books yet!!

My goodness an actual drug trip instead of metaphysical mumbo jumbo - this is excellent!

For some reason I wasn't actually expecting pyrokinesis. Huh. 

This is set in 2010?? Or is it set in the fuuuutureeee and he just THINKS it's 2010

Oh gosh I stopped taking notes there is literally no way to predict what direction this book will take after the first quarter.

Pike is just writing words - he had zero plan for this book and I am riveted. 

Sometimes, I think about the teachers and adults in my life who praised me for my interest in reading. I also think of the types of quotes that are like "be true to yourself!" And "do what you love!" Then I think about how much joy I take in these books and I think, maybe those quotes are wrong and adults should have made me watch more mainstream tv as a child. Because surely, this is not what people intended. Some people should not be left to develop their own taste. 

"She loved to make love in warm and ruined basements best." Wtf

WHAT was that ENDING.
Okay I didn't expect it to go in that direction, but I actually really liked it. It tied everything together super well, and gave it a truly melancholy ending with Jessa's refusal to give up her addiction for a loved one, and her selfishness in twisting him into a more broken person. Also, it was a 'this was all a dream' but it wasn't his dream. And there was a bit of a horror element in the 'maybe it's all real after all and the dream just shifted'. If it wasn't so WEIRD for a good 2/3rds this could be up there with Road to Nowhere in actually being a clever way to explore a hot topic.