Rating: 4/5

If Tolstoy were Jewish, a revolutionary, possessed a mordant sense of humor, and wrote short stories, he might resemble Isaac Babel. By that I mean the ability to see everything and everyone with great clarity, balancing equal amounts of warm sympathy and cool interest, whether for Cossack officers or Jewish villagers, villains and victims alike. 

Which isn’t to say that Babel’s masterpiece, the Red Cavalry stories are anything like Tolstoy, or even Chekhov. They are sui generis. But like Tolstoy or Chekhov, Babel never let morality or politics interfere with his writer’s compulsion to capture the violent truths that he witnessed as participant and observer of the Russian Revolution, and in particular, the 1920 military expedition into Poland. It was one of Bolshevik Russia’s first foreign forays and it ended in disaster. Red Cavalry made Babel’s reputation, but its blistering honesty also earned him powerful enemies.

Babel was a true believer in socialism and revolution, but he was first and foremost a writer, a fact that almost ordained his eventual arrest and execution by Stalin in 1939. “Babel sacrificed his life to his language,” critic Cynthia Ozick writes in the introduction. 

Babel was a master miniaturist; many of his finest stories are really vignettes — vividly etched character portraits and descriptive passages connected by a slender plot line. His prose is always striking and original. 

A description of a Cossack officer: “His long legs looked like two girls wedged to their shoulders in riding boots.”

The thoughts of a soldier after a day of defeat and retreat use words in odd but evocative ways: “The evening soared into the sky like a flock of birds and the darkness laid its wet garland upon me. I was exhausted and crouching beneath the crown of death, walked on hugging fate for the simplest ability — the ability to kill a man.”

Babel first made his reputation with his Odessa Stories, comic accounts of Jewish gangsters and family life in his native city. (Who can resist a gangster whose nickname was “Yid-and-a-Half?”) Red Cavalry possesses a dark humor as well, but what predominates are Babel’s portrayals of war’s degradation and brutality. 

He allows the basic humanity of his characters to survive, but little else. The combat often occurs in heavily populated Jewish shtetls, and Babel, who takes on the persona of a Cossack soldier in some of the stories, treats them in an alternately callous and sympathetic manner. The reflexive anti-Semitism of the Cossacks and their Polish foes can dishearten a modern reader.

Babel Is clearly testing his identity as a vanguard revolutionary at certain points, while at other times, he embraces — or at least does not reject — his Jewish identity. (In addition to Russian, Babel was fluent in French and Yiddish and never limited himself to writing purely out of a Jewish tradition.)

Babel’s later stories became longer and more personal, but the language remains fresh and striking. He also wrote plays and several screenplays, which were not produced. A vast number of manuscripts and parts of an unfinished novel disappeared after his arrest and execution.