Rating: 5/5

This is the one to read if you're reading only one. 

Spenser is an acquired taste. You have to like the formula and the archetype and not be overly concerned by the built-in limitations imposed by both. For me, when done well it's like listening to a great old song: you know what's coming but there's something irresistible about the melody. Like Ronnie "The Hawk" Hawkins might growl it out: "I put a spell on you."

At his best (not all the books), I love Spenser, the wisecracking gumshoe whose heart beats pure and who will find a way to do right by the end. He can be funny, tough, and effective, and he usually knows how to leave enough out in the telling to keep the suspense rolling. Though I've read the whole series, some were annoying and harder to finish than others. My problems usually revolve around Hawk, Spenser's alter-ego-leg-breaker-partner-in-crime, and Susan, Spenser's main squeeze. Spenser's white and Hawk's black and Hawk is the one who ends up doing the most hideous bloodwork because/so Spenser can't/won't/doesn't have to. There's something wrong with this formulation and the way it too often lets Spenser off the hooks he's been sharpening. He would be a more fascinating, complex, and compelling character if Parker really made him face the consequences of his dilemmas, each time. Susan is a psychologist and too often waxes pedantic about the whys and wherefores of the dark forces driving the wayward characters Spenser traffics in. Their relationship's a nice touch, but her heaviness of hand is not. 

But, for me, "Early Autumn" approaches art, about which I have a simple definition: 1)a thing of beauty in itself, 2)which stays with you, 3)and makes you want to return to it. All those elements are true here, and in deep ways. In art, as in life, a subtle and apparent simplicity is often the best thing and this book is a beautiful expression of that: transparent surface, roiling depths. From Robert Parker we would expect nothing less, who might as well be the bastard son of Ernest Hemingway and Raymond Chandler, so completely has he absorbed the ethos, styles, and beating hearts of both men. 

In the story Parker gets involved helping Paul, a sullen teenager being raised by selfish, rejecting, divorced parents whose only interest in him is to wound the other. Spenser becomes the boy's surrogate father, trying to help him grow up fast and survive his hellish forebears. The development of their relationship, the ways Spenser moves from wiseguy to wise man, and Paul's entirely believable growth are rendered with surpassing delicacy, subtlety, and richness of feeling. Parker rides the high wire of earned, piercing emotion without sentimentality as only the best can do.

Sometimes, when I want to feel again a certain way I reread the ending. It never fails to move me, nor to remind me of how it's done. 

That's art.