Rating: 3/5

A Laboured Poirot
A review of the William Morrow Kindle eBook (October 3, 2006) of the Collins Crime Club (September 1947) &amp; Dodd, Mead &amp; Co. (1947) original hardcovers, collecting short stories which first appeared in the Strand Magazine (1939-1940)

  “My name,” said Poirot, contriving as usual to make the simple statement sound like the curtain of the first act of a play, “my name is Hercule Poirot. . . .” 
The statement did not fail of its effect. Occasionally Poirot was distressed to find that a callous younger generation had never heard of him. But it was evident that Sheila Grant had heard of him. She was flabbergasted—dumbfounded.

In The Labors of Hercules (US spelling, otherwise known as The Labours of Hercules), detective Hercule Poirot sets himself a personal goal of solving twelve cases which would parallel the classic Greek myth of the Labours of Hercules. Instead of killing or capturing various monstrous beasts or stealing exotic treasures, Poirot has to take a few leaps in imagination in order make connections to the original mythology.

Often these connections are of a very tenuous nature such as the pairing of a dog kidnapping to the slaying of the Nemean Lion in the first story. As the stories are short, the culprit is usually easily found in the small cast of characters and the investigations are brief and usually not very exciting.

Unlike my usual practice, I could not get excited enough to do individual story ratings and synopses for this book. If you are interested in details see the Wikipedia link towards the bottom. Overall this was still a 3 rating though, it is Agatha Christie after all.

The front cover of the current 2025 William Morrow eBook. GR does not permit you to add alternate cover editions (ACEs) for Kindle eBooks for some reason. Image sourced from Amazon.

Although I thought this was a weak entry, I do otherwise continue to enjoy my 2025 re-reads and/or new reads of the classic Agatha Christie books from the 1920s through to the 1940s. Thanks to Kindle's notes function, it is especially fun to highlight favourite excerpts to use for status updates and review quotes. My full highlights are available here if you are reading outside of Goodreads.

Also, in a nice coincidence, this edition was greater than 400 pages, making it an eligible for my current Long Books Challenge with several GR Friends. So one of my comfort reads helped to meet both my Annual Challenge and LBC Targets 😊.

Soundtrack
You can listen to an extended version of the opening theme music of the long-running TV series Agatha Christie's Poirot (1989-2013) with many screenshots of actor David Suchet as the title character on a YouTube clip here.

Trivia and Links
The Labors of Hercules will not enter the public domain in the USA until 2043, 96 years after first publication in the USA. 

The Labors of Hercules was adapted as a feature length episode for the TV series Agatha Christie's Poirot (1989-2013). It was Season 13's Episode 4 in 2013 which was the second last episode overall in the series. The plots of only 5 of the Labors are incorporated in this adaptation. For details see Wikipedia (Spoilers obviously!).