Rating: 5/5

This book is one I borrowed from my local library, but is one that I will be adding to my personal collection very soon.

That said, this book is fantastic, which to be candid is what I have come to expect from Mr. Hamilton. I have read and enjoyed most of the other works he is known for such as the Commonwealth Saga and the Night's Dawn trilogy. His work tends to be like George RR Martin's work in that it is long (without being long-winded) and full of rich detail, big doings, and many, many characters. In fact, if Robert Jordan had had the skill these two authors possess, the Wheel of Time wouldn't have been so horrible, causing many people to drop out after the third or fourth book. 

I digress.

Misspent Youth is a coming of age tale set against the backdrop of sometime in the fairly near future. Characters ride around on electric motorbikes, and European society has changed somewhat drastically, politically speaking. The two main characters in the story are Tim, and his father Jeff. Jeff undergoes a brand new technological breakthrough that renders him young again. He is stuck in a machine that basically "de-ages" him from an elderly man back to his early twenties. The rest of the book following Jeff's emergence from the technological cocoon focuses on how he and his son (now only physically a few years younger than he is) Tim interact, as well as how Jeff has to learn to see the world differently now that he is vastly younger than the friends he had before when he was an old man. Trouble invariably erupts as his newly-minted hormones have him chasing every young woman around him, to include a girl that Tim had been very much in love with. Tim's reaction to their relationship forces him to do some growing and maturing of his own as he's forced to come to terms with everything that's happened to his family as a result of Jeff undergoing this procedure. To some extent, the idea of a young man with an older man's wealth, knowledge, and experience exploring a new lust for life (among other things) is the main overall plot. 

I am thirty two years old this month myself, and reading this book, and in the way it was written, really made me consider how I might feel if my own father were suddenly my age again, and we were peers instead of the normal close father and son relationship we have. How might that be different, or similar to what happens in this book?

In closing, this book is only somewhat like Hamilton's other works, because technology plays more of a backdrop rather than this overall fabric the story is weaved onto. Yes, things like computers with limitless storage capacity, electric cars, and house computers you speak to are very much in evidence. But the real story is a sort of parallel coming of age (and in Jeff's stance, a "re" coming of age) story that is very poignant and compelling.

I highly recommend this book.