Rating: 1/5

Throwing Smoke is a highly unusual allegorical tale about a mediocre middle-school baseball team struggling to confirm its group identity and figure out why they really play the game. It's fantasy mixed with large doses of reality in a style that only Bruce Brooks would dare to attempt; the story itself is innately strange in the way that it blurs the lines between the real and the imagined, but it's strange in a way that will breed curiosity in readers to discover how everything turns out by the end.

 The Breadhurst Newts are a school baseball team made up of rejects from the official team. All of the players have at least one promising skill that would make a good coach hesitate to cut them from their team, but without a wide enough range of overall baseball abilities to make keeping them around worth it in the context of a team game. The Newts formed themselves through a natural sort of "runoff" effect from the tryouts for the real Breadhurst team, but they had little success together in the season before this book begins, going winless and being soundly drubbed by opposing squads on a routine basis.

 Fooling around making vanity baseball cards in the basement of the print shop where he holds a job after school, Whiz, the team captain of the Newts, accidentally creates a new species of super-talented ballplayer for his team when he begins making baseball cards of players who don't exist; at least, they don't exist until he concocts them. Now, the Newts have the chance to become a great team; but will the introduction of these fabricated all-stars change the team dynamic and make it more of a curse than a blessing to play for the Newts? Like everyone else from the team that was originally comprised purely of castoffs, Whiz has to figure out why he really plays baseball, and whether or not winning is worth the disappointment of being continually relegated to the bench by an interloping group of made-up superstars whose baseball skills hold no apparent flaws.

 I'm still scratching my head over Throwing Smoke, not fully comprehending its deeper meaning. Still, there are some worthy thoughts to consider in these pages, so I would probably give the book one and a half stars.