Rating: 4/5

“Don’t try to beat them. It’s impossible.” Three CIA agents at very different stages of their careers engineer a wheeze to strengthen the myth of the CIA and thereby destabilise Moscow. This being 1979 things are complicated – when aren’t they? – but in David Ignatius we have an excellent guide.

“Siro” is a great read, a finely detailed depiction of humdrum spy tradecraft which is never less than gripping and terrifying in how consequential it all is. One reads “Siro” thinking how simultaneously boring and scary such work must be and by coincidence it probably helped that I’m currently watching the French TV series “The Bureau” which is similarly as far from Bond as it is possible to get and an illustration that on the ground, in the cities, not much has changed. The good news here however is that while the bulk of the work Anna and Taylor embark on is a series of meetings with very dubious types in assorted hotel rooms and bars which could of course be as dry as toast Ignatius has a real knack for great characters to keep us hooked. We follow puppyishly enthusiastic new recruit Anna Barnes – haunted by her Father and noticeably vulnerable when it comes to men and sex – going on a moral journey of her own, the more experienced and nihilistic Alan Taylor who doesn’t have any of the moral qualms Anna has and Edward Stone, an eminence grise pulling the strings who wants to see a return to the good old days of the CIA and who is slippery as an eel. Together they embark on pulling off essentially a magic trick which, in the context of the Russian invasion of Afghanistan starts to look increasingly reckless. Throughout, Ignatius manages to be personal and political at the same time – this is no mere vector for the author’s erudition or unpublished journalism, everything is in service of the story – and he even throws in some Ottoman history as a counterpoint to all the shenanigans, a reminder that the more things change the more they stay the same. It’s a great performance. 

Spy novels such as “Siro” inevitably get reviewed in the context of Le Carre but he and Ignatius are very different beasts. Le Carre always reached – pretentiously and long-windedly, some might say – for a sense of literariness in his writing while Ignatius, whose prose is perfectly fine (his description of Istanbul will make you want to visit), is no stylist at the sentence level. His writing gets out of the way of his material. Arguably Ignatius has better contacts than Le Carre thanks to his day job on the Washington Post and in terms of material Ignatius seems to pick up where Le Carre left off after the Cold War, “Siro” has the same sense of “inside baseball” as “The Spy Who Came In From The Cold” and “Tinker Tailor”. Finally, both writers are very specific products of their environments. Le Carre is good on English class politics and comes with a sense of auteurship, the working out of distant personal issues. Ignatius, in “Siro” at least, doesn’t have this which makes him a bit more accessible but less intriguing as a writer. Both men are primo storytellers and while no great devotee of airport novels, albeit very well written ones, I finished “Siro” eager to get going on the rest of Ignatius’ oeuvre. 

Better informed historians of the geopolitics of late seventies and early eighties than I will no doubt have a take on the aims of the people network depicted by Ignatius here and one notes with interest his emphasis in the end note that the whole thing is a work of fiction. Be that as it may but my discovery that Ignatius – a journalist still very much engaged in the zeitgeist – is not only a whip-smart and experienced correspondent for the Washington Post but also, damn him, rather good at the whole novel-writing business is at least some consolation after the wretched political events of 2024. “Pain is timeless.”