Rating: 5/5

This book needs to be required reading for parents everywhere. I read it with my husband and carefully applied techniques in this book to none other but ourselves first. With our behavior modified - and keep in mind, you must also want to change! - we were able to instill better discipline in our family. Our son's discipline has strengthened.

This isn't some parenting fad - this is for life. We learned the important differences between discipline and punishment; authority and power; respect and fear; excuses and accountability; and so much more that has been life changing. We learned to ask "what?" instead of "why?" with our child, instilling a sense of responsibility within. As children grow up, they should be asking, "What am I doing? Is what I am doing productive/helpful/useful/good?" instead of "Why?". We learned that asking "Why?" only teaches our children to make excuses. That's not to correlate with asking "Why is the sky blue"?, but rather, "Why did you do that?" 

Another concept we love about this book is that it is not just parent-focused first before children, but also its "one size does not fit all" discipline techniques. There are charts, contracts, agreements; a good variety of options for all children. 

One REALLY important point I want to drive home to all of those about to read this book: All that you read about and learn? To apply it takes PATIENCE and CONSISTENCY. Without both, you will fail, plain and simple. You cannot give up. Children will not hesitate to take advantage of your inconsistencies. We've learned that children are much more persistent that adults, and my goodness we couldn't believe how accurate it was in real life when it finally clicked. This book is so on-point about children that it is scary. The prediction of the way a child would react to time-out, or any other discipline technique, and how it gets worse before it gets better. No wonder so many parents give up, and this book acknowledges that. 

This book does NOT want to shame you as a parent; the author assumes you WANT to change so you can be a better parent for your children. Word of warning: This isn't going to sit well with those that hold on to the old-fashioned ways of parenting, such as yelling and spanking. This book is a REALITY CHECK. Our children are smarter than ever before. Today's children will test you, relentlessly. I can't believe that a book written in the late 90's rings so true in the year 2018. 

I will recommend this book to all my mom friends in hopes that they'll open their minds and tell them, "You're not alone. You CAN do this. You don't have to tolerate bad behavior. You're not a doormat. You can change and behave, so you children will, too!"