Rating: 5/5

‘The Lamb’s Supper’ by Dr Scott Hahn is an easy to read and an effective tool for Catholics seeking to understand more about the relevance of the Mass and its relationship with the Book of Revelation. Professor Scott Hahn in his simplistic but evocative manner has managed to not only simplify the different parts of the Mass, but also created a beginner’s manual to the last book in the New Testament which has been a source of speculation from time immemorial. I found the book to be an engaging read as well as instructive, especially to lay believers and seminarians.

Usually, Scott Hahn’s books post ‘The Lamb’s Supper’ have been penned in a sort of ‘thriller format’ leading a believer to read his theological books as if they were reading a thriller or mystery novel. However, this book has not been penned in that kind of a format and can be read as a regular but interesting book on Catholic Theology. It is no wonder the book was penned in this manner. After all, the Book of Revelation has to do with the Final Coming of Christ which is a book of reckoning which does not appeal to many readers be they believers or sceptics. Also, the book is penned in a symbolic manner which cannot be interpreted or deciphered easily. These symbols and the many wars, catastrophes, monsters, dragons, et al, rather create a sense of disillusionment in the mind of the lay reader. However, Professor Hahn manages to recreate and analyze the book as well as the world of St. John the Evangelist while penning this vivid book about the Second Coming.

He does so in the light of the fact that the Book of Revelation is nothing more or less than the very ‘Heaven on Earth’ as believers experience at a Catholic Mass. Read ‘The Lamb’s Supper’ to know more about how he does it. It is a rollercoaster ride of the intellect and faith, but can also be very instructive and informative to non-believers as well, especially Christians from other denominations who wish to know more about the Catholic Mass and why we hold a great importance to the Liturgy of the Mass.

We know as theologians and seminarians that the birth of the 20th century saw the start of three influential revival movements in the Catholic Church. The first was the Revival Movement for the importance of the Word of God or the Holy Bible in the life of the Church. Second was the revival of the writings of the Fathers of the Church and lastly, the Revival of the Liturgical Movement which was, as it were, in its ‘Golden Age’ during the Pontificate of the late Pope Benedict the XVI. It is this last movement that has spurred on Professor Scott Hahn to pen the book ‘The Lamb’s Supper’ which is yet another monumental work on the progress of the Liturgical Revival Movement and the Mission of the Catholic Church in its New Evangelization Program. How? Check the book and find out for yourself.

The book is fascinating, a great education tool, perfect for catechizing and written in a layman friendly manner. It comes these days with a study commentary published by the author himself and so one can avail of that in depth booklet as well. Certain topics discussed are the futurist version of the book of Revelation, the destruction of the Temple post 70 A.D. as per Christ’s prophecy, the Calvinist angle to the interpretation of the Mass of the Lord, the history of the Hebrew or Judaic Passover Sacrifice, the idea of the Sacraments being the living presence or ‘Parousia’ of Christ in the Catholic Church and a general analysis of the life and times of the Apostle St. John the Evangelist. 

My favorite portion in ‘The Lamb’s Supper’ was about the many ways the Book of Revelation can be interpreted. I was unaware that the Armageddon Millennium interpretations of the years preceding the year 2000 A.D was only one way of interpreting the Book of Revelation. I especially here refer to the writings of Hal Lindsey and his writings of the aforementioned book in the light of the coming of a Third World War, another Anti-Christ and a period of ‘Rapture’. It will be revelatory for the reader to know that there are several ways to interpret the last book of St. John and how even the works of Lindsey can be appreciated but on a more exclusive level rather than the inclusiveness which the book tries to represent to the reader. 

I was surprised to notice the mention of Mahatma Gandhi right at the beginning of the text for I’ve usually never seen Professor Hahn mention names of political leaders in his theological literature. It was indeed a pleasant surprise, and the reference was in connection to the topic under discussion. Truly, after reading this book which is easily available now in a hardback and paperback format, a reader’s appreciation of the value of the Catholic Mass will surely increase. More than just a service or a Bible reading program, the Catholic Mass turns out to be more than what it seems every time one steps into a Church. Read ‘The Lamb’s Supper’ to find out more about the same. 

Regarding those readers who are right now envisioning that probably the world is currently going through a period of ‘Rapture’ as is being mentioned on Evangelical television shows, OTT platforms and news channels, et al., especially whenever an Armageddon like event shakes the globe – to all of you, please read this book and get a better grip on the reality of the Second Coming or the Parousia of Christ. 

Professor Scott Hahn has proven again to be spearheading the ‘Liturgical Revival Movement’ in the Catholic Church. In the words of the late Pope Benedict XVI as he stated while still known as Cardinal Ratzinger, truly the Church is a Mystery and works with the Word of God to reveal that mystery of the Salvation of the World to others through transformation, sacrifice fellowship and communion. All this being created within and without us through the Mass and its Liturgy. 

For let us not forget (as even Scott Hahn states) that Parousia means ‘Presence’ and isn’t Christ already present with us? Then what exactly are we waiting for? Who’s coming? Find out as you read and ponder over ‘The Lamb’s Supper’. 

Professor Scott Hahn gets 5 stars from me!