Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars

When ten-year-old Devlin O’Neill witnesses his father, an Irish Rebel leader, captured with his hands bound, summarily decapitated by redcoat Lord Captain Harold Hughes, hate and a desire for revenge consume him. He makes it his life’s mission to destroy Hughes. He goes to sea in the British Navy at age 13 and becomes famous for his dazzling exploits and wealthy from the prizes he takes. At age 24, he is close to impoverishing Hughes, now Earl of Eastleigh, when he discovers the earl’s niece is onboard an American ship headed to England. If he captures this prize and ransoms her back to the Earl, the ransom will force the Earl to sell his remaining assets and have nothing left that Devlin hasn’t already taken. Devlin’s revenge for his father’s murder would be complete. 

His target, eighteen-year-old recently orphaned Virginia Hughes, is on her way to England to ask her uncle to save her beloved plantation, Sweet Briar, and has no intention of being held captive. Problematically for her, this blond Adonis pirate saves her life twice and she practically goes up in flames every time he touches her, and he’s not immune to her charms either. Devlin, however, will not be swayed by a pair of violet eyes. Only vengeance will satisfy his soul

Devlin deserves to be boiled in oil, and perverse that I am, I really enjoyed his assholiness up to the point where he forces Virginia to accompany him to his home in England and introduces her to all and sundry as his mistress. To ruin her reputation and force her to bear the brunt of censure and lasciviousness was deliberately cruel. Virginia is naive yet boldly honest, and makes no secret of her attraction to Devlin, erroneously thinking that he might come to love her. Perverse that I am, I really enjoyed her naïveté and hopefulness up to the point where she agrees to play along with being presented as his mistress in exchange for his friendship—poor, deluded child—and then things got too ugly between them for me to enjoy it anymore. That’s when the book lost one star.

It lost another star when Virginia issues an ultimatum to Devlin, asking him to choose her and their unborn child over revenge out of fear of the possibility her uncle might harm the child  he sticks to his original course, and she makes the stupidest decision on planet earth, a decision which puts herself and the baby in as much or more danger as Devlin’s course of action ever would. 

It was too long thanks to recycling the attraction/rejection scenario too many times, and logic—“I want to see another doctor” after promising to stay home—and historical accuracy—notorious mistresses invited to ton balls? Really?—went conspicuously AWOL.

Still, I wasn’t bored for a second. The desire to hit one or both main characters’ heads with a plank does tend to engage a reader and keep his or her attention.