Rating: 5/5

Horatian style satire peppered with innumerable references to Greco-Roman lore which would take a lifetime to decipher: luckily for me, ten days into this Sisyphean task I discovered Phil’s site:

http://www.ourcivilisation.com/smartb...

Aint the internet great? The reason the above site is such a treasure is not simply because it spoonfeeds the laziest reader the needful (a word usage I picked up in Sri Lanka: love it), but because it resolves the numerous dilemmas a rookie like me has whilst googling the plethora (of nouns, verbs, peoples and places). Take for instance Nereus: Folly has it fools deem themselves as handsome as Nereus. OK then, Nereus……the old man of the sea, has 50 beautiful daughters, precursor to Poseidon, yada yada yada…..no reference anywhere, but anywhere, to this ‘ancien’ ever being young or handsome: he seems to be always oldish, really, whenever he crops up. Except, apparently, according to Homer in the Odyssey, as per Phil’s site above, whereby he is the handsomest of Greeks. (but also, I think, the old man of the sea. Go figure).

I spent half a morning I think, prior to falling over Phil’s site, trying to pinpoint the story of Theophrastus stopping dumb like an ass before an oration: the more I couldn’t reference it, the more ambitious I became: the things I discovered online, I tell you, but none relating to Theophrastus (translated as divine speaker), only to find it a hypocriphical in joke in the 16 c with no attributable source. Well har-de-har.

Apropos these ‘in jokes’: its bloody damn difficult to know when Erasmus is speaking in vain and when he means it. In referencing Theuth it becomes clear he is satirizing, but what about say Nestor? Is he a good or bad counseller? A wiseman or a fool? The jury is out, so how does Erasmus mean it? 

And how does he get away with it all? Why wasn’t he hung drawn and quartered, really, not least for his ‘silenisization’(trademark: just invented this word). A small aside: did I not go barmy looing up the Sileni of Alcibiades only to find eventually that’s the title of another of Erasmus’s booklets. Erasmus is very cheeky like this: references himself at least twice in the text and promotes his other adages and what not. Back to Folly; there is definitely a meme of making the pope say a Sileni figure. So, why didn’t Pope Leo X have an apoplexy and smite and smote him? My own take on this is that Erasmus is so clever and manipulative at being Horatian rather than Juvenalian in his critique that quite, quite likely Pope Leo X probably never thought any of the references referred to him particularly: you know, it concerns some OTHER pope. 

Name dropping aside, Folly reads like a dream: Erasmus is brilliantly funny and ironical. Supposedly following in the footsteps of Greek Satirist Lucian, whom, needless to say, I haven’t read yet, but now simply must.