Rating: 3/5

No One Here Gets Out Alive probably deserves a couple more stars on this review for its place in Rock ‘n’ Roll history. After all it provided a resurrection for The Doors and Jim Morrison, as well as laying out the Morrison mythology and opening The Doors for the next generation of fans.

No One Here was written by Jerry Hopkins, who had interviewed Morrison for Rolling Stone Magazine and after Morrison’s death found himself more affected than he thought he should be, so he wrote book. During the 70’s there wasn’t much interest in Jim Morrison and/or The Doors and he couldn’t find a publisher, so Hopkins put the book away and went on to other things. That’s where Danny Sugerman enters the story or rather re-enters the picture. Sugerman was a teenager that was hanging around The Doors office so Jim Morrison hired him to answer fan mail. When he ran across Hopkins and the No One Here manuscript he asked if he could try to sell the manuscript Hopkins said “sure.” Sugerman then rewrote parts of it, some say in conjunction with Doors keyboardist Ray Manzarek as ghost writer. Then Sugerman shopped the manuscript around again until he found a sympathetic editor at Warner Books, and then in unconscious synchronicity, Francis Ford Coppola’s Apocalypse Now sparked The Doors renascence in 1979/1980.

No One Here lays out and outlines the basic mythology and legend of Jim Morrison that is still in operation today. Morrison was the first born of career Navy man and a somewhat eccentric wife, they moved all around the country as Jim’s father’s assignments changed, from San Diego to Virginia to New Mexico where at about age 5 or 6 Morrison experienced a mystical experience which deeply affected his life. On the way to New Mexico Jim’s father came upon an accident where a truckload of Indians had overturned and there were bodies and blood on the highway. Morrison felt as if at that moment the soul of a dead Indian leapt into his. Morrison also latter said that it was the first time he tasted fear because his father and mother couldn’t do anything, and his mother may have solidified the incident in Jim’s mind by trying to reassure him that it was all a dream. With all the moving around Jim became a rather shy and bookish kid, reading everything he could get his hands on. He also became a double threat at school, a smart kid and a joker who’s antics some times disturbed the class. He also started keeping journals and writing poetry. He decided to go to film school and enrolled at UCLA, not without some resistance from his father. At UCLA Morrison wrote essays on the history and theory of the cinema, and made a movie that seemed to have impressed no one except Ray Manzarek. Manzarek and Morrison seemed to have been friends at UCLA or maybe acquaintances, but Morrison was in one of Ray’s films and filled in as a guitar player (it was unplugged) when Manzarek’s band needed a guitar player to fulfill a contract. Morrison left UCLA, a lot of biographies claim Morrison dropped out of school but it was only two weeks before he was due to graduate. Morrison headed to Venice Beach and lived on a friends rooftop where he took, from all reports, a lot of LSD and wrote most of The Doors first two albums worth of songs. Jim then “ran into” Manzarek on the beach and read him Moonlight Drive and the two decided to form a band and “make a million dollars.” 
The Doors started playing together and working clubs on Sunset Boulevard until they worked their way up to The Whisky a go-go where they became the house band.. One night under a particularly large dose of LSD Morrison added the Oedipal section to The End, they were fired from The Whisky. But they also gained a recording contract from Elektra Records. Morrison went on to become one of the most provocative performers in Rock “n’ Roll creating some of the “firsts” in Rock ‘n’ Roll, such as being the first rock star arrested on-stage. In 5 years The Doors created some of the classic songs of Rock ‘n’ Roll, notably, Light My Fire, Hello, I Love You, Roadhouse Blues, L.A. Woman, Love Her Madly and Riders On The Storm. Morrison’s destructive urges took him to Paris where he died under mysterious circumstances, which No One Here tries to exploit, exaggerating the mystery surrounding the circumstances of his death. But it worked and the outlines of this myth still haunt Doors fans old and new to this day. Jim Morrison has become the iconic image of a rock star to us, even rock stars look to Morrison for their idea of a rock star.

No One Here Gets Out Alive is a good starter kit for fandom but not the definitive biography, it hedges too much on the side of idolatry. Morrison is the almost superhuman superman that can take the most amount of drugs, gets all the most beautiful women, walks on the edges of buildings without falling, we can see Morrison but the focus isn’t pulled clear enough of the outlines of legend.