Rating: 4/5

A witness, a shotgun and only 24 HRS for a tough cop to keep the brutal syndicate off the scent...

Deep in the shadow of the Caped Crusader, Riggs, his Beretta and Murtaugh were back. The year was 1989 and Apartheit still raged in South Africa, giving director Donner a vehicle to make a political statement while the two lethal weapons dodged a torrential downpour of henchmen and Krugerrands. The main rub, however, was keeping the annoying-voiced twerp Leo Getz alive, an accountant who discovered that the Afrikaaners were laundering money under cover of diplomatic immunity. Not indulging late 80s high-jinks and famously turned into a technicolor commercial for the 1968 Ford Mustang GT Fastback starring Steve McQueen, MUTE WITNESS is a solid cop thriller on its own, eschewing spectacular stunts for solid police work, building tension and a grinding, non-stop pursuit of truth, justice, and the American way.

Redirected to the 52nd Precinct after running afoul of the politically ambitious DA, Lieutenant Clancy, gets stuck with a MIDNIGHT RUN. Babysitting a West Coast criminal who's come all the way from Los Angeles to go up before the New York State Crime Commission a few days hence. Looking to use this case as a stepping stone, the DA and the good Lt. are far from having butted heads for the last time. Clancy is a tired cop in a faded blue suit and only has to marshal his team to keep the perp alive over the weekend, 24 hours at the most. This, of course, doesn't happen and that's not a spoiler, but the gateway to a much larger story. In a twist on the classic "give me 24hrs to solve this", MUTE WITNESS goes on a slight WEEKEND AT BERNIES bender, priming the DA as the immovable object to Clancy's unstoppable force. The dead and the dead tired pose as the main tenets of the narrative, making Lt. Clancy a less silver-screen-type cop, though undeniably real and relatable. Forced to face the music, which is apt to be pretty much off-key, Clancy and his crew are certainly up against it. And with the Syndicate entering the picture, they haven't got a prayer.
 
As hard-boiled as 1960s crime pulp novels get, MUTE WITNESS doles out a lot of facts, too many for the cops working the case, and they're going over it with a fine-tooth comb. Meddling through everything, Clancy and his posse present a realistic police procedural in absence of modern CSI-style tech and telephones, often running into proverbial brick walls and dry holes in their investigation. "Smoke 'em if you got 'em" and they do. With enough nicotine to give anyone lung spots, MUTE WITNESS nonetheless reads like a well-written episode of KOJACK, the running joke being that Clancy keeps yelling for two of his cops just the way good 'ol Theo did for Saperstein &amp; Stavros. Projecting that neatness is for businessmen and that when a man's too far into a hole the only way out is through the other end, MUTE WITNESS does just that for Clancy. Turning into a one man force he faces a slimy DA, corruption, crime, the system. In the biggest case of his life. One man. One will. Alone against the syndicate.