Rating: 4/5

Theroux’s non-fiction books can scarcely be classified as travel books. They are not tourist guides, not for those planning to travel to the countries Theroux visits. The places he visits are not the places tourists visit. He is there for the ride. He is there to observe the people, just ordinary people. What he delivers are his personal thoughts on what he sees and the people he meets. Particularly this book, is more about the act of traveling rather than the places visited. We peek into Theroux’s head. I would say this book is as much or even more about Theroux than the places visited. No, that is wrong, you learn both about the author and about places. You learn about the countries, the mentality of the people living there and the feel of the land. 

He travels without credit cards, without a camera or a tape recorder. He listens to people, ordinary people he meets along the way. During the off hours along the route, he transcribes from his notes what these people have said and what he has seen. He expresses himself wonderfully. It is his ability to capture in words his impressions that makes the book special. There is humor, often ironical in tone. The people he meets, I think, have to make you chuckle……but maybe not! He expresses his views, many of which I share. Maybe, if you do not share his views--on literature, on art, on politics, on colonialism, on race, on gender issues—then maybe the book is not going to say much to you as it did to me. You may then see Theroux as simply a cranky, whiny American traveler. If you agree with his views, you will smile and nod your head and marvel at his ability to capture in words landscapes and scenes and people’s behavior and things you have yourself thought but lack the ability to express with his lucidity.

On this journey he hops on the subway commuter train from his home in Massachusetts, along with all the others going off to work. Theroux, he is off to Esquel, Patagonia, Argentina. He will be traveling by train, pretty much all the way, that being the whole idea of the trip, to travel from northern North America to southern South America on one long continuous train trip. Small sections are done by boat, bus and air, when the train was out of the question. All advised him against such a crazy endeavor, but no one stole from him as everyone warned and in fact no real calamity ever befell him. Sure, he got a cut on his hand, that would not stop bleeding, and altitude sickness, but this had to be expected given the mountains traversed, and there were endless hours of waiting and delays and food that the mere thought of makes you gag. But he did it, the whole trip from north to south, and he made it in one piece! That is quite an achievement. 

The reward? The memories of what he saw and the people he met. He met people and saw places and ruminates about what it all means. This is what he gives back to us. Thank you, Theroux. I appreciate your gift.

He travels two to three months in the year 1978. He leaves the snow and cold up in the north, arriving in the dusty desert and plateau lands in Patagonia. He travels on Amtrak through the US, continuing through Mexico, Central America (Guatemala, El Salvador, Costa Rica up and Panama), through Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and finally into Argentina. Down to Buenos Aires where he met up with Jorge Luis Borges. The two could not stop talking; day after day they had to meet again and talk and talk some more. But the trip had to be continued, so off Theroux goes, off further south to the endpoint destination, Esquel, Patagonia, the end of the rail. 

We go to a soccer match in San Salvador. We talk with a woman who has been duped; she thinks she is in love with a guy who has TB and to whom she has given a large sum of money. She also owns parts of slums! The people, the people the strange people we meet! Oh, Mr.Thornberry, he is seventy-one, from New Hampshire. His one word sentences and his ever observant eye catching the “pipeline” must make everyone laugh. 

Theroux travels to places people do not go to, avoiding large cities as much as possible. He gives lectures along the way. He tells others he is a geography teacher, but Theroux is not just a geography teacher. He knows books and he has seen so much of the world and he has taken the time to think about what he has seen and what he has read.

Political events of the time are interwoven; these being the things people he meets talk of. Although Nicaragua is not traveled through, borders were closed, all spoke of the Civil War and the corruption, the atrocities taking place there. The Treaty with Panama concerning its take over of the Canal Zone was in the process of being ratified. History is covered; the past and the present interlaced. Bolivar is discussed. Colombian drug wars. Mountain passes are taken and the stoical, good-tempered, noncomplaining people who live there are met. We pass over a gorge, in a rickety train with loose doors and no windowpanes; we look down at the birds flying below! After the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire in the 16th century, Quechua, the ancient language of the Incas, is still spoken by the indigenous people. Theroux talks to them, but in Spanish of course. In Peru, train strikes threaten and occur, and government mismanagement is spoken of. Between Argentina and Chile,the Beagle border conflict, a dispute over the possession of the Lennox, Picton and Nueva islands, brought the countries to the brink of war. This too was in 1978.

Theroux reads books. He reads them constantly. He almost always has a book in his hand. He shares what he is reading with us. He shares his thoughts, both positive and negative, on The Life of Samuel Johnson by James Boswell. on The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket by Edgar Allan Poe and the works of Rudyard Kipling and Jack London and Mark Twain, poetry too, for example by John Donne. Both Borges and Theroux praise Thomas Hardy’s poems over his novels. When Jorge Luis Borges and Theroux get talking about books, it is a unique experience to listen in on. What they say to each other is straightforward, blatant and honest. The energy, the spark in their conversations is electric. Borges is seventy-nine years old and he is blind. Theroux reads to him; Borges recites complete verses from Kipling. 

The audiobook narration by Norman Dietz is very, very good. I settled on four stars but was even considering five. He captures well the irony in the Theroux’s humor. He pauses right when he should. The speed is perfect. He renders different dialects well. For example, when Theroux meets up with a priest from Belfast, you hear that is where he is from. The Spanish speakers do sound a bit all the same; this is why I have given the audio performance four rather than five stars.

I highly recommend this book.

************************

*Deep South: Four Seasons on Back Roads 4 stars
*The Old Patagonian Express: By Train Through the Americas 4 stars
*Ghost Train to the Eastern Star 4 stars
*The Last Train to Zona Verde: My Ultimate African Safari 4 stars

Next, I will try a book of fiction by Theroux. The Mosquito Coast seems appropriate. Given what he knows about the people and places in Central America, I am curious to see the story he will draw and the words he will use to tell it.