Rating: 3/5

I have read a ton on divorce… secular sacred… sacred that sounds secular… Gordon Wehman – almost a decade and a half ago – first convinced me of the biblical (and ecclesiastical) necessity of the permanence of marriage. It didn’t take much really – he used the bible and the church fathers.
In a time when commentaries are the sizes of tomes and at that produced in mass, anyone can spin the words of Christ or Paul (or even Moses) to say what they need. 
For the record John Murray, Jay Adams, Gordon Fee, etc. – despite being ‘conservative’ make me – literally (in the literal sense of the word literal, since it is so rarely used in that sense anymore) sick and I think that these men that loom so important and tall in Western Christendom fell when they decided to weigh in and comment on divorce and remarriage… they capitulated… they failed… and I say that as a failure myself. 
Protestants proclaim Sola Scriptura; then spend 45 minutes each Sunday and in their publication campaigns explaining away what Scripture says so clearly. 
The best book I have read – from a practical standpoint – hands-down is Andrew Cornes’ _Divorce and Remarriage: Biblical Principles and Pastoral Practice_. First published in ’93 by Eerdmans and again reprinted by Christian Focus in 2012. It’s a bit “big”, but not hard or heavy. Well divorce IS heavy, but it’s not overly academic or inaccessible. Perhaps a bit dated with stats and when he says solicitor he means lawyer, but other than that this book has few peers if any. So incredibly spot on, sooo incredibly pastoral. Great stuff!
Another book I would call your attention to is Bromiley’s little book (circa 80ish?). Now some of you may not like Bromiley, he translated a lot of German ‘heretics’ into English – but I think he makes a BRILLIANT case for the Trinitarain reality and covenantal continuity (Christ and his people and all that) in both Old and New Testaments being that of marital permanency. Now – Jeremiah 3 is admittedly a hard passage. But God sends mixed messages at best and only deals with some of Israel AND it all needs to be weighed in the light of Hosea. Yes, I am a STRONG supercessionist (at least for the time being)… but ALL of the marriages in the Old Testament sucked. ALL OF THEM!
Overstating my case? I’ll put the burden of proof on you.
From where I sit, Israel very much played the whore… and within the patriarchs, the stalwarts of faith, we have polygamy, adultery, flat out literal marriage to a whore and so on… ALL THAT NEVER END IN DIVORCE. The men and women of faith fought through. They endured. When the experienced estrangement or separation, they emulated Christ and waited for their spouses fidelity to renew. 
And how about the church… how faithful is she on a daily basis? For that matter, as member of the body of Christ, leaving aside your relationship with your spouse, how faithful are you to him(?!) on a daily basis?
Thanks be to God – for our own salvation’s sake and the salvation of our progeny – that he does not execute divorce on his unfaithful bride.