Rating: 5/5

This book is based off of an old folk verse. Told with vibrant illustrations, it tells the story of the construction of a cannon. Each soldier has something different to contribute, which intertwines a beautiful lesson of social-emotional learning, history, and poetry. The story starts off small and gradually builds to convey a bigger picture. 

“General Border
Gave the order,
Major Scott
Brought the shot,
Captain Bammer
Brought the rammer,
Sergeant Chowder
Brought the powder,
Corporal Farrell
Brought the barrel,
Private Parriage
Brought the carriage,
But Drummer Hoff fired it off.” 

I think this book would be perfect for a reading or writing workshop, because it takes various components and adds them to the existing story – an important element of writing in general. This idea is presented in a way that seems somewhat simplified as the reader must do most of the interpreting and thinking. Digging for a deeper meaning provides the audience to think more critically to develop a more in-depth understanding of the author’s message he is trying to convey. This text could be used for different purposes: to discuss poetic writing and other literary elements; as a mentor text for intertwining history into your writing; to learn about this period of history; or to convey the social-emotional type lesson that everyone has something unique to offer to an overall production… Everyone has a gift that is to be valued. 

My favorite part of the story is the illustrations, as their bright colors and details make it even more memorable. The first time I read “Drummer Hoff,” I knew it’s poetic and historical writing style would be appreciated by all. After all, it did win a Caldecott Metal! I was reassured that younger audiences would also swoon when my fourth grade reading partner expressed his excitement after reading it. He was exposed to a new literary style and both of us were ecstatic about the new possibilities of his writing. In fact, we were so inspired that we immediately went to his writer’s journal to update one of his latest poems. It brings something new to the typical classroom read alouds, as it truly is unique. The illustrations, characters, writing style, and plot are unlike everything I have read before which is why I find it brilliant.