Rating: 4/5

Actually, I really liked this one. Michelle Reid is able to invoke passion and angst in her stories that many writers struggle to convey. I read/skimmed reviews for this one, and there are many reasons (valid) that readers were not able to embrace it. I am actually going to do a different type of review then usual, and instead of focusing on an overview or plot(because there are already great reviews for that) I am going to talk about things that struck me. 

This story, as other reviewers pointed out, has a somewhat historical/regency vibe to it although it is clearly written in modern times. Whilst reading it, I couldn’t help but conjure up situations from a Jane Austen book(no I am not saying this is of the same caliber). But I feel like MR mashed a lot of things in here that were taken from previously written stories, movies, etc and put her own spin on it. So they don’t actually resemble the original works, but they make you think of the original works. 

For example: 
*The heroine having to tamp down who she is to fit some sort of expectation, therefore losing sight of who she is and therefore leading a less fulfilling life(I have definitely seen this theme played out in movies and books, and can’t help but think when Emma was playing matchmaker for Harriet changing her for the “better” and Harriet just wanted to be the less affluent farmer’s wife.   
*Families in a feud over their loyalty to their children. (OF course the quintessential feuding family of all time are the Capulets and Montagues) Again, I am not saying this compares to Shakespeare, it just conjured it up for me due to the feuding and meddling.  
*An abandoned house that had seen better days and just needs new tenants to make it shine again(It’s a wonderful life with Jimmy Stewart and Donna Reed)  
*Slapping and spanking is straight out of a black and white movie with a Humphrey Bogart, James Cagney, Clark Gable, Elizabeth Taylor, Vivian Leigh feel to it. Ok, so as a woman in living in 2022 I am probably supposed to be outraged at this but alas I am not reading HP’s for character building and I will never reference one to use in the discussion of violence in media. There are enough movies, tvs, video games, and internet websites I can refer to instead.  

Things I liked or disliked or just have to comment on.

Heroine: 18 year old, somewhat immature at times impetuous, but full of life. She has fun and MR does a nice job capturing her passionate nature and the war she has within herself to tamp down her natural inclinations as she gets older. (All of 22) She is going to be the fun mom of all the kids friends. 

Hero:for a 28 year old he made some really immature moves that were all spurned from his own insecurities that were perpetuated by those around him. For example the comment he made that spurned the mutual slapping incident: 
 “He’d been teasing her mercilessly all evening about a lovely blonde creature he’d spied across the room, mocking, taunting, downright provoking about how he’d like to put his shoes under her bed,”

 HELLOOO, you do know you are talking to your fiance and not the boys down at the pub right???
My take on this after reading more about the H, is that I think he kept pushing at the h to make sure she really wanted him for him and not just because they made a great match according to the family. He was also hung up on the fact that he was much older, and she hadn’t had a lot of experience in life yet. By 32, the 4 year separation let him reflect on his own mistakes, and he actually tells the h that she was young, but what was his excuse? 
 
Overall, the hero and heroine were passionately in love with each other. They were celibate during the separation. There were no vicious family members or ow’s and om’s. The one ow that showed up in the story was for the h’s benefit and her om was just a really supportive friend that you would want in your corner. He also liked to set the H on his toes. The H makes a huge romantic gesture for the h that was months in the making, so I believe he must have had plans to get her back or he just knew that she would be in England for her stepsisters wedding. I believe he had been biding his time, even though he was taking a chance. I also really liked how MR put in lots of time with the H and h being together in the story and she gave a really satisfying ending that came with a surprise! (Don’t read the last chapter of the book first if you want the surprise) One final comparison, he was a little like a Darcy to her Bridgett.