Rating: 4/5

I have a lot of thoughts on this book. Randee Hollis a young woman who is left with bitter rage and a need for revenge after her Aunt and Uncle are killed by the infamous Epson gang. After running away from her home to escape her stepfather, Randee is finally done running from her past. In order to avenge the deaths of her loved ones, Randee puts out a search for a gunslinger who can help her put a stop to the Epson gang once and for all. Randee isn’t your average prairie woman, she can hunt, shoot and ride better than any man. And she wants nothing more than to be the one to enact justice on the group that wronged her. Marsh Logan is a man under many identities. His line of work has left him to be one of the most skilled gunman in the west. But above all he has a burning hatred for the Epson gang after they murdered his family. When Marsh reads about Randee’s inquiry for a partner he has no idea of the tantalizing woman who stands behind the offer. Together the two of them must work to stop the gang and get to the bottom of the criminals motives. However along the journey they discover the deep passion they feel for one another and realize their partnership maybe far more than platonic. 

Listen. This book could’ve been so much better. I loved the storyline. A cowboy and a lady traveling together by horseback through the west?? Sign me up. It had all the elements to be great, especially the forced proximity that the plot created. However I did find the book lacking in a lot of ways. For starters it easily could’ve been 200 pages not 500. While I appreciated the long dialogue and extremely detailed plot line I found myself absolutely bored. After the first 100 pages it was a real challenge to persuade myself to finish it. And I really wanted to finish it! I mean I loved both Randee and Marsh, they were fantastic characters with depth and a sense of realism about them. The extended dialogues really painted a picture of who they were as people. But for about the next 300 or so pages I was unfathomably bored. Randee and Marsh would do the same things every chapter: Set up camp, compliment each other on their skills, make love, go to bed. AND DONT GET ME WRONG I usually like low conflict books but come on. Randee and Marsh had the healthiest communication I’ve ever seen from two characters in a historical fiction and it was WRONG LOL. Any time either character had a single thought that seemed like it could inspire a conflict down the line, they squashed that within the next few lines of dialogue. And while that made for a mighty stable relationship, it also made for a rather unexciting novel. The real action of the book takes place within the first 100 pages and the last 100 pages. Anything between then can be edited down greatly. While I have been complaining about the length of the book itself, it did tie up EVERY SINGLE loose end. Like any imaginable unresolved plot point was solved by the end. Also great plot twist, truly didn’t expect it. Which I would consider a positive. I like that Randee is a bad ass, and I enjoyed her being the main rescuer of the book as opposed to Marsh. So in conclusion while I liked the setting of the story and the idea of the plot, the execution could have been much better. I would recommend a shorter version of the story and slightly more conflict filtered throughout the book instead of just at the beginning and very end. It’s difficult to rate this because there are a lot of things I really enjoyed but when I have trouble picking up a book that usually is not a good sign. So…4 stars.