Rating: 3/5

Bernard Fall's study is considered a brilliant secondary source on the Battle of Dien Bien Phu. Compared to other books about the battle I have read, however, this one failed to impress with anything beyond glib storytelling. 

Fall expands on two main questions: Why did France herself provide not her armed forces at Dien Bien Phu with adequate support? and Why did the United States, knowing full well what was at stake, fail to provide that lacking support? Not that these questions are inappropriate – they are important. However, they are quite self-explanatory, and had Fall posed to think about the issue discussed for longer, he would not have needed to provide long-winded explanations.

Why did not the French send help to their garrison in the valley? The post-WWII recovery of France was slow, especially its economic recovery. Since 1944, its government had begun to hope that it would be able to get its prized colony of Indochina back and reclaim for France a prominent role in the Far East. But instead of recovering their colony, on which they relied for their country's industrial recovery, the French ended up fighting a long, bitter war with it. In 1946, when hostilities broke out, France was already exhausted. Its military capacity depended on the amount of aid provided by the Truman administration. After Truman was succeeded by Eisenhower, who was not as eager to throw American support behind his anti-Communist allies' imperialist ventures in the Third World, the French situation turned even less sunny. They had entertained hopes of potential US intervention in case of an emergency, but the new President did not make his intentions certain. By 1954, the French were exhausted and no closer to prevailing over the Viet Minh than in 1946. Even if they had had any substantial resources, many in the government did not saw the point of deploying them – especially in the face of increasing opposition from the French public. Furthermore, the French were not aware that the Viet Minh had indeed went all-out at Dien Bien Phu; that Ho was using all his forces and the outcome of the battle could make or mar his cause, so the French did not know the full significance of achieving victory there. In a war against elusive guerrillas, all their previous victorious had amounted to nothing. 

All in all, it was economically impossible and politically unwise for the French government to pour resources and men into the Battle of Dien Bien Phu. That's it – explained in one paragraph. 

Now let's analyze why it was that Eisenhower did not risk American lives to secure the continuation of French colonialism in Indochina. 

A firm believer in the domino theory, Ike Eisenhower did view Southeast Asia as an area of high geostrategic importance where one Communist victory could lead to many others. He was especially concerned about Malaya and Indonesia, believing that the loss of either country would jeopardize the island defense chain, cause the fall of the whole region, and force Japan to seek alliances with the Communists. On these points, Eisenhower was in agreement with his predecessor. He believed that the United States had to hold the line in Southeast Asia, specifically in Malaya because it was separated from the Chinese and Vietnamese Communists by one thousand miles of rugged territory, and it had only a small land border to defend. 

However, Eisenhower was more cautious than Truman when deploying American aid and military resources, especially in the Third World. He was less inclined to entangle his country in peripheral areas where Americans would fight from a disadvantageous position. He also relied less heavily on conventional forces than did Truman, preferring instead to use the threat of “massive retaliation” via nuclear warfare to contain Communism. That strategy allowed the Eisenhower administration to reduce military spending, which he hoped would boost domestic economic development and ultimately lead to victory in the Cold War.

While Eisenhower thought that Indochina was worth saving if the American government could save it by sending additional military aid or employing more of its air power, he did not consider the former French colony valuable enough to either warrant sending American combat troops or to threaten China with nuclear devastation for it. He was willing to let Indochina fall even though he knew the United States would lose strategically valuable territory and antagonize France because he knew that brandishing nuclear weapons at the Chinese was significantly more risky. Furthermore, from his estimations, Eisenhower concluded that the state of affairs in Indochina favored France's enemies. The President was discouraged by French inability to muster a strong local  force in Vietnam, which was essential for victory. By the time of the Battle of Dien Bien Phu, he, like most in the West, was not aware that the French and their Vietnamese allies had just as big as a chance to win the battle as the Viet Minh. Referring to the use of American troops in Indochina, Eisenhower exclaimed, “I cannot tell you how bitterly opposed I am to such a course of action. This war in Indochina would absorb our troops by divisions!”

All of the aforementioned concisely explains the American policy-makers's decision, despite their knowledge of "what was at stake", to not send combat troops to faraway Indochina in 1954. 

The second reason why I was unimpressed by Bernard Fall's work is his profound fascination with "might-have-beens." There is no such thing as a "might-have-been" in historical non-fiction; it belongs to the world of historical novels. Recently, I saw an adventure story about a samurai fighting alongside a British knight and two Venetian seamen in the War of the Roses. Now that is a fascinating "might-have-been"! Indeed, what might have happened if a samurai army participated in a 15th-century British civil war? I would like to read such a study. But I would not vouch for its realism and historical accuracy. The same goes for Fall's "might-have-beens," to which he dedicates more of his analytical powers than necessary in my opinion. 

Generally, HELL IN A VERY SMALL PLACE fails to deliver in terms of insight and thoroughness. The author's writing is engaging, but the content does not match it. I do not recommend this book to anyone interested in studying the Battle of Dien Bien Phu well.