Rating: 5/5

What an incredible piece of thriller fiction! Just when one despairs and is forced to think that nothing worth reading would come out in the tired thriller/suspense genre, along comes this beauty. The premise is simple: six-year-old twin boys are kidnapped without a trace. Their parents, grieving and shocked, grow distant from each other. The father, a media journalist, decides to launch an investigation of his own when the police investigation comes to a dead end. 

Even before I'd finished the first ten pages of the novel, I was hooked. The story moved along at a great pace which never slacked till the very end, which was a remarkable feat for a 400-plus page novel, made even more remarkable by the fact that, despite the breakneck pacing of the narrative, the author covered every possible angle of the abduction and the ensuing police procedural part of the book. Crisp prose, a richly drawn cast of characters (even the peripheral ones were delightfully oddball), the author's human touch with which he handled his characters as well as the crime at the center of the story, and delicious asides into such wonderful sub-cultures as origami, stage illusions, and voodoo, make for a stunning read. 

Intricately plotted, full of genuine good old detective leg work as well as occasional penetrating insights leading to the next clue, and told in such a credible voice as to render even the more outlandish parts of the book within reason, the story sweeps the reader along on a ride which is full of wonderfully disturbing, blood-curdingly harrowing, mouth-dryingly suspenseful, and genuinely entertaining turns and twists. 

This is a superlative example of the thriller genre. My only quibble was that, at the end, the confrontation with the bad guy was much too short, but then again, it was in line with the rest of the book where the author never lingered over a scene even a moment longer than required, thus, never losing the pace or the interest of his readers. 

I am going to dig up more of John Case in the near future. I am disappointed that the book has ended. It would take a while and a lot of luck to find an equally entertaining book sometime soon.