Rating: 5/5

“Hitler’s Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the Holocaust” by Daniel Jonah Goldhagen is a richly detailed and provocative history of the Holocaust. The book strives to explain why this genocide happened where and when it did. I remember that the book was controversial when it came out in 1996, and when I finally read it, I can see why.
	Goldhagen’s book tries to rebut popular misconceptions about the mass extermination of Jews in Nazi-held territory: that the killing of Jews was done only by SS officers and Nazi Party members, that most Germans of the time knew nothing about the concentration camps, that perpetrators of the murders were only following orders and would have been killed if they disobeyed, and that only a small minority of Germans in the early 20th century were antisemitic. 
	“Hundreds of thousands of German contributed to the genocide and the still larger system of subjugation that was the vast concentration camp system,” Goldhagen writes. “Despite the regime’s half-hearted attempts to keep the genocide beyond the view of most Germans, millions knew of the mass slaughter.”
	Goldhagen convincingly points out that antisemitism had a long history in Christian Europe and was strong in what in 1871 became Germany. “European antisemitism is a corollary of Christianity. From the earliest days of Christianity’s consolidation of its hold over the Roman Empire, its leaders preached against Jews, employing explicit, powerfully worded, emotionally charged condemnations.”
	This widespread antisemitism in Germany and, to be fair, almost all European countries in the early 20th century was amplified by the Nazis when they came to power in 1933. The Nazi Party was obsessively antisemitic from its start in 1919, and Hitler’s “Mein Kampf” exhibited hatred of the Jews and a determination to make Germany free of them, one way or another.
	No evidence has been produced, Goldhagen writes, that any German soldier was killed or sent to a concentration for refusing to execute Jews. He also writes that the claim that German soldiers blindly obeyed orders in general is false. In many cases, German military people of all ranks disobeyed orders they thought illegitimate, and a number of Germans, including top officers of the Wehrmacht, conspired to kill Hitler.
	Goldhagen condemns the failure of Christian churches and their leaders in Germany, with few exceptions, to oppose the Nazis and the murdering of innocent Jews. “The moral bankruptcy of the German churches, Protestant and Catholic alike, regarding Jews was so extensive and abject that it warrants far more attention than can be devoted to it here.”
	Most Protestant and Catholic churches, despite some private dissent of the Nazi’s doctrine about the Jews, were publicly antisemitic, Goldhagen writes.
	He readily admits that other countries in Europe and elsewhere had populations that were antisemitic. But in Germany it was worse. Antisemitism was not popular in Italy and not originally part of Benito Mussolini’s Fascist government, Goldhagen writes. Even when Mussolini was forced to accede to Germans’ demands against Jews, “Italians, even the Italian military, by and large disobeyed Mussolini’s orders for the deportation of Jews to what they knew would have been death at the Germans’ hands.” 
	Antisemitism could be found – and can be found – in many area of the world, including the Middle East and the U.S. But a few nations were worse than others. “The most important national groups who aided the Germans in slaughtering Jews were the Ukrainians, Latvians, and Lithuanians, about whom two things can be said. They came from cultures that were profoundly antisemitic.”
	One aspect of antisemitism and the resulting obsession with murdering Jews is how illogical and fantastical these beliefs were from start to end. This might seem a mystery except that we must understand that bigotry by its very nature is illogical, a hatred that is a matter of faith not of evidence.
	“All antisemitism is fundamentally ‘abstract,’ in the sense of not being derived from actual qualities of Jews, yet simultaneously is real and concrete in its effects.”
	Goldhagen continues: “Christians’ antisemitism was not based on any familiarity with real Jews. It could not have been. Similarly, most virulent antisemites in German during Weimar and during the Nazi period probably had little or no contact with Jews. Entire areas of Germany were practically without Jews, since Jews formed less than 1 percent of the German population and 70 percent of this small percentage lived in large urban areas.”
	There were 525,000 Jews living in Germany in January 1933, a small part of the total population of Germany of 67 million. Almost 130,000 emigrated in the next five years. During 1938-39, 118,000 more Jews emigrated. After WWII began, 30,000 more left. The Nazis had forced over half of the Jews of Germany to leave, usually having to forfeit all their property and belongings.
	The Nazis believed and persuaded many Germans that Jews were a threat to the Fatherland, despite their small numbers and limited political and economic power. The Jews were accused – again, illogically – of being the founders of both capitalism and communism.
	The ideological obsession of the Nazis to destroy Jews was self-destructive. During World War II, Jews were murdered and mostly not put to work in war plants despite a labor shortage, and the Holocaust effort diverted valuable resources from the war effort. “The destruction of the Jews, once it had become achievable, took priority even over safeguarding Nazism’s very existence.”
	The Wannsee Conference of Jan. 20, 1942, directed by Reinhard Heydrich, came up with a grandiose master plan for “The Final Solution” against the 11 million Jews in countries from Portugal to the Soviet Union and Ireland to Turkey. Many of the countries were not in German control but presumably, to the conference attendees, would be.
	The book includes a map of Europe with totals of the number of Jews killed during the Holocaust. Most Jews were not killed in Germany but German-occupied countries. The most Jews killed were in Poland (2.9 million), Soviet Union (1 million), and Hungary (550,000). In Germany, 134,500 Jews were killed. Only 60 Jews were killed in Denmark.
	Mere statistics can numb one’s comprehension of this horror and mute empathy for the victims of this genocide or any genocide. Fortunately the author spends many pages detailing individual stories of the perpetrators and victims during the 1930s and 1940s in Germany and German-held territories. These stories are difficult to read.
	Several people attacked “Hitler’s Willing Executioners” after its publication as being anti-German. I think the more relevant question is whether Goldhagen’s book is accurate and fair. If the book is indeed (almost or entirely) accurate and fair, then that charge is meaningless.
	The book was produced from Goldhagen’s doctoral dissertation. He mostly avoids the worst of dense, jargon-filled academic prose, but the book still can be dense in places and at times he uses big words where smaller ones would do. For instance, why did Goldhagen use the word “voluntaristic” repeatedly instead of “voluntary.”
	A more important criticism is great repetition of argument throughout the book, not just once or twice but dozens of times. A statement is made on one page, then again three pages on, then 50 pages later, etc. 
	The 622-page book includes an index and 126 pages of notes, but no bibliography. I would have liked to have seen a bibliography, to be able to compile a list of books I might want to read later on. A lack of bibliography made this task a little more difficult.
	Overall, I thought the book well-researched and illuminating, providing gruesome details of the Nazi evil drive to eliminate Jews and other people. The book is also thought-provoking, lingering in my mind for weeks after I finished it. I hope to read related books in future years to see how Goldhagen’s assertions have stood the test of time.