Rating: 4/5

‘Why does Zeus send prodigies to earth? For the same reason He makes a comet streak across the sky. To show not what has been done, but what can be.’

Back in the 1980s I read Robin Lane Fox’s biography of Alexander the Great. It was non-fiction, but the story of Alexander’s life was told so dramatically that the book became one of my favourites. Steven Pressfield’s fictionalised biography is another tremendously good read. Alexander’s life was so dramatic that it’s probably very difficult to re-tell it in boring fashion; although, to wander away a bit from this book review, I would have to say that the 2004 movie made a good fist of doing so.

We will never know the truth of Alexader’s inner thoughts, but Pressfield has given us a portrayal, based on the man’s actions and on what those who knew him said. Up to the Battle of Gaugamela he is portrayed in this novel as a hero – a driven man to be sure – but as someone whose attack on Persia was motivated not just by ambition but also by righteous anger at the earlier Persian attack on the Greek homeland. The chapters featuring the 3 great battles, The Granicus; Issus; and Gaugamela; are stirringly related. I found them exciting even though I knew the outcomes!

After Gaugamela things become more complicated. Alexander finds that ruling an empire is much more difficult than simply conquering it.

‘We are like the snake that swallowed the elephant. We have won this prize, so great we choke upon it. It overwhelms us, even as we claim it as our own.’

His rule starts to lean towards tyranny, and always he must be conquering, invading the lands of India and attacking rulers who have never done him harm. The world itself would not have been enough.

In the novel Alexander is portrayed as subject to his daimon, a sort of inner force that he cannot control – it controls him. Towards the end a Greek dramatist remarks:

‘Tragedy is the arrest of a man by his own nature. He is blind to it. He cannot transcend it. If he could, it would not be tragedy.’

An excellent, unpretentious, read.