Rating: 3/5

I don’t really think that Ishiguro’s talent is something that is up for debate. He’s got “it”, whatever “it” is. I also think that he is one of the authors that inspires me the most – reading his books, I am flooded with ideas for short stories and novels, however unlikely I may be to actually put pen to paper. That being said, Ishiguro is also human. Like other humans that also happen to be authors (I think that’s pretty near 100% of them), Ishiguro has a few recurring themes. The excavation of memory is one of the main ones, but I think that the slow approach toward unresolved trauma is another. In exploring these themes, sometimes by themselves and sometimes mixed together, he has a few tried and true basic plot structures. I have found that the structure he employs in Klara and the Sun and When We Were Orphans is easily at the bottom of the list in terms of its attractiveness. The reader immediately knows the approximate whereabouts of the end of the story, and we are forced to sit with the narrator as he or she figures it out. There isn’t much of a payoff.

I speak of payoff, but you may also tell me that the payoff is not the final goal for many books. The journey is. Fair enough. With this one, even the journey is arduous. Seemingly important characters are whipped in and out of the narrative. If I have to naively put myself in Ishiguro’s place, I would bet that he had 3-4 really exciting ideas about the overall themes (romantic love, parental affiliation, emigration/home, belonging) and he got carried away in trying to integrate them all in a coherent narrative. It still works, but just barely. My least favourite book of his so far, I believe. However, I cannot with good will give it anything less than a 3, because you could blindfold and tie up Ishiguro, wake him out of a drunken stupor, and he would dictate better than the majority of the authors out there today. It is a low 3, but for what I consider to be his “miss”, I don’t think that’s too bad.