Rating: 3/5

Dag Hjalmar Agne Carl Hammarskjöld was the second Secretary-General of the United Nations. He served from 1953 until his untimely death in a plane crash en route to negotiaions in 1961. He was the youngest person to have served in this post and one of only four people to have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize posthumously. He appears to have been a popular and respected diplomat. 
 
He kept a sheaf of jottings, aphorisms, and reflections, starting aged 20 until he died. After his death, these notes were translated and published as "Waymarks", or as in this edition, "Markings". This translation of the Swedish word "Vägmärken" is instructive. The word can mean roadsigns or the markings left by animals: a suggestion of of a route that has been taken, rather than a definitive map. 

It was this absence of narrative that I had a problem with. The form of the book is based on haikus and short paragraphs. There is an indication of year but there is no sense of a journey through life. The passages I enjoyed the most were clear and instructive:

"Concering men and their way to peace and concord -? It is more important to understand the motives for your own behaviour than the motives of another. 
The other's "face" is more important than your own. 
If while pleading another's cause you are at the same time seeking something for yourself, you cannot hope to succeed."

Other passages are more obscure. 

"What must come to pass, should come to pass. Within the limits of that "must" you are therefore invulnerable."

Reflections on his faith become more prominent as time goes on:

"Your responsibility is indeed terrifying. If you fail, it is God, thanks to your having betrayed him, who will fail mankind. You fancy you can be responsible to God; can you carry the responsibility for God?"

 There are many passionated devotees of this book and I feel as though I've missed something in reading it. Or maybe it is a book better suited to Christians or to those in leadership positions. Either way, I found the book intriguing but hard to read. Perhaps it is best enjoyed as something to pick up, read a few lines, and then put away for another time.