Rating: 4/5

I'm not sure if I liked Legacy or not, and that makes me perhaps like it more. Written in 1987 to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the US Constitution, Michener wove fictitious characters into our American history who affected the Constitution, directly and indirectly, in ways I might favor and ways I might not. And perhaps that was Michener's point.

A smarter reader than I could probably peg James Michener's political persuasions, but I think (s)he would need to be quite clever. I think rather Michener wanted to blend a reluctant Confederate officer and awkward suffragette into the same family to leave the reader wondering which values were Michener's. And I don't think he wanted us to know. I think he wanted to paint a landscape of the Starr family as a metaphor for the Constitution itself.

I wanted to see what the contemporary narrator of his own family history would be like for the story. At times I think it weakened the emotion of the scenes and prevented depth of character. This is my first Michener novel (one of his smaller), yet one of his later books. Could the size of his book and his fame have conspired to allow him to slack off from better narrating? Perhaps. It wasn't terrible, but I had high expectations. At some point, I too would like to write a narrated family history book (different topic), so I was perhaps more dissecting in my reading as well.

A while ago I read another book aimed at telling a story that defined debates about the Constitution. What irritated me about that book was the story for me was lost in excessive sexuality. This story seemed more normative of average Americans, but whether its averageness took away from the story, I don't fully know. The sexuality of the other story didn't win me over. In that way, this one is far superior.

I can't say I'd highly recommend this book. It's a bit too instructive, a little distant. But the presentation of differing characters from one family was intriguing, as I have plans if my own for multiple generations. What do you think?