Rating: 2/5

I wanted to give this book 2.5 stars, but can't, and sadly don't think I can round up for it.

First and foremost, I am not a Catholic. That being said, I did all I could to read this book without any bias. I wanted to gain a better understanding of the Catholic approach to the Eucharist, and believe that the Catholics are very reverent about it despite some of the differences I have with their beliefs. I was disappointed when it didn't seem like it focused as much on the Eucharist as much as it did Catholic Mass in general, and even then it didn't seem to have much about that considering the book's purpose is to explain how Mass is a time when heaven and earth meet.

Hahn claims that growing up Protestant, and even as a minister, he never understood the book of Revelation, and I can understand why given the typical "Left Behind" style teaching he would have received. He claims that being a part of the Catholic church helped him to finally understand the book of Revelation, but I really don't believe it. Why is that? Because he gives the book just as many meanings, and confusing meanings, as he claims he left behind. He states that the book of Revelation is about the Mass, but then he spends a large portion of the explanation of Revelation explaining how it is actually a statement about the destruction of Jerusalem...even though he also states that it was looking back to the destruction of Jerusalem. He seems to flip flop back and forth. On top of that, he claims that all of these other teachings about Revelation are probably true as well because the book can have many meanings, so while he talks about how confusing the book of Revelation was when taught in the Protestant styles, he also says that they are most likely true as well as here. It doens't make sense.

Hahn seems to do a lot of interpretation based on what he already believes due to what the Catholic church teaches as well. It isn't about studying the book of Revelation, discerning what it means and then shaping his beliefs on that, but rather, "The Catholic church teaches this, and so this has to match up with this because Catholicism teaches is true." For instances, the 144,000 in Revelation have to represent the priesthood since they are virgins.

There are some things he just gets wrong as well. For instance, he says that God destroys Sodom because it was standing in the way of the covenant God made with Abraham. Where does the Bible say that? Nowhere. Ezekiel gives us reasons why they were destroyed and that isn't it. He also makes the claim that Jericho was destroyed because it tried to get between God and His promises to Israel. This simply isn't true. Israel approached Jericho, not the other way around. They sent spies there, and they marched around the walls without Jericho ever striking them or trying to stop them.

This book, I suppose, just wasn't what I expected, but it isn't getting 2 stars simply because I don't agree with Catholic doctrine, but because it does a poor job of explaining what Hahn is trying to teach with any sort of consistent, understandable way. He gets a number of things just wrong, and they are simple things. He doesn't try to interpret the book based on what it says, but rather on what he already believes. 

I was really excited to start this book, and his getting into Catholicism at the start was a fairly interesting account, but after that the book just seemed to fall apart.