Rating: 3/5

The Bronte sisters' leading men possess no endearing qualities. Having first read an Illustrated Classics comic book of Wuthering Heights as a nine-year old, I was on to Heathcliff the minute I saw this sullen little boy, about the same age as me then, on the page. The spineless Hindley Earnshaw and Edgar Linton fare no better. Ditto Pere Earnshaw for being such a poor judge of character. Reading the actual novel in my twenties only confirmed my childhood sentiments. 

But Jane Eyre's brooding Edward Rochester, whom I only came across in my mature, discerning thirties--him I fell for. Throughout the novel's negligible highs and dramatic lows, I championed the unfortunate Rochester as strongly as I did poor Jane and their romantic interludes, a testament to Charlotte Bronte's mastery in storytelling and/or the Disneyesque influence my generation grew up on. Because how indeed could Jane Eyre ever find happiness as the wife of a bigamist who has locked his wife in a tower while our liege plays the alpha Prince Charming? Thank you, John Sutherland, for the un-pedantic discussions, and steering me to the belated realization that yes, Edward Rochester is actually just a pretty boy version of Bluebeard. 

* The book discusses 34 stories, but I've only read eight novels and am familiar with another six, having come across them in movie adaptations or the Classics Illustrated comic books. And although this book has ruined George Eliot's The Mill on the Floss's ever making it to my future reading list, I hope the rest of the inconsistencies and spoilers highlighted here do not diminish my reading experience when I do get around to reading the other books. Among Sutherland's selections, works by Charles Dickens, Jane Austen, and Thomas Hardy are given the most preference. Great Expectations, which I've read, is notably discussed twice; as much as I enjoyed his books, I have always felt the audacity of the coincidences after contrived coincidences in Dickens's novels. The eight novels I've read so far are:

1 Mansfield Park by Jane Austen
2 Emma by Jane Austen 
3 Great Expectations by Charles Dickens (showcased twice)
4 Wuthering Heights by Emily Bronte
5 Jane Eyre by Charlotte Bronte
6 Black Beauty by Anna Sewell
7 The Yellow Wall-Paper by Charlotte Perkins Gilman
8 The Good Soldier by Ford Madox Ford*
 
* But for the malicious, delightfully suspicious mind of John Sutherland, the thought never occurred to me: was Nancy Captain Ashburnham's illegitimate daughter and the reason for his suicide? Which now makes me wonder: was Heathcliff Mr Earnshaw's illegitimate son, the product of a dalliance with some gypsy girl from Liverpool?