Rating: 4/5

I enjoyed this book very, very much. It is a love story and it is a book of historical fiction that closely follows the growth of the union s at the coal mines in southwestern West Virginia. The events culminate in 1920 with the Battle of Blair Mountain when the United States Army fought 10,000 unemployed pro-union miners with airplanes, bombs and poison gas. Here is a link detailing this: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_o... I advise that you read it after reading the book. What is marvelous about the book is that the conflict is understood by following the characters’ experiences. You are there with them; this isn’t the same as reading a page at Wikipedia. And as I first said there is a wonderful love story. In fact two love stories, both of which are totally convincing and realistically portrayed. Aren’t you surprised? I never read love stories, but that is because they rarely deliver as this one does. 

In addition the writing is tremendous. The dialog is written with a Southern dialect. You are there in the South. Occasionally I found this difficult to understand, but the feeling it created was worth any added effort needed to follow the conversations. The story is told by four: an activist, a union man, a nurse and a Sicilian immigrant. The Sicilian woman’s chapters were few and short. They demand attention; she cannot speak English properly. Again, the effect was perfect. Originally I thought her entries could have been skipped, but they were in fact absolutely necessary to include the immigrant miners’ experiences too. The flagrant brutality of the coal operators is shocking. The miners’ lives, with all its horrors, are movingly portrayed with depth and clarity. 

This book will be highly appreciated by all those who love a love story and want to learn a bit of history at the same time. Excellent writing. You are there, down in the South in the 20s. 

There is a sequel to this book: Unquiet Earth 
Can a sequel be this good? I am hesitant to try it. This was just so very good; I don’t want anything to lessen its impact.