Rating: 5/5

In your reading life, you encounter all sorts of books: books you like, books you love, and books you wish never to have crossed your path. On rare occasions, you come across a book you feel privileged to have read. David Copperfield falls into this rare category. 

The book needs no praise from me. It is only another addition to the millions of love and appreciation it has received from its first publication. Charles Dickens himself has said that David Copperfield was his "favourite (literary) child". All these are proof of the book's worth and greatness. 

Charles Dickens has written so many great books. There is no argument about it. But if he ever wrote a book with his whole heart and soul, it is David Copperfield. I haven't read all his books, but enough to be assured that it is so. It cannot be otherwise, when the book is almost autobiographical of the author. Dickens is well-known for his clever and witty writing and satirical observations on English society. But in David Copperfield, his writing is beautiful, passionate, and sincere. 

David’s life resembles Dickens’s in many respects. Like David, Dickens had a troubled childhood. Like David's, Dickens had to leave school for employment at a tender age to support himself (and in Dickens’ case, his family too, as his father was imprisoned for his pecuniary liabilities). The experience he gains at the younger age helps David learn about life and the need to work hard with consistency and devotion to become successful. This was Charles Dickens’ motto, too. He was a self-made man whose craving for knowledge and learning made him successful despite the difficulties he endured in his childhood. Like David, Dickens was a Parliamentary reporter before becoming a full-time writer. In short, David is his literary presentation of himself, more or less. 

The main story in David Copperfield is the life journey of David Copperfield from birth to old age, filled with loss, hardship, struggle, adventure, success, and happiness. David is also the narrator. The story is also about David's moral and personal development, how he grew up from his childhood fantasies and mistaken impressions, shaking off his vanity, self-importance, and mistakes of the undisciplined heart, and learning the true value of life. Also, included as subplots are the stories of various other characters, closely connected with him. These stories allow the reader to gain a broad perception of Victorian society, the differences of people according to their classes, the vain superiority of the rich, the difficulties and struggles of average men and women, and the tragic lives of young innocent girls who become victims of wicked and lustful men. A wider area of life, of the relationship between parent and child, husband and wife, of morals and principles, of the tragic lives of "fallen women" (due to no fault of theirs), of society, is addressed in these stories, making it a complete work. 

David Copperfield is truly a great book. In my reading life, I have come across many that emotionally affected me, but only a handful have been able to tug at my heartstrings. David Copperfield is certainly one. Several scenes of this novel moved me to tears. The characters and their stories all felt true and real. If anyone is thinking of reading just one book of Dickens, it should be David Copperfield.

To the opening statement of the book that "whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life, or whether that station will be held by anybody else, these pages must know", I have only this. David is indeed a hero because two women (Aunt Betsey and Agnes) supported and loved him unconditionally. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/