Rating: 5/5

The giving of presents for Christmas is, of course, at the heart of this well-known short story. Yet what struck me on this Christmastime reading of O. Henry’s 1905 story “The Gift of the Magi” is the way in which the story is much more than the sum of its parts.

“O. Henry” (William Sidney Porter) was born in North Carolina and grew up in Texas. His eventful life, which included a three-year stay in prison for embezzlement, provided fodder for the hundreds of short stories that he wrote. His stories were characterized by ironic twist endings that might remind some readers of the work of Guy de Maupassant, and today “The Gift of the Magi” is probably the best-known example of his work.

The story has only two characters – James and Della Young, a young New York City couple who are very poor and very much in love. As the story begins, Della considers their poverty with sorrow, because she cannot purchase for James the sort of gift that she would like to give him. She wants to give her beloved husband “Something fine and rare and sterling – something just a little bit near to being worthy of the honor of being owned by Jim.” But she only has $1.87 with which to buy her husband a gift; and therefore, “There was clearly nothing to do but flop down on the shabby little couch and howl. So Della did it. Which instigates the moral reflection that life is made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles predominating.”

This passage reminds me of O. Henry’s literary limitations – and of the manner in which he overcomes them. His narrators tend to be intrusive, to editorialize, in a way that calls the reader’s attention to the narration rather than the story. And his writing is graceless, clunky, devoid of style. And yet, somehow, O. Henry’s sheer commitment to telling his stories carries the reader along nonetheless.

Because James’s one prized possession is his gold watch, a family heirloom that previously belonged to his father and grandfather, Della wants to buy him a watch chain: “A platinum fob chain simple and chaste in design, properly proclaiming its value by substance alone and not by meretricious ornamentation – as all good things should do.” There’s that editorializing narrator again; but the reader gets that sense that Della is willing to sacrifice what is most dear to her – that is, her long and beautiful hair.

Having sold her hair for $20.00, Della then “went to work repairing the ravages made by generosity added to love. Which is always a tremendous task, dear friends – a mammoth task.” Worried that James will not appreciate the change to her appearance, even though she sacrificed her beautiful hair for his sake, Della “had a habit of saying a little silent prayer about the simplest everyday things, and now she whispered: ‘Please, God, make him think I am still pretty.’”

When James does arrive at home, he looks at Della with a “peculiar expression on his face” – one that is “not anger, nor surprise, nor disapproval, nor horror,” but one that she cannot read. Della is concerned that James might be angry at her decision to cut her hair short, and moves to forestall any possible anger on his part: “‘Maybe the hairs of my head were numbered,’ she went on with sudden serious sweetness, ‘but nobody could ever count my love for you. Shall I put the chops on, Jim?’”

O. Henry, savoring the plot twist that he plans to spring upon the reader, lets his tendentious narrator emerge once again for a bit more moralizing:

Out of his trance Jim seemed quickly to wake. He enfolded his Della. For ten seconds, let us regard with discreet scrutiny some inconsequential object in the other direction. Eight dollars a week, or a million a year – what is the difference? A mathematician or a wit would give you the wrong answer. The magi brought valuable gifts, but that was not among them. This dark assertion will be illuminated later on.

Jim then gives Della his present for her, and observes her response: “White fingers and nimble tore at the string and paper. And then an ecstatic scream of joy; and then, alas! a quick feminine change to hysterical tears and wails, necessitating the immediate employment of all the comforting powers of the lord of the flat.”

For it turns out that both members of this little family have sacrificed the thing that they loved the most, in order to provide a special Christmas for the person that they love the most. It is worth giving that element of the story a bit of additional consideration. Think of the thing that comes to your mind when I say the words “your favorite thing.” Now imagine giving that thing up – forever, as far as you know. How many of us, if put to the test, would really be equal to such an act of unselfish love?

When I first read “The Gift of the Magi,” I knew the story’s twist ending in advance, and I feared that the story would end on the sort of smug, superior note of condescension that marks a number of such stories: “Yeah, there you go, life is tough, stuff happens, blah blah blah.” I thought of that Alanis Morissette "isn't it ironic" song that sets forth a number of potentially difficult life situations (not all of which actually qualify as ironic) and then states, "And who would have thought? It figures." 

But instead, O. Henry ends the story on a decided note of respect for this nice young couple who are poor in all things but love. Reinforcing the title’s allusion to the Magi, the three astrologers who followed the Christmas star so that they could give gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh to the Christ child – as set forth in Chapter 2 of the Gospel of Saint Matthew – the narrator reminds the reader that “The magi, as you know, were wise men – wonderfully wise men – who brought gifts to the Babe in the manger. They invented the art of giving Christmas presents.” 

And yet, the narrator suggests, Jim and Della, and others like them who truly give from the heart, may have a wisdom that outstrips that of the wise astrologers: “[I]n a last word to the wise of these days, let it be said that of all who give gifts, these two were the wisest. Of all who give and receive gifts, such as they are wisest. Everywhere they are wisest. They are the magi.”

The generosity of heart of that conclusion caused me to like “The Gift of the Magi” much better than I had expected to.