Rating: 2/5

Contrary to the title, after talking and diagraming for some 260 pages, de Bono admits that what he outlined in this book might not even fit how the brain works at all. After reading it, I would safely conclude it doesn't because of the inconsistency of what he proposes. The main idea of the book is something de Bono calls a memory-surface (MS). A MS will catch things in itself and they can be represented as data. He gives such examples as a dog's footprints in the snow, pools of water collecting as it runs down a slope, and how we might approach problems. A special MS will also organize the objects as it collects them (e.g. a sieve with different sizes of holes). It is an interesting concept until it comes to actually applying it to the real world. 

The issue is that minds, animals (and their behaviour patterns in snow), the shape of slopes, etc. operate by very different rules. They can represent data but they process things in vastly different ways. So when de Bono finally gets around to speaking on how to manipulate MSs in order to improve thinking two thirds of the way through the book, I had to recoil at the thought. Is he talking about inanimate real-world objects, shapes, lines, etc., as he did throughout the book and is now applying it to human memory? How can we change a MS from the inside? A slope cannot change itself, nor a line, nor a shape. For de Bono's theories to work, neither can the data inside the system change it because then it would not be organized by the MS. These have to be manipulated by a mind outside the MS. If so, then this would never work for the human mind because our memories might incorporate the data collected but there is little we can do from within the system to maximize our thought when our physiology changes (e.g. brain damage, dementia, etc.).

The only good part of the book is when de Bono starts talking about lateral thinking closer to the end, which I actually agree with. However, he tries to somehow say it changes MSs, which I just described cannot logically change like de Bono wants. So, instead of reading this book, read his "On Lateral Thinking" which is much better. 

There was also a discussion on Po as a new word to use to redirect thought. Personally, it seemed redundant given all the words in English we use to express the same idea. If you want to know more about this instead of this poor book, de Bono also has two other books devoted to it. Don't bother with this one.