Rating: 4/5

A band of Israelis ferret out and capture Adolf Hitler deep in the jungles of South America. As the secret collapses, the hunters struggle against the elements to get Hitler out before the rest of the world shows up. In a disturbing and harrowing moment of inspiration, they decide to put him on trial themselves.
This is a complex and eminently, maybe even profoundly, troubling novel, partly because of the horror it exacts out of its circumstances, partly because of the seeming futility of justice in a world where murder and atrocity have become so commonplace that we have become inured to them.
Steiner's novel has not been without controversy, though, as he made clear, it was not his intention. Hitler's defense of himself is hellish and disturbing, but plays into Steiner's interest of the power of the word and of propaganda.
As one of the hunters, Gideon, points out, who suddenly begins to question their purpose, if accounts are drawn and history draws a line, then the world will forget what has happened, the example will be lost. The crimes of Hitler will be exonerated through finality. Best to let him die, in the flood-choked wilds where he belongs.
When the other hunters realize that their secret might very well be out, they decide to try Hitler there in the wilds, for they can see that the closer he draws to civilization, the stronger he becomes, for he knows that voices like his are attractive, that the banality of bestial ferality, rational and simplistic, is easy for the world to hear, no matter who your vehemence is directed towards. There will always be, Hitler seems to argue, those that hate others enough to listen to people like me. You can still shear the wolf in sheep's clothing and wear a sweater made out of him.
When Gideon argues against taking Hitler out, he is very much aware of this and Hitler's final defense of his actions falls on no ears save the ones who found him. But he confesses that the Jews, as God-makers, are the creators of conscience, and this our Hitlers or contemporary versions, can't abide.
Complex and strange, offensive only if you put any stock in Hitler as truth-teller.