Rating: 2/5

For The Love Of Money
Im June 96, Tracy is now teaching middle school, but after a conference with a parent whose kid didn’t do the work demands the child be passed, Tracey decides teaching just isn’t for her anymore. She starts to again long for the fast life. So she calls up a college friend (Kendra) who lives in LA to come out and pay her a visit. Kendra says if she’s interested she can introduce her to her friend Yolanda whose connected to the entertainment business. After a few days of bringing out in LA, Tracey has already picked out a condo and plans to have moved there by Christmas. Yolanda meets with her and tells her that if she’s serious about screenwriting she suggests she take some writing courses at the Biz and UCLA. When her move is permanent they can sit down and talk.

By September, on Tracey’s birthday she takes her first crash course in screenwriting, She meets two significant classmates (Susan and Richard). Susan is just there to learn everything about the business. Richard she considers an “associate” (No one she’d be willing to date, but someone she’ll say close to just for the connection). Susan she likes but loses contact with her after the class. In October, Tracey enrolls in the UCLA Extension Program and attempts to write her first screen play motivated by a crazy driver who keeps cutting her off and almost runs her off the road. Only it doesn’t go over to well and the class (men) pick it apart. After a bogus Hollywood network party, Rahema calls Tracey and surprises her by the news that she’s getting married and is three months pregnant.

Tracey completes the screenwriting course. She calls Yolanda up and she invites her to a sci-fi wrap party. Tracey is hesitant but Yolanda claims that’s where the money is and not to get hung up on “black shit”. At the party, she makes a big impression and again meets up with Susan who she finds out family has powerful connections in the entertainment industry. A director (Time) gives Tracey his card and mentions he’s looking for someone to fill an assistant position. After sending in some of her writing samples Tracey gets the position on a series called “Conditions of Mentality” for three thousand dollars an episode. Shortly after Tracey runs into Victor again when going home to attend Rahema’s wedding. Tracey tries to seduce Victor but he ends up again playing mind games with her by refusing not to use a condom and suggesting she be his second wife. After this Tracey decides to finally let Victor go. 

When she returns to LA, Tracey becomes more in demand and writes another episode for Conditions. But eventually, a new boss is hired and she lets the show go. In July, she meets a young, hot, model and uses him as her plaything for a little while out of loneliness and horniness (Cole). But down the line she sees she’s not the only one he’s plaing around with and gets bored with him. 

Tracey starts to notice the lack of black roles. She takes on a newcomer named Reba and starts to write a show for her about the South. She even gets Cole a role or two on some sitcoms. During this time (Spring 98) Susan legally becomes an agent and Tracey sign her with. No networks take much interest in Reba’s show. Then one does only it wants there to be another lead white actress. Only Tracey *knows* this game. They’ll eventually pus the white actress to the front and kick Reba out. So she refuses. Susan argues that it will get Reba’s food in the door and be a good opportunity. Tracey doesn’t want to sell her people short. This leads to an argument with Tracey dissing Susan’s family (assuming they’re all about the money). Susan takes her to meet her uncle who advises Tracy that those who create for the love of passion get better, while those who do for money get worse. So Susan agrees to shop around for a good fit for the show. This leads to Tracey writing a poem called “Led Astray” that she also develops into a script.

Reba’s show gets turned into something called “Peaches and Cream” about two girl’s from the South whose parents (the white one) gets killed in a plane crash and she has no family to stay with. Reba gets pissed with Tracey that she turned the show down and she starts getting hate from the other actresses who’ve heard that Tracey will be working on a movie “Lad Astray”. Tracey then finds out Reba and Cole have hooked up. Tracey is pissed because of all the ways she helped Reba and this is how she repays her.

Led Astray is shot and the wrap party takes place Realizing she’s the only one there without a date, Tracey ends up sleeping with the director. But for some complicated reason, it doesn’t go much further than that, It ends with Tracey looking fabulous stepping out of the limo for the premiere for Led Astray.

In 2999, she returns home to speak to her old high school (Germantown High). They ask questions about Victor, how to make it in Hollywood, and about the sex scenes she shoots in Led Astray. After deciding she should keep an eye (and having lunch with) her impressionable cousin (Vanessa) she buys her Dad an Infinit as a bday present but ends up getting an “attempted” carjacking not far from her house. Luckily one of the thieves knows who she is and lets her off with giving them 40.00 She catches up with old friends one of em (Kiwanna) is now married to a white man and (Mercedes) wants her to pay for a house she wants. Later she does decide to buy the house for her but makes her agree to keep up the mortgage first. Until then it’ll be in her name.

While at home, she gets a script for a movie called “Road Kill” and she immediately starts to add her own touches about a character named “Alexis” who takes out gang bangers who hunt down women. Tracey decides that she’ll invite Vanessa out to LA every summer because she thinks Vanessa could use a change of pace, but her mother isn’t having it. But it ends up working out this way because Vanessa hits her mother and she kicks her out. Unfortunately, this is the time Tracey gets the role. So she invites Jason out also. Omar Tyree agrees to write the sequel “For the Love of Money” after not responding nearly half the book. Tracey becomes a millionaire for the advance copies of the rewrite of “Fly Girl” and she finds a small, movie, company “Wide Vision” that accepted all her changes to the original version of “Road Kill”

My Thoughts
SO SO FUNNY! The AUTHOR throughout the WHOLE book didn’t want to write this book because he KNEW that no one was interested in this book without Tracey and Victor’s relationship. But IRONICALLY he wrote it ANYWAY! Like so many reviewers, when I first read this book, I just didn’t like it. I thought it dragged. I thought it was NOTHING like Fly Girl. I thought it was boring and I didn’t remember how it ended. Actually, the ironic thing is had this story been about Tracey’s REAL life been the plot of “Led Astray” it would have been SO MUCH BETTER! But even though this still wasn’t as good as Fly girl, I think I had a certain appreciation that I didn’t before for this book because even though it was slow, it went into what it takes to make it in Hollywood in the writing business if you want your writing to be successful. Lately, I have decided to write a series of books and have been faced with the question after I write it (the books) what next? And what if one day they get turned into television scripts or a movie scripts? It made a good point about having black scripts taken over by white actresses (actors). It also made a good point about Hollywood not accepting certain kinds of scrips. It put a lot of things in my head that already have been in my head. I got the idea to write the series I've been working on. And this book shows more than anything it’s all about who you know and having connections! I don’t know if it all happens this quick. That part I found the pace a little bit unbelievable. But maybe it does happen like that for some peop[e (the ones who ARE lucky enough to be connected). I could also appreciate that when this book ends Tracey does ALL this, move to LA, get her first job on a television show, get her script “Led Astray” turned into a movie (starring herself) WITHOUT THE HELP OF A MAN! And it ends with her attending the premier for “Led Astray” WITHOUT A MAN! OR having to sleep around. I really don’t think she needed Victor at ALL! His part in this wasn’t even necessary. So if you take these points, this really wasn’t the worse thing I’ve read. I do get how lonely being single can be with no one to share your success with but I think this story was strong in it’s own right. Maybe it wasn't *the* most exciting but it shows what it takes if you want a career in writing in Hollywood and it gives a positive message that speaks to the strength of determination.

Rating: 6