Rating: 3/5

Reviewing one of Stephenson's tomes is always difficult; this is a huge book with many redeeming and not so redeeming aspects. Stephenson tells us in the prologue that The Confusion is basically two books 'con-fused' together; the two story arcs run parallel in time, so Stephenson gives us a linear narrative divided into two related but discrete tales here. The first follows Eliza-- the former harem slave girl 'half-cocked Jack' rescued from the siege of Vienna by the Turks. The second follows Jack himself following his abduction and enslavement by the Barbary corsairs (this happened in Quicksilver, and it was obvious his character would return at some point in his massive saga). Of course, we also have a broad supporting cast, including Jack's brother Bob, an array of French nobility (including the king), Liebnitz (the German 'natural philosopher'), and the 'cabal' of slaves associated with Jack (in Algiers to start with), some of which where introduced in the last volume as well. All in all, The Confusion covers about 15 years, from roughly 1688 to 1703 or so. 

Quicksilver ended with Eliza being captured by a French privateer while trying to flee to England with the fortune she made in Holland. Due to various machinations, she is a minor noble in France and England. Eliza, her funds absconded by the privateers, is in a state of limbo as since she is a French noble, having her fortune taken by a French privateer is questionable at minimum. Jack on the other hand, the former 'King' of the vagabonds, connives with 9 slaves an audacious plot to pirate a large shipment of silver the former Viceroy of Mexico is bringing back to Spain and win his freedom (along with the rest of the cabal) at the same time. 

Having given the basic set up, I will stop with the plotting; Stephenson takes us on a vast journey here (over 800 pages in the hardcover). The Confusion is not nearly as focused as Quicksilver (and that is saying something). Basically, the main features of the plot revolved around a few aspects. First, the financial system in place in the late 18th century in Europe receives a lot of attention-- bills of credit, money matters, etc. The war between England and France really serves as a backdrop to highlight the issues of state finance, as both England and France need money to pursue the war, and neither has a functioning system. France relies primarily on rents from the various estates to fund itself and somewhat dubious letters of credit. England struggles to finance basically anything and money (e.g., coins) have basically disappeared from the population after having been debased to worthlessness. The financial aspects are at times brilliant and other times quite mundane. I loved the discussion of how money or credit was moved around/among the various European nations, but this may bore some to tears. Essentially, the silver from the new world minted by Spain is the common currency of most of the world by now, but neither France nor England have much means to put their hands on it. Eliza's renown as a financier moves this story arc along.

Jack's story arc, on the other hand, primarily serves as a means to highlight the various political situations all over the world. His journey takes us from Algiers to Spain (for the heist), then to Cairo, then to India. Mild spoiler-- he manages to travel around the world in this one literally! Stephenson's portrayal of India reeks of Orientalism; perhaps because it is narrated through Jack's eyes, but this was definitely one of the less redeeming features of the novel. Nonetheless, the research required must have been substantial to say the least, and Stephenson gives us views of India, Japan, the Philippines and the Americas in a very tongue and cheek way as Jack's adventures continue. 

So, basically, The Confusion gives us late mercantile finance in Europe in spades, and a world tour of politics and economics/trade. I can see why people love this-- as a work of historical fiction, Stephenson gives us a vivid and lucid look at the world circa the late 17th century, warts and all. On the other hand, I can see why people would be bored to tears with this one as well. It really lacks the relatively fast pacing of the Quicksilver, along with the evolving scientific discussions and actual scientists introduced there. Sure, we run into Newton and John Locke, but Leibnitz and some of his theories are really marginal to the story. Pretty mixed on this one, but I will settle for 3 stars.