Rating: 3/5

The Doctor’s Wife (1864) was the hyper-prolific Mary Elizabeth Bradden’s eighth novel, written in the wake of her prototypical sensation novel Lady Audley’s Secret (1861), which catapulted her to fame, or notoriety. Three years on, Braddon was tiring of critics “pelting” her with the word “sensational” (as she wrote in a letter to her literary mentor, Edward Bulwer-Lytton). The Doctor’s Wife was intended to redeem her by showcasing her skills as a serious novelist.

The plot of the novel is a curious moralizing revisitation of Madame Bovary (1857), if you can imagine such a thing. Its protagonist, Isabel Gilbert, is, like Mme B, the wife of a prosaic provincial doctor, going slowly out of her mind with boredom and lured by fantasies of a different life. Unlike Flaubert’s heroine, or anti-heroine, though, Isabel is childishly innocent; although she dreams of love, her notion of it is a bizarre mishmash of medieval amour courtois (she has a thing about Dante and Beatrice), with romantic poetry, especially Byron and Shelley, laced with an incongruous dash of Dickens’s Edith Dombey (of all people). It would all be completely absurd (I was reminded of Charlotte Lennox’s The Female Quixote in terms of the utter disjunction between Isabel’s fantasies and reality), except that we see enough glimpses of Isabel’s dismal, precarious childhood to empathise with her flight into fiction. 

Obviously, one quite significant difference between The Doctor’s Wife and its Flaubertian model is that it isn’t in the same league in literary terms. Braddon is rather a blunt instrument in stylistic terms, although she’s generally a pleasing, easy read. As a take on the theme of the bored and provincially adulterous provincial wife, I found her novel an interesting comparison with George Moore’s very different The Mummer’s Wife (1885), which I read recently. Moore is savage in his Zolaesque realism, and Braddon can feel quite vanilla by comparison, but I did find myself thinking about the element of near-sadistic misogynism often implicit in the theme of the “fallen woman,” and rather liking Braddon’s determination to make Isabel redeemable, despite her folly. I can see why feminist critics like her work.

The most enjoyable thing about this book for me, though, was its metaliterary dimension. Some of the obscure literary figures who haunt Isabel’s miscued romantic dreams were unfamiliar to me, and I had a lot of fun looking them up (I’d recommend the Oxford World’s Classics edition, which has good notes). I was especially taken with Eugene Aram, a real-life eighteenth-century philologist and murderer (d. 1759), and the subject of a long-forgotten novel by Bulwer-Lytton. He is definitely ripe for a biopic. 

Best of all, though was the scene-stealing, bit-part character of the sensation novelist Sigismund Smith (né Sam Smith), a childhood friend of Isabel’s husband and “author of about half-a dozen highly-spiced fictions which enjoyed an immense popularity among the classes who liked their literature as they like their tobacco—very strong.” As an ironic self-portrait, it’s both witty and goodnatured, and I loved Smith’s rollicking accounts of his latest lurid plotlines. Here’s a sample to end with. 

“There’s a suicide, then, in your story?” George said, with a look of awe.

“A suicide in 'The Smuggler's Bride'!” exclaimed Sigismund Smith; “Why, it teems with suicides. There's the Duke of Port St. Martin's, who walls himself up alive in his own cellar; and there's Leonie de Pasdebasque, the ballet-dancer, who throws herself out of Count Caesar Maraschetti's private balloon; and there's Lilia, the dumb girl,—the penny public likes dumb girls—who sets fire to herself to escape from the--in fact, there's lots of them.”