Rating: 5/5

This book was a gift from my friend Carolyn and I am pleased to say that I loved it just as much as I had hoped I would. It is a truly special book, one that beautifully examines an entire life. It's almost hard to believe that it is relatively short -- 308 pages in my edition, yet it covers so much without ever feeling hurried or cramped. Hagar Shipley is quite the character, a woman who feels so vivid and real as soon as she is introduced. Throughout the book she looks back on her past, while also dealing with her present situation. Elderly, feeling pushed to the side, often treated in a condescending manner by those around her. She especially struggles in her relationship with her daughter-in-law, a woman I found understandably irritating, though I could also appreciate that she was the one dedicating all her time to caring for Hagar, which would be difficult at the best of times let alone with some whose personality clashes with your own.

Hagar's frustration at her treatment is wonderfully captured and also serves as a good reminder of how easy it can be to unintentionally undermine someone, and how people often end up treating the elderly like small children and not people who have lived full and interesting lives, people who have their own valid thoughts and opinions who still have things to offer the world. 

The difference between the relationship Hagar has with each of her sons was also an aspect of the book I found particularly well done. I don't suppose a parent ever intends to love one child more than another, but the reasons why we love people don't always make sense, and it isn't always fair. I did have sympathy for Marvin here -- the faults she finds in him are ones I understand not being drawn to, but he is her child and she treats him quite poorly. Even in this though she feels relatable, wonderfully human in all her many flaws. There were moments when I was so deeply frustrated her, but I also understand that we can't help the way we feel.

I am very grateful to Carolyn for sending this to me all the way from Canada. It has become an instant favourite and Margaret Laurence has become an author I would like to read more of.