Rating: 5/5

“Seeing the truth of a thing is a far cry from making it your own.”

This book was so full of beauty and truth and while there was sadness I was happy to be back with the Bonners, a decade later. 

Spoilers below 👇🏻 
Hannah mourns her loss:
“Strikes-the-Sky, her husband. Gone now more than two years and still her tongue remembered and craved the taste of him. As meat craves salt. She said those words aloud and watched them drift off in the white cloud of her breath. In that substance she could see his shape, far off at the edge of the forest. His voice was much closer. There are other kinds of food in the world, he said to her. Food without salt still fills the belly. It was true. There were worthwhile things in the world, and many of them were already in her hands. A home, a family, work, people who needed her help. Good things that held her here as surely as a pinned fly. Life here would be safe, and comfortable, and sterile. Hannah wondered how long she could manage such a delicate balance, and where she might land when she lost it.”

Classic Elizabeth and Nathaniel antics:
“He pulled her closer with his free arm around her waist and kissed her properly before he let her go. He smelled of honest sweat and pennyroyal ointment and pine tar and blood, and his mouth tasted of mint. Then he swung her around to pin her where she stood, his arms stemmed to either side of her head. It was one of Elizabeth's greatest pleasures in life, to have her husband catch her up against a wall to kiss her. He knew this very well, and he used it now to his advantage.”

Lily learns about men and possibly, love?:
“Then on the third day, as she made yet another strange cabin comfortable for the night, it came to Lily that Simon Ballentyne was a great deal like her father, in at least one way. He had the gift of patience, a word far too simple to really convey the quality. It was the thing that made the difference between a man who learned to hunt and one born to hunt. Men who could wait with utter calm because they understood their prey as it did not understand itself, knew what it was thinking and feeling and what it needed, most of all.”

“She gasped. “And you call me a heathen.” “My grumfie, my love,” he whispered against her mouth. “We'll be heathens tegither, the twa of us.” ❤️‍🔥

TW: war and associated injuries and death, attempted rape, kidnapping