Rating: 3/5

Meet Alison. She’s bawdy, she’s boisterous, but how anyone can describe her narrative as feminist is beyond me.

Alison’s made her way through five husbands in bewildering succession, and now considers herself a bit of an authority on the subject of matrimony. Fair enough. She’s used her sexuality - her only bartering tool - to ‘control’ her husbands. Well, all except the grand finale of Number Five who reads her religious propaganda and then strikes her so hard, he renders her partially deaf. To her fellow pilgrims, she’s very open about her sexual relations with all five husbands, and is now on the lookout for Number Six.

Is this a critique of marriage? Estate satire? A feminist commentary? No, it is a critique of the Church. Chaucer is deeply critical over the corruption of the Church, using Alison to condemn the power it holds over the illiterate as well as the conflict between bookish learning and experience as authorities to be obeyed. Of course, he does make transient references to Biblical teachings which offer little clarity when it comes to marriage: King Solomon had a thousand wives or so, so why is Alison censured for having only five husbands in comparison? But the most generous interpretation I can support is that he challenges these texts of male power to reform them, to accommodate female desire, not necessarily to defeat them.

There are allusions elsewhere that could be interpreted as feminist, but it becomes clear that it’s ultimately artifice, all feeding into the religious focus. Alison is a small industrialist: she exists outside the feudal system, making her own money and is doing rather well, truth be told. But she is submissive in more than one sense, stating boldly that her fifth and most abusive marriage was her best. What, the sex was the best? This repartee, this antithesis between anti-feminism and pro-feminism, is integral to Chaucer’s rhetoric. Shame it’s channelled elsewhere. Chaucer does not subvert the static image of women as craving sex insatiably (despite the fact the only sexual sin committed in the narrative is by the male knight), instead he reinforces it. Her ‘outrageous’ sexual comments aren’t really all that significant or progressive in context: people were open Chaucer’s day. It’s only since the Victorian era that we’ve become so prim and proper about sex. And then, women want sovereignty in a marriage, apparently. What about a strong partnership, eh?! 

The resolutions are politically frustrating. Alison’s abusive husband never seems to have got his comeuppance, nor does she condemn his behaviour in any sense. The apparent sovereignty wielded by the Queen and her entourage of maids is ridiculously specious. They have been delegated the power (to decide the fate of a rapist) by a man, and their actions only reinstate the image of women as bearers of clemency. As one lad in my seminar retorted, “Yeah, but it was really good for the time…” DON’T HOMOGENISE HISTORY!!! And what makes it even worse, the knight is offered redemption. Hurrah! In fact everyone’s all hunky dory… the only character who is not offered redemption is the victim, the maiden. Fucking typical.

Besides from the infuriating presentation of women, I found Alison’s relation of her marital career rather dull aside from the occasional bawdy comment that made me snigger. Inclined to think that my exploration of The Canterbury Tales will be aborted in the light of this story. Crucify me.