Rating: 5/5

The late, great David Halberstam followed the Trail Blazers during the 1979-1980 season, two years after their acclaimed victory over the Sixers. 

 The Breaks of The Game, the book that resulted, remains one of the best sports books I have ever read and a work that has easily stood the test of time.

The author of more than 20 books on topics as diverse as the Vietnam War, the modern civil rights struggle, the decline of the American auto industry, and the history of American media , Halberstam returned again and again to sports as a topic.

Although readers of The Teammates and The Summer of '49 could tell that baseball during those years had a particularly firm grip on Halberstam's heart, The Breaks of the Game remains a special work, even among the 10 of his books that I have read.

To begin, unlike many sports narratives, the story follows the Portland franchise after its memorable ascent and during what ultimately became a lengthy decline. As a result, the triumphant moment, while still present in the book, is a reminder of past and rapidly receding glory, rather than the culmination that precedes the tidy wrap up and update in the Epilogue. 

In additon to the narrative arc, The Breaks of the Game is replete with vivid and memorable characters, from coach Jack Ramsay, whose inability to accept losses affect his mental health and relationships with his friends, to power forward Maurice Lucas, whose physical style of play is vital to the Blazers' success yet who, like an earlier Shawn Marionon the Mike Dantoni-era Phoenix Suns, feels unappreciated, to Billy Ray Bates, the cocky, late- season addition to the squad who helps fuel the Blazers' late-season playoff run.

The characters do not just exist on the court. Rather, Halberstam employed his relentless reporting drive with his direct knowledge of American history-he covered nearly every major story from 1955 to his untimely death in 2007-to create textured portrayals that teach the reader about the players' background and even more about their place in American society. 

Bates, for example, grew up in the cotton fields of Mississippi; Halberstam ends the book with tales of his playing reverberating in that community. He also writes extensively about Kermit Washington, the enormously shy power forward from Washington, DC, whose life became inextricably linked with Houston Rockets star Rudy Tomjanovich when he punched the oncoming Tomjanovich in the face during an on court fight between teammates.

And, of course, there is Walton, the supremely talented, sharp-passing, politically active, red headed center who had one of the greatest careers in NCAA history, yet who never quite delivered on his enormous promise in the NBA because of his recurring injuries.

These portraits add tremendous richness to the book because they provide far deeper context than one usually sees in accounts of sporting games-I'm about halfway through Dan Rooney's My 75 Years with the Pittsburgh Steelers and the NFL and don't know if I'm going to be able to make it for that reason.

The Breaks of the Games also has many memorable moments. 

Some are of unintentional cruelty. Halberstam describes how a surgeon tells Geoff Petrie, a former Rookie of the Year and an early Blazers star, that he will never play basketball again, and then a second later exults at getting to meet New York Jets quarterback Joe Namath.

Others are humorous. 

Halberstam's description of how glowering power forward Lloyd Neal, leapt up from the bench after Lucas blocked a Kareem Abdul-Jabbar sky hook ,and yelled, "Take that, motherfucking cuckoo!" to a startled and uncharacteristically silent Jack Nicholson, remains one of my favorite of all time. The exploits of the outrageous Marvin Barnes, who showed up just before game time in a mink coat with his uniform underneath are similarly entertaining. 

In short, the book is an utter treasure, and not just for sports fans (although hoops fans who have not yet read The Breaks of the Game are in for a real treat.). So, while checking out the latest exploits of Roy, Aldridge, Oden, Outlaw and Co., or for those who are simply looking for a greater, check out The Breaks of the Game. 

You will not be disappointed.