Rating: 2/5

First read: August 2006
Re-read: Feb-March 2018
Rating: 2/5 stars

Incubus Dreams has always been my least favourite book in the Anita Blake series. When I read it originally I thought it deviated heavily from the previous books in terms of the ratio of personal relationships vs the supernatural politics and police procedural aspects of the plot.

My opinion hasn't changed during the re-read. There were some good moments; we got an update on Larry's life and what he's doing now, Dolph seems to be getting a bit more accepting of Anita's new life choices, Ronnie appears for the first time in age, and Anita seems to be growing as a person, allowing Nathaniel to get closer to her and accepting that her life has taken a very different path to where she thought it would go. I also liked the zombie raising that we get to see, and how the growth of Anita's power in other areas of her life impacts on her natural abilities.

However the crime that is introduced at the very start of the book is only mentioned infrequently until the end when it gets solved, and I disliked one very significant plot development that takes place in Incubus Dreams and that is Anita's secondary triumvirate; which consists of Anita, Nathaniel and Damien. It is also revealed that Anita has gained the power to channel Belle Morte's gift of making her followers more beautiful, as Damien's physical appearance is enhanced once the secondary triumvirate is completed. I struggle with Damien as a character. I don't intensely dislike him, the way I do with Richard, but he seems so unnecessary to the overall story. He seems to exist only to act as an example of Anita's growing powers. I think he slows the story down and takes up way too much page time. Another side effect of this plot choice is that the Ardeur gets worse again just as Anita is learning to control it. This also slows the story and detracts from the more interesting parts of the plot.

Overall I found Incubus Dreams to be the slowest and least entertaining book so far in my re-read of this series.