Rating: 2/5

I read this because I enjoyed Feed immensely, but I was very disappointed. This is one of the most depressing books I've read in a long time. On the plus side, the dog doesn't die. That and the charming bizarreness of the novel's world ("Would you like some of Jennifer? Or some of Dave?"; the dilemma posed for parents by Boston's lottery for virgins) saved it from getting only a single star.

Like Feed, the book opens with a light-hearted tone but descends into darkness. The main character, Chris, lives in a mildly alternate America where vampires are a commonly accepted hazard, like alligators or rattlesnakes, and are captured and lynched whenever possible. The citizens of Christopher's town perform a ritual every year to keep the vampire king Tch'muchgar imprisoned underneath their reservoir. Amusingly, the ritual is more like a carnival that just happens to include some Latin and sacrificing a goat, and part of it is done at a local restaurant because the restaurant was built on top of one of the ritual sites. Chris discovers that for some unknown reason he is becoming a vampire himself and is understandably a bit worried. He's approached by Chet (seriously? Chet?) who claims to be a servant of the Forces of Light and promises to cure Christopher's vampirism if Chris will deliver a device to Tch'muchgar's prison that will destroy him. Chris does as he is told, but it turns out Chet was lying and either can't or won't cure him (in D&amp;D terms, Chet would be Neutral Evil), so the book ends with Chris in his bedroom agonizingly thirsty and thinking about whether or not to kill his family.

Anderson's writing style, which I liked in the near-future dystopia of Feed because it felt like it fit the setting and the characters, feels a bit stilted and awkward here. There are some hilarious bits, such as this: "I have read about a billion spy novels, and when you are following someone, you hide behind newspapers, or pretend to paint the house next door, or hide a camera inside a spacious poodle." Who thinks to describe a poodle as spacious?? Other bits are almost poetic, such as this description of the man who has been following Chris: "He follows me to school. He waits on the circle at the base of the American flag, and every class I'm in he turns like the shadow on a sundial to face the windows." But overall, the absence of contractions and oddly detached manner of speaking didn't work for me in this story.

My biggest issue with this book, though, is that nothing really happens. There is no real conflict, no real tension, and worst of all no resolution. Yeah, the vampire king is killed, but since he never rises to the level of an open/active threat (and it turns out he wanted to die anyway) it’s wholly irrelevant. Christopher’s role in Tch'muchgar's death, where one might have expected some challenges and the need for him to show some gumption, is quickly and easily accomplished with zero difficulty. The nascent romance between Chris and Rebecca never goes anywhere, nor do the red herrings about Rebecca studying the Kabbalah which I thought might offer a way for Chris and Rebecca to join forces and take some initiative. Unlike the main character in Feed, Chris never really grapples with his central dilemma; he doesn't like it, he's worried and isolated, but he just mopes around waiting. In the end he has been disappointed but has not grown or changed and has taken no action since all his time was used up waiting for Chet to keep his promise. There is no love in this book (his own mother will turn him in if she thinks he's become a vampire), no affection, no passion, no loyalty (he and his friends are often mean to each other), no striving, nothing to counteract the mundane dismalness of the situation. Chris is passive and helpless in the face of what's happening to him. Worst of all, he is not only lied to and manipulated by Chet, Chet actually makes fun of him at the end! How disgustingly small and mean-spirited is that??

The single exception, and to me by far the best scene, is when Chris encounters his friend's dog, Bongo, and struggles with his desire to kill it and suck its blood. He is saved from this brutal act by his ability to empathize, his wish not to cause his friend pain. For this one brief moment Chris became a real person for me, his dilemma vivid and agonizing; my heart broke for him a little even as I applauded his strength and self-control. If rest of the book, or even just Chris, had sustained that same intensity and depth of character I might have liked it better.

A minor nit, but the use of the word "lynching" for the staking of vampires irritated me. Lynching is a weighty word that needs to be applied judiciously and it simply doesn't work here.

A number of other reviewers saw the vampirism as a metaphor for being gay, which totally escaped me. If it is, then it certainly is a very discouraging one and seems more appropriate for the mid-1970s than today.