Rating: 4/5

I bought this book just randomly, I had no idea what it was about or anything about the author. Considering that, I enjoyed it quite a bit. I was a bit scared because it was a murder mystery and I thought it would be hard for me to follow along. Some of the details of the case were a bit confusing for me, but I think I got the gist. 

Here is a recap: Tony, the MC, became a lawyer because his girlfriend was murdered at 17 and he was a suspect, even though he was innocent. So he wanted to protect people like him, who were in the wrong place at the wrong time. So, when Sam, his high school friend, calls him 27 years later, who is in a similar situation (he is a suspect for the murder of a teenage girl), Tony wants to help him out. Sam, who is married, admits to having an affair with Marcie (the teenage girl) but says he didn’t kill her. Tony successfully defends Sam and saves him from life in prison. But then Sam later confesses to the murder of both the teenage girl, AND Tony’s girlfriend 27 years before and kills himself? 

I’m not really sure what the point of this is. Maybe don’t define your life around an early tragedy? Don’t try to avenge your past self? You’re just gonna end up defending a pedophile murderer in court? 

I’m not sure what it’s trying to say about friendship. Sam was always very envious of Tony, and their friendship never seemed genuine. And Sam always seemed kinda weird. Have genuine friendships? There are probably a lot of male friendships where they don’t know much about their friends core values. Which I can say from experience. Maybe actually get to know your friends so they don’t turn out to be murderers? Try to engage with them emotionally and see if there is anything there?

Also like there was a lot of infidelity in this book which makes me sad. Like soon after Tony’s girlfriend is murdered, Sue (Sam’s girlfriend) and Tony spend a night with each other after the high school dance. I thought it was just going to be two friends hanging out and talking about the traumatic life event that just occurred, but they have sex? Like I get the situation was fucked but can a man and a woman not be friends? And then when he comes back 27 years later they make out? When both of them are married?

But overall, I liked the writing. The level of detail was impressive. The way he described certain social situations was very interesting and detailed. The author also worked with psychologists and legal experts to write the book which is cool.

So yeah, a good book to read just randomly.