Rating: 4/5

Part I: The Book

After the melancholy of 
  North and South
—where even the grand romance is tempered by children starving and teenagers dying from cotton-clogged lungs—some escapism was desperately needed. And The Phantom of the Opera provided the most sweeping, colorful, splendid escapism one could ask for.

Yet there is a deeper undercurrent here. It was the hatred of the world that drove Erik mad.

The plot of this story is likely familiar to all: a mysterious being known only as the Opera Ghost takes up residence below the Paris Opera House. Meanwhile, an orphaned chorus girl named Christine Daaë has to fill in for the prima donna Carlotta one night, and brings down the house with the beautiful voice that no one knew she had. 

Christine’s childhood friend Raoul is in the audience and falls in love with her, despite the disapproval of his elder brother—viscounts can’t marry untitled chorus girls! The idea!—but Raoul soon discovers he has a bigger obstacle. There’s another man. His name is Erik, he is a magician, and Christine is both terrified of and protective of him. He’s already kidnapped her once, and he intends to do it again.

There appear to be a few sizable divergences between the plot of the novel and that of the musical, but I’ll wait till I watch the 2004 film to evaluate those and decide which I enjoyed more.

One big difference already evident is the appearance and characterization of the Phantom. In the book, he’s not sympathetic, just pathetic. He vacillates between threatening to blow up everyone and groveling tearfully at Christine’s feet. Not only is he bipolar, he also has roughly six hairs on his head, looks like death, lives in the middle of an underground lake, strangles people, is irrationally convinced that one person/object holds the key to his happiness, his eyes glow in the dark, and he frequently refers to himself in the third person. Does this remind you of anyone?

Somehow Andrew Lloyd-Webber turned this hideous nut-job into a heartthrob. I can’t wait to see how he managed that.
 
The other characters are fairly standard for the Gothic genre. Christine is all innocence and gentleness, while Raoul is rash and brave and spoiled and wholesome. The Persian is intriguing, and I wish Leroux had given us more backstory about how he knew Erik. The supporting cast are quite funny, always yelling and blaming each other for things they know they couldn’t have done—anything so long as they can pretend the Opera Ghost doesn’t exist.

Leroux’ prose seems lacking, but that might be more the translator’s fault than his. This is very much a horror novel in the vein of 
  Frankenstein
 rather than a character-driven novel like 
  Middlemarch
. That said, just because Frankenstein and Phantom are a bit melodramatic and short on psychological details doesn't make either any less poignant or profound.

Part II: The Musical &amp; The Movie/Comparisons with the Book

Just finished watching Joel Schumacher’s film version of Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber’s musical (2003), which supposedly sticks to the script of the play quite faithfully. Lots of fans seem to think that the movie is a poor representation of the play, and I’m sure that nothing can compare to the kinetic energy of a live stage performance. However, I heartily enjoyed the movie (edit: since originally writing this review I've watched the film three times and loved it more with every viewing). 

A lot of theater geeks complain that neither Gerard Butler (Erik) nor Emmy Rossum (Christine) has an operatic or Broadway voice. While this is true - he sounds like a grunge rocker and she sounds like a singer-songwriter - I believe that they capture their characters better than the (equally talented) duo of Ramin Karimloo and Sierra Boggess in the 2005 live performance at the Royal Albert Hall. Butler is charismatic, menacing, and broken underneath in this role; Rossum is gentle and sincere and a bit otherwordly; their chemistry is electric and their connection seems deep. Also, Patrick Wilson is Raoul, and he's so good he makes the character likeable.

The characterization of the Phantom has changed significantly from page to stage/screen. He has been transformed from an unholy hybrid of Gollum and Frankenstein’s monster to a weirdly-attractive chimera of Heathcliff and Batman. 

I’m not sure how I feel about this. On the one hand, giving him a normal body and a face that is not just 75% normal, but 75% very handsome indeed, could actually make him more frightening, because you have to steel yourself against him—whereas one has no trouble rejecting a being that looks like a zombie. They say the Devil can disguise himself as an angel of light, and that’s just what he did here. (Leroux hints sometimes in the book that there might be something diabolical about Erik, similar to insinuations Emily Brontë makes about Heathcliff in Wuthering Heights).

But on the other hand (to quote Tevye from Fiddler on the Roof, probably the greatest character to ever grace a Broadway stage), many viewers won’t—and haven’t—perceived it that way. Instead they make excuses for him: “It’s his horrible childhood!” “He only kills because no one loved him!” “Christine could have changed him!” 

And they have a point. We are, after all, talking about a man whose earliest memory is of his mother handing him a mask so she wouldn’t have to look at his face. Leroux says nothing more than that; the freak show is a Lloyd-Webber invention, and a good one (it also offers a far more satisfactory reason for Erik’s alliance with Madam Giry than that given by the novel). That Erik—again, like Heathcliff—was abused and damaged, is doubtless. But the same could be said of Quasimodo (another book I have to read sometime) and he turned out the opposite. It’s an explanation but not an excuse.

As for Christine, she did change him, in both the book and the play/movie, by showing him compassion when he needed it most. In the book, the horror of his proposal goes unmixed, while the musical has her heart torn in two different directions, between a good man who would die for her and a bad, broken, sympathetic man who would kill for her. In another timeline, where different choices were made, I hope that Erik and Christine were able to make a life together. As is, she made the only reasonable choice his actions allowed her to make.

WHERE IS THE PERSIAN?!? Well, Lord Andrew? Why did you write out one of the book’s most interesting characters?

The book has some disturbing violence in the Phantom’s torture chamber (yes, he has one), where Raoul and the Persian might die of heat exhaustion if they don’t despair of finding the hidden door and hang themselves first. Also, the Phantom’s got enough explosives down there to blow the Opera House to kingdom come, which he threatens to do many, many times. He also strangles quite a few people with his Punjab lasso. A lot of his illusions are terrifying, though none so horrid as his own poor face. Teens and up.

The movie contains one scene of highly disturbing violence. Erik finds out that a stage hand was spreading rumors about his disfigurement, stalks the guy in the rafters of the stage, throttles him, and hangs the corpse so it falls on the stage. He also drops a giant chandelier on a packed house. The stage musical supposedly has almost no sexual content. The movie doesn’t have anything terribly racy either, but apparently the screen Phantom pets Christine more than his stage equivalent does, and her outfits show a wee bit more skin than the stage costumes tend to. Should be fine for teens, but judge for yourselves if it’s okay for younger kids.