Rating: 5/5

This is perhaps Tom Clancy's most known book and I first read it in the mid-80s, just out. I had a wonderful memory of it and must say that this rereading confirmed it. Of course, you can feel all the political changes that have taken place in these 35 and more years (the Soviet Union has been gone since 1991 ...) but it is still a beautiful, compelling and plausible thriller. The plot revolves, as the title says, on the escape of the Red October, a Russian nuclear submarine headed for the United States, and on the difficult decisions that the American military leaders must take to understand if the Russian submarine really wants to escape or if it is lying to unleash a third world war. There are two main protagonists, both unforgettable, because they are among the best in action literature. Tom Clancy was very good at describing the atmospheres, both physical and psychological, for example the sense of claustrophobia that exists on board a submarine, but also the moves of the senior officers towards the soldiers of their team. The book is quite long (600 pages) but it can be read in a very short time, because the desire to see how it ends is great. The first of the 2 protagonists is Marko Ramius, an admiral of the Soviet fleet who planned to desert and go to the USA, with the soldiers loyal to him, bringing the Red October, the last jewel of Russian submarines as a dowry to the Americans, equipped with the top secret anti-cavitation system, which makes it invisible to sonar.
During the first outing of the submarine, Ramius, who had long prepared himself, implements his plan and begins a journey to the US coast: some of his men know the plan but most of them don't. Ramius then has to tell them lies to get the submarine headed for America. And he also have to be very careful that no other US submarine intercepts it in the open sea before it arrives in America and can seek asylum. A somewhat complex undertaking, with the further threat of the Soviet Navy's vehicles, which could see his plan and destroy Red October rather than make it fall into the hands of the Americans. And in fact all this happens: on the one hand the Russians try to stop the deserter submarine and on the other the Americans suspect that Ramius is playing a double game to launch a surprise attack. Ramius is therefore between a rock and a hard place and here comes the other protagonist of the book, the CIA analyst, Jack Ryan, who analyzing Ramius' signals is convinced of his intentions and tries to convince the US government that Ramius does not want to blow up the third world war, but rather wants to deliver the jewel of the Soviet navy to the USA. I'll stop here, otherwise I'll spoil the pleasure of reading.
It is certainly a suspense book, with a bit of morale about Freedom, still due to the echoes of the Cold War, and with lots of super-technical details, relating to submarines and detection systems. Clancy's writing is very smooth and engaging, because it is very descriptive, and the characters are represented in an exceptional way. The psychological part is also very thorough and helps a lot to give the thriller atmosphere. A great book.