Rating: 4/5

Mo Yan is not joking with this one. Not at all. There is no moment of levity or happiness to be found in this book. When I read his novel Frogs, I was a bit unsure about the slapstick comedy. But now that nobody is having any fun, I kind of miss it.

The story is straightforward enough, even though it is not always told chronologically. The farmers in the district have been told to grow garlic. The harvest is bountiful, and despite falling prices, there is hope for a good year. However, when they try to sell their produce to the only refrigerated warehouse, which is a gruelling trek from the village, they soon discover that the collective is unable to buy it quickly enough. They are still not allowed to sell to others, and when the warehouse suddenly closes, a revolt breaks out. All the farmers want is to sell their garlic, but ultimately, the administration building is ransacked and those identified as ringleaders are punished. We read about a number of people from a village and their relationships with each other and with the devastation that the garlic crisis wreaks on them all.

Mo Yan writes about historical China in the 1980s, in which the individual takes centre stage. The system and the regime behind it remain hidden from view, and the focus remains intensely on ordinary people caught in the cogs of the system and slowly being ground down. Yan presents us with simple, often gullible people who do not understand what is happening to them and are unable to help themselves. On the other hand, there are those with middling power — never the big leaders, but rather the bureaucrats and elites in villages and smaller towns. They are cruel, looking out for themselves and using the language of the system and the threat of being labelled a counter-revolutionary to oppress those under their control. It seems that any bit of authority corrupts, and nearly everybody is capable of cruelty.

There are bureaucrats ignoring the garlic farmers who are protesting against policies that victimise them. There are prison guards and police officers who enjoy dehumanising others. There are cellmates who mirror the hierarchy of power and abuse by forcing the weak to eat faeces and drink urine. There are fathers who string up their daughters to hit them and brothers who don't hesitate to sell their sisters dead body to the highest bidder. 

The underdogs have no chance. A young couple in love endures a multitude of beatings and near-death experiences before their dream of living together ends in horror and blood. A father who is content with his life and expects things to improve ends up with festering wounds picked by chickens and living a life in captivity. The old woman who was pardoned ends up dead anyway. You get the gist.

Nevertheless, this is an interesting and often fascinating book. While there is an endless parade of suffering, blood, lice, piss and excrement doused in the stink of rotting garlic, the picture painted of the time is vivid and intense. It is also a way of criticising a regime that seems very specific to Chinese discourse. It becomes even more interesting when you consider that Mo Yan does not write from exile, but instead balances the censorship and control of the Chinese government with his literary themes. Overall, it's depressing but worth it.