Rating: 3/5

Easily the worst short story collection among the Holmes stories. I would barely call this worth my time, and I’m sad it ended on this note after starting so strong. Several stories are randomly racist, the plots are almost universally boring, and very few stories stand out; even my favorites among the collection hardly hold a candle to my favorites from past collections. I said of the first post-Reichenbach falls collection that you could tell Arthur Conan Doyle had let go of serious literary value and was having a good time; by this collection, you can really tell that Arthur Conan Doyle himself barely even cared. If I were to advise you, I’d tell you to skip this. 

GREAT – sadly, none. 

GOOD
The Illustrious Client - dark but excellent; Kitty Winter and Shinwell Johnson are both highlight characters.
The Blanched Soldier - a genuinely sweet story about a mysterious disappearance; Sir James Saunders is a highlight character.
Thor Bridge - quite loved this story about a mysterious murder by a governess, though I absolutely saw the reveal coming; racial politics are bad

FINE
The Mazarin Stone - just not much to write home about here
The Three Gables - first attempt to write a female villain, and just didn’t care for the execution much
The Three Garridebs - camp! very fun story about a will asking for three people of the same last name. premise is ridiculous. the reason this doesn’t get bigger is because it’s fantastically racist. 
The Sussex Vampire - saw the reveal coming a mile away, but motherly love and devotion is always a fun plot point
The Lion’s Mane - this is actually fine, though missing Watson is sad, except that I googled it and the twist is scientifically inaccurate. 
The Veiled Lodger - just a narrative! though i like this character, this isn’t really a full mystery. 
Shoscombe Old Place - not bad but nothing to write home about; an actually twisty ending was good. 

BAD
The Creeping Man - just utterly ridiculous
The Retired Colourman - whatever. I hated this but I can’t articulate why. 

➽Follow me on Substack at ellexamines.substack.com
TikTok | Goodreads | Letterboxd | Instagram | Youtube | Spotify | About |