Rating: 1/5

I love history. I love Canadiana. My mother is from Québec and I studied there. My 24 year old daughter read Dear Canada when she was a young girl and loved the series, so I was excited to share this with my 10 and 8 year old daughters. 

This book follows the journey of an impoverished, orphaned THIRTEEN year old girl, Hélène, from France to New France (present day Québec) with her older sister who was selected to be a Filles du Roi. The Filles du Roi (and before them, the Filles a Marier) were mostly young women who were sent to New France to marry and populate the settlement. When her sister dies, Hélène takes her place.

Written in the early aughts, this book does not stand the test of time. Certainly not past the discovery of mass graves at Residential schools (by white Canada, Indigenous people knew they were there all along). There's an attempt to create some sympathy towards First Peoples through the character of Hélène's friend, Kateri, however the general attitude is that Indigenous folks are violent and to be feared. There are frequent honourific mentions of Marguerite de Bourgeoys, who founded the first school for indigenous girls and who was directly associated with the Society of Notre-Dame of Montréal for the Conversion of the Savages of New France. The "success" of this school led to funding for further schools throughout French colonies. Bourgeoys' legacy is the establishment of institutions that contributed to colonization.

But most heinous offense of this book is that it romanticizes the grooming of a THIRTEEN YEAR OLD girl by a thirty year old man. Yes, it was a different time. And yes, this happened, but to try and describe this situation of power imbalance as a blushing, blossoming romance is gross. This is a young girl being taken advantage of by her friend's father. It's vile and our kids deserve better. As we were reading the book and the story was building towards a relationship between and thirty year old man and thirteen year old girl, I thought, "no, she'll admit a crush and he'll gently let her down and she'll find someone age appropriate and live happily ever after." NOPE. 

Why are we spoon feeding the patriarchial bs to our daughters? You can still tell the story of the Filles du Roi without sugar coating what the experience for these girls really was. Do better Scholastic. Ugh.