Rating: 3/5

The Past - 
The h/H - Cassie and Ned - are childhood friends/neighbors. Others in this childhood group include her twin brother Freddie and the pretentious ow, Arabella. 
Young Ned is a serious 'prosy' guy and is smitten with the pretty Arabella. While the h, Cassie may be book smart but is also a hoyden/tomboy who along with her twin is always up to some mischief. 
While 5 years may not seem a lot as adults, I cannot imagine a boy and a girl (the h/H) with that age difference to be bosom buds or confidants or intellectual equals who used to discuss high-brow stuff. 
Ned asks Arabella to marry him only to get laughed off. He shares his heartbreak with Cassie who consoles him while inwardly seething at the shallow Arabella. 
As Freddie is off to India on his brother-in-law's bidding, Ned decides to accompany him. 

The Present -
Cassie has grown into a more serious bluestocking. Her sister makes her go to London for a season. 
Ned and Freddie return and Cassie sees them after all this while at a ball. She's shocked to see the new Ned - tall, broad and suave. Arabella is similarly affected.
Of course, the story progresses along expected lines. Ned is now quite the expert at flirting and dalliances. Cassie misses the old Ned while he admonishes her for becoming too serious. 
Cassie is also upset as he takes up back with Arabella. He responds by saying something to the effect that the ow is good fun and knows how to have a good time. So, the two party animals flock together. 
It seems he's learnt to play the game now. Although his sex life is not discussed at all but certain things hint that he did 'dally' with sophisticated women after returning. 

So, the conflict is built around how both have changed and don't seem to have much common grounds or time for each other. Cassie actually misses him but spends a lot of time with her scholarly pursuits from where she acquires an admirer whom Ned sees as an even more dulling influence on her. 

While I get Cassie's point - how could he take up with the very shallow and selfish Arabella who had humiliated him and made him flee in the past. 
But his admonishing Cassie is bit mean and unfair. I did not quite like Ned. 
Yes, we know he's never serious about Arabella but she does 'take his breath away' a few times and he realizes (again) her shallowness too late. That makes him quite stupid imo! 

There's not much in way of romance here as they both realize their 'true feeling' quite late in the book.

And the polish that he seems to have acquired in India - and later strangely enough European anecdotes also get added - happened in just a Two-years-span! Wow, did he have a jet in those days to travel to all those Indian cities/courts and then to a few European ones as well. 

The 'fur and feather contingent' (a dog, a cat and a duck) are more annoying than cute as they are shown as having thoughts and povs of their own.