Rating: 4/5

Nick and Sheila were our neighbours in 1952: a wonderfully neat and tidy young Jewish couple. They pretty much kept to themselves, and I often used to wonder why. Now I know.

I was 2 and a half years old, and my parents kept their memories of the war years from us kids. The prevailing WASP wisdom was to shelter your tots from such horrors (did their literary guru, Dr Benjamin Spock, advise that?).

When I finally tried to read this book in 1994, I was taking a break at the Antigonish, Nova Scotia Highland Games from a waspishly insensitive senior manager whose shadowing I had been cursed with since I was a New Boy. It wasn't his fault... 

He was just a stern disciplinarian, like my Dad.

He was also a gung-ho, born-again clock watcher - timing the junior managers' (as I was back then) smoke breaks (also guilty) to the millisecond.

So I was wrong all the time, at first. It hadn't originated with his trusty 2-IC in our own backwater, whom some smokers mocked. Couldn't have. I loved and respected that guy. It was the Big Fish.

It started with this guy with the millisecond hand - named Mack (my nom de guerrre for him). Mack was the veritable cornerstone of our division. And he watched his subalterns like a HAWK. HE was the guy with the millisecond hand on his Rolex. 

Bless him, Mack's now pushing up daisies. But smoking didn't kill him - could it have been complications from stifled rage for those who did smoke?
***

So that's why I left Summer Day unfinished. I was stressed to the max. My rage was stifled like Mack's. Humbled, I’m rereading it now.

I loved Shaw, a member of the WWII Greatest Generation, when young. Don't get me wrong - but he was a dreamer, and here he capitalizes it - The American Dream. It had now become a flawed dream for him, because of its tacit racist overtones.

And violence.

Shaw had seen the Dream turn Nightmarish in his brave, feisty life, and the hero of Summer's Day too has seen its ugly side, its glory now tarnished...

But I was now rudely awake in Antigonish, when I only wanted to rest. I saw my pitiful life as a junior manager clearly: a Dreamless dog's breakfast now. Ever had one of THOSE existential crises in your life?

Thought so...

So my doc had given me a childishly simple Rx for me:

REST.

Therefore, my rest itself was now just a dog's breakfast.

Reading Shaw, Mack's Milliseconds hounded me to northern Nova Scotia.
***
 
You know, there's no rest for the wicked. I guess I had a mean streak back then...

And with the Holocaust so real and vivid in the 1950's Shaw could get no rest either. In 1952, with such anti-Semitic traces, folks like Senator McCarthy had guys like him in their witch-hunting sights.

So the inner, hurting voices of this summer day are present here too, echoing my own hurt in Antigonish. And my Mom, too, had hurts in the fifties, with parents of mixed religious backgrounds.

Can such scars heal?

I believe so.

For I believe that, at last, that blessed Final Voice of an Endless Summer Day will lay down the Law of Love to us all -

So, like Kafka at the end, we will all finally find peace - with our convictors now silenced -

And at last smile about it all, having found our ultimate Rest.

***

When I went to Antigonish I was in my midage. Now I’m almost 75. I’m in my dotage!

What comes around goes around…

And now, in my wide awake second childhood I see Mack was no Fascist.

He ran a clean ship, is all. 

I shoulda done the same in my bipolar years, as a middle manager…

And I shoulda sweated out my purgatory, just like him, all along -

No matter how high God racheted up the flames!