Rating: 4/5

This book stuck out to me because I was nearing the end of december and did not know what to read because after 10 pages of every book I tried to read I would get bored. This is a very short book but also was pretty good because first of all i am into demons and paranormal activity like this book. This book was 120 pages and was a quick read for me to get through this month. Next month i will try and read two of the books #2 and #3 for January. 

The Calusari starts off with a family at a park. Two little boys named charlie and Teddy, Charlie is a year or two older than Teddy. Teddy is taken to the bathroom with his mom and put so he can't get out. His mom checks on him while going to the bathroom twice and then as soon as she gets out he is gone. She comes out of the bathroom looking for teddy right away and notices he is trying to go for the balloon but then notices that the balloon is going into the train tracks where the train goes by every 15 min for the little kids. The train kills teddy. Charlie watched the whole thing happen. FbI agents see this and when looked at again there is a figure holding the balloon leading Teddy towards the train. Soon they figure out that Charlie is possessed by a demon after his Father and Grandmother are killed while Charlie is present. Charlie almost kills his mother as well but he is stopped before he could do so. 

For a small book it was pretty good but the bad thing about reading a small book is that no one really gets to know the characters and see what they feel and get their sense of personality. Also it was very easy to figure out what was going to happen next, very predictable. I would say that would be the only two bad things about this book. 

The book had a lot of good things about it too. It had a lot of action and had a very good plot line. I really liked how they started out the book with Teddy dying right away because it shows thats the least of the action in the book. I am really into action type books like this because you will never get bored or tired of reading.