Rating: 3/5

My wife and I just recently completed watching season one of "Westworld", a fascinating and thought-provoking HBO series based on the Michael Crichton movie of the same name. It brought to mind several other books and movies, most notably "Jurassic Park" (another Crichton book) and this one, perhaps less popular and memorable, but deals with similar themes of the lengths and risks humans will take, technologically, simply to be entertained...

I've never been into gaming, both computer or role play. I used to play the occasional Dungeons &amp; Dragons game with friends, but I never really got as excited about it as some. I did like the concept of role-playing games, creating one's own character and destiny, even one's own universe. 

I always admired the imagination and thought that went into preparing and playing a D&amp;D game. I know, too, that there are some pretty intense video games out there that have attempted to simulate the D&amp;D vibe, some more successfully than others. 

It seems to me that D&amp;D is one of those things that, if you have to ask why people do it, it's probably not for you, and that's okay. It's not for everybody. 

Back in the early-80s, which seemed to be about the time that D&amp;D was at its all-time highest popularity, sci-fi authors Larry Niven and Steve Barnes collaborated on a novel called "Dream Park". The novel is set in the near future (back in the '80s, that probably meant right about now) in California, where an entertainment conglomerate has re-zoned much of the land into a giant amusement park called Dream Park. 

Like Disney World, the park offers rides and attractions but its major draw is simply called The Game. Using a mix of animatronics, holograms, virtual-reality, and live actors, The Game is a simulated adventure in which a group of people set out on a pre-programmed quest and try to "survive" until the end. No one really dies in The Game. Deaths are simulated, and those that die early are simply brought back to Dream Park debriefing quarters to watch the rest of the game on TV. 

Dream Park's Chief of Security, Alex, is investigating the theft of a highly important piece of Dream Park tech and the murder of a programmer. All evidence points to one of the Gamers. So, Alex is forced to slip into the game undercover as a Gamer. He soon begins to understand the seductive charms and draw of the Game, as he and the others battle hordes of angry natives, zombies, and other fantastic creatures. 

"Dream Park" is a fun sci-fi/fantasy murder mystery. Much like the game that it's paying homage to, the book has no real purpose other than to entertain, and it succeeds. It's also quite interesting to see how insanely popular D&amp;D was at one time and how some saw its inevitable evolution.