Rating: 4/5

Keith Laumer, author of this collection called Once There Was A Giant, is something of a giant in my eyes as an author. Whether military adventure in his famous Bolo series of “Machinery, the Bolos were, but never mere.” (p. 211), hilarious diplomatic parody (I didn’t realize he had a real background in the diplomatic realm until I read the closing essay in this collection—p. 213) in the Retief anthologies, twisted tales of farcical looping time travel in The Shape Changer series, or more typical fare such as in the Worlds of Imperium or The Ultimax Man.

In the opening novella, Once There Was A Giant (with copyright to Mercury Press, probably originally published in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science-Fiction), one is not sure whether the protagonist is antihero or, as the adventure progresses, villain. Laumer doesn’t choose an unrealistic, sentimental ending, but the story is full of conflicting emotions. Commissioned (in this case, also known as “blackmailed”) into an assassination mission directed at a larger-than-life alien who, ostensibly, stands in the way of progress (symbolically being able to subdivide an under-developed planet). In a story predating the film Enemy Mine, there are some aspects of the story that would resonate with the Dennis Quaid vehicle which came later. Obligations slide back and forth between would-be assassin and targeted victim. The story doesn’t develop quite as I expected it to unfold. Frankly, I like Laumer’s actual resolution rather than my expected ending.

While Once There Was A Giant may have more literary value, No Ship Boots in Fairyland is the most fun with its twist on alien invasion, fantasy-esque Lilliputians, and space-time anomalies. It features Laumer’s typical play with names, the protagonist is Vallant (who is reluctantly valiant), a professor has the surname of Wormwell (C. S. Lewis’ reference to junior demon Wormwood?) who are introduced on the first page of this novella (p. 93), but my biggest chuckle was regarding Princess Touch-Me-Not (p. 151). Speaking of allusions, there is a scene of feasting which takes place prior to the start of a deadly quest and leads to a biblical reference from one of Jesus’ parables. After Vallant calls out to “Eat, drink, and be merry…,” his companion, Jimper (of Lilliputian comparison) responds: “’If you can,’ Jimper said, mournful again, ‘knowing what tomorrow will bring.’” (p. 161)

The combination of fascinating human adventure in the first novella, sheer entertainment in the second novella, and intriguing observations in the concluding essay make Once There Was A Giant a significantly more valuable addition to any science-fiction fan’s collection than I would have anticipated upon seeing the cover. I may rank the collection higher than many readers, but it belongs above the “I liked it” stage in my collection.