Rating: 4/5

Before I started reading the Sackett series, I thought of Louis L'Amour as a western author. And indeed he is, but he is so much more than that. I've not been a big reader of westerns, and my main knowledge of L'Amour's Sackett series came from watching movies rather than reading books. But all that has changed - for the better!

L'Amour certainly deserves his title as one of America's greatest storytellers. He not only makes the history of America readable and exciting, but his style is such that it pulls you into the story and you can't wait to hear more. Passages such as this: "I had not eaten when the others had. There was too little food as it was, and I was strong enough to survive. When I looked up at the mountains there was black rock, perhaps wet from melting snow, and a lone golden eagle swinging on wide wings against the sky and the snow. A thin waterfall, thin from here at least, perhaps forty feet wide where it was, fell from rocky shelf to rocky shelf, mostly melting snow. By late spring, it would be only a trickle. Now the mountain was stark and beautiful, a place for no man or animal, just for the clouds and eagles."

The first two books in the series tell the story of Barnabas Sackett, the founder of the Sackett family in L'Amour's tale. He leaves England and settles along the coast of America, in the area of the Carolinas in the very early days of our country. His sons Kin and Yance, in the third book of the series, move further inland, into the Blue Ridge Mountains. But they are always aware of the push of settlers to come, and they send Jubal ahead to scout a place further west where they can go if necessary.

Jubal is the youngest son and has always been the different one. He has always had a call to go beyond the Blue Ridge and see what lies on the other side. Stories he has heard from Indians and trappers fill him with a yearning to see the plains and the high mountains that lie further to the west. This is Jubal's story - filled with adventures, new friends and bitter enemies, and the challenges of learning to live in a beautiful but unforgiving land.