Rating: 4/5

YES this book reeks of self-indulgence, entitlement and ethnocentricity. It's essentially a book about the shock of being white middle/upper class and being the only woman ever to fall pregnant. 
That said, Wolf clearly writes from a highly personalized perspective, and as such this was always going to be a subjective experience rather than a broad overview of pregnancy. 

Personally, I had a love/hate relationship with this book. There were so many occasions in which I felt Wolf giving a voice to so many of the suppressed misgivings I was experiencing during my pregnancy, and it was the first and only time I've heard some of these anxieties acknowledged. Very few of my personal experiences seemed to align with the expectations that had been instilled in me by common maternal culture and I was left feeling abnormal, conflicted, irrational and unable to even express why I was feeling so alienated from a process other women appeared to relish. 
So in many respects this book was a great source of reassurance, and even refuge.

On the flip side, each page of this book fed my bitterness like a self-indulgent resentment bonfire! Call it pregnancy hormones, but I actually felt like I had a minor panic attack during the chapter on 'Birth' which caused me to throw out any objectivity, and seriously (and confusedly) question the medical options I had been pursuing, without any clear alternatives. I felt frustrated by Wolf's approach of: The system sucks, you will suffer. 
And you know what? A lot of my expectations about pregnancy and motherhood were broken, but it wasn't the dark tunnel of deception the author describes. A lot of it is tough and strange, but I found unexpected pleasures in equal measure, and this balance to the experience was glaringly lacking in this book.

All of that said, I'm thoroughly glad somebody wrote this book. It has genuinely added a richness to the dialogue surrounding female experience, and resounded greatly with me, especially when I was at my most self-indulgent.
It's a total bummer, though.