Rating: 5/5

The only hint I had before I started this book that I would give it 5 stars was the fact that Donna Tartt read the audiobook and wrote the introduction. I know Tartt doesn't do such things lightly so I knew this could be something worthwhile. Even having seen and enjoyed the remake of the film, I wasn't fully prepared for how much I would enjoy this book. 

Mattie Ross is truly a heroine, and a narrator, for the ages. She is so matter-of-fact, so determined, so tough as a 14-year-old girl. As a spinster writing her own story she is the kind of person who does things her own way and who is always right. I love both versions of Mattie and she is absolutely one of my favorite heroines. My very favorite scenes are her negotiations with the townspeople and Cogburn early on, she sees herself as a full fledged adult and is better at it than most of the people she encounters. She should have been a lawyer.

Of course, to really enjoy the book you also have to be intrigued enough by the crochety, grumpy, drunk Rooster Cogburn. (I will say that having seen Jeff Bridges in the role, he inhabited it in my head for the entire book and it was not a bad thing at all. I had completely forgotten who plays LaBoeuf, which is probably fitting given the character.) It is quite impressive how Portis makes Cogburn both noble and immoral, a drunk and a hero, likable and yet not someone you actually like. In many ways, he and Mattie share a clear-eyed, pragmatic approach to the world, but where she insists on getting her way, Cogburn has been more beat down by time. 

This is an adventure story where you never really doubt the outcome, and knowing the destination takes no joy whatsoever out of the journey. I already miss Mattie.

Donna Tartt's narration is absolutely perfect. She reads in a way Mattie would approve of, straightforward but with enough distinction in the characters' voices to know who is talking. Her Cogburn is gruff, her LaBoeuf is fussy, and her outlaws are sinister and a bit dim. It's clear she loves the book and the characters before she tells you so herself in her essay read at the end.

Update: Reread the audio and this is absolutely a new comfort read for me. Adored every second.