Rating: 4/5

I recently came across a short article where readers were polled asking them what decade they thought was the best for category romances. Mind you, it was less than 500 individuals who responded but it was still interesting to see what people had to say. Most thought the best romances were written long ago. And the best decade? The 1990s. 

Kids Is a 4-Letter Word was a light frothy category romance with popular themes from that era. Instant chemistry/attraction/lust. The plot covered days rather than months. Eye-rolling silliness: the words, ’make it go away’, come to mind. And the certainty that the story will contain an HEA. 

Jo Montgomery was in a sober three year relationship with Alan Parish. They were both business owners; his was successful, hers wasn’t. She was currently delinquent on a loan but determined to pay it off without letting Alan know of her anxieties. If he found out, she would never live it down. At the moment, she was vying for a contract with a mom and pop daycare company. If successful, it would put Montgomery Group Interiors on the map. 

And then the unthinkable happened; she met the Sterling family. That is, successful businessman and widower, John Sterling, and his three children. Nine-year-old Claire with her glasses and insecurities. Unpredictable and rambunctious six-year-old Jamie, aka, the troublemaker. And three-year-old Billy who refused to be potty-trained. 

Besides the constant shenanigans whenever Jo came in contact with the children, she unintentionally gets swallowed up with little white lies. And as I mentioned, she doesn’t break from her boyfriend even though the chemistry between John and her was instantaneous. John knew there was no ring involved and thought all was fair in love and war. It would have annoyed me more except you could plainly see that Jo and John were made for each other. Because of this, I knocked off one star. 

I enjoyed Kids Is a 4-Letter Word. John was written in a realistic fashion: a loving father that struggled to make sure his children were cared for and happy. Jo made numerous mistakes in judgement but was still very likable. The children linked the two together in a good way.