Rating: 5/5

Children on the Oregon Trail by Anna Rutgers Van Der Loeff is a very moving and interesting novel based on factual events that occurred during the 1840's in the United States of America. It captures the spirit of courage and determination among the pioneers and their families as they journey through challenging times.

The novel is about a pioneering family who are making the huge journey from Mississippi to the Columbia Valley in the Far West. The Sager family consisting of Father and Mother Sager and their seven children as they set set out in convoy with many other families to to reach the seeming utopia of Oregon. During the early stages of the journey, both Father and Mother Sager fall very ill and after giving birth to their seventh child they both pass away; leaving the seven children as orphans. They have to decide to either follow the convoy to their new destination of California or to continue on to Oregon alone in hopes of completing their father's dream of owning a farm in the beautiful Columbia Valley and having new born baby Indepentia baptised in Oregon. The children decide to follow their fathers dream, so they sneak away from the convoy and start on the great trek to Oregon.

The journey is dangerous and the children encounter many life threatening situations, eldest son John, at the age of thirteen is thrust into the position of 'fill-in father' and manages to always protect the children from danger as they slowly and gloomily make their way through the unavoidable dangers of the American wilderness.

The author Anna Rutgers Van Der Loeff uses a very descriptive style of writing, she uses adverbs, adjectives and figurative language to paint a picture and engage the reader into the brilliant novel. She also puts across some very important issues in the novel such as bravery and determination. They are two very important issues of the novel that we also need in our own life. The children face many problems and adversaries along the way in which the author portrays how important it is to be brave and stay determined. If the children (especially John the eldest child) were not brave and did not stay determined, they would never have survived for even a few weeks amongst the harsh and dangerous terrain.

I thoroughly enjoyed reading Children on the Oregon Trail by Anna Rutgers Van Der Loeff as it was so interesting and moving, it amazes me that it is based on factual events. I would recommend this novel to just about anyone however twelve years and over would be the best age group to suit this spectacular book, because of that I would rate it 9/10.