Rating: 5/5

Let’s get this out right at the start. I am a fan…a fan of Ellis Peters/Edith Pargeter…a fan of The Chronicles of Brother Cadfael. So take any extravagant praise in that context. 

I have read these books before (but never written a review of The Sanctuary Sparrow) and enjoyed how Derek Jacobi played Cadfael in the British series. 

Brother Cadfael is monk ensconced in the Monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul in Shrewsbury, England of the 13th century. He is a former crusader who has found his peace as a botanist and herbalist for these Brothers. Yet, from time to time a crime comes his way and he uses his knowledge and unique skills to help solve it. By this book he is in his 60s and life at the monastery has a certain rhythm. There is a tentative partnership between church (Cadfael) and state (deputy sheriff Hugh Beringar) that will grow. “…an odd pair to move so congenially side by side, the monk squat and square and sturdy, rolling in his gait like a seaman, and well launched into his sixtieth year, the sheriff’s deputy more than thirty year younger and half a head taller, but still a small man, of graceful, nimble movements and darkly saturnine features. Cadfael had seen this young man win his appointment fairly, and a wife to go with it, and had witnessed the christening of their first son only a few months ago."

It is a domestic tale that gives Peters the opportunity to relate how a 13th century small town functioned with its various crafts and skills as well as the domestic life of a household. For me, this is as interesting as the mystery of who whacked the goldsmith over the head and stole much of his stored wealth.

The prime suspect is a young vagabond entertainer (singer, juggler, musician) who was entertaining the guests at the wedding of the goldsmith’s son. We learn much about him and his sordid life early in the story and it is clear that Cadfael is inclined to look elsewhere while this “sanctuary sparrow” resides in the monastery temporarily safe from the angry townsfolk who want to see him punished. 

The following will illustrate Cadfael’s approach to a post-mortem examination:
"He inserted his fingers between the parted lips, and showed the teeth also parted, as if in a grimace of pain or a cry. Carefully he drew them wider. Tendrils of crowfoot clung in the large, crooked teeth. Those peering close could see that the mouth within was clogged completely with the debris of the river. 
“Give me a small bowl,” said Cadfael, intent, and Hugh was before Madog in obeying. There was a silver saucer under the unlighted lamp on the altar, the nearest receptacle, and Abbot Radulfus made no move to demur. Cadfael eased the stiffening jaw wider, and with a probing finger drew out into the bowl a thick wad of mud and gravel, tinted with minute fragments of vegetation. 
“Having drawn in this, he could not draw in water. No wonder I got none out of him.” He felt gently about the dead mouth, probing out the last threads of crowfoot, fine as hairs, and set the bowl aside. 
“What you are saying,” said Hugh, closely following, “is that he did not drown.” 
“No, he did not drown.”"

But what charms me most is Peters deepest dive into domestic life, teasing out the details of family “arrangements” and duties and conflicts. For the mystery fan, there is a more than adequate plot. However, it may be that you are not as beguiled by the context as I have been. This is one of the best of the series because Peters elevates and illuminates the commonplace.

Additional quotations:

"The old woman’s live eyes in her dead carcase clung to Cadfael’s face, yet not, he thought, trying to convey to him anything but her defiant reliance on her own resources….Even with the priest she did not speak again. She bore with his urgings, and made the effort to respond with her eyelids when he made his required probings into her sense of sin and need and hope for absolution. She died as soon as he had pronounced it, or only moments later."

"The lofty timbers of the roof soared above them into deep darkness. The three women, two living and one dead, were drawn together into a close, mute intimacy, for these few hours islanded from the world."