Rating: 5/5

I don’t often read biographies - pretty rarely in fact - but Agatha Christie being one of my all time favourite authors, it seemed rude not to. 

First impression - this is one big book! Fear not however, it reads very easily and fast. Christie’s voice comes through her sentences, and it is one full of character and humour. From witnessing her Victorian childhood to married life, passing through not one but two world wars, I was enthralled! I was also many times surprised. Agatha for instance, albeit having a very strong personality, was a shy person. 

Travel featured prominently throughout her life, first with her parents, then her husbands, going around the world (learning to surf in Australia!) to working on archeological digs. She also went on her own, to Baghdad for instance, taking the Orient Express :O) 
“As for trains - what can beat a train? (...) A great puffing monster carrying you through gorges and valleys, by waterfalls, past snow mountains, alongside country roads with strange peasants in carts. Trains are wonderful; I still adore them. To travel by train is to see nature and human beings, towns and churches and rivers - in fact, to see life.”
I for one am sure that this wealth of knowledge, from seeing other cultures and experiencing them, enriched her writing. "You step from one life into another. You are yourself, but a different self.”

Then there is of course her career. The book offers us glimpses: how she wrote, got published, and created her famous characters. 
 "Why not make my detective a Belgian? There were all types of refugees. How about a refugee police officer? A retired police officer. [..] He should have been an inspector, so that he would have a certain knowledge of crime. He would be meticulous, very tidy, I thought to myself, as I cleared away a good many untidy odds and ends in my own bedroom. A tidy little man. I could see him a tidy little man, always arranging things, liking things in pairs, liking things square instead of round. And he should be very brainy - he should have little grey cells of the mind - that was a good phrase: I must remember that - yes, he would have little grey cells. He would have rather a grand name - one of those names that Sherlock Holmes and his family had.”
 "I think it is possible that Miss Marple arose from the pleasure I had taken in portraying Dr Sheppard’s sister in The Murder of Roger Ackroyd. She had been my favourite character in the book - an acidulated spinster, full of curiosity, knowing everything, hearing everything: the complete detective service in the home.”
Would you believe that for the longest time she didn’t see herself as an author? Truly! "I still had an idea that writing books was only the natural successor to embroidering sofa-cushions.”

Upon finishing this long autobiography in a couple of days, I was amazed. Agatha didn’t always get what she wanted but she didn’t let this pull her down. "If the thing you want beyond anything cannot be, it is much better to recognise it and go forward, instead of dwelling on one’s regrets and hopes.” She wasn’t afraid to try anything, even if risky, her vitality infectious. I’m ever so pleased I read this autobiography of an astonishing life and am even more determined to keep on reading everything she has ever published.

P.S: For those who are interested in Christie’s famous disappearance, you won’t find anything here. This is her autobiography and she obviously decided not to shed any light on this incident. 
P.P.S: Ariadne is modelled on her - such as her love of apples *lol*