Rating: 5/5

”The Land of Laughs was lit by eyes that saw the lights that no one’s seen.”

  

Jonathan Carroll

Thomas Abbey is a prep school English teacher who is weighed down with loneliness, boredom, and a lackluster attitude about the direction of his own life. He has three passions: one, he likes to collect unusual masks from around the world; two, he loves the books of Marshall France; three, he hates (loves) his famous father. 

He has been defined his whole life as the son of….

Things begin to change for him during a chance encounter in a bookstore. Bookstores, in my experience, are sometimes the best settings for life changing moments. Thomas finds a first edition book by France he has never seen before, only to be told by the bookseller that the book has already been sold. A piece of his collector’s soul goes up in flames. He decides to wait to meet the person who has bought the book to offer her more than she paid for it. His father has left him with means, the bastard, and so the price of the book is irrelevant in regards to the pleasure he will achieve in owning it. 

This is how he meets Saxony. He has masks on his walls. She has puppets. He loves Marshall France and so does she. As it turns out, she will provide the spark that will set him on a new course. No one has ever successfully written a biography of Marshall France. Saxony is good at research, and Thomas is a pretty decent writer; maybe between the two of them they can bring Marshall France back to life.

Back to life? Interesting choice of words there, Mr. Keeten. 

Thomas takes a semester off, and he and Saxony decide to make the pilgrimage to Galen, Missouri, which is where France had lived until his sudden death at the age of 44. I don’t know if Jonathan Carroll picked 44 on purpose or not, but that number resonates with me because it was the age of two of my favorite writers when they died: F. Scott Fitzgerald and Robert Louis Stevenson. In fact, one might say I’m a little leary of the number 44. 

There is one hurdle that must be leaped for Thomas to have a chance at writing this book about his favorite writer. France’s daughter, Anna, has the keys that unlock all the doors with the treasure troves of information to make the book a definitive biography. 

Anna has that “Lauren Bacall-deep ‘if-you-need-anything-just-whistle’ voice” which gives Thomas an ”eleven-foot-long erection.”

Maybe a slight exaggeration, but you get the idea. He has been knocking boots with Saxony, so this is a new wrinkle that could potentially blow the whole project sky high. To the discerning collector, having sex with your favorite writer’s daughter is the ultimate in obtainable collectible items. 

All that I have discussed is the set up for the main plot, which leads up to the twisty, eyebrow raising, mouth dropping conclusion. Things really start to get wiggy when Thomas hears the Bull Terrier, named Nails, talking in his sleep. I didn’t say barking. I said talking.

What the hell is going on? I mean...what the hell? 

Soon Thomas is wrestling with the concept of whether his idol was...God or Frankenstein?

  

The thing I’ve always enjoyed about Jonathan Carroll is how his plots always start out so normal, and he just keeps adding elements. Some of them are a bit odd, but still within the scope of the lives we all lead. He sucks us in, makes us invested in the characters, and then he starts leading the reader into more and more unfamiliar territory, but still at a pace that the reader has to keep going to find out where Carroll is taking them. Then he hits you with the great reveal that is a bit wicked, a bit deviant, and always brimming with originality. I recently read Pat Conroy’s book “My Reading Life”, and he devotes the final pages of that book discussing how much he enjoys Carroll’s work. Conroy inspired me to reread Carroll’s books for the pure joy of having a chance to revisit his writing, but also a chance to review these books that have given me so much pleasure over the years. If you haven’t had the chance to read Jonathan Carroll, I can’t recommend him highly enough. 

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten