Rating: 2/5

The cover of Five Smooth Stones describes the story as "A monumental novel of forbidden love." It purports to be the story of a marriage between a black man and a white woman during the civil rights movement. But the fact is, it is much more a novel of the civil rights movement; the relationship (which is on again, off again throughout the book, mostly off) is a secondary plot line. 

The story focuses on the life of David Champlin who is raised by his grandfather in New Orleans, wins a scholarship to a college in Ohio (in a foreshadowing of Affirmative Action, he is one of several black students chosen to attend this almost all-white college), attends law school at Harvard, becomes a lawyer in Boston, then is moved to join the forces that are just beginning to mobilize in the South. In the background is Sara, whom he met when he first went to Ohio. She falls in love with him from the first moment, and he quickly follows suit. Yet through most of the book he resists marriage with her because he does not believe she can deal with the repercussions of being a white woman married to a black man. 

The book is an education for anyone who is either white, grew up somewhere besides the South, or both. I grew up in Miami (FL) and am old enough to remember water fountains labeled "white" and "colored" in the Miami courthouse where my mother sometimes worked. But my first-hand experience is limited, and I appreciate the perspective I gained from the book. 

That being said, it was a chore to read. The writing seemed tedious, and at first I got bogged down in paragraphs that didn't always make sense. After awhile I quit trying to digest everything and simply read through until the story picked up again. 

One interesting sidebar was when our hero (David), in his second year of college, resisted the advances of a drunk (male) student, resulting in that student, with the help of a closeted professor, starting a rumor that he (David) was gay. David fully expected to be expelled for this infraction of school policy until his friends and their powerful families rallied, forcing the professor to resign instead when his seduction of numerous male students was uncovered. This novel was written a few years before Stonewall and the gay liberation movement, and the subplot was a reminder of how easily life for gays and lesbians could (and still can) be turned upside-down.