Rating: 2/5

A useful text in many respects for the graduate student. The first chapter was especially insightful and even inspiring in its explanation of how and why we study history. It indirectly provides some particularly zesty counters for addressing and redirecting those who cling to the particularly pesky mantra of “those who forget the past are condemned to repeat it,” which has always bothered me, but I’ve never before had the verbal ammunition to overcome.

Perhaps the greatest flaw of this work is that it is now quite dated having been written in 1992. My professors did not specify an edition, and this is the one I purchased not realizing that there is a 6th ed., if not a 7th (if not, there probably will be soon). What a difference two decades makes in the technology sector. Card catalogues (p.48) are now on the extinct species list, and there are no longer conversations needed of weighing the pros and cons between deciding whether to write by hand, typewriter, or the "word processor" (p.348-363). The foreboding tone of the conversation regarding the pros and cons of the "so called 'laptop'" (p.24) had me laughing aloud. To be fair, I was unaware that laptops existed in 1992, so surely this book was at the cutting edge at the time of publication. Also long since resolved, is the problem of what to do with frail and aging materials as the great digitization projects have rendered this crisis moot. Surely too, will future editions of this work dispense with large portions of Chapter 4 "Finding the Facts", as Google and internal library search systems have thankfully replaced the cumbersome and time consuming days of hunting through various indexes in order to find the desired subject matter. 

Technology aside, the weakest section in this work is Chapter 10 " Plain Words." It is a chapter of unqualified condescending drudgery, in which the authors leave the young writer to question the use and validity of every word he or she has ever committed to paper, while simultaneously managing to sound like the stereotypical "Mean old Mr. Murphys" of the world who shake their collective canes at school children while shouting the inevitable "You kids today...!" speech. What is most curious is their particular tirade "The State of Language Today," regarding what they feel are improper uses for the words "cohort" and "testament" (p. 227-228). Questioning my own grasp of the English language, I picked up my dictionary to consult the entries. In both cases, the definition that the authors asserted was incorrect was listed as the secondary meaning of the word. What made this finding more curious is that my dictionary (American Heritage published in 1963, well before this book) was in their footnote as one of two preferred dictionaries (p.229) that they recommended. In my mind this leaves three explanations for this rant: 1) the authors' do not like secondary definitions of words (possible); 2) the authors' did not bother to re-read the definitions (highly unlikely); 3) they were well-advanced in their careers and crotchety by the time this book was made and mid-chapter they had to grade a stack of freshman papers (my favorite option). Regardless, for me the effect was to weaken my impression of the remainder of their diatribes (of which there were many) for the duration of the next two chapters. This effect is unfortunate because the book is chock full of excellent recommendations and reminders about the necessity to be hyper vigilant with one’s writing. 

Perhaps most useful aspect about this work is that the authors have helpfully included tables and charts which explain various aspects of historical writing and shorthand that students learn casually without really ever knowing the meanings behind the abbreviations. The Proofreader’s Marks (p.340), Roman Numerals and Their Use (p.303) and Common Abbreviations (p.306) are all of great value and highly convenient to have in one work. My recommendation would be to get this work, with the caveat of making certain that one has purchased the most recent edition available. With some works the changes matter very little, with this work the updates are essential.