Rating: 5/5

I read this passage by Weil and sensed that my perspective would forever change:

"There is only one way of never receiving anything but good. It is to know, with our whole soul and not just abstractly, that men who are not animated by pure charity are merely wheels in the mechanism of the order of the world, like inert matter. After that we see that everything comes directly from God, either through the love of a man, or through the lifelessness of matter, whether it be tangible or psychic; through spirit or water. All that increases the vital energy in us is like the bread for which Christ thanks the just. All the blows, the wounds, and the mutilations are like a stone thrown at us by the hand of Christ. Bread and stone both come from Christ and, penetrating to our inward being, bring Christ into us. Bread and stone are love. We must eat the bread and lay ourselves open to the stone, so that it may sink as deeply as possible into our flesh. If we have any armour which is able to protect our soul from the stones thrown by Christ, we should take it off and cast it away" (106).  

To be in the presence of genius like this is a delight and an honor. Words like a honed sword. Reading Weil revives my faith, and here she offers a reminder of the holiness of attention and waiting, to turn towards the divine. Reading this made me habitually stand in the kitchen in the mornings, clutching a cup of tea and staring out the window, pondering irresistible phrases: "there are degrees of silence," "the point at which parallels meet is infinity," etc. What does it all mean??? The yearning and the seeking is also a drawing near.

I love Weil's audacity because it is counterbalanced by immense humility. Also, wowza, she definitely has critiques valid for the Church today, especially how it can foster a dangerously blind sense of patriotism as "for a terrestrial country." On page 176, she writes, "The whole world is uprooted and widowed of its past, and this is so because the new-born Christianity did not know how to detach itself from a tradition which, after all, had ended up with the murder of Christ." Weil also breaks down The Lord's Prayer in a breathtaking analysis (e.g. because of "Thy will be done," we must "desire that everything which has happened should have happened, and nothing else" because "God has permitted it" and "the obedience of the course of events to God is in itself an absolute good" [!]).

One of the greatest thinkers of the twentieth century.

"The beauty of the world is Christ's tender smile coming to us through matter" (112).