Rating: 5/5

I'm not a student of the Chinese written character; and I know Han-shan's poems have found a devoted following in the U.S. through the aegis of Gary Snyder's Stanislavski-like improvisations on Han-shan in Lu-ch'iu's edition. But just as we would not limit Whitman's impact to the poetry culture, insisting rather that he belongs to American (indeed world) culture, Burton Watson has tried to bring Han-shan through sinology to his world audience. 

Here, e.g., is a lyric monkish in its use of Zhuangzi in three distinct English modalities; first Watson's admirable version; next Snyder's iconic poem [both of these from the late Fifties]; finally, a modernist "construal" by Red Pine:

Wonderful, this road to Cold Mountain -- 
Yet there's no sign of horse and carriage. 
In winding valleys too tortuous to trace,
On crags piled who knows how high,
A thousand different grasses weep with dew
And pines hum together in the wind. 
Now it is that, straying from the path,
You ask your shadow, "what way from here?"
____
The path to Han-shan's place is laughable,
A path, but no sign of cart or horse.
Converging gorges -- hard to trace their twists 
Jumbled cliffs -- unbelievable rugged. 
A thousand grasses bend with dew,
A hill of pines hums in the wind.
And now I've lost the shortcut home,
Body asking shadow, how do you keep up?
____
The Cold Mountain Road is strange
no tracks of cart or horse
hard to recall which merging stream 
or tell which piled-up ridge
a myriad plants weep with dew
the pines all sigh the same 
here where the trail disappears
form asks shadow where to?

The third, the Red Pine, is 48 words: six words per eight lines. This discipline bespeaks not a role, as in the second, the Gary Snyder, but wants to enact that spartan quality of the wanderer. It's easy to ignore Red Pine's discipline, to mis-construe it as the modernist virtu of using no undue word. 

Snyder's, by contrast (again, the second in this sequence, though probably the earliest), is urbane ("laughable"), manly ("unbelievably rugged"), candid in its verbal dexterity -- like a Hank Williams vocal. "And now I've lost the shortcut home" -- the implied emphasis, surely, is on his having known one. 

Watson's doesn't make his reader keep up with his dramatic little shifts in tone. Nor is it distilled down to an essence, as is the Red Pine. Watson understands the tension in the voice between devout inward substance ("too tortuous to trace") and the shift toward outward-attending focus: "you ask yourself". The literary idioms in the Watson also convey the original's urbanity ("Now it is that . . ." "who knows how high").

In short, I find much to recommend this little selection from Han-shan put out in 1961 by Nathaniel Tarn's Cape Editions, and then later republished by Watson's home-press, Columbia University. These surely don't replace Gary Snyder, but capitalize on him --