Rating: 3/5

This is basically a different take on X-men. Rather than explore the superhero route, it goes into politics a lot heavier than X-men (not that X-men doesn't). In some ways that makes it more boring, but in some ways more interesting. I think it doesn't get to do characters as well because it's dealing with a longer span of time in three books. 

My main problem is that the Talents come across kinda evil. They more or less control non-Talented, or at least have better life/privileges. They just read their minds, control their emotions, and have huge say in things that happen. The most unrealistic thing about it is they are all just good upstanding people with the exception of one of the short stories. They are all super benevolent (or at least well-intentioned) but it strips all characters of complexity. None are self-serving. They don't murder or have jealousies, they don't do anything real people would do with their powers with the rare exception previously mentioned. 

First half is a collection of shorter stories.
To Ride a Pegasus: 5 stars. Probably my favorite, very short little glimpses through the setup/discovery of Talent and the Talented. I enjoyed these characters and how it explored the ideas.

A Womanly Talent: 3 stars. A little less interesting, but still interesting, exploring motherhood and some of the implications of Talent being passed on genetically and how to deal with a baby with great power and no ability to control. I wanted to see more of Dorotea and hope we will in the next couple books.

Apple: 3 stars. I liked the crime aspect. It mostly deals with what a problem the Talented who aren't so benevolent-minded would do and how it causes problems for those trying to normalize the Talented.

A Bridle for Pegasus: 2 stars. Definitely my least favorite among these shorter stories. I just had a hard time understanding the dynamics between the three Talented it centers around. I got the general gist by the end, but still think it wasn't particularly well-executed. Perhaps I just think these stories thrive in shorter form and this was the longest at over 60 pages.

Pegasus in Flight: 3 stars? Struggled to get into this one, but it was really just the child trafficking plot I didn't like until the end. I think it could have been dropped entirely except it gave a climax to the whole thing. It could have been shorter as some things were repetitive. I also hate the last half of the epilogue pairing Sasha with a twelve year old. It is creepy. It would have been much better if it had been a father-daughter dynamic and would have elevated the story for me, but no, they are romantically interested in each other. McCaffrey often has sort of problematic/questionable romances, but this is by far the worst, and it didn't need to be there. 
I did enjoy Peter and several other characters though I think again, they are pretty flat or uncomplicated. 

Overall, not sure I'd recommend this to anyone, but I'll probably read the last book just to see where it goes. Then, that might be it for me reading McCaffrey.