Rating: 5/5

Magnificent. This is the second of Bahr’s three Civil War novels—beginning with The Black Flower and ending with The Judas Field—and the second that I've read, though by accident I'm going in reverse order. The three are loosely connected, as all are about Mississippians from a town called Cumberland and their experiences during and after the war, but are standalone novels and not really a series. 

The Year of Jubilo is the story of Gawain Harper, a former professor or literature at the Cumberland Women’s Seminary who was shamed into joining the army by the father of the woman he wanted to marry, Morgan Rhea. With the war over, Gawain returns and seeks Morgan again, but a lot has happened in the meantime, including the murder by irregular Confederate cavalry of Morgan’s sister and her pacifist husband. Morgan’s father demands one more thing of Gawain before he will consent to a marriage—help him kill King Solomon Gault, the leader of the guerrillas.

Gault is a great villain—a realistically human mix of the urbane and brutal, a skeptic planter who attends church services for amusement and got rid of his slaves before the war, not out of any altruism—he sold them off—but because he dislikes black people so much he'd rather have poor whites sharecrop his plantation. In addition to terrorizing the countryside during the war with an undisciplined band of guerrillas, Gault has plans to set himself up as virtual ruler of Cumberland via insurrection against the Yankee occupiers. His plans include terrorism and murder, to start with, and Gawain and Morgan are in the way.

Bahr includes lots of well-drawn and memorable secondary characters. Perhaps my favorite is Harry Stribling, a fellow ex-Confederate who joins Gawain on his trip home and who has decided to become a philosopher now that the war is over. He and Gawain have some great comedic dialogue. Others include the creepy Molochi Fish, a deformed tracker who sees ghosts, and Old Hundred-and-Eleven, an eccentric albino who issues prophetic dicta and seems to be everywhere at once. I could name more—the story is loaded with brilliant characters—but these were the standouts.

All the characters are dealing, in one way or another, with the horrific aftermath of the war—something they can't escape, as the town center is ash and rubble and lots of the men who left have not returned. What now? seems to be the question animating everyone, from the veterans walking home, to the women anticipating the arrival of men who may not show up, to embittered commanders like Gault, and even to the occupying authorities, who no longer have an official war to fight and are unsure what to do with the ruined landscape they are now assigned to guard. The answers to that question that each character comes up with drive the plot.

The story, as befits the former curator of William Faulkner’s house, has Southern Gothic elements like ghosts, dreams, visions, and bizarre behavior, but they aren't overplayed. Everything resolves nicely and the ending is quite moving. This is one I'd like to read again someday. But before then, I need to read more about Bushrod Carter, the hero of The Black Flower who, here, appears to Old Hundred-and-Eleven as a ghost.

Highly recommended.