Rating: 5/5

A coming of age story with an emphasis on coming. 

“Stories In An Almost Classical Mode” was the best collection of stories I’ve ever read, but was hesitant and almost fearful of this book after reading about this book. 

I’m happy to say for no one trying to read this, I’m glad I went ahead and encountered Brodkey’s proprietary “moments” again. 

 I did not at all encounter anything similar from the previously mentioned story collection outside of a few names. 

If he’s the American Proust, he’s more correctly termed the “White Trash” Proust. As a fellow “Middle Western” raised child, this is a badge of achievement. Of survival. 

This is a book of remembrance of his life being adopted by the worst family imaginable. In just under 900 pages, we encounter much nuanced loving and touching from almost literally every character Wiley was in proximity to. 

Like “Classical Mode” I started with excitement, rolled my eyes and scoffed at some of the cringy narrations like “fucky-ducky”, but by the halfway point, Brodkey has you submerged fully in his consciousness and it’s kind of a beautiful and ugly thing I feel like I haven’t experience anywhere else. 

Here are some prose samples I’ve texted some friends:

“It's sad inside me.. the willfulness and the intensity of feeling.
If I looked in the mirror at this point, I might think, I don't want to be shallow but I don't want to feel this much either ... I suddenly imagine my own face here a sharp dark-whitish blur of emblematic and compromised presence. Not real. I am very still. Oh, the tight-balled grief.
I have a rictus-smile. On my palely sweating face. I'm ashamed of my dad's death. I feel shame that death exists. I feel amazingly lost and wrong-muscularly and electrically jangled. This grief-I am adopted.
It burns, the thing of being awake and real: it burns. Daddy sometimes said when I was in pain about something, JESUS GOD, LOOK AT YOU; and I would blush and try to be deadpan.
The blaze of supreme heat behind my eyes: juiceless and hot, ironic, lunatic—the lostness-one's flammable breathing edged hoarsely with upset at absence, loss—a noticeable sound: one knows oneself this way from before... Peekaboo, Bad Times; whoop-de-doo...
The fear of the wild world, this partly obliterated world (by grief, the continuums of grief, of griefs of all kinds) I am cheatingly ashen and sweet, tense-nerved, stinking—and secret. I don't like the force there is in grief. I stare blindly in the weirdly lit lightlessness, the whitening real moment. One piece of pinkish light is on the window screen. I smile wryly. The tastes I had that year were foul and rough—tender and sincere—childish and hidden but wartime-fashionable, all in all. I don't know about others but I want to be able to be a brave soldier. I compare my reserves of strength and my state now. I oppose the anguish, if that is what it is, to my morning strength and my chances of living through the day and lasting to tomorrow. I don't really know about tomorrow or if I'll make it until then and be sane, I don't even know about the next few minutes, but I'm not going mad in this grief just now.
This pet is over and I’m safe for a while.” (Failed to have the page, but is near the end of the chapter titled “The Masturbation”)

And

“So, our lips come together in the mutual oddity of something like being retarded or having regressed. They touch, a lile moistly, chapped.
We pause without parting from each other: we listen at our lips to each others stuff in the caves of our mouths. I think I hear a buzz of parts of her mind-like schoolchildren — or like the self decomposed in a tomb
-the smell of death is here. I am oddly phallically well instructed in my own requirements, although specifically a fool as a Casanova that way. My feelings are an odd pressure, like a muscular pressure, or clench-ing, and yet some quality in the feeling, like an edge (as if the feeling were a butterfly wing or a moth wing of a man-moth), rots the surfaces of the lips and into the rot her rot pours and oozes until my eyelids fly open and I look into her eyes and she is there... I don't know who she is but this is an uncontingent end of loneliness-oddly sportive— and yet a fatality. It is like bleeding to death, but that is not what is happening. How odd the world is. I know her. How odd. How odd. How odd. I hold my mouth rottingly to hers and bleed to death emotionally into a ghoulishly after-everything-is-over sense of intimacy. But nothing is over. I intensely mind intimacy—and I wrap myself in it. It scares me. Revenant creatures walk then: the dead. Love and its griefs-you know that shit? The skulls, with the hair and features, of the two deadishly living kids are like lanterns half buried where some sort of breath of wind blows them in such a way that—if I may say this—it is as if the burning stuff inside each skull-sexual hallucination, sexual calculation, sexual wit, sexual selfishness, sexual stupidity, whatever —moves weirdly, dirtily, effectually, from skull to skull and burns each soul up in the magnetisms that arise from such motions.” (697 I believe)

Brodkey is a lot and I cannot lie, but this is the only man I would trust to write about paint drying and it being done to the highest order. 

There was nothing wrong with Silverbladt reading the first page over and over again. What people fail to understand and that Silverbladt did was, “this is a book I’m going to read for the rest of my life.” 

My brain is fried and fuck Nonie (not actually for the love of everything.)

I don’t know. The book is under $10. Doesn’t hurt to have it look back at you. 

Brodkey is everything under the iceberg. The closet you’re unable to get out of.