Rating: 4/5

“If you work to obtain your goal, and realize from the very beginning that nothing valuable comes easily, and still forge ahead, without a doubt you’ll reach your goal, whatever it is.”
― V.C. Andrews, Heaven

I try to express only my most honest opinion in a spoiler free way. If you feel anything in my review is a spoiler and is not already hidden in spoiler brackets please let me know. Thank you.
Heaven lives in a small little house on a mountain in West Virginia. She has an older brother a younger brother, and two younger sisters. Things aren't easy for them. They are very poor and their dad isn't around much, usually out drinking or bedding what little money they have. Its hard work and a hard life for Heaven but she loves the mountains. Things are changing for Heaven though and they are changing fast and not all of it is good. (Sorry for the vague blurb. I don't know what else to say without giving away any spoilers.)
So ever since I was able to read a book this size, I have loved V.C. Andrews. I knew even then that the books were a bit preverted and there seems to always be a little bit incest like things happening, but still the stories are intriguing and always pretty dark. This one was no exception to any of that. As a child/teen when I read this book. I felt bad for Heaven, but loved the adventure that was happening. As an adult I just hate all the adults in this story. ALL of them are messed up, I swear. Anyways, I will continue on with the series eventually.

  How I choose my rating:
1* Did not finish, or hated it but forced myself to finish.
2** Didn't really like it. Didn't hate it but not sure why I finished it other then for some closure.
3*** I liked it. I had some issues with it, but as a whole it was good. I probably won't reread again ever, but there is a chance I might finish the series. (If part of one) But if not it's not a huge loss.
4**** I really liked this book. Maybe not a work of genius, but highly entertaining. I might reread this again, and I will finish the series. (If part of one) I would recommend to those I know hold interest in this books content.
5***** I loved this book. I found little to no issues with it at all. I will definitely be rereading this and probably more than once. I will finish the series and reread it multiple times. (If part of one) I will recommend this book to EVERYONE!!!!