Rating: 5/5

5+ stars (6/10 hearts). I picked this up when I was high-strung and nervous and needed something calm and sweet to read. It fit the bill perfectly. Set in 1800s America, this slice-of-life novel is full of tea-parties and circuses, school and games. Alcott’s humorous, descriptive style immerses you in the story of Bab + Betty Moss, two fatherless little girls living quiet lives, &amp; Ben Brown, a former circus boy struggling to find security. 

Ben was a delightful protagonist. He is very realistic—quite boyish, and with plenty of flaws, but also with a very kind heart and a strong determination. His arc was very good, and I loved seeing him settle down and flourish in a home. Bab was such a humorous character, reminding me a little of Nan from 
  Little Men.
 An independent, creative, loving little girl, learning to think before she talks and look before she acts. Betty was an excellent sidekick—sweet, simple, and just as loving. They were all very realistic children, and so were all their schoolmates, who added quite a lot of humour. Dog Sancho was a sweet addition, too. Thorny was a jolly, humorous boy, rather thoughtless and careless, but with a very kind heart—a good big-brother type of character. Mrs. Moss was a lovely mother, too. But my favourite was certainly Miss Celia—I’ve always adored the “a sweet, beautiful, Godly young lady who makes a difference in everyone’s lives and makes them want to live better” trope. And she filled it perfectly, being still very human and real while also Godly and inspiring. 

The plot is very simple and quiet—just a summer’s adventures, yet touched by tragedy. Ben’s father’s storyline was very good and rather unexpected. The whole point of the book really is the children learning to be better people and trust God through sunshine and rain, and I love it. The tiny speck of romance was adorable, too. 

Overall, this story is a breath of pure, fresh air and a completely satisfying little tale with a happily-ever-after ending. &lt;3

A Favourite Quote: It takes so little to make a child happy, it is a pity grown people do not oftener remember it and scatter little bits of pleasure before the small people, as they throw crumbs to the hungry sparrows.
A Favourite Beautiful Quote: A pleasant spot; for a soft rustle filled the air, a brown carpet of pine needles, with fallen cones for a pattern, lay under foot; and over the tops of the tall brakes that fringed the knoll one had glimpses of hill and valley, farm-houses and winding river, like a silver ribbon through the low, green meadows.
A Favourite Humorous Quote: “I’ve drove elephants and camels, ostriches and grizzly bears, and mules, and six yellow ponies all to oncet. May be I could manage cows if I tried hard," answered Ben, endeavoring to be meek and respectful when scorn filled his soul at the idea of not being able to drive a cow. 
The Squire ... answered gravely,—“Don’t raise elephants and camels much round here. Bears used to be plenty, but folks got tired of them. Mules are numerous, but we have the two-legged kind; and as a general thing prefer Shanghae fowls to ostriches.”