Rating: 5/5

Just finished my 2nd (or 3rd?) reading of a favorite book I've had in my collection for years. It's still taut, suspenseful, and chilling!

Like a lot of readers, I enjoyed the movie so much I bought the book at a time when you actually had to go to bookstores and place an order. Online purchases were a thing of the future at that time. I found a first-edition hardcover copy in a used bookstore or thrift store (can't remember). 

In 1962 a score of irritated French paratroopers have formed an organization called the O.A.S. (Secret Army Organization). Feeling betrayed by Prime Minister De Gaulle for giving Algeria its independence, they have sworn to kill him. After repeated failed attempts, the group goes in hiding and conjures up the only plan with any chance of success..... They must hire an outsider to assassinate the Prime Minister.... They must hire a contract killer with no connection to the OAS. Only in this way will the killer be able to move freely without French authorities being aware of him.

The man they hire is an Englishman who happens to be an incredible shot with a score of kills on his resume. His price for this job of a lifetime is $500,000. When he has half deposited in his Swiss bank account he'll move. But his employers will not be aware of his plans, nor will they be aware of when he'll move forward. Secrecy is the best weapon they have, not forgetting his ability to hit his mark.

By pure chance and coincidence the French authorities learn of the OAS plan and assign their best detective to go to work and learn who this killer is, how he plans to kill their PM, and when. It's a difficult task and all the detective has to go on is the killer's codename: JACKAL!

The movie closely follows the book, which is good, only in greater details that a movie can't do. It's well-paced and thought out. It'suspenseful and leaves you curious about whether something like this actually happened. The Jackal is ruthless, cunning, and stealthily stalks his target, leaving a few dead along the way to cover his tracks.

The author did good research and readers will be taken to a dark world as they learn what it takes to search for and hire a contract killer. When the assassin accepts the contract, he returns home and casually gathers necessary things like clothes, suitcase and passports. Then he calmly cleans out his refrigerator of all perishables considering he'll be gone for some time (I thought that was a good touch of reality). When his OAS (Secret Army Organization) inquires about trusting him to do the job versus taking off with his $500,000 price tag, the Jackal, ever the business-minded fellow, calmly explains how it would cost him too much money to go into hiding from their organization if he did that (paying for protection from French commandos looking to collect their money).

This is a timeless book despite having been written in the early 70s. It's one I'm glad to maintain in my private collection.