Rating: 5/5

One day when I was ten years old sitting in the school library it occurred to me that Jesus Christ was just a big confidence trick. I shared my theological insight with my neighbor, a girl who instantly stood up and ran to the teacher’s desk shouting “Maru Kun thinks Jesus is a confidence trick, Maru Kun thinks Jesus is a confidence trick”. My New Testament exegesis hadn’t been entirely thought out when the teacher came over to ask exactly what I had in mind, but fortunately she didn’t press me for details and instead focused on calming down the young zealot, which I recall she did quite effectively.

Unfortunately I didn’t take my insight any further, which is a shame because if I had I might have written ‘The Gospel According to Jesus Christ” and won the Nobel Prize for Literature instead of Jose Saramago.

At the risk of simplifying what is a very powerful, thoughtful and entertaining book the main premise of ‘The Gospel According to Jesus Christ” is that God created Jesus to help spread His Church, and hence His power, by scripting a very dramatic human-interest story, the Life of Christ, that will hold enormous appeal to its audience, humanity. The devil is in on the deal, as he prospers from an expanding Christian church just as much as God does. In this respect God is a lot like a reality TV producer trying to bring out a world-beating TV series starring a reluctant Jesus Christ (a charismatic rebel who won’t stick to the script, destined for a tragic end) with support from a sexy older woman with a past (Mary of Magdalene) and featuring plenty of family conflict, money worries, political revolution and a few miracles thrown in to justify the special effects budget.

This is a deeply subversive book; it succeeds in turning Christ’s last message from the cross into a cry for human dignity against the war and suffering caused by religion:
  Jesus realized then that he had been tricked, as the lamb led to sacrifice is tricked, and that his life had been planned for death from the very beginning. Remembering the river of blood and suffering that would flow from his side and flood the globe, he called out to the open sky, where God could be seen smiling, Men, forgive Him, for He knows not what He has done.
If the book had been written before 1826, the year of the last execution under the Spanish Inquisition, Jose Saramago would undoubtedly have been burnt at the stake. (The last person to die on the Spanish Inquisition, Cayetano Ripoll, was hung by the civil authorities, much to the annoyance of the Church who buried him in a barrel painted in flames to compensate for this unwarranted act of secular generosity). It is no surprise that the Catholic Church tried to get the book banned, not just because it is subversive but also because it is pretty entertaining.

I have been an atheist ever that first encounter with religious extremism in the school library. Since then I have become a not-very-good-Buddhist (a sect that allows drinking, getting angry and an inability to remember the Four Noble Truths while acknowledging that Buddhism would be a good idea if more people could actually understand it, one of the fastest growing Buddhist sects in the West) and am happy to leave the Christians alone as long as they don’t interfere with me. As the Dali Llama once wisely said, you are better off sticking with the religion of your parents and trying not to do any bad stuff rather than change your religion unless you ready to put up with a lot of trouble. Being a not-very-good-Buddhist is decent compromise between the advice of the Dali Llama and my Church of England upbringing.

Sadly Christians these days, in particular some (not all) Christians in the US, are showing every sign of wanting to interfere with me, and my friends and pretty much anyone else on the planet that doesn’t fit in with their ideal of the high-earning, gun-toting, liberal-smoting American Jesus who is happy to start WWIII if it would bring on the Rapture and His Kingdom that much quicker.

So I would recommend this book to any un-godly atheist destined for the deepest pit in hell who wants to renew his religious non-belief but who would appreciate a break from Hitchens/Dawkins/Harris and the like. Refreshingly, the Jesus it depicts is quite the opposite to the American Jesus as he has much more in common with the Jesus of the Gospels of Mathew, Mark, Luke and John - a figure one can admire in many respects but who seems pretty much forgotten about these days.