Rating: 2/5

First, just a helpful tip: This book is essentially divided into 3 sections: An introduction, an "updated/rewritten" Tao-Te-Ching-like poetry section, and commentary. I found it worked really well to read the introduction sections first (everything up until the Tao-like poetry section). Then I grabbed 2 bookmarks and simultaneously, but separately, made my way through the Tao-poetry and commentary. So I'd read a little poetry, then a little commentary each time I sat down (trying to generally keep to about the same percentage-progress of each, if that makes sense). Reading the poetry straight through was going to be a no-go for me. Anyway, that may help someone else.

As for the book, it goes from fairly general to very specific, in terms of spirituality and theology. I quite enjoyed the beginning 'general' approach of the intro and the commentary section which nicely showed parallels between the teachings of Jesus and the philosophy of the Tao Te Ching.

But, as I read further I slowly realized I was getting less and less out of it (it was losing me). Then had a bit of a revelation: The commentary starts with alot of references to Jesus, scripture, and the Tao Te Ching (Lao Tzu). But as it goes along, you'll notice the ideas, references, and theology slowly switches to quoting Russian/Eastern Orthodox monks, priests, and other 'church authority figures' more and more until, by the end, we're simply swimming in a dark (and not necessarily scripturally-inspired) Christian Orthodox dogma soup.

It was a strange journey to start out with beautiful pictures of Jesus as Tao but end up, essentially, in the same theology as the modern American Evangelical crazies we're trying to escape: The body is evil, suffer and die here with the only goal of getting to heaven, all my (self induced) pain is a sign that "I'm right" and God favors me over others. There's even a story in the last section where a holy man "sees God" and his immediate reaction afterwards is to instantly, and intensely, hate himself! Oof.

This is not the Tao of Love that I believe Jesus pointed us towards. It does not celebrate God's beautiful and holy creation (the world...but also us humans and our bodies!) It just ends with a dark picture of judgement and self-hate that is dogmatic and ugly.

I was pretty excited about the concept of this book because I truly have seen how much the Tao can enlighten our view of what Jesus was teaching us. But this book ended up right back where we started: with the church piling a crushing load of theology and dogma on the people, telling them it's the only way to heaven.

Boo.