Rating: 2/5

For me this was 2.5 stars, with the story unfolding as they seek to prove her innocence. Their past, his infidelity (emotional not physical) and the end left me with a sense of dissatisfaction. He did stray no matter where you draw the line and that she somehow ends up taking some of the blame for their difficulties in the past did not sit right with me.

A re-read; 2*. Well written, had some great passages, but a cheating book with redemption is hard to pull off. 
"I want you to forget about the past...", of course he does, cause he wants back in her pants. Nothing cries I've always loved you, like divorcing and marrying the ow. He was still grieving for his wife when he gets the call about the h being arrested. A good dose of lust seems to take care of all that. She's pined over him since the divorce and he's been in a happy marriage. Then he's getting all whiny because she isn't all over him, but as far as I'm concerned she's a doormat. The situation the h find herself in could be attributed for the bad judgement or heightened desperate emotions. Yet she also kept apologising to him every time she was somewhat snippy. Why? he deserved it. He really was all about lust with the h. The H was just another man who wanted to have his cake and eat it too. He tells her she's not 2nd choice, I understand the words but not sure the sentiment was true at the time he was involved with the ow. 

What really gets my panties in a twist is this, "She understood more clearly now that she had been equally to blame for the breakup of the marriage". Really? she pushed him into another woman's arms did she, got him all emotionally entangled with the ow by using her psychic powers? Whatever the problems between them stepping out is the weakest of behaviours, and to follow it up by not even trying to save his marriage. That last discussion before she sends him off was realistic and after when she's missing him she muses "Where was it written that love had to be weighed in equal measure". IN ROMANCE BOOKS dammit, that's where! The final straw was when she goes back to him and expresses some understanding about his involvement with the OW. That was a bridge to far.  This was about forgiveness, overlooking the imperfections, swallowing pride but today I really did NOT want to read about reality.