Rating: 2/5

I first read Vengeance of the Lion when I was about nine or ten years old, in an empty library, on a different continent than the one where I now live. Over the next few years, most of the characters, plot, and even the title and author of the book faded from my memory.

As I grew older, the world entered a new age - one which promised that all books, movies, songs, and everything else would be stored online for the rest of time.

So I was surprised to learn, as I embarked on a mission in my late thirties to reread the books of my childhood with the context and wisdom I had gained in the intervening decades, that the promise of the internet was a lie. Not everything would be saved. Only what came after 1995, or perhaps the first decade of the 2000s, would be preserved. Countless mass market paperbacks, VHS tapes, training pamphlets, cassette tapes, and even CDs released before then were to be ignored, forgotten. People were too busy to digitize them. We had new movies and television shows to watch, coffee to drink, social media to become addicted to … why bother?

I had also lived for nearly forty years under the foolish impression that libraries existed to preserve knowledge, and therefore they must also preserve books. You know, like the Library of Alexandria. So I was shocked to discover that my local library (of a large, wealthy city) did not have physical copies of books that were best sellers in the 1980s and 1990s. Often, it would not even have the ebook version. It turns out that libraries are more like puppy mills. If no one checks out a book for a long time, that book gets “put down” - it will be removed from circulation, and often thrown away.

My illusion of book security shattered, I became preoccupied (as much as the father of a newborn could) with finding this book. I joined the Goodreads group What’s the Name of That Book???, scoured the internet, and finally found a good candidate. Which my library did not have in any format. So I searched the Los Angeles Public Library’s database - aha! They had one physical copy, but it was part of their reference collection and could not be checked out.

Thanks to the good people over at the Internet Archive, (who digitized this book in 2010), I was finally able to read Vengeance of the Lion again after almost thirty years.

This book sucks.

Seriously, it’s not good. The characters are paper-thin. The plot is contrived. The historical accuracy is sometimes laughably bad (no, iron cannot cut through bronze like paper), sometimes good (how Tyre extracted its famous purple dye). The villains are almost all sadistic, power-hungry sociopaths, and the heroes are all extremely flawed men who are nearly impossible to like, admire, or even find interesting. The women all act, think, and sound the same, except for a black woman toward the end of the book. But unlike all the other women, we never get her point of view, and I suspect her “personality” is more of an assemblage of black female stereotypes than anything else.

There is far too much telling and not enough showing. At one point two of the main characters fall in love off-page. Why? Because they’re main characters who happen to be in proximity to each other. Because the author wants them to. Is it convincing? No. It’s not even convincing to the characters involved, who must be informed of their love-struck status by their friends and peer pressured into forgetting that one of them is married. In another instance of Danielson’s excellent character work (we need a sarcasm font), a man portrayed at the start of the book as impulsive and inconsiderate (he is sleeping with one of his father’s concubines, who also happens to be the mother of two of his half-brothers. Yeesh), becomes the least impulsive and most considerate of his ten closest brothers. How? Why? Who knows! This book certainly doesn’t.

Not being raised religious, I did not pick up on the fact that some of the characters are from the Old Testament when I was a kid. Unlike the rest of the book, I had no memory of Jacob and his family. Which is probably because of how extremely boring they are compared with every other character and plot thread in the book. I’m not sure why Danielson included them at all - maybe he thought having religious figures would drive sales to Christians and Jews. He was probably right, although “religious” is not a word I would use to describe this book. There are themes of hope, redemption, atonement, etc., within the story, but they are not tied to any spiritual or divine guidance.

And yet …

There is a reason why a few lines of dialogue and several scenes in this book have been burned into my mind for decades. Some of them are good. Excellent, even. The plot can move lightning fast, pulling the reader along with it like the tail of a comet. And there are times when Danielson makes you really believe that this story takes place in the ancient world. Makes you really feel like you are amidst the reeds of the Nile River, or that the brutal armies of the Shepherd Kings are approaching. Danielson does an especially good job with the names of people and places - they are all consistent with their respective cultures, a welcome change of pace from the random-name-generator approach taken in the fantasy novels that I mostly read. And there is even some wisdom in the book:

We all spend our youth as fools.
A man needs to have something to lose to really live.
The act of trying to improve the world is a victory in itself.

In a way, I’m glad that Danielson never made me feel for any of his characters (with the possible exception of Ben-Hadad). So many tragic things occur in this book, if Danielson had been a better writer, I would have spent the majority of it weeping.

I am also happy that I read this book when I was so young, because I might not have finished it if I picked it up today for the first time. Childhood truly is the best time to read bad books, especially if you were, like me, a young boy with the emotional awareness of a brick.

Despite all of its flaws, Vengeance of the Lion has some magic to it. At least it did for me. Because even though I forgot most of the book, including every single character name (I did remember Mereet’s nickname - kitten), the story and its world were buried deep within me. How else can I explain my lifelong fascination with the ancient civilizations of Sumer, Assyria, and Egypt? How else can I explain writing a fantasy novel set in a land inspired by Bronze Age Mesopotamia, with a character known as the Lion?

It makes me wonder … what other books, songs, movies, images, words have I forgotten that are a part of me? How many can I find or rediscover? How many can I save before they vanish into the past, never to be experienced again?

Shouldn’t we try to preserve the things that created something good in us?