Rating: 5/5

Upon starting this book immediately after finishing Labrecque's delightful Barely Mistaken, I didn't believe that there was any chance that I would like this one nearly as well. I was completely wrong, and I may have actually liked Better Than Chocolate even more than Barely Mistaken. For shorter books, both are great, enjoyable reads. 

Better Than Chocolate features Eve Carmichael, a supremely ambitious New York business woman who is focused on a promotion that she is anxious to attain. Eve's counterpart in the company's San Francisco office, Jack LaRoux, covets the position just as badly as Eve. The one of them who wins a Chicago ad campaign will become a company vice president and head of their department nationwide. Unbeknownst to each other, Eve and Jack, who have never met, both arrive a few days ahead of their initial client meeting in Chicago. They meet up at the hotel pool, not knowing who the other is, and without even exchanging names, feel an immediate mutual attraction. After making plans to have dinner together, Jack inadvertently discovers that the lady he is so attracted to is his rival, and he allows a passionate encounter to follow their meal without Eve knowing his true identity. When Eve accidentally finds out who Jack is before he has a chance to tell her, she is beyond furious. To Jack's surprise, he and Eve end up spending the remainder of the weekend together, regardless her anger. They part at the end of the weekend, both agreeing that their time together is completely over. After a briefcase mix-up sends Jack after Eve, they both realize that they want to spend what little available time together that they can, knowing that it will all be over in a few weeks when one of them doesn't get the promotion. Over the next few weeks, Jack and Eve realize they have unexpected new feelings for one another. They must determine if their attachment can endure their business rivalry and if they can ever truly trust each other.

This book caught my attention from the beginning, and I was engrossed until the end. I thought the unbidden romance that develops between Jack and Eve had some very sweet aspects, and there were also some very steamy scenes. There were a couple of things I initially found troublesome - such as Eve continuing her erotic weekend with Jack when she was fiercely angry and distrustful of him - but they somehow worked for me as I kept reading. I thoroughly enjoyed both of the Jennifer Labrecque books that I have just read, and I will be reading more by her.