Rating: 4/5

Voodoo River (1995) was the fifth book in the Elvis Cole series, and having begun to reread the books in order, I would argue that this was the best in the series up to that point. 

As the book opens, Elvis is hired by a famous television star named Jodie Taylor. Taylor's mother gave her up at birth thirty-six years ago. She was adopted by a loving couple and regards them as the only parents she ever had or ever needed. However, she now wants Elvis to identify her birth parents. She says that she doesn't want to meet them but she does want to know if there are any medical issues in her biological family that she should be aware of.

Cole takes the case and flies to Louisiana where Taylor was born. Naturally, as soon as he begins digging into Taylor's past, all sorts of dark secrets emerge that will cause problems for Elvis, for his client, and for a lot of other people too. Other people may be digging into Taylor's past as well and Cole finds himself entangled with some very nasty customers. Inevitably, he will have to call upon his partner, Joe Pike, and, as usually happens in these books, Cole and Pike will find themselves in a major battle before all is said and done.

The plot is fairly complex and interesting, but of special interest here is the setting. Robert Crais is a native of Louisiana, and unlike the previous Cole novels all of which took place mostly in and around southern California, Voodoo River takes place almost entirely in the Pelican State. Crais knows the territory well, and once immersed in the book, the reader feels like he or she has been transported to Louisiana.

The other notable thing about the book is that it's here that Cole meets Lucy Chenier, a Baton Rouge attorney who has a young son named Ben. A portion of the book is given over to the relationship that develops between Cole and Chenier, and it gives nothing away to note that this will be the beginning of a long-standing relationship between the two.

If I have any complaint about the book it is that  again Crais ends the book with a major battle featuring Cole and Pike pitted against a veritable army of viscous bad guys. This is the fourth or fifth time the two of them have survived against odds that would have overwhelmed any mortal men, and I found myself wishing that Crais would tone it down a bit. The over-the-top, unrealistic ending was something of a letdown for a novel that seemed otherwise fairly well-grounded. . That's a relatively small complaint, though, and overall, I really enjoyed the book. Elvis Cole is definitely growing on me.