Rating: 3/5

Though this may not be the best storyline in Matt Wagner's GRENDEL epic, this book remains to be my favorite standalone graphic novel of all time.

The story follows Christine Spar, daughter of Stacy Palumbo who was raised by Hunter Rose - the first Grendel. She has just written a best-selling novel, "Devil By The Deed" that chronicles the life and death of Hunter Rose and Grendel. After her son is kidnapped, Christine snaps mentally and goes on a crusade to first find her son, and then enact revenge on the person who kidnapped him. Along the way, she dons the mask of Hunter Rose's Grendel character and assumes the mantle of this devilish persona.

As time goes by, and the outlook of finding her son alive seems more grim, Christine spirals deeper and deeper into the character of Grendel. She soon captures the attention of Argent, the werewolf arch-enemy of Hunter Rose who eventually killed him and ended up crippled himself in the process. Argent now wants this "new" Grendel brought to him, and to find her he uses her own friends for information against her.

Now almost totally mad, Christine puts an end to the reign of terror caused by her son's kidnapper and sets her eyes on putting an end to Argent - the one task that Hunter Rose started as Grendel almost 30 years before, but never finished. Will she succeed or will Argent claim the life of yet another Grendel? The answer may surprise you.

Matt Wagner's story is flawless, and this book is just the beginning of a truly epic story, with DEVIL BY THE DEED acting as a prelude for everything to come. Matt Wagner is a comics genius. GRENDEL was a comic book that was originally published in the 1980's, but still is far more intelligent and holds more weight than most of the comics being published today. GRENDEL was years ahead of it's time, and Matt Wagner held no limits to what he would do with the characters he created within the pages of his books.

The Pander Bros.' artwork is amazing, and this volume features totally remastered color which makes their artwork shine even more.