Rating: 5/5

5 Strobing Foxtrot Stars on a Huge Dancefloor Go to this Roman-Fleuve

I took much delight in this fascinating and woefully underappreciated roman-fleuve (a long sequence of novels together making up a single work) particularly when reflecting upon it as a dance to "the music of time" in which "partners disappear only to reappear once again, once more giving pattern to the spectacle." A Dance to the Music of Time, composed of four movements of three novels each, takes place between 1921 through 1975 in England as the narrator Nicholas Jenkins progresses from his schooldays at Eton all the way through the free-love late 1960s into the early 1970s. Notably, Powell attended Eton at a time when several other talented writers were there, including Eric Blair (a/k/a George Orwell), Cyril Connolly and Henry York (Henry Green). 

Jenkins is as much an observer as he is a participant, and rarely the center of attention. Instead, he gives focus to the lives, growth and aging of his closest three classmates and paints on a huge canvas his and their dance with thirty-two other characters who join and leave and rejoin. The sequence captures in a way I've not seen in any other work how time alters the players by introducing them, then bringing them back at a later time, and then takes them away again, ultimately all of them--some with violence and in war and some quietly--and the reader--this one at least--is knelled by the impermanence of life and its permanence (it goes on). 

The primary trio includes the boorish and ambitious Kenneth Widmerpool (one of the most memorable, despicable characters drawn in any literature I've read), the blue-blooded and self-destructive Charles Stringham and the self-assured and worldly-wise Peter Templer. 

He brilliantly composes each of the thirty-two supporting characters with such prismatic particulars that I can recall most of them now, a year out from reading the cycle. The primary beauty of the four movements is watching these characters waltz in with an ease that can only be imagined by a writer on his game pouring his soul into the works.

The novels are each relatively short, a bit over 200 pages, a few less, and were published between 1951 and 1975. I am so glad I threw away my fear to plunge into the Dance.

This work is hard to figure the best way to review. It is 12 novels, 4 movements, and I fear giving too many details will scare some potential readers away. I will supplement my review to address the separate works (likely by the 4 movements) individually.