Rating: 5/5

I don't know if I've ever felt as emotional throughout the entirety of a book as I was with this one! *Gulp*! I must be really caught up in this now; these are like my own people. Some of them I want to sit down to tea with and have a nice heart-to-heart. Others I want to shake until a spot of sense returns. Some of these characters seem like little children that have been led astray- I may be angry with them but deep down I still care. 

It’s hard to say too much without giving anything away – I don’t want to ruin this for any readers that are considering the series. I’ll speak pretty generally, minus any spoilers plot-wise.

Ross continues to struggle with his mine and undergoes an inner turmoil that will test him and those close to him. He sinks further psychologically. "For the first time in his life he began to feel old. Often these last years he had known himself a failure, but always within him there had been a fundamental conviction that this was a temporary phase, a ‘down’ which in the nature of events must be followed by an ‘up’. At least a part of this conviction had derived from a knowledge of his own youth and vigor."
 
Caroline Penvenen is a favorite of mine. I applaud Winston Graham for writing such a complex character – there is certainly much more to her than meets the eye. Her wit and her generosity shine through; one can’t help but be charmed by her.

George Warleggan is featured even more extensively in this installment. His power seems to have no boundaries. Yet there is some deep-seated inferiority complex that seems to drive many of his actions. He wants to be seen and heard, whether good or bad. "George did not spend his time in company which cared nothing for his approval or disapproval."
 
In a curious turn of events, we see Ross playing the role of matchmaker. Of course, his wisdom in these matters is really thanks to Demelza, who is an expert in matters of the heart – at least the hearts of others. "She’d say life holds only two or three things worth the having, and if you possess them the rest don’t matter, and if you do not possess them the rest are useless." Yes, Demelza, let’s do sit down one of these days! I think we’d get along splendidly.

I clutched the edge of my seat after finishing the last page and yelled to the hubby to queue up the next three episodes on our DVR. Oddly enough, he is nearly as smitten with the television series as I am with the books. Each time I have opened a paperback in the past couple of weeks, I have had to dash his hopes. He eagerly awaits my completion of Book 5, The Black Moon, so that we can begin Season 3 which began airing this month. I love pairing the books with the series, a little at a time. As I finish one book, I watch 3 or 4 episodes and it all feels so real to me! The book captures more of the emotion than even the show can do; but I like to have the faces in my head while I read, as well as the stunning scenery. 

"We can none of us separate ourselves from the consequences of our own behavior."