Rating: 4/5

“There is a time in the life of every boy when he for the first time takes the backward view of life. Perhaps that is the moment when he crosses the line into manhood. The boy is walking through the street of his town. He is thinking of the future and of the figure he will cut in the world. Ambitions and regrets awake within him. Suddenly something happens; he stops under a tree and waits as for a voice calling his name. . . With a little gasp he sees himself as merely a leaf blown by the wind through the streets of his village. . . “

This may be the third or fourth time I have read Sherwood Anderson’s classic (1919) story cycle, Winesburg, Ohio: A Group of Tales of Ohio Small-Town Life. It makes me think of other portraits of places via tales of individual persons, such as Joyce’s Dubliners, or Master’s Spoon River Anthology (which was published in 1915 and which it most closely resembles). I suppose you can name many novel cycles, too, such as Faulkner’s saga of fictional Yoknapatawpha County--based on Lafayette County, Mississippi, where he spent most of his life--that are similar. 

Anderson’s Winesburg is based on Anderson’s own hometown, Clyde, Ohio. It was written mainly in Chicago where Anderson escaped his small town life to become a writer, just as his main character, the would-be writer George Willard does. As a growing-up story, it feels a bit like the alternately nostalgic and dark stories of Ray Bradbury’s Waukegan, Illinois stories, including Dandelion Wine. 

“One shudders at the thought of the meaninglessness of life while at the same instant, and if the people of the town are his people, one loves life so intensely that tears come into the eyes.”

Anderson’s style focuses on psychological insights of characters over plot, and plain-spoken prose, and his approach, one of the first modernist works of fictions, was influential in the development of his mentee Ernest Hemingway’s early work about northern Michigan. Anderson is not as good as any of the above-mentioned writers, though this is his best work.

The 22 stories in the book feature particular townspeople, beginning with a kind of frame, “The Book of the Grotesque,” a term Flannery O’Connor popularized in her stories of the south. Most of the people seem sad and lonely here, but I think Anderson’s point is not to depict small town people as miserable, but to reveal that under the surface of their calm, quiet exteriors they are sometimes seething with longing, lust, fear, restless ambitions, lost dreams. 

“She was very quiet but beneath a placid exterior a continual ferment went on.”

One story is about a minister who sees a woman smoking in a window one night and, suddenly obsessing about her, without her knowledge, turns his life upside down over her. Another is about a woman who waits much of her life for her teen love to return to town; one more is about a bitter man once dumped by a woman. What emerges centrally out of the telling is the character of George Willard who weaves his way through many of the stories, and who struggles with whether to fall in love and stay in town or strike out to make his way in the world:

“He wanted terribly to make his life a thing of great importance, and as he looked about at his fellow men and saw how like clods they lived it seemed to him that he could not bear to become also such a clod.” 

Much of George’s struggle is between love and ambition: “In youth there are always two forces fighting in people. The warm unthinking little animal struggles against the thing that reflects and remembers.” 

So George Willard (and Sherwood Anderson) choose the latter, an they also get and take some advice for their journies: 

“You must not become a mere peddler of words. The thing to learn is to know what people are thinking about, not what they say.” Anderson definitely does that, and the result is often moving.