Rating: 5/5

Summary
It’s not easy growing up with the name Naomi Soledad Leon Outlaw, but she doesn’t let the kids teasing her get the best of her. Naomi is a shy girl who kids at her school refer to her as “nobody special”. Naomi lives with her great-grandmother who she calls gram and her younger brother Owen in Avacado Acres. Not only does Naomi have a hard time with other kids picking on her, but her brother has it even worse because he has a health condition which makes his face look abnormal. Naomi thinks that the only things she is good at is soap carving, worrying and making lists but little does she know that her last name Leon will truly be what she becomes by the end of the book.

When Naomi and Owen’s mother unexpectedly pays a visit to her children things begin to turn for the worse. Skyla, their mother, tries to be a mother again and is buying things for the children and taking them places to make it seem like she hasn’t been away for over 7 years. This isn’t tricking gram and she is not letting her guard down. Things all start to change when Skyla announces that she plans on taking Naomi with her and her new husband to Las Vagas to live with them. Naomi, Owen and Gram are devastated and will do anything to stop this from happening. The one thing that can stop Skyla from taking Naomi for good is by finding their father and having him testify against Skyla, but is the family up for the challenge on finding their long lost father all the way in Mexico? 

Response
This book is such a great book for children and adults to read. As an adult I found this book to be so uplifting. This is a genuine story of a young woman trying to make sense of her life and why her parents are not in it like normal kids. She struggles with the same struggles kids face in today’s schools, which is bullying. She is trying to find herself and become a stronger person. This book could relate to so many people and help students realize that even if they are that shy person that they can become a strong individual and stand up for what they believe in. I think that this is the message of the book. To be who you are and fight for what you want and what you believe in and what is in the best interest of yourself. 

Classroom Connection
One idea that you can use for the classroom came from the book itself. Soap carving is a big topic discussed in the book so the directions on how to exactly do a soap carving is listed on the back of the book. Since this is a book for older children I don’t think there is a problem with the complexity of the project. Another activity which came from teachingbooks.net is have the students make a review of their own. By doing this, the students could better understand the book because they are writing about it using what they taught of the book and not just reading what someone else had to say about it. 

Text Complexity
This book has an unknown Lexile/GR level is V.