Rating: 4/5

4 Stars ~ Working as the elementary school secretary in their quiet village where everybody new everybody's secrets, Mercy was content with her life. Last year she'd become engaged with Phillip, a teacher at the school, and with her future secure, her parents decided to retire to Australia. Saving their pennies for a home, Mercy and Phillip planned to marry sometime next year. Their's is a companionable relationship, with both content to wait for their marriage before they become passionate. When Mercy's former school friend returns to the village to be married, Mercy is surprised and pleased to be asked to be a bridesmaid. Hilary had changed, become more sophisticated and worldly since her move to London. At the church, preceding the bride down the aisle, Mercy's is drawn to a handsome stranger with the most intense grey eyes, who is equally drawn to look at her. When Hilary later outside the church, begs Mercy to keep the man, whose name is Croft, busy and away from Hilary's new husband, Mercy is compelled to promise. Having never flirted with a man before, Mercy does her best to feign an attraction and successfully keeps Croft at her side during the reception. Unknown to Mercy, Hilary's brother is feeding her vodka laced fruit cocktails, and Mercy becomes a tad tipsy. Croft is enchanted with Mercy, and when it's becomes obvious she's two sheets to the wind he offers to see her safely home. Putting her to bed in only her slip, he feels uneasy to leave her in case she's ill during the night, but Mercy's flat is too small to hold a sofa, so Croft's forced to join Mercy in the bed. Unfortunately, the next morning comes too soon, and Phillip who was to take Mercy out for the day, arrives, and when there's no answer to his knock he lets himself in using the spare key that's hidden. Of course, there is Mercy in her slip and Croft under the sheet with his bare chest showing, and Phillip makes the obvious conclusion, one that Croft doesn't dispute. Mortified, Mercy believing she's done the deed, asks Croft to leave, but he's in no hurry, and before he does he gives Mercy his card with his various numbers, in case she needs to get a hold of him. Knowing she has to face the village sometimes, she bravely heads out on foot to Hilary's to collect her car, only to return to her flat to face her landlady who demands she leave as soon as she can. Her landlady does not strange cars parked all night outside her flat, nor men who sleep over. At her wits end and feeling confused as to her future, Mercy calls Croft. He offers her the use of his getaway cottage, and for her to take all the time she needs to sort herself out. Once away from the meddling villagers, Mercy begins to feel free and she finds herself spending more time thinking about Croft than she's every thought of Phillip.

I find that I'm always guaranteed a.n fun read when I pick up a book by Jessica Steele. I adored Mercy, she's an old-fashioned girl that had drifted into an engagement with a man who was steady and equally as old-fashioned. When that engagement ends, she quickly realizes that Phillip really wasn't the man for her, and decides to make a new start with her life. Her attraction to Croft confuses her, but when she's with him she's not the placid mouse but a woman learning to stand on her own feet. Croft finds Mercy pulls him like a magnet, and he patiently watches as she gains confidence in her own appeal. They send sparks off each other, and both protecting their prides, they misunderstand each other. Luckily Croft isn't willing to give up. This was a fun quick read, and I enjoyed it very much.