Rating: 4/5

After kicking around what to rate this book for the better part of 24 hours, I’ve landed on 4 stars. Don’t get me wrong, this is one epic monster of a book. It took me 29 days to read and I don’t regret a moment of it, but as much as I want to rate it 5 stars (and part of me really does), I feel like 4 is the more fair and honest rating. Let me explain (if you’d like to hear that is)…

Alaska by James Michener is one of the longest books I’ve read, possibly even the longest. And for good reason. By the time Alaska came out, people new what they were getting with a Michener release. He picks a setting (anywhere from Texas to Poland to Space), turns back the clock to the earliest days (in this case, the book starts long before the first mammal climbed its way onto dry land), and pulls the reader headfirst in to an epic journey through the ages of both the earth and humans, and tries to paint as full of a picture as he can. The book is made up of 12-15 chronological, loosely connected novellas (though some are novel length in the own right), and by the time we come out the other side, with a long grey beard, notably stronger forearms but with arthritis in our page-turning hand, we have learned more about Alaska in this one book than I ever learned in school. However, since the book is more of a collection than a true novel with one main story, we run into the classic dilemma of rating any collection: the fact that some stories inevitably will be better than others.

Nonetheless, I still do look at this as a novel, not a true collection, and while some stories are indeed better than others, none of the stories were bad. I was not bored at all throughout the course of this novel and that is a hell of an achievement in Michener’s part. If I were to rate individual chapters, there were a couple that fell into that 3.5 range, so I felt it only fair to go for 4 as an overall rating. That said, there were also quite a few full 5 star chapters in Alaska, and when Michener is on it, he is on it, blending history, interesting characters, action, love, brutality, and just about anything else. Some of these stories were truly excellent, and oddly enough I found myself loving the latter parts of the book even more than the earlier parts. In this case we start out with the land and only the land as a main character (and it remains the only true main character throughout the book), and move on to a chapter with a Wooly Mammoth as our main character, and slowly move through time, to early native settlement, to Russian America, to when America purchased the land from the Tsar, through the Civil War era, the world wars, and ending up in the late sixties. It was truly an epic journey. 

Most importantly (given the length), this is a book that starts off and remains extremely readable for all of its densely packed, tiny fonted, 1100 pages. This is important, because if a book this size starts to become difficult to read, boring, or stops holding your attention, it could end up being tough to finish. That never happened here; as I mentioned above, Michener keeps it readable and entertaining. This is a hell of a feat for any writer, and I think he deserves credit for doing this, over and over again. The writing is simple and the storytelling works great, my only complaint is that I think I would’ve liked a bit more atmosphere and setting description. Though there definitely is some of that, but I think I would’ve preferred just a tad more.

So if you’re considering jumping into a Michener novel but find yourself intimidated by it’s substantial length, I say just go for it. It moves and engages the reader in the kind of way that will make you not mind the length one bit, or even make you happy it’s as long as it is. I, without a doubt, plan on jumping into another of these huge Michener books soon, maybe even before the end of the year. I’m curious about Chesapeake, Poland, Caribbean, and Space most of all, but I believe that I could pick up any one of his books and be entertained the whole way through. Just do it; I’m glad I did!