Rating: 4/5

I loved this book. And I’m taken with the mystery of Balzac. What was he doing? What was his aim? What motivated him?

I think that the answer is that Balzac loved to tell stories and he loved to spin them out like a silk scarf being drawn out, and drawn out some more, from a magician’s top hat. And he must have loved to talk because his written conversations are so good and because his wit is so delicious. (For example, “Vice, Hulot found, could forgive him; vice smiled on him from the midst of unbridled luxury. Here, as before a jury, the magnitude of a crime was an extenuating circumstance.”) He was in love with words, I think, with the tumble of language. But he never creates mountains of language and of pages as in Les Miserables by Victor Hugo; Hugo is in love with subject matter and can sometimes bore.

Balzac is neither a total realist or a satirist. He writes about real human events in a real 1840’s context, but I think he can be sometimes over-the-top because he’s entertaining himself. So, it’s not realism though it looks that way. It’s not satire either. I’m not sure that Balzac is so cruel or so devoted to social criticism and social change. He is like a Dickens without the need to show us grief, poverty, goodness, etc. linked to the idea of inspiring better conduct or a better world or a frisson of compassion. Balzac is just not that warm-hearted either.

I wish I knew more about later French writers because I sense that Balzac must have been a great influence. Zola had to have read and absorbed Cousin Betty because his Nana has similarities to Balzac’s Valerie Marneffe, including her end. But I don’t think Zola has the same lightness of touch, the same attitude of observation, the same urge to storytelling for its own sake.

If you want to read what Cousin Betty is about, there are plenty of summaries. I’m more interested, as I said, in what Balzac was about. But I want you to know that I think Cousin Betty is a good read!

Oh . . . I read the copy out of the online Gutenberg Project which I put on my Kindle. (Check out that website!) The translation is from the nineteenth century and is really straightforward and good (which tells me also that Balzac really could drive a story well). The translator is given as James Waring. But that is a pseudonym for Ellen Marriage who translated almost all of Balzac’s 90 novels for the English publisher. She often used her own name on the title page. But she used the pseudonym when the subject matter was a little more “bold” as in Cousin Betty which is full of courtesans and wannabe courtesans and courtesans-in-training. 

As I’m writing, I realize how much I liked this book! Bravo, M. Balzac!