Rating: 5/5

A fascinating document of the opinions, interests, religious thoughts and philosophising of a sixteenth century miller. Unusually for the time this is a document of the world of the working-classes, although this should be caveated with the knowledge that millers were in a slightly elevated position because everyone (rich and poor) needed their services and our own Friulian miller was able to read, write and add. 

What is fascinating is how the religious turmoil spreading across Europe at the time (reformations, burnings of heretics, the flip-flopping between Catholic and Protestant persecution, inquisitions) impacted on a small rural community in Friuli, northern Italy. 

Menocchio our miller seems to have been quite a character – reading it I imagined him as a Piers Corbyn figure, known to be eccentric and maybe someone you wouldn’t want to be stuck in a lift with but with some very valid and considered ideas amid the rambling. Some of the testimonies given by his neighbours paint a vivid picture of a man desperately seeking people to discuss his ideas with. 

   “He is always arguing with somebody about the faith just for the sake of arguing – even with the priest.”
“He will argue with anyone, and when he started to debate with me I said to him: ‘I am a shoemaker, and you a miller, and you are not an educated man, so what’s the use of talking about it?’”. 

The mistake here was the assumption that Menocchio was not educated. He wasn’t formally but his choice of reading material had educated him and fired his desire to explore ideas and possibilities about the world.

Despite his narrow topic of conversation the miller was universally liked, being described as, 
   “an honourable man”, “…everybody’s friend” 
 and many saying, 
   “I like him very much”. 

Menocchio has survived through the transcripts of his two trials for heresy. During his questioning he displays a knowledge of many well-known and influential books of the time and shows how his reading of them have shaped his views, views that seem surprisingly modern today and in conflict to how we imagine people of that period viewed Christianity. One of the books he read was the Decameron and seeing the portrayal of priests, monks and nuns in these stories along with the injustices he saw as endemic in the church can be seen as contributing to his belief that the organised church had little do with spiritual belief. He says,

   “Priests want us under their thumb, just to keep us quiet, while they have a good time.” 

 He sees many of the rituals of the church as being self-serving rather than God-serving, believing indulgences and baptism are unnecessary and questioning the notion of original sin. 
He also has an all embracing attitude to other religions. There is some evidence he read the Koran and he repeatedly (if foolishly) says that if he had been born another religion he would love it as much and be as happy as do Christians. This tolerance to his fellow man is at the heart of his version of religion (spirituality I think we’d term it today) as he believes that entry into heaven, that to live a good life how you treat your neighbour is the benchmark, more important than any religious practice you might observe. 

His ideas on the origin of the world sound crazy but is not a million miles away from life evolving almost spontaneously from a primordial soup and the big bang theory. The title comes from his theorising that, 

  “All was chaos, that is earth, air, water and fire were mixed together; and out of that bulk a mass formed – just as cheese is made out of milk – and worms appeared in it, and these were the angels”. 

A fascinating peek into the life of a well-read working man living through some of the most tumultuous times in history, his attempts to make sense of his world and his search for meaning away from the dogmas of faith. Menocchio is a man you should become acquainted with through this wonderful book.