Rating: 5/5

EDIT: After reading, I'm giving it 5 stars because it is very well written and it drew me in, and it described very well a traumatized victim with PTSD very very well. 

Triggers: PTSD symptoms/reactions described in detail, violent r*pe described partially but enough to trigger imo, probably more, but really I think h's reactions to being touched or intimacy are realistic enough in themselves to potentially trigger someone else's similar PTSD.

Okay, so I realize there's a Big Bad traumatic Secret that is behind h's intense fear of large men, touching, kissing, making out, sex, etc., but I keep picturing her is the Avian Bone Syndrome girlfriend from 30 Rock:

image: 

But for real, at this point (85%) I'm beyond annoyed at the h for not only refusing to do anything to mitigate her issues with even interacting with men, let alone her own fiancee/husband, but refusing to tell her OWN HUSBAND even the broadest reason for her inability to go beyond light petting; he freaking holds her hand a little too passionately and she's like "you're too rough!" like gurrrrl. 

All I can say is that the big bad secret better be worth all the hell she's putting the H through. She treats him like a freaking rapist and he's easily the most gentle and patient of any HQ vintage Hero I've ever seen. 

Well, he's a bit of an AH in the beginning and too pushy, but by the time they're engaged and then on their honeymoon? If she's ace, she should have told him before; if she's capable of having sex but not ready yet she should have put off the marriage till she was ready to actually have a full-on marriage with sex and everything.

EDIT:

The big bad trauma was in fact sufficiently horrific. It was a violent, brutal gang r*pe by 2 young men in her town and someone else. It's not gone ALL the way into, but enough to be pretty traumatizing imo. 

Also: H got frustrated and nearly r*ped h, which of course triggered her, which is when she finally FINALLY told her celibate husband of months about the incident and why she's been so afraid of sex... sort of. She is so convinced he's going to be disgusted at her because she's not "pure" that she still didn't tell him that she's also been terrified that he'll reject her, and then she insists on a divorce because she's a traumatized idiot who needs therapy like years ago... ofc the H thinks it's because he's disgusted HER by nearly raping her and being so physically pushy (fair! He WAS way too pushy and he did nearly force himself on her, and was not gentle about it at all). 

Anyway, they quickly work things out after a weird situation with a stray kitten in a tree in the rain, a sprained ankle, and finally coming clean about all their hangups. 

Would have been better imo if they ended it with a *real* wedding/reception and he convinced her to wear white this time and they did a vow renewal or something because she 100% deserved that- not over the top, but she deserved to wear a white gown imo. 

Actually the real only improvement I would have made is to have them engaged throughout the book until the end, trying to work things out as an engaged couple, so she could have her white wedding.