Rating: 4/5

I love that at the beginning, Hafen points out that the broken heart applies both to our broken heart and contrite spirit but also to Christ's heart, broken for our sakes.

He writes that the gospel was given to us to heal our pain, not to prevent it.

(I'm not putting quotations because I listened to this and then dictated my summary of what he said, so while parts are pretty close to what he said, most aren't direct quotations.) I loved what he wrote about Christ's words to come unto him for his yoke is easy and his burden is light do not describe one event or even just an attitude. It's a process. Christ isn't asking for just the answer to a yes/no question but an essay that meanders through the winding path of our experience. As we traverse that trail, He is not only aware of our limitations but He will compensate for them. Each of us needs to take the Atonement more fully into the deepest part of our consciousness.

He points out that the requirement to enter the Celestial Kingdom is more than just being sinless or having paid for our sins. It requires a broken heart. While those who don't repent and must pay for their own sins will satisfy the demands of justice, they will not have the divine reconciliation, the divine achievement, that comes only through a combination of our repentance and Jesus Christ's grace. He compares it to someone who has spent time in prison. Going to prison satisfies the need for retribution to be paid, the law of justice...but it doesn't necessarily rehabilitate the prisoner, it doesn't necessarily lead to a change of heart. "Mercy and grace are rehabilitative in nature, not retributive."

The Savior's Atonement can make up for not only our sins, but also our inadequacies. No only our wilfull disobedience but also our unknowing mistakes, errors of judgment and imperfections.

All of us are like the one sheep that has gone astray. The Savior will leave the 99 to go and find us. Often we are lost sheep not because we have wandered intentionally but because we are facing difficult challenges and need the Savior's help to overcome and return home.

The nearer we approach our Savior and become a true disciple, the more we recognize our blemishes and faults. Maybe that's part of what it means to have a broken heart.
 
Hafen wrote that if we judge all human activity as either success or failure, with nothing in between, then because human activity is rarely an unequivocal success, we will judge nearly every action taken to be a failure. If we are honest with ourselves and we're committed to high principles, there will always be a distance or gap between where we are and where we hope to be.Progress usually occurs with small steps in the right direction, small incremental changes...but with both ups and downs as we progress, but with an overall upward trend. Often, our downs are seen with fear or discouragement...we worry that they show an overall trend of backsliding or poor performance when really it's a completely natural part of the process of growth. He then says to imagine two circles, one smaller inside of a larger circle. The inner circle is the reality of our actions/behavior/thoughts. The outer circle represents the ideals by which we try to live our life. We are standing in the inner circle, with what is real and true about ourselves, but we are reaching outward, trying to pull ourselves closer to the ideal. We especially see the distance, or gap, between the real and the ideal when we become aware of our imperfections.As that realization grows, so can our frustration. But it often actually shows our growth...because Heavenly Father doesn't show us what we lack all at once, He slowly shows us one area where the real and ideal have a gap and then helps us to lessen or close the gap and then reveals another area where there is a gap. We don't become perfect in one great act, but as we trust the Savior and use His Atonement the inner circle slowly gets pushed nearer the outer circle. So we need to be patient with our own shortcomings and others. And try to notice not only the gaps but also the small, incremental progress being made. 

No matter how hard we try we can't attain charity on our own...it is bestowed upon the true followers of Christ...we can't just work hard to achieve it...it is a spiritual GIFT.