Rating: 2/5

So this is my first book by the infamous, prolific Piers Anthony. He's been writing books for a very long time, and going by what I just read and what I've heard, it feels like he's one of the last of his breed: the pulp author. It's so strange to see his endorsements on the dust jackets of Tolkien-esque fantasy like Robert Jordan and L.E. Modesitt Jr. when his own work echoes to an older era, to the John Carter days of fantasy and sci-fi.

Take this story. It was published in 1986, but started life as a short story in the 60's. It shows. The characters are stiff, the plot simple (until the climax), and the philosophy shallow and didactic. It has not aged well, with modern readers likely to find the writing of women misogynistic. I'd say it's actually not bad for the 60's, and outside of some outdated language, we do get racial diversity, with a black main character and a crew with several Chinese characters as well. In fact, as mandated by Space Agency of Whatever, they have a a perfectly diverse crew! Race and gender wise, that is. 

The story is pretty basic: Captain Shetland is sent on a mission to travel through time, into the future, to find an energy source to bring back to present-day Earth, which has had to limit population growth, food, and common luxuries in the name of resource preservation. He commands a crew that consists of several friends and acquaintances, and the woman he hopes to one day make his wife.

The bulk of the first two-thirds of the novel are conversations. Philosophical, personal, and scientific discussions between the captain and the crew. Lots of pop-physics are bandied about, casual sex is had, and in a shockingly understated scene someone commits suicide out of nowhere. Most of this is just foreshadowing for the climax, and it's not helped by the indistinct characters and the cold pragmatism of our main star. There are some interesting ideas, but it's just kind of slow and stilted. It reminded me a lot of the movie Cube. The need for symbology in the characters superseded the need for them to be human. This book is worse off though, because Cube had some visual flair, shocking moments, and intensity. This is just a lot of talking.

Then the climax hits, and everything goes psychedelic and bizarre. The book improves a lot at this point. We get an interesting scene that the crew sees in cutaway, that serves as our bridge to the ending, which is just completely bananas. It's trippy, but drags on too long, and by the end of it we're just being told directly what it all the means by the narrator. Also, the writing slips at this point. It feels like every other line ends in an exclamation point, like R.U. Slime did some editing work or something. It ends abruptly and abstractly, in a way that would work much better if this was still a short story.

Overall, I don't know. This was just amateurish, and I feel like if Anthony was going to update his decades-old story for a novel, he should have fleshed things out more, made it more punchy. I know the Xanth books, which I've heard also have some outdated gender roles, at least have humor and personality. This felt like an exercise, a book you'd write for a class about a philosophical concept you only half-understood and only took half-seriously. The final message of the book is actually very mundane, it basically states that the Seven Deadly Sins actually contain, in moderation, the tools we needed to evolve successfully as a species. That sounds more interesting than it is, since the connections are obvious and not very illuminating once drawn.

I will be willing to check out more of Piers' work in the future, namely the Geodyssey series, which seems to have attracted the most positive critical acclaim of his many, many books. Will I dare to dip my toes into the well of his pulp work again? I'm not sure. I did finish this book in a day, so it didn't take up much of my time. Sadly, it also didn't make much of impression. Oh well.