Rating: 4/5

This story can be seen as an example of a conflict in which everyone is both right and wrong. In the play, Julius Caesar and his supporters confront a group of conspirators, including Brutus, Cassius, and Casca. The plotters claim that they are acting out of love for Rome, not hatred for Caesar. They are convinced they are on the right side of history and see themselves as Rome's saviors.
The conspirators must defeat the incipient tyranny now or risk losing liberty for centuries. To use an anachronism, they have resorted to a preventive measure. Caesar, they believe, is preparing to assume absolute power, turning free citizens into slaves, though this has not yet happened.
One aspect of this multifaceted work speculates about the nature of power and leadership. The state mechanism and the human organism are compared.

To the opposing camp, led by Mark Antony and Octavius (the future emperor), Brutus and his allies are nothing more than traitors.
 But are the conspirators sincere when they claim to be defending freedom from the battle-scarred Julius Caesar?
What constitutes sincerity? Is there only one kind and one degree? 
The volatility of public opinion, often as fickle as clouds on a windy day, is brilliantly shown. Mark Antony's speech to the crowd of Roman citizens after Julius Caesar's assassination is a perfect example of manipulating mass consciousness. Just now, everyone seemed to agree with Brutus that violent deliverance from the "tyrant" Caesar was legitimate and necessary. But the public mood suddenly turns 180 degrees. The crowd is ready to believe Antony's masterfully constructed speech, in which he assures the people that they were despicably betrayed. An associate of the murdered Caesar begins each of his invectives by praising the offenders. He hides his antagonism under the mask of objectivity, giving everyone credit, and seemingly craving only justice. Every word of Antony's speech is full of venom and hits the target. It is a polished accusation wrapped in flattery that appeals to common sense. How could anyone not believe such an impartial speaker?
As a result, citizens are demanding that the treacherous criminals who dared to take Caesar from them be punished. According to Antony, Caesar was devoted to the well-being of the people around the clock.

The behavior of the Divine Julius immediately before his tragic death - his brief hesitation, which was quickly replaced by a determination to meet Fate - is dramatically conveyed. The augurs tell of the unfavorable signs hanging over the ruler's head. Calpurnia, Caesar's wife, implores her husband not to go to the Capitol that day. But she fails to persuade him. Caesar is not going to eschew the trappings of Fate.

Many of William Shakespeare's historical plays carried messages for his contemporaries. Through these stories, the playwright subtly addressed issues pertinent to his time. He often endowed the characters from the past with the traits of his contemporaries. Scholars have devoted many pages to searching for parallels and finding hidden messages in his texts. However, not all of the allusions that were discernible to the audience at the time are readable to us today. So, what can we say about the contemporary context behind "Julius Caesar"? 

The year is 1599. Queen Elizabeth has been on the English throne for many years, but she has no heirs. Many apprehend that things may get worse after her death. They fear that the sectarian conflict between Catholics and Protestants will escalate. Attempts have been made on Elizabeth's life several times, justified on religious grounds. Around that time, a scandalous treatise by the Jesuit Juan Mariana appeared. Mariana argued that it is legitimate to remove a tyrant if it serves the "common good." 

In his play set in ancient Rome, Shakespeare demonstrates that political murder does not yield the desired outcome. It may have the opposite effect in prospect. It was under Octavian, Caesar's successor, that the Roman Republic finally transformed into an empire.

Around 4.5 stars