Rating: 4/5

Acid-washed gems drop from these characters' mouths each time each mouth is opened. Careful now, the acid lingers and will burn and eat through all of your layers, your clothing, your skin, muscle and fatty tissues, the life you dream you live in, your shape that has been forced upon you, the forces that shape you, your so-called identity. Ouch, that's bad acid! No good trip will come of it.

These acidic treats are like the musings of gods and geniuses, or at the very least, PhD candidates. These beings of extraordinary lucidity and deep intelligence ponder life and the forces that move lives forward. They contemplate these things while grinding each other and making out, while robbing houses, while nursing bottles of alcohol and sucking down various drugs, while conducting seances and satanic rituals, while mutilating and dismembering father figures. Oh, in case you think this novel is even remotely supposed to be "realistic" - whatever that even means - you should know that these hyper-articulate monsters of superlative intellect are an 8-year-old boy and a 12-year-old boy and girl. The author is not aiming for realism. This is a postmodern construct, among many things. A child of Kathy Acker without the purposeful plagiarism, a child of William S. Burroughs without the self-loathing sexuality. A smart child, certainly, but not a very pretty one. Nor a realistic one. This is a dream child, a wee little nightmare.

What's this deep dive into deadpan despair all about it? What is this coldblooded and malevolent fantasia on capitalist, fascist, and Oedipal longings actually trying to say? Well, first and foremost, it is talking about America. In particular, Southern California. But let's look at the bigger picture here. America is just a place. The book engages with the American Dream, but that's just a dream. The History of Luminous Motion is about all of the things that should make us into human beings but instead make us feel hollow, or hollowed-out. Families... gender... politics... consumption... etc et al. This is a poetic, beautifully written, darkly humorous book; it is also a pitiless, scouring therapy session. It comprehends you, what drives you, what makes you stand still, what forces movement. It understands you, fully. But in the end, it just doesn't like you very much.