Rating: 5/5

The most illuminating single volume history of WWII, and one of the very best books on the war, period. It has incisive insights that reemerge in other great books on the war, such as Adam Tooze's the Wages of Destruction: the ultimately futile and vastly destructive and genocidal attempt of a middling power, such as Germany was, to challenge the changing global balance of power vis a vis the US (and USSR). It spends time on fronts and issues that were frequently ignored at the time when the book was first published, especially as relates to the Eastern front as well as other less known areas of the conflict. Political, diplomatic, economic as well as military matters are weaved into one seamless tapestry. You read about the great battles of the war, and then learn about the critical battles that were not waged, such as the would have been conquest of Madagascar by the Japanese that never was. One learns about the industrial might harnessed by the allies in service of the war effort, and realizes the untenable position of the axis powers. 

An exercise typical of Weinberg, and one of my very favorite sections of the book, relates to his analysis of the Russian counterattack in the titanic 1941 battle of Moscow, perhaps the most decisive moment of the entire war. He takes the impatient reader on a long detour that details the political and diplomatic background of that culminating event, before finally turning to the unfolding attack itself. This exercise, repeated in different forms throughout the book, impresses on the reader the global nature of the conflict. The fact is that the military and political leaderships of the respective countries saw it as such: a global conflict, with events in one theater of war impacting others in real time. 

For the military enthusiasts, this is not a tactical military history of the war, although the military struggles are naturally addressed and do form the center of gravity of the narrative. Such readers would be better served by books that deal with military events in individual theaters of conflict. For those seeking a deeper understanding of the war, the rationale for its unfolding events and the inevitability of its outcome, they can hardly be better served by another tome on the subject. Very highly recommended.