Rating: 5/5

I've been curious about this book for a long time, but I've never taken the time to seek it out. When I ran across it by chance at the local library the other day, I thought it was high time that I checked it out and read it. And I'm glad I did. 

The book was published in 1958 and, in some ways, the story is a little bit outdated these days. But not completely. Our overseas embassies are still (now more than ever before, actually) virtual fortresses, and the Americans who are stationed there are still largely cut off from the local population culturally because of PX benefits, lavish accommodations in gated communities, frequent SIGGs (an acronym coined by locals in Thailand in reference to cocktail parties in the US diplomatic community which stands for ‘social incest in the golden ghetto’), etc. 

And we still pay boatloads of money to ship people’s private automobiles to and from their stations, an absurd and outrageously expensive practice, which only adds to the perception by the local populations of these countries that Americans are overprivileged, obtuse and out of touch as they race around in their air-conditioned SUVs, rarely emerging to interact with anyone or anything outside their bubble.

I’ve visited a number of our overseas embassies over the years, both for business and personal reasons, and I’ve seen this for myself. State Department employees have a very high opinion of themselves, and they easily get trapped into an ivory-tower mentality, where they believe themselves to be superior to anyone who does not share their lofty status.

When you assume that you're the smartest person in the room in any given situation as these people tend to do, you end up missing a lot of what is going on around you. As a result, we have enabled corrupt governments from Iran to Nicaragua to Saudi Arabia to Afghanistan, and we still can't seem to figure out what we are doing wrong.

I think the Peace Corps has probably done a lot to improve this situation since the time in which the book is set, but there’s a lot more we could do to put ordinary Americans in touch with their counterparts in the countries where we desire to improve our image and our reputation.

I intend to share this book review with my senators and representative in Congress in hopes that they and their staffs will give more thought to how we can improve the situation in our embassies.