Rating: 5/5

This is the sort of book that I would like to write one day. While I do enjoy works of great length, this is due more to my own mulling processes than any real dislike of shorter pieces. I prefer to read, ponder, read, ponder some more, allowing subconscious faculties to leisurely sample the intake over the course of days; when the book has finally ended and the review awaits, much of the thoughts are there to meet them. What I remember of the days before, I use; what I don't was fit to be filtered out. It makes for a far denser result.
  His curiosity flamed over a word, an adjective, over the seductiveness of the fact that I was taking down a volume of Thomas Mann from the library shelves. Eros has a thousand friends.
I previously compared this work to Rhys, Colette, Frame, for svelte and shining style that captures the soul in a few short shrifts, but the middle stands out for her casual relations with time. Others flit and weave and encircle like she does, but the barest trace of narrative remains, unlike Hardwick's enrapturement with persona and place and prose that forgoes any trace of linear plot beyond what vignettes fail to belie. It is as dense as Women and Men in a far more contemplative sense of the word, it is as succinct as the success of succulence, its thin handbook cover is as treacherous as a spiderweb, that common nuisance of deadly efficiency which pound for pound is stronger than steel. If all shorter works were of this style, a grasping at the complexity of crystalline growth set in the snow globe of memory, every shake eliciting the sort of multifarious perfection found only in the biology of closed systems, I'd have no use for the likes of War and Peace.
  Many are flung down carelessly at birth and they experience the diminishment and sometimes the pleasant truculence of their random misplacement. Americans who are Germans, Germans who are Frenchmen, like Heine perhaps.
There's an upper class bookish feel to it all, but of the transitional kind, as the variety of women encompassed by a matching variation of lengths can attest to. The poor are strong in dirt and drugs and grit without a trace of sentiment, the rich are parodied in their panderings and pride, the in-between delve into sex and politics in however a manner is their custom. Men appear, but as accessory to the fact, and whatever fascination they provoke is often a desire for transience, exhilarated and on edge. While male authors litter the references in a pleasing shape and heterosexuality's a definite thing, female solidarity runs the roost.
  Some men define themselves by women although they appear to believe it is quite the opposite; to believe that it is she, rather than themselves, who is being filed away, tagged, named at last like a quivering cell under a microscope.
Very New England, very Europe, the essence of the efforts of The Goldfinch and a smack of postmodernism to boot, judging by the indictments below. The dregs of dreams' remains, spun into existence incarnate with all its spans and gaps.
  Time—that is something else. With the hesitant intellectual years fly by like the day; life is shortened by the yellowing incompletes. The "book"—a plaguing growth that does not itself grow, but attaches, hangs on, a tumorous companion made up of the deranged cells of learning, experience, thinking.