Rating: 4/5

I was familiar with Trevor from reading his short stories, but I hadn't read them for quite a while - probably since they were last published in the New Yorker. My impression of him, faulty as it turns out, was as a story-teller of the small lives and small epiphanies sort, but told very well. Boring.

Wrong.

I read this after reading Francine Prose's Reading Like a Writer: A Guide for People Who Love Books and for Those Who Want to Write Them so I was better prepared for reading Trevor. He is a writer who writes in-between the lines, i.e., you must pay attention to what is not being said and how it is not being said.

"The Boarding-House" is a novel of what happens after the collector of lonely souls in a SW London boarding-house dies. Mr. Bird thereafter flits in and out of the novel, sometimes as just thoughts, sometimes as apparitions and sometimes in dreams. In the first sentence, on his death bed, he is sighing at the bunches of forget-me-not on the wallpaper. As Prose taught me - a detail like this, with a writer like Trevor, is IMPORTANT. Indeed, the rest of the novel reinforces that Bird must not be forgotten as he leaves the boarding-house to two of the nastiest boarders with the proviso that all be left as is.

What ensues is the most Sparkian novel I have read outside of Muriel Spark. The omniscient narrator is not sympathetic and frequently displays the snark of Spark. The sadness of the lives of the lonely souls is not dwelt on, and the reader finds it hard to sympathize with them. As such the book can be thought of as a bit cruel - but then God can be, right? Mr. Bird flies over them as if they are his collected creatures.

Much is also made of the fact that the boarding-house is not of the present time - Mod London had not penetrated every where beyond Carnaby St. It is in Havishamian decay, but not of memories, just old stuff that could be discarded without a care to anybody. I think Trevor is quietly making the point that new London is destroying old London, but that it might not be a bad thing. Indeed, at the end of the novel (which is dramatic and perfect - think of a Nigerian Milton Waddams from "Office Space") one can imagine the boarders might be shaken a little bit out of the stasis that they were in.