Rating: 4/5

I remember having a ‘phase’ of reading Monica Dickens in my late teens… I particularly adored her (coming of age) novel Mariana and one of her several memoirs One Pair of Hands (about working as a domestic servant and cook, despite Dickens’s wealthy background). Whether fiction or factual account, Dickens largely wrote close to her own experience, her characters being from upper-middle-class backgrounds, contemporary to the author’s own life – at least the pre WW2 work (Dickens was born in 1915 and died in 1992 – and yes, she is related to ‘the other’ Dickens, being his great-granddaughter). 

I re-read Mariana recently and thought I would take a look at Dickens’s autobiography. It was quite a life, in addition to her varied work experiences (as journalist and writer, cook, and nurse, all documented by herself), Dickens was a debutante (a quaint and out-moded idea where girls of a certain background were presented to the reigning monarch (!) then enjoyed their first ‘season’ of socialising in London, then moved to USA after her marriage in the 1940s. Living in Washington DC, she and her American husband adopted two daughters and she undertook humanitarian work alongside (prolific) writing and broadcasting, returning to UK in the 1980s.
Phew. So, the fact Dickens feeds so much of her life and experiences into her writing means some parts of her autobiography are already familiar. However, there are some interesting insights into her childhood as the youngest of three and feeling a bit of a misfit, then her journey to find her place in the world. Then later the sorrow of her brother’s death during the war, and the conflict between her commitments at home and new family in the US.

Overall An Open Book is a bit of a curiosity, as interesting for its window into a certain period in history in a specific place as it is a peep into the author’s life. But Dickens is a great story-teller and this reader was kept engrossed. 
By the way, one of the interesting nuggets for anyone who’s written their own book/s is when Dickens writes about promoting her work – it seems some things don’t change that much.