Rating: 1/5

If only this play were done as a comic book... it would still really, really, really suck (but then, you never know about the quality of the artwork).

This book was so bad that I stopped reading it halfway through Act III, near about line 360. In fact, right after this passage, which I pick up toward the end of a one and one-half page-long ramble that some sad sack actor will be expected to recite from memory:THE DEVIL. I could give you a thousand instances; but they all come to the same thing: the power that governs the earth is not the power of Life but of Death; and the inner need that has nerved Life to the effort of organising itself into the human being is not the need for higher life but for a more efficient engine of destruction. The plague, the famine, the earthquake, the tempest were too spasmodic in their action; the tiger and crocodile were too easily satiated and not cruel enough: something more constantly, more ruthlessly, more ingeniously destructive was needed; and that something was Man, the inventor of the rack, the stake, the gallows, the electric chair; of sword and gun and poison gas: above all, of justice, duty, patriotism, and all the other isms by which even those who are clever enough to be humanely disposed are persuaded to become the most destructive of all the destroyers.

 DON JUAN. Pshaw! all this is old. Your weak side, my diabolic friend, is that you have always been a gull: you take Man at his own valuation. Nothing would flatter him more than your opinion of him. He loves to think of himself as bold and bad. He is neither one nor the other: he is only a coward. Call him tyrant, murderer, pirate, bully; and he will adore you, and swagger about with the consciousness of having the blood of the old sea kings in his veins. Call him liar and thief; and he will only take an action against you for libel. But call him coward; and he will go mad with rage: he will face death to outface that stinging truth. Man gives every reason for his conduct save one, every excuse for his crimes save one, every plea for his safety save one; and that one is his cowardice. Yet all his civilization is founded on his cowardice, on his abject tameness, which he calls his respectability. There are limits to what a mule or an ass will stand; but Man will suffer himself to be degraded until his vileness becomes so loathsome to his oppressors that they themselves are forced to reform it.

 THE DEVIL. Precisely. And these are the creatures in whom you discover what you call a Life Force!

 DON JUAN. Yes... you can make any of these cowards brave by simply putting an idea into his head.	 

 THE STATUE. Stuff! As an old soldier I admit the cowardice: it’s as universal as sea sickness, and matters just as little. But that about putting an idea into a man’s head is stuff and nonsense. In a battle all you need to make you fight is a little hot blood and the knowledge that it’s more dangerous to lose than to win.
Blah, blah, blah... and Shaw's starting point for this drivel was to differentiate and mock Dante's and Milton's respective visions of Heaven and Hell. Why I could not tell you... it has seemingly little to do with Shaw's explicitly stated purpose of writing a story around a Nietzchean ubermensch (as defined by Shaw, that's anyone -- but usually a man -- whose sociopathic amorality makes it possible to achieve greatness)... and I should add that Shaw's "Don Juan" here does not really seem to fit those qualities nor to really behave consistently or intelligently.

One last complaint -- Shaw seems less to have written this for performance than for an imagined literary posterity. (Apparently successfully, alas.) The play is bracketed by a lengthy explanation/apologia and an equally rambling socialist manifesto ostensibly penned by one of the play's characters (and thus hyped by the play's stage action), which might suggest that the author was at least somewhat aware that his work could not stand on its own merits. Add to that ludicrous stage directions/commentary like this which opens Act III: We may therefore contemplate the tramps of the Sierra without prejudice, admitting cheerfully that our objects—briefly, to be gentlemen of fortune—are much the same as theirs, and the difference in our position and methods merely accidental. One or two of them, perhaps, it would be wiser to kill without malice in a friendly and frank manner; for there are bipeds, just as there are quadrupeds, who are too dangerous to be left unchained and unmuzzled; and these cannot fairly expect to have other men’s lives wasted in the work of watching them. But as society has not the courage to kill them, and, when it catches them, simply wreaks on them some superstitious expiatory rites of torture and degradation, and then lets them loose with heightened qualifications for mischief, it is just as well that they are at large in the Sierra, and in the hands of a chief who looks as if he might possibly, on provocation, order them to be shot. Just you try being the director staging that nonsense.

Sure, you could parse this book for "ideas," and find in it morsels to fuel various sides of various social or religious debates. Of course, you could accomplish as much by randomly pulling paragraphs off the internet. The profundity to which your source material is put is not a guaranteed reflection on the quality of the source material. So by all means, spare yourself now.