Rating: 5/5

REVIEW FOR SERIES:: 
Did you know the novel in the third volume of this series "The Tale of Plagues and Carnivals" was the first piece of American fiction about the AIDS epidemic, published way back in 1984? Did you know its publication in the volume Flight from Nevèrÿon resulted in ALL of Delany's books being banned from Barnes and Noble for a number of years due to the moral cloying that existed at that time around AIDS? This series is downright historical for this piece of trivia alone, and it barely scratches the surface.

This is above and beyond Delany's best and most fully realized work, and I think also his most underread and underrated (I've read most of it, at 6,000+ pages so far). The long and the short: A linear unfolding through stories, novels, and novellas of Sword and Sorcery Fantasy concerning the slave uprising led by one famous former slave across an empire that is on the historical cusp of both writing and the minting of money. Each section begins with an epigraph from a postwar critical theorist, and the writing then begins toward and against these various ideas and thinkers, but it is never as simple as a mere explanation of an idea via narrative, and at times when it seems to be, those explanations are then problematized, warped, and reversed in successive pieces. 

It's got all the hallmarks of Delany is known for: genre writing, headiness, weird sex, S&amp;M, experimentalism/metatext, sly humor, lurid anecdotes, brilliant subtlety, blatant didacticism, monologue, dialogue, a consuming interest in what and how writing means, weirdos and outcasts, a true panoply of literary style and form. 

Beyond that, it is sentence for sentence word for word his best written book (I say "book" because it really should be published as an omnibus, hint hint Library of America). I will and do forgive Chip a great deal of clumsiness in the minutiae for his larger sense of grace in general (especially in something like Dhalgren), but there is no forgiveness needed for Nevèrÿon, it is, dare I say—perfect? And that is coming in at ~1200 pages of dense philosophy laden fantasy narrative where to be honest not a lot "happens." I was engaged, and impressed, and stunned, and at many moments even emotionally moved, which is just a strange combination for a book like this that, honestly, should not work in the way it does or as well as it does.

I exhort you: read it read it read it READ IT!

And while I'm at it: Just give Delany the Nobel prize already. What are we waiting for?