Rating: 4/5

I finished reading The Dream of the Broken Horses later last night than I intended. It was after 10 when I reached the “have to finish this now point”. Broken Horses is a very interesting mystery novel.

The setup of the novel is a little unusual (at least in my experience) for a detective story. While it has many of the standard story elements (a sensational murder, an amateur detective, a romantic foil for the detective and a tired policeman), Bayer adds a new element: time, the murder took place 26 years ago. It’s a very interesting story device; it lends a certain amount of detachment to all the action. Except for the occasional and effective use of contemporary written records (journals, newspaper stories and the like) everything we learn is indistinct, filtered by the intervening years. (Oddly about the same time I started Broken Horses I watched the Swedish version of the The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo in which Blomkvist investigates a 40 year old crime.)

In Broken Horses the detective, David, was a boy at the time of the murder and was not totally unaffected by it. One of the victims was both the mother of one of his classmates and a patient of his father’s and the other victim was one of his teachers. In the present, fate has contrived to return him to his home town, the fictional Midwestern city of Calista, to cover a murder trial. His own obsession with the “Flamingo Murders” does the rest.

Although I have no idea when or where I bought this the why is not too hard to figure out. The cover art caught my eye and the dust jacket text reeled me in: The back has a quote by T. Jefferson Parker (Laguna Heat (1985)) praising the book, the inside front flap has a quote from Robert B. Parker (the Spenser series) praising Bayer, and the inside back flap describes Bayer as “One of our most elegant and commanding writers of psycho-erotic suspense”. What can I say, I’m easy.

But as it turns out Broken Horses was well worth reading. I’m glad I discovered it languishing on my unread shelf, a fate it definitely didn't deserve.