Rating: 1/5

Storyline: 1/5
Characters: 3/5
Writing Style: 2/5
World: 3/5

This was one of those rare cases where it would have been better to have read an author interview before starting the book. I delight in creativity and surprises to the extent that I usually don't read synopses and always avoid reviews. There was a lot of creativity and some good surprises, but I spent most of the book in a fugue trying to figure out why any of it mattered.

In many ways I should have connected with The Star Fraction. I like political theory and economics. It is great when an author takes an idea and follows it to its logical conclusion if only to see what it would look like or how it would work. MacLeod was doing all these things. I just couldn't tell what he was doing with them.

MacLeod gives us a near future world in which the European, and particularly the British, social and political order is markedly transformed. Why that transformation occurred, its significance, the relevance to the plot, nor MacLeod's point, however, are obvious. It is an inventive and disorienting world, all the more so because of the cyberpunk flair - interfacing technology, biological enhancements, drugs galore, pervasive delinquency, and disdain for rules (including those of grammar, continuity, clarity, and order). There's no map, though, to help navigate through this world. There were a couple of chapters, later in the book, where MacLeod unexpectedly makes order out of disorder; he gives adequate history or explanation to put contemporary events or factions into their intended context. These moments, however, were too few and too far into the book and left too many things left unexplained.

As a narrative, this was as inscrutable as the political and technological. MacLeod had difficulty relating events through the character's perspectives. Character motivations, then, were often shallow, supposedly dramatic developments came off as unremarkable, "difficult" decisions appeared either obvious or unimportant, and most relationships, interactions, and motivations were perfunctory. For much of the book, I couldn't follow why the characters thought some pieces of information or goals were worth pursuing and others weren't. I couldn't tell why some evidence was relevant and others not. I really did not know whom I was supposed to care about or what I hoped to see happen at the end of the book. 

This is all the more unfortunate because I think I'd like to hang out with MacLeod. He's obviously interested in technology and the future, he's thinking through the implications of concepts such as historical materialism and playing with the varieties of capitalism. He's well versed in leftist political philosophy and movements. Were he to have told me what he intended to do with this book, I would have cheered him on and eagerly read it. Without that background, though, I simply didn't know what was going on. Others who are cyberpunk fans can read the book for its edginess and propensity for destruction. My guess still is that most readers miss the point of the book. That is MacLeod's fault, though, and not the readers. I suspect that he had detailed notes and backgrounds for every political faction and ideology in the book. I'd bet money on him having thought through and noted the theoretical implications and significance of the economies described herein. I think that he had substantive critiques and admissions that were thoughtful and revelatory. None of it made it from the author's head to the book, unfortunately.