Rating: 4/5

One of the things I love about the Brother Cadfael series is that they feel very contemporary, while giving us a glimpse of another time, in this case 1139, and place, Shropshire, England. She often explores issues of gender, in this case, that even wealthy women may not have control over their own lands and decisions to marry, as well as class and other kinds privilege and oppression.

A good part of The Leper of St. Giles is, not surprisingly, set in a lepers colony. She depicts clear prejudice – and also negative attitudes to people who respond poorly to people with leprosy. Characters mistreat lepers, avoid them, bring them food and medication, or relate to them as any other human being: Brother Cadfael “knew of leprosies of the heart and ulcers of the soul worse than any of these he poulticed and lanced with his herbal medicines” (p. 15). 

It is easy to think of these historical prejudices as being old ones and resolved – and they have not been. We continue to be cruel, to objectify and malign.

I don’t know how people perceived others in the 12th century, but Ellis Peters reminds us that people have unique perspectives: some are foolish and self-centered, others compassionate, and yet others compassionate and wise. This makes her stories a type of comfort food for me, especially when I am reading the newspaper too much. 

"Death is present with us every day of our lives, it behooves us to take note of its nearness, not as a threat, but as our common experience on the way to grace. There is no more to be said.” (p. 102)

Apparently, leprosy has not been eradicated (about 208,000 worldwide have the disease), although it might seem that way as it is now called Hansen’s Disease. Hansen’s Disease can be treated by antibiotics, but skin lesions and nerve damage already incurred are irreversible. Members of lepers colonies, if Peters is to be believed, may have had any of a number of other skin problems – boils, ulcers, scrofula, rashes – due to problems of poverty and cleanliness, all treated as one. Although Hansen’s Disease is contagious, it is not highly contagious. Close physical contact rather than more casual contact is required.