Rating: 4/5

Pablo Lopez
May 28, 2015
Book review
Famous all over town
	Famous All over Town is a memoir written by Danny Santiago is a clear representation of what life is like for a Mexican American family who struggles with money and communication in the family. This book takes place in the 80s in a rundown part of east LA. Chato as he is known by his barrio is a part of a street gang called shamrock here he feels like everyone is his family because they treat him and care about him just as much or even more than his own mom and dad do. The book relates to so many young Mexican American boys who are living in the same circumstances as Danny and who have no one and nothing to turn to so they seek a place in a gang where they can feel a sense of protection from rival gangs, white people and even the police. In this book Danny starts to experience sexual awakening and for a very long time he is very over protective of his sister Lena because he feels that everybody interested in her has the same intentions Danny has for other girls. 
	In this book you get to read about some of the Mexican beliefs, for example how a woman has to stay home and be in charge of cooking cleaning and taking care of the kids and the husband is the one to go out and have a job to put food on the table. In the book Danny Santiago talks about how his sister meets a Mexican immigrant who she falls in love with. Lena Chato’s sister is forced to tell her dad and despite the father being against the relationship he wants them to marry before they can go any further in their relationship. In many Mexican families people marry each other at a young age because it is a belief that you must marry the person you love or else you will be looked down on. Famous all over town is great at keeping you interested in what is happening because everything going on affects Danny and his family in ways that are good and bad for the family.
	I would recommend this book to other people to read because it is filled with drama and action from gang violence to his own family fighting each other, jokes, sad moments, happy moments that help shape Chato into a person who loves his family despite all the bad things about them but most importantly he becomes a man and you can see it from the beginning of the book till the end. I recommend this book to other people because when you read it you might realize that Danny Santiago’s life is not very different than yours and his mistakes might make you see that you don’t want to live the life he had to as a young Mexican American teenager. I really enjoy reading this book and I recommend it to other people who are into reading about the ups and downs of someone.