Rating: 5/5

This is the fifth Forsyth thriller I have read and they have all been first rate. It is one of the best.

It is a page-turner and the writing flows smoothly. The research on settings, organizations and technology is commendable. The many characters and interweaving story lines are quite interesting. They include thinly fictionalized versions of Margaret Thatcher, Jimmy Carter, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Cyrus Vance and the Soviet gerontocracy. Written in 1979 and set in in 1982, it went to print just before the Iran hostage crisis that resulted in Carter’s disgrace and subsequent landslide defeat by Reagan in 1980.

The plot has lots of good twists, right up to the end, which has a corker I didn’t see coming. Several elements of the 44-year-old geopolitical plot are remarkably current. The Ukrainian struggle against Russian domination is a central conflict. A headline-grabbing attack on commercial shipping features prominently.

Other goodreads reviewers noted good points that I think merit quoting. Chris Berko called it “a true masterclass in how to juggle multiple story lines”. RJ said “Tom Clancy may have used this book as a guide when he assembled some of his early (read: best) techno-thrillers”.

Like nearly all writers, politicians and pundits of the time, Forsyth misjudged how close the Soviet regime was to collapse. Its dissolution wasn’t inevitable, but it also wasn’t unthinkable, necessitating appeasement and accommodation of an evil empire. It required less than a decade of steadfast determination from leaders like Reagan and Thatcher to peacefully accomplish.

Forsyth came closer to anticipating it than most. The grain harvest subplot illustrates the vulnerabilities of its central planning and control and the potentially devastating consequences. He explicitly points out the problems the Soviets had simmering just beneath the surface with their many discontented nationalities. The Brzezinski character advocates strenuously for the kind of hardline approach that succeeded under Reagan, though in the novel a reelected Carter predictably wimps out and negotiates a short, toothless treaty in a bid to give himself a sham "legacy". Those elements are unusually prescient for something written a decade before the Cold War ended. Forsyth or his editors may have thought going any further would be considered too unbelievable at the time.

There are very few writers who I think are consistently good to great after reading five of their novels. Only Raymond Chandler, Dashiell Hammett and Robert Harris come to mind. This book left me resolved to read a lot more of Forsyth’s back catalogue in the coming year.