Rating: 5/5

Powerfully and staggeringly timely.

Man is mortal. That may be, but let us die resisting; and if our lot is complete annihilation, let us not behave in such a way that it seems justice!

I chose justice in order to remain faithful to the world. I continue to believe that this world has no ultimate meaning. But I know that something in it has a meaning and that is man, because he is the only creature to insist on having one: hence he must be saved if we want to save the idea we have of life.

Despite the clamors and the violence, we tried to preserve in our hearts the memory of a happy sea, of a remembered hill, the smile of a beloved face. This was our best weapon, the one we shall never put away. But we know now that the weapons of happiness cannot be forged without considerable time and too much blood.

The moment people begin rejecting the mystifications on which nihilism is based, then hope is possible. The whole question is whether or not we shall develop faster than the rocket with a nuclear warhead. And unfortunately, the fruits of the spirit are slower to ripen than intercontinental missiles. But, after all, since atomic war would divest any future of its meaning, it gives us complete freedom of action. We have nothing to lose except everything. So let's go ahead. This is the wager of our generation. If we are to fail, it is better, in any case, to have stood on the side of those who choose life than on the side of those who are destroying.

The rebirth is in the hands of all of us. It is up to us if the West is to bring forth any anti-Alexanders to tie together the Gordian Knot of civilization cut by the sword. For this purpose, we must assume all the risks and labors of freedom. There is no need of knowing whether, by pursuing justice, we shall manage to preserve liberty. It is essential to know that without liberty, we shall achieve nothing and that we shall lose both future justice and ancient beauty. And art unites whereas tyranny separates.