Rating: 5/5

FIVE STARS: usually I wait until I have read a title a couple times to be certain it's one that will provide increasing returns, but this is the best new book I've read in a long time. 

Anyone with a serious interest in noir fiction should be reading Japanese mystery; preferably women writers publishing in the early 1990s and onward. I have no idea what's in the water -- cultural or literal -- that such a specific subset would consistently produce such compelling and complex titles in this particular subgenre. But Miyabe has now joined luminaries like Natsuo Kirino and even Minato Kanae (although she trends more horror than mystery) in my estimation, so there you go. 

All She Was Worth (and usually I don't like "re-titling" books for the English market, but that choice was a banger) is the most amazing deconstruction of the femme fatale archetype I have ever seen, with a modern sensibility and psychological depth that puts every cliche about a pretty face with a dark secret to shame. The celluloid-inspired nostalgia of jazz riffs, red lips, and stocking-ed legs emerging from a buttoned trench coat is sent up in smoke. Even Ross Macdonald has competition, although he has the advantage on the prose level of not having to suffer the lens of translation. (For what it's worth, I thought this was a good one, but there were definitely spots where I knew idioms or allusions had been swapped for more recognizable facsimiles to a Western audience. Seriously: when will translation footnotes return from the wars?) But to my mind, Miyabe has carved her own place in the canon of "classic" noir by taking the time to dissect the beating heart of its appeal: the beautiful woman who is portrayed as the invitation to experience the world's evils. 

Miyabe makes it look so effortless, you might be fooled into thinking what she's doing is easy. The story itself is very straightforwardly told. Detective Honma of the Tokyo police force is suffering through a twilight of semi-retirement after an injury on the job leaves him in chronic pain and riding a desk. A distant relative of his dead wife comes to him for help: his fiancee has vanished, and under truly unsettling circumstances. But what starts as a missing person becomes a case deeply entrenched in the ills of modern society, involving predatory lending, aspirational self-sabotage, and possibly murder. 

Honma's investigation is based in the believable detective work of the pre-internet days. He tracks down acquaintances and information, so there are no dramatic chase scenes, no shoot-outs, no hostage situations. And yet I found myself turning through the pages eagerly, and revelations in even the most mundane context -- conversations in noodle shops, or over tea -- had me captivated. I believe it's because, while Honma and the people he meets throughout the book are interesting in their own right (more on that), the book is a character study of the missing woman. And this is what Miyabe does, so skillfully you might mistake it for a story of Honma going places and talking to people: revealing details and puzzle-pieces at just the right times and in just the right order as to take you through a compelling journey of human understanding. It could have gone wrong so easily, tipping into righteousness or pathos at any turn. But Miyabe doesn't let her central figure fully become a victim or a villain, and so by the time she appears in the flesh she is far and away more fascinating than any other person in the book. 

It's an absolute masterstroke, but Miyabe doesn't stop there. All She Was Worth is also a searing indictment of certain elements of modern Japanese life, most especially how these elements affect vulnerable women. The story of the missing fiancee would have gotten the message across clear enough, but what elevates this book is the absolute plethora of fleshed-out female characters, and how they embody the other ways a woman can "turn out." For good or ill -- but there's a definite focus on how both the expectations and constraints of this society are constantly at work on them, and how this guides their choices and relationships. (Again: it's a delicate balance, but Miyabe errs on the side of understanding these women, not pitying them or even moralizing.) The men might participate in the "action," or what there is of it, but women are front and center in every way that matters. Even Honma is a bit of a cipher to the reader, but his touchstone of emotional connection is the memory of his wife and the lingering effect of her life upon his. The result is a deeply compassionate portrait of adult lives in the modern world. 

A rich, thoughtful story told in simple language, with imagery I think will linger in my mind for a long time. A truly special book.