Rating: 1/5

Well this novel managed to surprise me. But not in a good way.

(After her friend, Kevin, is transformed into a phoenix, he is captured and brought to live at a zoo, but when Tess seeks the help of another Switcher to set him free, she discovers a devious plot brewing against her imprisoned friend.) ~ Blurb from Goodreads

There's a moment I really liked in chapter six. So Tess is running through a list of forms she can use to sneak through the zoo that Kevin is being held at and eventually settles on a pine marten. Not only does it give the reader some insight into Tess's backstory about how her family took care of a pine marten like a pet at her old place, but is also a clever choice given its speed, small size, superb climbing abilities, and so on and it's something that I would've never thought of.

I was split on the whole "Phoenix or Vampire" thing. So one of the major conflicts of this novel involves Tess trying to decide if she wants her final form to be a phoenix or a vampire. On the one hand, I love how the novel really dives into the pros and cons of each form and, thus, allows the reader to feel just as conflicted as Tess does about it. The novel could've had the phoenix form be the best choice hands down without giving the other a fair shake, but I'm glad it went that extra mile. On the other hand, this whole conflict is undermined by the fact that there's no reason why Tess just can't choose a form that can shapeshift. As far as I know, she still has that mythology book from the last entry, so if that the case, why can't she just look in there for inspiration for her final form?

Chapter nine almost made me blow a gasket. In this chapter, Tess visits the home of a boy named Martin, whom she suspects is a switcher and responsible for rallying the rats of Dublin earlier in the novel, and tries to recruit him into helping her bail Kevin out of the zoo. He agrees on one condition. That she see his switching power in action. He deliberately brings her close to a group of sketchy boys and scares the group off by turning into a vampire. A short while later, he basically leads her against her will to a darker, more secluded area of the city, threatens her into joining him, and tries to kill her via blood sucking when she doesn't answer within two seconds. Tess switches into a vampire, believing it's the only form to use to protect herself from another vampire, and just lets Martin link his arm with hers and lead her somewhere.

Oh boy. Where to start? 

For one thing, in this novel (and the first one to some extent), Tess is shown to be a street smart character and in chapter six of this novel was shown to be capable of being creative and clever with her switching. Not only does Tess know next to nothing about Martin at this point, but Martin has also done everything possible to prove that he's not to be trusted, so given what the reader knows about Tess, it would've been way more believable and made way more sense if Tess had turned into a Saltwater Crocodile. Hear me out. It's got an absurdly high bite force of 3,700 PSI. For context, a hyena is capable of crushing bone no sweat and its bite force doesn't even crack 2,000 PSI. The Saltwater Crocodile also has scaly armor that can make the vampire's bites next to useless, can grow up to twenty-three feet in length, and has a tail so strong, it can propel its entire body out of water. So with that in mind, having her become a Saltwater Crocodile would tie into Tess becoming more creative and clever with her switching, but also provide her a good way to do enough damage to cripple Martin long enough for her to escape. Now in chapter fourteen, it is revealed that he's been struggling with his feelings towards his deceased dad and the car accident they were both involved in, but Tess and the reader don't get this information until a little over sixty percent into the novel and it does not and should not excuse his behavior in the slightest. One could also say that Tess was acting out of sorts because she was under the influence of Martin's vampire powers, but that argument holds no water when you consider that, before she got unwillingly lead away to somewhere more secluded, she legitimately ran away and tried to get help from a couple in a car and also became a vampire to protect herself all on her own. 

Also, this entire thing with Martin is completely pointless because if Tess had put in at least five seconds of thought, she could've just soloed her entire mission to rescue Kevin. Heck, I did this and actually came up with a plan. 

1) In an aerial form like an owl or hawk, fly over the zoo and find the area that generates the zoo's power.

2) Using a squirrel, chipmunk, or even pine marten, cut the power in order to disable security measures like cameras and whatnot and create a distraction for the security guards.

3) Using a large form like a rhino or elephant, destroy one of the barriers to Kevin's enclosure.

4) Entice Kevin to follow in order to get him to a safer place like Lizzie's.

In chapter ten, it's established that nothing harms vampires outside of the daylight hours giving them horrible dreams, yet later in that same chapter, it's also established that they're weak to a stake through the heart (which someone could very much do at night). Like, really? Why? Honestly, if this novel had gone with either the former or the latter, it would've actually been more effective at clearly conveying just how much of a threat vampires are in this universe. But, as is, not only does it paint a very confusing picture of vampires in this universe, but it also comes off as lazy because it would've been a very easy thing to fix.

So in chapter eighteen, there's a scene that's just... well... Let me explain as best I can. So after Tess bails out Kevin from the zoo with the accidental help of the rats and after a long fight between Kevin the phoenix and Martin the bat, the three end up in a random part of this park. Martin soon transforms into his vampire form and tries to convince Tess to become a vampire. Tess almost accepts until she is face to face with Kevin the phoenix and gets sobered up. After going back and forth trying to decide between choosing the vampire and phoenix as her final form, she grabs Martin's hand and Kevin's phoenix foot just as they're about to collide into one another for another possible fight and armies of good and evil fight inside her mind. In a very predictable twist, she realizes that she doesn't have to choose either, releases her grip, shouts, "I just want to be human!", and Kevin and Martin involuntary revert to their human forms. The novel tries to flimsily justify this in chapter twenty by having Kevin say to Tess, who later corroborates, "I didn't get it to begin with, either, but I think I do now. I think I could only exist as a phoenix as long as Martin existed as a vampire. We counterbalanced each other in some way." 

No Kevin. No Tess. That is not it at all. Not even close. Kevin got permanently trapped as a phoenix because that's the form he chose on his fifteenth birthday (as per the pretty well established rule of "lose your switching power at age fifteen") in order to save himself from dying from the napalm and fire related injuries he got in the last novel. What makes even less sense about this is that their adventure from the last novel where this occurred is mentioned several times throughout this novel. In other words, everything about these two moments craps all over the continuity and what little consistency the Switcher system had. Some might argue that I'm being over dramatic about the inconsistencies of this novel and the last novel, but I assure you, I am not. If everything keeps changing on a whim for no good reason, then nothing matters and the reader has no reason to care.

Overall, Midnight's Choice is the worst entry in the Switchers trilogy by far and considering that the first novel wasn't even that good, that's saying a lot. 

Overall Grade: F