Rating: 4/5

TW: Rape.

This is the first book by Richard North Patterson that I've read and what an introduction to his work it is! I am impressed and now interested in reading more of his books. Though this is the 2nd book in the Tony Lord series, the story stands on it's own pretty well.

At the heart of this book are two really terrible murders. The first victim is Alison Taylor whom Tony Lord at 17, is accused of killing. Almost three decades later, Tony's best friend, Sam Robb is accused of killing a student at the school where he is vice principal, Marcie Calder. It also focuses on two timelines (covering the two murders) but not concurrently which worked well for the story telling. 

I have to say that going in, I didn't have high expectations, I was just hoping it would at least be good. I am glad to say this turned out better than I hoped. The writing is quite captivating, it really pulled me in and I had difficulty putting the book down. Couple that with the characters and we have a winner.

Tony Lord in particular is a wounded man after having been accused of killing his girlfriend when he was a teenager but you get the sense he's a man trying his best even though he's forever been traumatized by that incident. He felt real in the way he related with Sam. Yeah their friendship was kinda toxic but there was an authenticity to the way it's presented.

At first, I found it unbelievable that after all these years, he'd go back to Lake City and it's like he never left but as I read, I understood. 

Do you have people in your life whom you knew when you were growing up, maybe they stayed in your life for a while or maybe you just went through something with them?? I've noticed that we may get stuck in who we were with them that even years later, in their presence, we revert to the 12 year old or 17 year old or 25 year old - esp if there are unresolved issues. Sometimes you can move on but to those people you'll always be that 12 year old or 17 year old or 25 year old they knew and they treat you as such now, even though so many years have passed and you've grown up.

Tony and Sam went through some terrible stuff plus their friendship wasn't all that healthy to begin with so it makes sense that even as adults, they'd fall back into those roles they filled as teenagers. I could relate to that.

On to the mystery, you are kept guessing right up till the end. I saw a reviewer say they'd figured out who did it very early on but I didn't. Even when it was revealed I was shocked. However, I wasn't reading this, rushing to the end so I can know who did it, I was enjoying the journey and the characters and seeing how they interacted with each other.

I would read this again despite knowing how it ends, and speaking of endings, when I finished this, I had a bittersweet feeling. Bitter because there were some moments that were hard to read and even the last few sentences are melancholic but they leave you hopeful; and sweet because it was really good.