Rating: 5/5

Review from 2018

A- for both narration and content, that's 4.5 stars founded up.

I was really pleased to see that some of Lisa Kleypas’ older, previously un-recorded/out of print titles are making their way into audio format, and even moreso when Suddenly You popped up at Audible with Beverley A. Crick as the narrator. (I’m not so pleased that Tantor’s next foray into Ms. Kleypas’ backlist, Someone to Watch Over Me, uses one of the worst narrators I’ve ever heard, but that’s another story!)

Suddenly You was originally published in 2001, and it’s easy to understand why it’s such a firm favourite with many. It’s got a higher steam-quotient than some of the author’s other books dating from this period, but the thing I most enjoyed about it was the way in which the hero is so completely smitten with the heroine from the outset and is wonderfully supportive and encouraging of her throughout.

Amanda Briars is a successful novelist, a forward-thinking and independent woman who doesn’t shy away from tackling difficult subjects in her books, sometimes finding herself targeted by those who insist that her themes are not sufficiently ‘improving’ or ladylike. Those voices don’t worry her, and in the professional sphere, she’s imaginative and confident. But in the personal one, she’s a perennial wallflower. Having realised in her youth that she wasn’t much to look at, she decided to cultivate her mind instead, and after having spent several years caring for her invalid father before his death, she’s reached the age of thirty without having seen much of life and without having any admirers or lovers – she’s never even been kissed. She’s unfashionably plump, short of stature, and possessed of a riotous mass of reddish-brown curls, but although she knows she’s destined to remain a spinster, that doesn’t mean she has to live the rest of her life without experiencing the thrill of passion. So she discreetly approaches the madam of London’s most high-class brothel and asks her to procure her some male company for the evening of her thirtieth birthday a few days hence.

But by the time her birthday comes around, Amanda has changed her mind. As a woman whose livelihood depends to an extent on public opinion, the possibility of discovery and ruin are playing on her mind, so when she opens the door to her ‘present’, she tells him of her change of heart and offers payment – but he very charmingly refuses to accept either, and somehow, she ends up inviting him in for a drink. He’s absolutely gorgeous of course, and Amanda finds herself reluctantly drawn to him, even though her rational mind tells her that it’s his job to flatter a woman and make her feel wanted. She tells him she knows she’s not a beauty and that he shouldn’t try to pretend otherwise but can’t help the stirring of pleasure deep inside each time he makes it clear he finds her attractive. Realising suddenly that this is one night on which she might say and do anything she wants because she’ll never see this man again, Amanda decides to allow herself to be seduced.

Jack Devlin, the bastard son of a dissolute nobleman and an Irish housemaid, has worked hard to make something of his life and is looking to expand his successful publishing business. To this end, he makes his way to the home of novelist Amanda Briers with the intention of speaking to her about his plans to publish her work – and instead finds himself mistaken for the prostitute she has hired for the evening. Surprised that a woman as lovely as Amanda would need to do such a thing, slightly amused at the mistake and immediately smitten, Jack decides to play along. It’s clear from the start that he’s attracted to Amanda’s mind as well as her lush body; before he even met her he liked and admired her work and he quickly realises that for all her intelligence and skill as a writer, Amanda lacks self-confidence and deserves to be seen and treated as the desirable woman she is.

Jack knows, of course, that his deception will become apparent pretty quickly, especially as he still intends to approach Amanda about publishing her work. Naturally, she’s not at all pleased at having been deceived and at first tries to refuse to have anything to do with Jack or his business. But when he outlines his plan to her, he proves himself to be knowledgeable, astute and ambitious – and Amanda can see clearly that she would be a fool to turn down the opportunity he is offering her. In this way, they begin a professional partnership, but the attraction that sparks between them is impossible to ignore, and that partnership soon develops into a passionate affair.

Jack and Amanda are both extremely engaging characters, their romance is imbued with a playful sensuality and their banter is witty and clever. It’s possible to see the conflict in the story coming a mile off, but that’s because Amanda’s character is so well-written and her insecurities are so very relatable. Jack is a real charmer, but he never lies to Amanda (except that one night when he lies by omission) – he respects her and admires her and wants her to succeed; and one of the best lines in the book comes when he shrugs aside her reservations about becoming the editor of a prestigious magazine (because she’s worried no-one will take a female editor seriously):

“Set the world afire. Just let me hand you the matches.”

Beverley A. Crick does a splendid job with the narration of this audiobook, which I’m sure will come as no surprise to anyone who is familiar with her work. Her pacing is just right, her delivery is smooth and easy on the ear, and her performances are always emotionally resonant, pulling the listener right into the story and the characters’ experiences. Most importantly for a romance audio, she is able to convey the intimacy necessary to create a believable connection between the hero and heroine and performs both characters extremely well. Jack is half Irish and the text indicates that his speech is accented; the accent Ms. Crick employs is accurate and consistent (in spite of the odd wobble!) and she makes him sound masculine and sexy, while her portrayal of Amanda encompasses her fierce intelligence as well as her vulnerabilities. Secondary characters are performed and differentiated appropriately throughout, and as always, she’s spot on in the more romantic and emotional moments. In a year that’s been sadly bereft of good historical romance in both print and audio, Suddenly You was delight to listen to, and I’m more than happy to recommend it.