Rating: 5/5

This is HANDS DOWN my FAVORITE and MOST RECOMMENDED Breastfeeding book!

It goes in with the tone that you WILL succeed and you will NOT give up, something that mother's need more of! Finally, there is a bit on what to do if you really, truly CANNOT breastfeed (which is extremely rare), so I'd consider it a very well rounded and just wonderful book!

Breastfeeding is HARD and this book answers ALL of your questions with REAL info you can use! It really does cover ALL aspects of breastfeeding, ALL the nitty-gritty!

I was already in love with this book because of the info provided and how it is wonderfully organized, but when Max was a few weeks old and was not gaining weight (1/2 oz per day, as opposed to 1 oz a day) as fast as he should, me KNOWING my milk supply was not an issue (and it is a big fat myth that a mother's milk may not be good enough for her baby....except in the MOST extreme situations, and even then, rarely) was soooo frustrated when Max's Doctors were telling me to quite breastfeeding and put him on formula and told me that I would end up KILLING him if I never put him on formula. Understand, I would have eventually put him on formula if I felt I needed too, but it was not that serious yet and the doctor did NOTHING to investigate the issue further, and that coupled with some other comments he made, made it clear to me he really knew nothing but some outdated material and old wive's tales when it came to breastfeeding. Not to mention the WIC office and the Lactation consultant told me everything was fine.

Anyway, back to how this book saved the day!
I was reading over a chapter I'd skipped on reflux in infants, because Max was not spitting up (something I though babies HAD to be doing to have reflux). Well in it, they descired the normal symptoms of reflux but then also the atypical symptoms and it was WORD FOR WORD everything Max had been experiencing! Green (as opposed to the normal yellow), seedy, slimy poop, a rash on his bottom and constant crying and pulling away!

I immediately got him into the doctor (a different one this time), book in hand, requested an xray, and sure enough, he had reflux! Put him on Reglan and within 19 days he'd gained 28 oz!!! Remember, an oz a day is normal, he'd gained nine extra ozs! To this day, I am still tempted to go to that doctor and tell him what he did to me!

Cannot suggest this book enough, for so sooo many reasons!