Rating: 3/5

Re The Wayward Bride - Daphne Clair brings us a brilliant character study of a supposedly spoilt rich girl and an up-and-coming young lawyer who wants the h's father's goodwill to advance his career.

This one has mostly H pov of view in it and so we mainly get to know the h from the H's perspective interspersed with secondary character's comments. What the H initially sees is a very beautiful woman who likes to play push and pull games with men. The h's father is all too eager to reinforce the impression that the h is a silly little flirt and how much he would like the H to take her in hand. The H has no intention of being served up on her platter, so even tho the h's father is pushing the h quite forcefully on him, he refuses to react to her challenges and keeps his distance.

They do start dating tho and we as readers get the first hint of something being off when the h meets his friend's children for the first time. The H makes a comment about how unlikely the h is to be around children and to his surprise she takes great offence at his remarks. The h is upset that he is inferring she wouldn't be a good parent, but not enough to dump him. We see more of the h's life as her father continues to try and force her into what he wants her to be and the h realizes that since she doesn't have a job, she doesn't have the means to be self supporting. She takes the initiative again and asks her father to pay for her to go back to school to get more training in computers, which should boost her employablity. 

In the meanwhile, she is still dating the H and getting to know his family. There are lots of children about and while his older sister is dubious about the h's maturity level, his younger sister thinks the h is great and used to using her looks and a sparkling personality to hide a lot of pain and vulnerability. Eventually the h proposes to the H. It is hinted that she has several reasons, she likes the H and wants to do some boudoir bouncing with him, she wants to get out of her father's house and she really wants to have a baby. The H accepts, ostensibly because he would like some boudoir bouncing too, but mainly cause the h's father can do his career a powerful amount of good. 

They marry and the h surprisingly is very good at housekeeping and domestic engineering. She even does a great job watching the H's friend's children when their parents go off for a few days. Soon the h is pregnant and things seem to be great on the domestic front, but there is tensions when the H doesn't discuss his work with her. The h sees him with a young attractive lady partner from his law firm and has some understandable concerns, mainly because the H never says he sees her as anything more than a pretty face. The H is a lot like the h's father, as she is finding out now that they are married. 

Then the h suffers a miscarriage, and she sinks into the pits of depression. The H gets increasingly desperate to get the party girl h persona back and invites her father over. The h's father proves to be an insensitive cad who tells the h to pull herself together, he can get over the loss of his first grandchild and she needs to too. 

 Those words provoke a powerful attack by the h. It seems the lost baby was not the father's first grandchild, the h had a baby a 17 that she really wanted and the father made her give up in a closed adoption. Years of resentment and rage come out when the h succinctly explains that her father only ever wanted for her what he wanted her to have, she was never allowed to have her own life or her own independence and she quite rightly hates her father for his limiting, controlling ways. The h tells him she can't forgive him for refusing to help her keep her baby and that she has hated him ever since. 

The H is shocked and makes the father leave. Then he asks the h about the guy she was with when she got preggers and the h believes that he took her father's payoff and left to go backpack around the world while the father was browbeating the h until she gave her baby up for adoption. 

The H gets a different story from the h's father, he lied and told the h's boyfriend, (who wanted to marry her or do whatever the h wanted, cause they were very much in love,) that he had the h get a termination. The H is livid at the h's fathers insensitivity and arrogance, and tho the h had since apologized to her father, the father remarks how he never sees the h, the H remarks he can understand and how he doesn't want to see the h's father either. 

Then the H decides that he needs to give the h back to her lost love and so he finds the young man, now five years older and establishing himself, and tells him about how the h's father lied to him and invites him to meet the h. The h's former lover does show up and the H leaves them for a bit. When he comes back both the young man and the h are gone and the H believes that the h left him to be with her first love. He gets a postcard from the h postmarked from the town where the former lover lives and so the assumes they are lurving it up together. 

He eventually discovers that the h never left with the OM when he calls up to chat about the demise of their marriage. In fact the h and the OM only chatted together for a bit about the past and then never contacted each other again, too much time had passed and they weren't the same people. 

 This discovery panics the H and he starts an all out search for the h, for some reason he still persists in seeing her as a wayward child who can't look after herself. He eventually finds her, taking care of herself with a job and a flat and after establishing that he isn't only her babymaking stud service, he convinces her he loves her and wants her to come back for the big HEA.

A lot of people really love this book. Especially the part where the H lets the h go because he thinks she is happier with her first love. While I think the character of the h is exquisitely done, I pretty much despise this H. Throughout the book he and other characters, except his younger sister, are patronizing, judgmental gits and I finally ran out of patience for the lot of them. 

 Just because a woman is beautiful and flirty, they judge her as being an immature man eater. But every single male, except for the h's first love and a man from Canada she dates a bit early on in the book, sees the h as a empty headed sex toy and treats her like one, and that includes the H. I don't feel he ever once sees who the h really is and while DC did an excellent job of revealing the h's character to us, she never shows that the other character's in the book see it too. (Except for the H's younger sister - who winds up being a patsy to push the H and h back together.) 

Even the subsequent revelations about the h's life don't stop this H from arrogantly assuming the h is some kind of helpless, doormatty parcel he can manage and pass around. The continual subtle demeaning of the h's character by the H was enough to pretty much make me ill. 

It never stops, he never thinks she is an independent person who can manage her own life, even at the culmination of the book. The h's father was just atrocious and unfortunately I never really see the H as anything different. This H never, not once, just sits down and expresses his sorrow for the h over the loss of her children and then simply asks her how he can help her be happy again. Instead he makes this asinine decision to hand her over to her first love, without even consulting the h. So in my eyes, he should have been left permanently, cause he was a self-centered louse and refused to see the h has a mind and a brain and a will of her own.

 I don't think DC spent enough time after the big secret reveal to rehabilitate the H's attitude. The H is still more focused on the h's first love than he is about the fact that she has lost her children, and she is so obviously grieving and feeling guilty and it is NEVER addressed. This h needed help, not a love clubbing and I can't quite forgive the H or DC for not seeing it. 

(Really the only great time I had with this book was figuring out the perfume, that was selected by his younger sister, the H gives the h at her birthday party at the start of the book. I have determined based on the description of it being a new for 1990 carnation scented oriental with a delicate tone that it must have been Rocha's Byzance - even tho DC never names it in the book, it fits the description and it's scent kinda characterizes the h perfectly. She is nice, but sassy and has a lot of undiscovered depths that only show up as we become accustomed to her. )

Still the first part of this book is beautifully done and the h is really well portrayed, for all that we get very little of her POV. A lot of readers will find the H highly romantic, so while I did not buy the HEA or like the H, because I wanted to see the h get her own life and be happy with pretty much anyone else, most people find this an excellent story and a great outing to HPlandia.