Rating: 3/5

After going through the Lensman series, I figured I should read one of the earliest things E.E. "Doc" "Fella" "Bachelor's" "Master's" "Community College Degree" Smith wrote in his career. It was a little rough.

The overall plot's some enjoyable silliness about a chemist stumbling into how to unlock the atomic energy of copper and convert it into drive energy, so of course he works with an industrialist buddy to build a spaceship (the Skylark, natch). However, evil rival chemist and cohorts build their own lesser spaceship, kidnap his fiancee, and adventures occur.

Two of my favorite moments in the book:

1: the marriage chapter. Our heroes all get married on a friendly civilization's planet. The ceremony is ever so much more beautiful and majestic than mere Earthly ceremonies. Also, a large part of the officiant's speech involves going into how our heroes are a sign from the First Cause that their civilization is truly fated to righteously utterly genocide the planet's enemy civilization. The reader must assume that the genocide bit was some of what made Space Marriage much more beautiful than the terrestrial variety. (It almost goes without saying that, later, they righteously utterly genocide the enemy civilization.)

2: our chemist hero goes into a sudden paragraphs-long rant about how the goddamn jewelers' cabal have artificially inflated the price of platinum, manipulating a stupid fad of using platinum in jewelry when it should be going to honest scientific laboratory work and any scientist even half worth his salt wouldn't allow anyone he even passingly knows to buy platinum jewelry on pains of slugging them right in the face goddammit see if he doesn't, so fucking A right he's going to load the entire cargo hold up with tons of platinum in order to flood the terrestrial market with it at fifty cents a pound while making sure the goddamn jewelers can't get their grubby claws on any of it, it's all going to be scientific lab platinum dammit. (His fiancee simpers agreeably.) I was imagining Smith typing away at a steady workaday clip until that section, whereupon he started ramming his fingers angrily down into each key so hard it repeatedly got bits of the typewriter stuck.

The whole thing kind of trails off at the end, because it's setting up more episodic sequels that I probably won't seek out.