Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars — Classic case of right book, wrong time?

Didn’t do this any favors by reading it in disrupted, distracted spurts spread across a busy two weeks of summer travel and time spent with family. It's episodic and ephemeral enough as it is, and my staggered reading no doubt made it even more of a struggle to connect with these characters and their respective journeys.

I think the main thing that kept me from adoring this as much as some of my other GR friends, was the lack of a clear, compelling plot. Not that I need every book to include an action-packed storyline, but I do prefer a stronger and more balanced "story to emotion" ratio than this. 

There just wasn't enough narrative momentum in this loosely structured story of unconventional love and friendship between Jonathan and Bobby, two boyhood friends, and a woman they both meet later in life, to sustain my interest or make me care about what happened to them on any kind of deep or lingering level.

Amidst this frustrating aimlessness, however, there's some truly beautiful writing and lovely character development to savor and enjoy. I didn't necessarily like most of these characters, but I finished the book feeling like I knew them on a sometimes uncomfortably intimate level. 

At times the prose feels strained and overwrought, which shouldn’t come as a surprise considering it's one of Cunningham's early novels. But there are also passages of pure genius scattered throughout, the kind of lyrical perfection and punch-to-the-gut relatable life wisdom that left me tossing the book aside and gasping for air several times.

The childhood and adolescence chapters were my favorites, especially those told from the point of view of Alice (Jonathan's mother). She was the most complex and interesting character for me, and Cunningham seems most confident and insightful when exploring the complicated, fraught relationships between parents and children. 

There's an aching vulnerability and raw honesty in these chapters about a young mother struggling to connect with her lonely and sexually confused teenage son, that really resonated with me in a way the rest of the book didn't.