Rating: 4/5

I took a very long break from starting this boo to finishing it but this collection of translated poetry by Soviet poet Yevtushenko is incredible, evocative, and touching. Translated as accurately as possible while maintaining the original sense of rhythm, it is hard to say how much this translation carries the spirit of the original text but based on these translations, Yevtushenko was a treasure.

Yevtushenko's ability to conjure up time and place with a nostalgic familiarity is the most striking weapon in his arsenal and is apparent in near enough all of the poetry in this collection. Throughout childhood reminiscences and revisitation, we see an image of the author's life through a familial and personal lens that seems filled with both aged wisdom and youthful simplicity. Starting with the author's most famous poem, the autobiographical Zima Junction, which runs for the first fifty pages of this 91-page book, it is the perfect scene-setter for Yevtushenko's aforementioned style as it is probably the most extreme example of it within the entire text. 

The rest of the collection consists of similar nostalgic poems, albeit of less length, and it is those that recontextualized the first epic poem as the logical extremity of the author's verse and it is these follow-up poems that I found myself being completely captivated by, admittedly Zima Junction was perhaps a little too long for somebody like me, relatively new to poetry, to enjoy unquestionably. His poems all rely on memory, yet some strike upon a more profound chord as he deals with the political issues of the time and talks from his lived experience of tragedy, this staged side-by-side with verse about the joys of riding a bicycle; with both being conjured just as convincingly as the other. While many poems in the collection are touching, none seem more imbued with greater purpose than Babiy Yar, a protest poem about growing anti-Semitic rhetoric in the Soviet Union. I will end this review, which I hope indicates high recommendation with the closing lines of Babiy Yar. 

No Jewish blood runs among my blood, 
but I am as bitterly and hardly hated
by every anti-semite
as if I were a Jew. By this 
I am a Russian