Rating: 5/5

Novelists tell that piece of truth hidden at the bottom of every lie.
-Italo Calvino in an interview with The Paris Review

Memory is a sly kitten, darting to and fro through the living room of our mind, appearing in flashes here then there, never in an orderly fashion and rarely giving us a perfect still-frame to assess all the details. Elizabeth Hardwick’s astounding ‘novel’—or should modern times brand it with the now-popular ‘creative non-fiction’ label—Sleepless Nights is a brilliant blending of fact and fiction that assesses the ‘I’ at the heart of her story as it harnesses memory into language, language that blossoms and blooms on the page like the most gorgeous of gardens. Often paralleling her own life (‘a well-traveled and intensely insightful writer and teacher from Kentucky who married for a time with poet Robert Lowell’ may suffice as a brief biography for the uninitiated), Sleepless Nights takes dozens of brief reflections across the narrator’s timeline spent loving, losing and living to create a poetic mosaic of a life, wielding ‘fiction’ like a box of crayons to color in the black outlines of memory. ‘If only one knew what to remember or pretend to remember, writes Hardwick, ‘make a decision and what you want from the lost things will present itself.’ There is a truth in every fiction, and fiction in every truth. In a montage investigation of the ‘I’, Hardwick reveals that the self cannot be separated from the places and people that color their days, and that one person is in fact the collision of many others all believing in their self-isolation as they move from cradle to grave in the beautifully tragic story of what it is to be human, all delivered through an impressive blending of fact and fiction.

Alas, the heart is not a metaphor, or at least not always a metaphor.

Elizabeth Hardwick steals my heart with every page, every perfect poetic sentence. If Sleepless Nights is a mosaic, each tile is a perfect prose poem that captures the essence of existence in like the best of poets. Her descriptions are utterly serene in their use of language to penetrate right to heart of a person or a landscape.
  Winter came down upon them. The suicide season arrived early. The land, after a snowfall, would turn into a lunar stillness, satanic, brilliant. The tall trees, altered by the snow and ice, loomed up in the arctic landscape like ancient cataclysmic formations of malicious splendor. The little houses on the road...trembling there in the whiteness, might be settlements waiting for a doom that would come over them silently in the night.
Sleepless Nights is the best of both the ‘novel’ and the ‘poem’, being both and neither at the same time. The brief, staccato-like vignettes culminate to a portrait of a life, but each individual moment breaths a lifetime of insight on its own. Hardwick delicately condenses a lifetime into each beautifully phrased sentence the way the most skilled of novelists reveal the landscape of a character’s nature through small details of mannerisms or anecdote.Of course these things are not mine. I think they are usually spoken of as ours, that tea bag of a word that steeps in the conditional.
So much revealed in so little space, the acknowledgement of a marriage, bringing the connotation of once-happy times and love, and the assumption of a divorce and all the confusion and awkwardness left in the wake of the downfall. Each passage, detailing time spent in Kentucky as a child, time spent in Holland, time spent with Billie Holiday, the lives of maids and the love affairs of friends, manages to construct a universe of ideas and meaning out of the minimal space of prose. 

While you are living, part of you has slipped away to the cemetery.

Hardwick chronicles her life, and the lives that have touched it across the slim 128 pgs. Sometimes cynical with repeated reference of our inevitable permanent address in the cemetery, Hardwick reminds us that we are spending our lives getting our affairs and finances in order only to be wiped out of physical existence to only carry on in the memories of others. Hardwick chronicles the trials and tribulations of those around her throughout ‘her’, immortalizing them in fiction, as much as she investigates the life of the narrator. It seems that the impact of her acquaintances are very much a defining aspect of her, as we are all influenced by those around us, not limited to those we hold most dear. It is the collective experience, the plural of human beings, that define existence and not just the isolated solitude of the singular. A refreshing aspect of the book is that the female is often characterized as the pillar of self-identification. Even the womanizers who leap from bed to bed must inevitably realize that their selfhood is defined by the women that they chase in order to identify as a ‘womanizer’: 
Some men define themselves by women although they appear to believe it is quite the opposite; to believe that it is she, rather than themselves, who is being filed away, tagged, named at last like a quivering cell under a microscope.
However, even the ‘I’ must confess that ‘I have always, all of my life, been looking for help from a man.’ One cannot be a self without the mirror of others; the love, hate, companionship or just mere interaction with the rest of the human race is the experiment of selfhood from which we are able to analyze the date of our identity.

Hardwick also probes the geographical settings through which she traverses, from her home in Kentucky to apartments in Europe, to extract the importance of place on identity. ‘The stain of place hangs on not as a birthright but as a sort of artifice, a bit of cosmetic,’ she writes, admitting that place plays a recognizable role but not one that should forever typecast us. Movement is also key to the novel, that one may uproot and take life into their own hands and not be forever a rotting root in the soil.
  What began as a green start may turn overnight into a desert filled with alarm, with impossibility. So move on. Try out a similar arrangement on Riverside Drive. But defiantly, as if to say: You cannot destroy a ruin.
We have the ability to make a life for ourselves and must not be afraid of change, as change can lead to great growth or a lifting of burdens. One must not resign themselves to fate, but take fate into their own hands.

Sleepless Nights is a glorious achievement of prose that examines ‘the transformations of memory’ through its fractured meditation of a life lived. Fact and fiction intertwine towards a exquisite memoir that proves there is no rigid boundary between the two and examines the culmination of experience and how each individual moment in a life is equal and as poignant as the some of its parts. The novel is relatively plotless but, as Hardwick mentions in an interview with The Paris Review, ‘if I want a plot, I’ll watch Dallas'. This book shows the victory of ideas and writing over any necessity of plot and is as engaging and consuming as any of the latter. Hardwick is a master of language and each page waits with a shimmering gem of poetry to dazzle the soul. However, and in the spirit of LeVar Burton helped introduce me to the joys of reading at an early age, don’t just take my word for it. I strongly urge you to read this novel and bask in each perfectly formed sentence.
5/5

'The torment of personal relations. Nothing new there except in the disguise, and in the escape on the wings of adjectives. Sweet to be pierced by daggers at the end of paragraphs.'