Rating: 4/5

Possibly I have been reading too many Cornell Woolrich and Jim Thompson gutter noir novels, tightly constructed, no waste, down and dirty, but I thought this was both elegant and about 1/3 longer than it needed to be. Patricia Highsmith imo gets high marks for this book that Hitchcock made into a classic movie, but it is also full of too many rather dull and sophisticated suburbanites. And yes, I am also reading #34 of Agatha Christie’s Hercules Poirot so I have a fairly high tolerance usually for rich snobs as characters, but usually they are less dull than many of these folks. Guy and Bruno, our two main characters, are interesting, though, because they are corrupt in ways that the Good and Boring are not. These two operate homo-erotically, and dopplegangerishly and Oedipally as a lot of mid- nineteenth-century mysteries seemed to be, with lost of psychopaths and sociopaths. Apparently Highsmith liked both psychology and “literary” fiction; she studied the psych texts of her time, and also liked Camus, Dostoevsky, the darker guys that inform a lot of noir. So her work is something along the lines of psychological thriller more than detective fiction. We read this from the perspective of Guy and Bruno.

Guy, an up-and-coming architect, is talking to a stranger, Bruno, on a train and for some (bad) reason he spills all the details about his train wreck of a personal life: He and his wife are separated and seeing other people and they are seeking an amicable divorce. The stranger hears the story from a Guy he increasingly likes (and “likes,” maybe) and he talks about murdering her for Guy. Guy says no, he finds out she is pregnant and then she miscarries, but (spoiler alert!) Bruno does in fact kill her. Can Guy now go on with his life with his new love, Anne? Well, it's not that simple. Bruno wants to get rid of his Dad, and he says to Guy, if you don’t kill my Dad for me, I will make it clear you are implicated in the killing of your own wife, so. . . . Guy does kill Bruno's Dad. This is a stretch to believe, I’ll admit, but the point about them is that they are essentially one character, Jekyll and Hyde, and they are dopplegangers, and they are attracted to each other, and they are both more in love with their mothers than any other women. This is the Oedipal part, for both men. Anyway, there's a lot you are going to have to question about in this story beyond your disbelief about Guy becoming murderer.

But, Highsmith has other concerns in her psychological drama:

“Any kind of person can murder. Purely circumstances and not a thing to do with temperament! People get so far -- and it takes just the least little thing to push them over the brink. Anybody. Even your grandmother. I know.” 

And this stems from our “doubleness,” our capacity for good and evil:
 
“People, feelings, everything! Double! Two people in each person. There's also a person exactly the opposite of you, like the unseen part of you, somewhere in the world, and he waits in ambush.”

Guy, the good architect, has as his opposite Bruno, the loser, and this relationship is an emblem of the human condition: 

“But love and hate, he thought now, good and evil, lived side by side in the human heart, and not merely in differing proportions in one man and the next, but all good and all evil. One had merely to look for a little of either to find it all, one had merely to scratch the surface. All things had opposites close by, every decision a reason against it, every animal an animal that destroys it, the male the female, the positive the negative.”

The attraction to their mothers by our two antiheroes is kind of creepily interesting in this story, as is the mention of mother characteristics in each woman either of them gets involved with in some way. 

Drink, present in most detective stories and noir in particular (and looking back to Dostoevsky), is also an interesting aspect of this story:

“The way to see the world was to see it drunk. Everything was created to be seen drunk.” 

“The tragedy was not even the first drink, because the first drink was not the first resort but the last." 

“The taste of Scotch, though Guy didn’t much care for it, was pleasant because it reminded him of Anne. She drank Scotch, when she drank. It was like her, golden, full of light, made with careful art."

This is like a lot of noir sort of Calvinist in that it assumes kind of baseline total depravity. That's an interesting aspect of noir in general. Strangers is maybe 3.75 for me, not as good as the Ripley novels I recall reading years ago or as deliciously evil as the Thompson or Woolritch books. I glanced at reviews that gave it 1 or 2 stars from friends I respect, but hey, I liked it quite a bit in the end.