My friends in education like to talk about a “growth mindset,” the idea that a person can improve themselves and their condition by hard work. This story is ultimately an adventure story, that of one young man, a boy really, at age 12, alone in an open boat at sea. That was exciting. But what I really loved about the book was watching a boy put that growth mindset to work. He believed he could, so he did.

Skiff’s mom has died, and his dad, a fisherman on the coast of Maine, has fallen into a deep depression. He doesn’t get off the couch. Meanwhile, the family’s boat has sunk, at the dock. Skiff visits his neighbor Mr. Woodwell, a ninety-something year old boatbuilder. Mr. Woodwell tells him how to raise the boat using steel drums and ropes and a winch. Then Mr. Woodwell tells him how to remove the rotten boards and replace them with clean boards from his shop. Skiff does all this.

But there’s a problem. The engine repair will cost $5,000. Skiff needs cash. He thinks he can get it by trapping lobsters. He sets 200 traps. It’s physically demanding work, pulling up those heavy traps, but he ignores his aching muscles and continues. The money does start to trickle in. But there’s another problem. There’s a bully in town cutting Skiff’s lines, just out of meanness, which means there’s no way for Skiff to pull them up from the bottom. 

Skiff confronts Tyler Croft, the bully. Tyler says it’s your word against mine. Skiff figures that he can’t win that fight, because Tyler is rich and his daddy can afford lawyers, while Skiff is just a poor swamper. What then? How can he get the money?

While he’s thinking about it, an out of towner pulls up at the dock with a bluefin tuna he caught. The fish is 410 pounds. He sells it for $6,560. That’s it, Skiff thinks. All I need is just one of those big fish. If I could catch just one, all our troubles would be over. 

And then the adventure begins, an adventure that is one part grit and determination, and many more parts stupidity. The stupidest thing, after going in the first place, is that he doesn’t have a radio, and didn’t tell anyone he was going. But how can you not root for the kid?

Obviously, this book harks back to its namesake, The Old Man and the Sea, but what it reminded me of most was Hatchet, by Gary Paulsen, another book about a boy with a growth mindset, a boy who finds himself in an impossible situation, way beyond his apparent abilities, and says, “Well, here I am, and I don’t want to die. Let’s see what I can do.”