Rating: 4/5

Published almost 20 years ago now, "It's Your Ship" is a modern management classic that is widely read and recommended not just in the military but in Corporate America as well. When CMDR Abrashoff took command of the USS Benfold, the ship was the worst in the US Navy Pacific Fleet, but when he ended his command tour 2 years later, the ship was the best in the Pacific Fleet. Abrashoff explains how he did it in this book. Care for his sailors, openness to new ideas, a willingness to take risks and an emphasis of effectiveness over tradition had completely transformed his ship and made their tour on the Benfold a great experience for his sailors. The lessons for all sorts of organizations are clear. Bad leadership begets bad performance, and unhappy employees will not lift an organization to success. Because of this, "It's Your Ship" is must reading for leaders, especially senior leaders, in all sorts of organization.

There are only two criticisms that I have of this book. The first is that many of the lessons learned in this book could have been summed with one word; humility. Leaders with humility listen to their subordinates, care for their wellbeing and do not abuse their authority. Interestingly, the word humility is hardly ever used in this book. This is one of my pet peeves with modern leadership books. In order to be socially acceptable, these books present ancient wisdom without referring to the source of this wisdom. It is almost as though modern leadership writers are afraid to admit that they adhere to value ethics, classical philosophy or (gasp), religious principles. Unfortunately this book falls into that category.

Another criticism that I have of the book is the naive vision of the military that it presents. Granted that this is a short book, and granted that its intended audience is non-military leaders, but it seems like Abrashoff panders to popular impressions of military leaders and unthinking, tradition-bound, ego driven tyrants who are only interested in advancing their careers. As a retired military officer myself, I can testify that these types of leaders exist in the military, and there are far too many of them. But I would estimate that most military leaders today, and especially senior leaders, are not in this mold. The principles advanced by Abrashoff are in wide application today, although not as wide as they should be. And perhaps it's a testimony to the effectiveness of "It's Your Ship" that this book may have transformed many otherwise narcissistic military leaders into collaborative and effective commanders.

Overall I highly recommend "It's Your Ship" to all leaders both in the military and in civilian life.