Rating: 2/5

Actual rating: 2.5

Amalia was a very irritating character to me. I felt like she always made herself the victim when clearly a lot of the things are her fault. Yes, some things were out of her control, such as being abused by her dad, emotionally abused by her mother, and physically/emotionally abused by Salvador. And a few partners (well all except Raynaldo) hurt her. But besides all that? Everything else she had a way of avoiding the outcomes. She could have taken things in controlled but then not. Instead she was busy loving the idea of living right by Hollywood and how a Mexican- American woman like her is somewhat lucky to have made it there. 

The one major thing that bothered me was the fact she called herself a devout Catholic, she committed MANY sins. She would live, and sleep with, men that she was not married to. Normally I would not be bothered by this, but she would always say how she is "living in sin by living with a man she is not married to." But apparently it is okay because God knows her reasons. She cheated on Raynaldo. Because she never got to feel sex that way, she saw that it was sort of okay. She obviously knew what she was doing was wrong, yet she went ahead and still let Angel see and touch her.She lied ALL THE TIME. But again, God says it is okay. She did not really pay attention to her kids. I feel like she just let them grow up on their own. She never really got to know who they are and what was going on in their lives. Like how Juan is a gay prostitute, and Gloria was touched inappropriately by Raynaldo. Maybe if she had taken the time of day to talk to her children and ask how they are, what is new in their life, what have they been up to, then maybe she would have known what is going on and have a much better and HONEST relationship with Juan and Gloria. Manny as well. Maybe if she had looked after him well, he would not have joined a gang and gotten arrested. He would not have committed suicide and cause his family so much pain. I also find it ironic how Amalia yells at Juan telling him he is living in sin by being gay, yet she is living and having sex with a man that is not her husband. When he kids tell her exactly all of everything that I had stated, she feels like she is being attacked and that they are lying to her and just trying to make her feel bad. She refuses to see things clearly until the end.

And the ending. What the heck was that. Did not give me much. It felt very sudden. Like as if Rechy just wanted to get things over with and end it quickly.

Besides the confusion on events, and some parts being a tad bit too boring, it did have some interesting parts. Rechy should have just organized it a bit better. It was sometimes hard to grasp if whether Amalia was in the past or in the present.