Rating: 4/5

Found this one on Thriftbooks. Ex-Library copy wrapped in laminate, but it is in good condition and was a decent price.

An example of don't judge a book by its cover because the story inside was really good.

A Nightmare Hall book actually written by Diane Hoh, R.I.P.

The prologue always starts out with the antagonist of the book going off about something and this one is a disgruntled artist, not happy that a certain someone noticed something about the painting they did.

The someone is Rachel Seaver who admits to her new friends at Salem U that she is not an artist and knows nothing about painting in any form of medium. At an art exhibit, Rachel notices a seascape that everyone else seems to loathe saying it isn't very good. It is what Rachel "sees" in the painting that makes her take notice.

The seascape seems to have a person drowning in terror among the waves. Rachel isn't trying to be morbid but since her parents died in a car accident a long time ago and it gave her night terrors for the longest time, her perspective is different.

Later that night, Rachel has a nightmare for the first time in years since childhood. A student she knows from math classes at school is out near the falls in town and has someone in black come behind him with a baseball bat. The young man, Ted, survives the blow to his head but going over the falls causes his death.

The next morning, Rachel wakes up and learns from her roommate, Bibi, that Ted drowned in the pool at the bottom of the falls. Everyone else goes about life as usual but Rachel is shaken since she dreamed about his death and saw the person drowning in the painting. Going back to the gallery, Rachel finds the painting has been taken down.

The others don't find it unusual since they thought the painting was absolutely horrid and that the artist must have been embarrassed by it. That is when Rachel sees a still life and at first, the colors are pretty enough to catch her eye but again, something is hidden within. The vase of flowers looks to have a body taking a fall down a flight of stairs in horror.

Then Rachel receives the seascape portrait with M.Y.O.B. on the bottom where an artist would sign their work. Rachel knows what it means - mind your own business. After a night at a party thrown in Nightmare Hall, Rachel prepares to go to bed and finds a charm on her pillow.

It is a small brass monkey representing "See No Evil" and that night, Rachel has another nightmare of an unfortunate resident of Nightmare Hall falling down the stairs of the fire escape by the pushing hands of the figure clad in black.

I won't say who for those who have read these books with the few recurring characters, but they don't die and I think might actually just slip into a coma for a while.

After this disturbing incident, Rachel knows she is running out of time when she finds the note written clear as day in her bag.

YOU WILL NEVER LIVE TO SEE ANOTHER MONDAY.

There are a lot of suspects in this book and many red herring pieces of evidence to just who is responsible for bringing these morbid paintings to life and it is never really explained just how Rachel has these "deadly visions" but that actually is in the book's favor.

Sometimes leaving the unexplainable as just that is better.

Of course, Rachel's love interest is a suspect, and he is an artist named Aidan McKay who expresses his art through life masks. Made by covering a person's face in grease and then pouring plaster over the whole head to make a mold. Straws are placed in the nostrils for the subject to breathe and cotton placed in the ears.

He keeps wanting to make a mask of Rachel's face and two other artists, Joseph and Samantha, have done it before but failed to stick with sketches and watercolors. That makes Aidan stick out like a sore thumb for most of the book.

Until you find out that Paloma makes jewelry and one of her hottest pieces is bracelets with the "See No Evil, Hear No Evil Speak No Evil" monkeys. Or you learn that Bibi is dating a guy named Rudy Samms, who has the manners and looks of a Neanderthal and apparently no talent in art. 

The reveal was actually very unexpected, and the ending was slightly more positive than most Nightmare Hall books. Rachel doesn't walk away from her experiences with a complete terror of all things art but wants to understand it better so she can see the beauty in it and maybe not see any more terror.

Deadly Visions is suspenseful, and I guess the only reason I couldn't give it five stars is because the motive of the insane artist seemed a little out there but then again, I am not an artist. I may be a writer but even then, none of us see what's there or what lies beneath.

Be it in paintings, movies, books or even other people.