Rating: 4/5

Louise Dana, (age 17) and her sister, Jean, (age 16), along with two of their Starhurst schoolmates, Doris Hartland, and Evelyn Starr are on a European vacation, more specifically, in Frankfurt, Germany, when they find out that a former Austrian prince is intent on seeing them. 

And after several minutes of excited conversation among the girls, they find themselves face-to-face with Rudolph Krisler. The girls all notice that he’s a little older than them, (early twenties), he’s at least six feet tall, he’s blond, and the fact that he was a handsome young man was lost on none of them! 

After the introductions were complete, Krisler lets them know his reasons for coming to see them. 
He starts by telling them that he’s heard of the sister’s investigative prowess from their Uncle Ned, or to everyone else, “Balaska” ship Captain Ned Dana. Krisler explained that he’d met, and become acquainted with their uncle, the captain, during one of his many transatlantic trips. 

The former prince then went on to tell them the story of his family’s lost heirlooms, and their connection to a long abandoned Swiss chalet named Altberg, located a Jungfrau. He then drew a paper from his briefcase, it was a hand drawn picture of a circle with lines intersecting it at various angles. Krisler explained that he’d found the drawing in with his late father’s papers, and that he’d suspected that they were somehow important, perhaps even a clue as to the location of the heirlooms. 

Louise and Jean take a close look at the drawing, and based on its uniqueness, they agree that it might be of value, perhaps a kind of map, they both guess. Jean says they’d need to study it further and gets Krisler’s permission to take the map to the hotel desk to get a copy made, she then gives the original back to him. 

Krisler then suggests that the girls could include a look at the chalet as part of their Switzerland itinerary. That’s when Louise and Jean’s aunt, Harriet Dana, their vacation chaperone, (the Dana girl’s mom had passed away several years before) says that they’d have to get the permission of her brother, the girl’s guardian, Uncle Ned. 

They send a cable to their uncle, and shortly after he cables them back with a message that Krisler’s claim was authentic, and that they had his permission to investigate the chalet when they arrived in Switzerland. 

And so, the adventure begins! 

And as I reached the end of the first chapter, I realized that we’d be searching for clues of a royal family’s precious heirloom, and that a storied and abandoned Swiss chalet was somehow connected with the precious artifacts. I was intrigued, and read on with interest, and by the end I was not disappointed, after all, I’d encountered so many fascinating people, places, and situations along the way. A few of which stood out for me, these included…

A few startling encounters, which included: A deadly avalanche, a menacing confrontation with an ornery mountain goat, a piece of porcelain smashing into a girl’s head, and a near collision between a car and a large, speedily rolling wheel of Emmenthaler!

And as far as unique sleuthing techniques are concerned, the Dana Girls were no slouches. They continued the investigative tradition of using commonplace items to help them unlock important clues, in their case, these included a piece of tissue paper, a wooden bottle stopper, and the contents of a hotel room trash basket to name a few. 

Also, before I read this book, I had an appreciation of Switzerland as a fascinating and picturesque country, interestingly, this book only increased my fascination. A couple of mental images that stood out for me included the image of a working piano, made of ice, and a charming little chalet that was missed by hikers because it spent the entire year encased in a massive snowdrift. 

And I’d be remiss if I didn’t touch on all the new things I learned while reading this mystery. Part of the reason there were so many new learning for me was that I’ve never travelled to Switzerland, (a deficiency I hope to correct in the future). Some of these new facts included: 

“Foehn” – A tepid, dry wind that comes down a mountain, as is the case on the north side of the Alps. 

“Anise” – A plant of the Parsley family, having loose umbels of small yellowish-white flowers that yield aniseed. Anise is sold as a spice, and its seeds are used as breath fresheners, (among other uses). 

“Schuss” – A straight downhill run at high speed, especially when skiing. 

“Wassail Bowl” – A vessel, often made of wood, and sometimes mounted in silver, used on ceremonial occasions and drinking toast. Wassail is a beverage made from hot mulled cider, ale, or wine, and spices. The drinking of this beverage is known as Wassailing. 

“Cembra Pine” – Also known as “Swiss Pine,” is a species of pine tree, predominantly seen in the Alps, and the Carpathian Mountains of central Europe. 

And finally, one of the most surprising things I learned while reading this book has to do with Swiss St. Bernard alpine dogs, and the fact they do not carry a small barrel on their necks! I always thought that this was so! 

Apparently, the myth of this was originally created by an 1820 painting by Edwin Landseer, titled, “Alpine Mastiffs Resuscitating a Distressed Traveler.” The work depicts two St. Bernard's rescuing a person, one of the dogs is carrying a barrel containing brandy to warm the chilled traveler. According to this story, the small barrels are sometimes placed on a belt around the dog’s neck, but this was done only to please camera happy tourists. 

So, all in all, this was a well told story in the youth sleuthing tradition of Nancy Drew, The Hardy Boys, and Trixie Belden. Also, as mentioned above, the story was filled with new and intriguing facts. This was a double win as far as this story is concerned. 

A solid four stars.