Rating: 3/5

Paleologist Calvin Cohn, this novel's protagonist was studying the bottom of the ocean when the Second Flood struck. The flood is due to the thermonuclear war brought about by the Cold War (this novel was first published in 1982) and God willed the total anihilation of men on earth. However, God made a "marginal error" by not seeing Calvin in the bottom of the ocean and also some apes who also survived the catastrophe. The first of these apes to surface out is a chimp called Buz, a subject of a scientist who has been teaching him to speak like a human being. Soon other creatures appear - baboons, other chimps, five apes and a lone gorilla, George. This are all the characters in Malamud's modern-day dystopian fantasy: a man and a bunch of apes. 

Aside from being a scientist, Calvin is a Jew. Since Buz can speak, he teaches the other apes on how to speak like him. Then Calvin tries to teach them like human beings in the "schooltree." Calvin believes that he and his bunch of apes can start another generation of "people" that will populate the earth. I will not tell you the ending because someone might call my attention and require me to put a spoiler in my review ha ha.

Bernard Malamud (1914-1986) is, along with Saul Bellow and Philip Roth, one of the greatest American Jewish authors. He is more known for his movies that have been turned into movies like The Natural and The Fixer. God's Grace is his last novel and it is, being a dystopian fantasy, a total departure from those two mainstream novels. In God's Grace, however, Malamud still incorporates his strong belief in God as he gave Calvin the ability to talk to God (mostly in dreams) and that God can take his life anytime as a correction to the "marginal error." That belief pervades the mood of the story as one can feel the danger that is lurking and that death is imminent. It's like watching James Cameron's Titanic because you know even at the start of the movie, that ship will capsize and most of them will die. That did not dampen your interest on the movie though because the movie is well-made. Just like God's Grace. It is well-written.