Rating: 4/5

This book is a collection of ideas of Ayn Rand, organized by topic. She criticizes the German idealist philosopher Immanuel Kant for his denial of moral approval to the man who desires to do the right thing and does it. Instead, Kant gives moral approval only to the man who desires to do the wrong thing, but does the right thing anyway, out of a sense of duty. On this topic, Rand is in agreement with the Aristotelian philosopher Mortimer Adler, who asserted that virtue is right desire. That is, Adler (and Aristotle) give moral approval to the man who desires to do the right thing. Kant gets it wrong. The Buddhists are also on the wrong side of the issue. They assert that desire itself is evil. But only wrong desire, the desire to do things that harm our long-range goals, is evil, according to Aristotle and Rand. (Ayn Rand did not discuss Buddhism, or even Mortimer Adler, in this book, I am just voicing my own opinions). Ayn Rand also criticizes the American philosopher John Dewey, who was a major contributor to the philosophy of pragmatism. Rand objects to pragmatism, because it denies that there are general principles that apply in all places and at all times. She also criticizes Dewey for deriving his philosophy from Hegel, a philosopher she despises. Although Ayn Rand does not mention moral relativism in this book, one of its origins was Dewey's pragmatism. Ayn Rand writes about man being a creature with a "self-made soul". Here she emphasizes the importance of free will, in comparison to heredity and environment. The materialists deny the existence of the soul, the right-wing scientists emphasize the importance of heredity, the leftists emphasize the importance of the environment, and the religionists see the soul as an unearned gift from God, and not as self-creating. Her philosophy is thus distinct from all the major philosophies in our current world. Her position represents a part of common sense that has not received much past support from articulated philosophy.