Rating: 3/5

I was born on Jane Russell's 31st birthday, both of us Geminis on the cusp of Cancer. That would have meant something to her as she was really interested in all things astrological. When referring to people in her autobiography she frequently mentions their sign of the Zodiac. She liked to surround herself with Geminis.

Russell was amply endowed up top and had legs that went right from here to there, otherwise she might have spent her days working in the doctor's office where she was spotted by an agent working for Howard Hughes. He starred her in The Outlaw, highlighting as much of her rack as he could get away with at the time, all pretty tame by today's standards. In fact Hughes was heard to say that there were two reasons men came to see Jane Russell. Over the course of her career she starred in a number of westerns; she was well suited for them as she brought her own pair of matched 38s. The best westerns, other than The Outlaw, were comedic westerns in which she appeared alongside Bob Hope, The Paleface and Son of Paleface. Her serious, even surly, approach made her the perfect straight (wo)man for Hope. I've seen her in one other western, The Tall Men, but she is more a property for Robert Ryan and Clark Gable to fight over than anything else. I remember she spent an ungodly amount of time changing her long stockings.

Jane covers all the ground in her book: her childhood and teen years, rise to stardom, her marriage to NFL Hall of Famer Robert Waterfield, (her childhood sweetheart), and their eventual adoption of three children. Jane avoids mentioning that she was probably made infertile by an abortion she had as a teenager. Ironically, the child was probably Waterfield's, but she wasn't sure. She went on to found an organization to assist the adoption of children from other countries into American homes, WAIF. She goes on to tell the reader what the word "waif" means, a condescension I didn't care for. It's not the only time in the book that she does this. It drives me batty.

One of Russell's peculiarities that struck me even as a child watching her movies is that she seldom seems happy. She has that look...I don't know...cynical, aloof, maybe even surly. Turns out she is a bit of a bitch and drama queen. Slicing her husband's face with a fork at a dinner with guests present, screaming, ranting, carrying on. But at least she admits to it...although she has a tendency to downplay her transgressions. Her infidelities were things of beauty while his were an affront to family and the institution of marriage.

It's amazing that there were any infidelities at all, given the fact that Russell lays claim to being so all-fired religious. Her staff couldn't do thing one without joining her in prayer and she frequently coerced fellow actors to attend Bible study at the family chapel. This is the point where she lost me; frequently throughout the book she inserts messages she has received from God either directly or channeled through a friend. These messages are quite detailed and written down as though she remembered every word. If I read it correctly, there's even one message where He tells her to go ahead and continue an affair she was having. I have nothing against religion, but don't pretend that God has the time to give you a personal message about what job to take when he could use that time to stop hunger or bring world peace. I think I would have refrained from writing that...even the Pope doesn't pull that shit off.

This book was nicely written in more-or-less chronological order. I found Jane to be an average actress and better than average singer. She brings you in, introduces you to the family, tells you about the ups and downs, successes and failures. She doesn't hide her alcoholism or her stay in the nervous hospital. She had some class, and even though she had something to show she refrained from putting it on display. She seemed loyal to friends and really didn't have too much in the way of bad things to say about anyone. There are lots of photos of Jane, her family and associates. It's a nicely constructed book, but come on, Jane! Messages from God...Really?