Rating: 4/5

"Deadly Duo" combines two mystery novellas, "Wanted: Someone Innocent" and "Last Act," in a single volume. Although Allingham is best known for her Albert Campion novels, neither of these novellas stars Campion and both are stand alone stories.

"Wanted: Someone Innocent" tells a tale about a lovely young woman who is recruited by a somewhat older woman, with the two having gone to the same boarding school and therefore knowing each other slightly from the past. The young woman is broke and at loose ends until she is almost literally dragged into a new job tending to an Army officer trying to recover from his war injuries. The older woman, his wife, spends no time with her ill husband but leaves the young woman to tend to all his needs, a highly unusual situation. The officer and his young attendant become extremely close, but after a couple of months he realizes he is falling in love with his young caretaker and tells her she must leave the house and her job with him. His wife is furious when she learns of her husband dismissing the girl and reacts almost violently, only to be found dead the next morning. 

"Last Act" is the story of an aging French actress, who is very wealthy. Although she now lives in Britain, her properties are in France and subject to French law. This means that she can only leave her estate to her two "sons," Victor and Denis, and her "adopted" daughter, Margot. Because of an emotional injury in the long ago past, the actress hates Denis. French law prevents any of the three heirs from inheriting if they are guilty of murder. The actress designs a plan to fake her own death and cause the hated son to lose his right to his inheritance. But she makes a crucial mistake and really does die. Now the question is, which of the heirs, if one of the three, really did murder her? Or was it one of the other inhabitants of the grand house she lives in in England?

These two novellas are both great examples of Allingham's writing talent, which earned her a place as one of the "Mystery Queens" of the 20th century. If you are an Allingham fan, or merely a lover of mysteries, you will undoubtedly enjoy these two short novels. I did.