Rating: 5/5

It was quite surreal when I got the first book of Alan Moore's Swamp Thing run, also dubbed The Saga of The Swamp Thing. It was even more surreal reading it. Many people were telling me for years about Swamp Thing was an overlooked masterpiece and how Alan really revitalized this at the time little known monster comic and how he managed to move comics into being a medium that was more respected, and finally getting some recognition for it rather than peers that had tried and not necessarily succeeded like Gerber or Eisner. To be honest, I was actually afraid to read this at first. 

Yet, I was quite pleased to see that Alan's take on this muck and crusted monstrosity was just as good as everyone had said it was. Alan writes with a deft hand and with this first arc, we see that he has no plans of playing it safe and littering in his ideas for a slow build, but rather to walk up to the plate and swing for a home run. The Anatomy Lesson, in particular, proves itself to be one of the best singular issues of comics that has ever been done, the way that Alan Moore weaves the tale of Swamp Thing's origin is one of the finest twists ever pulled off in a comic, and one that I won't dare take away from the audience, it is meant to be experienced. But I can't merely give Alan the credit, as the superbly illustrated work of Stephen Bissette and John Totleben. Few artists have the ability of getting under my skin and actually creeping me out, much as there's few books that can creep me out, yet Bissette and Totleben work together to create some of the most nightmare inducing panels that I've ever seen in a comic, few artists can achieve a similar effect for me: Paul Azaceta, Andrea Sorrentino, Richard Corben. 

But it is the writing that sticks out more to the eye, out of all the superhero deconstructions that Alan did in the 80s, Swamp Thing is the one that's not really even a superhero deconstruction, it's more of a deconstruction of old monster stories and American horror in general. While Miracleman is a deconstruction of the Superman/Shazam superego type (though the concept leans more towards Shazam) and Watchmen is a deconstruction of caped crimefighters like Batman, Green Arrow, or Daredevil, Swamp Thing is an odd book that sits in the middle, with Alan allowing himself a rare opportunity to try something fresh and new with an oddity such as Swamp Thing. I've never really considered Swamp Thing a tried and true 'superhero' much like how I consider Batman or John Constantine to not really be superheroes (though, funnily enough this book was where John first appeared.) Swamp Thing, for me, is an odd detour in Alan's journey with his commentary on superheroes and what they mean to us, and it was also a way for Alan to stretch his creative muscles and show that he wasn't a one trick pony, and that he could play with more genres that just the superhero one, and as someone who likes reading more than just superhero comics, it's quite nice to see something so radically different. 

As mentioned before, with it only being the beginning of Moore's run, one might expect that Moore would want to play it safe and use his first stories to try and set up what he plans to do with his run for Swamp Thing, and while most writers may use 6 issues to set up the tone and world of the run that they're going to write, Moore only needs two issues to set up the world and tone and then spends the rest of the series telling strange, yet personal stories. Though Moore doesn't quite do the strange one offs until later on with the series, the first two arcs in the series are also strong and uniquely realized. Moore's knowledge of the DC universe and its more obscure characters, such as his inclusion of Etrigan The Demon, also comes into play throughout this trade, though it becomes more apparent as the series goes on, the inclusion of such characters like Etrigan, The Floronic Man, and The Monkey King showcases Moore's enthusiasm and love for the universe that he once had, which is quite apparent and rather nice to see as this series continued to take form. 

Much like Miracleman, Swamp Thing is much more straight forward in what the story is about, but it just touches the edge of complexity that Watchmen would later bring. With Swamp Thing's commentary on the state of horror as well as its unique approach to the monster concept, Alan turned Swamp Thing into an existential journey of a being unsure of its identity. He takes much of his tone from a variety of sources such as Lovecraft, EC Comics, previous horror comics from DC Comics, and even Stephen King, yet Alan's vision is purely his own. The way that he plays with the genre speaks to his understanding of the genre, and will be more apparent as the run moves forward. Another thing that is apparent is Alan's respect for his audience, which is something I've always admired him for, he rarely ever talks down to his audience or tries to tell them how to think or feel, but allows them the treat of coming to their own conclusions, it is sad to see how Moore has started to teeter from this with From Hell and, to a lesser extent Promethea. 

Swamp Thing, much like Alan's other works in mainstream comics, is unlike anything anyone has ever seen before or after it was published. Many people have tried to follow up what Alan did with such titles as Swamp Thing, Miracleman, or Watchmen, but sadly there's so many who don't comprehend what made such works so brilliant and eventually making pale imitations that lack. That's not to say that others have managed to follow Alan's footsteps and add a new twist to what he helped to start, but none have ever come close to ever repeating what he did to mainstream comics. But with this run, we've only seen the beginning...and it'll only become better from here.