Rating: 2/5

Found by searching for humorous fiction at my library. TL;DR review: good characters, no plot.

This short novel is a western, historical, which brings together some Mormons, some Indians, a girl from the Carolinas, a teenage cowboy, a shady entrepreneur, and a Quaker family. This makes it sound like a great set-up to a joke, but there is very little humor in this novel. It is narrated mostly in first person, and the author does a good enough job as distinguishing the voices. 

The bad: the plot promises to be, via a device that advertises an excursion, about a trip to some Mesa Verde-type cliff houses. In fact, every two chapters, the author gives you the ad again, or parts of it, to remind you of what's coming. But you hit the 50% mark and in fact no one has left on any excursion and nothing much has happened. You know how, as you're reading a book, you're supposed to be forming questions as you read that worry you and make you turn pages? There aren't many formed here, and the ones that exist are small. Is the blowing up the dead Chinese guy thing going to pay off a la Chekhov's gun? Is Granny going to speak a second time and does it matter? Is that frog important or not? Will Star really consider the Bishop's proposal to become his 7th wife? Probably not, you think, because those don't really relate to this excursion to the cliff dwellings, if that's what the novel is indeed supposed to be about. (And my tiny story questions may make this sound interesting, but honestly, it isn't. Those are straws I'm grasping at. There is no story question.)

So from 50 to 60 per cent, I started flipping pages, and I still can't give you any plot summary because, really, what's the plot of this? Is there one? I'd have to care more to flip to the end and see if, in retrospect, one had appeared along with a satisfying ending. Also, I only chuckled once in 50%, so that's not a comedy, to me.

I'm reading a craft-of-writing book right now about how story/plot is everything, which is imo true, and I think this writer needed to read that book. He has skills elsewhere, but zero skill in plotting, and yes, like that craft book explains, that's everything in a novel or movie. (Think of the movie Days of Heaven. Gorgeous music. Possibly the best cinematography ever--ah, those wheat fields! The locusts! But if Gere's character isn't on the run and there isn't that love affair and you don't care about all the four main characters, all the details of migrant workers' lives and the artistry of Almendros and Wexler would have been for naught. Indeed, the plot is so slow in that movie, it doesn't have as many fans as it might have otherwise.)

If you like all set-up and no pay-off, this is your book. If you want to read a truly funny historical western with good characters and a plot that makes you worry about those characters? Joe Lansdale, The Thicket.