Rating: 3/5

A book written in the 70s, about a plague in the U.S., by a writer from the UK

Yes, I read about the plague in the middle of a pandemic. It was an extra helping of misery in the age of COVID-19, but there were a few interesting advantages to reading this book at this time in the world. There were several instances in the book that took on new meaning given what we going through now in 2021. This book was written in 1977, and it was definitely dated (more on that later), but some of the things Masterton puts in could have been written yesterday. Take this quote for example: " 'A fascist?' he said softly. 'Is it the mark of a fascist to speak the truth?' " This is a doctor speaking about the origins of the plague. I steer clear of politics in my reviews as best I can, but this does seem to be indicative of what I see going on now with COVID-19. Many times I have observed the term fascist being used to describe, and denigrate, doctors and scientists who speak publicly about the science behind COVID-19. No, its definitely not everybody, but its a lot of people. 

Masterton also talks about adults succumbing to the plague more rapidly than children; the country's leaders claiming 'everything humanly possible has been done to contain the outbreak'; state lines being shut down to outsiders to prevent the spread of disease; masks; public announcements for people to stay home; people without the plague dying outside hospitals because there was no room to treat them; and this quote from page 260: "...the city of New York was told by the President to act brave, and go down with all flags flying." 

So lots of things in this book sounded familiar, but there were many, many instances where it was clear I was reading a novel from the 70s. First and foremost, was a general attitude toward women. Nearly all women in the book were portrayed as secretaries, mothers, or lovers. The main character is a doctor who already has an ex-wife, is having an affair with his secretary though he will not commit to her, and eventually manages to cheat on the secretary while they are on the run. I don't want to spoil anything for you, but the secretary is treated horribly by the doctor when she needs him the most. Masterton doesn't do this to show how uncaring the doctor is. Rather, he makes out like the doctor is a hero to be admired for the way he treats women. When he cheats on the secretary, it is with a girl they met that same day, basically to make the girl feel better. Kind of a sympathy screw because he is such a great guy. I don't know, it just makes me wonder about how different things were in the 70s from now. 

Masterton is clearly a British writer. Although this story takes place in the U.S. many of his British phrases slip into the book. For example he uses the word "torch" instead of flashlights; instead of turning on the lights in a car, the doctor 'switched on the car's electrics'; and others. These didn't really detract from the story, but they are noticeable. He also speaks of "negroes" ,"blacks", and "coloreds" frequently, and I don't know if this was a British thing or a 70s thing, but in 2021 it is a racist thing. I will try to give Masterton the benefit of the doubt here, but be warned, its in there. 

I did enjoy the nostalgia contained in Plague. Masterton speaks of smoking everywhere - even doctors - I had nearly forgotten Lark Cigarettes. He describes the New York skyline being defined by the looming twin towers of the World Trade Center. He talks about actors such as Ronald Reagan moving into politics. And, perhaps my favorite, the use of the word dig. "Do you dig massage?" [page 212]. Oh yeah! I can dig it!

So enough in here to make it an interesting read. It is sad though that I was actually able to think "that's not how a real worldwide pandemic rolls out" because I had actually seen how one rolls out. As a horror fan I can appreciate the truly terrifying rat scenes that Masterton includes in the book - but they are the stuff of nightmares! And finally, although the ending is a bit abrupt and did not leave me feeling uplifted, it is likely a realistic one. 

I give this one 3 stars out of 5, because I liked it more than I disliked it. An interesting read given our current times.

3 out of 5 stars