Rating: 4/5

I imagine most people will experience The 101 Dalmatians the way I did: first seeing the beloved Disney animation many times, then hearing there is a live-action adaptation (no one has paid me to watch that yet), and then perhaps reading the original book. I'm glad I proceeded to the latter phase: it's an enjoyable and quick story, filled with many surprises when compared with the 1961 animated version.

The first surprise is that Dodie Smith's book was published in 1957, only antedating the film by four years: a pretty quick turnaround by anyone's standards. The next is that the Dearlys are already married; there's no meet-cute to be had in the park. Instead of a struggling musician, Mr. Dearly is a wealthy consultant, having saved the British government from a financial crisis. Pongo's wife is named Missis, and the character Perdita (the Latin word for "lost") is another dalmatian who has lost her own puppies and is brought in by the Dearlys to help suckle Pongo and Missis's 15-puppy litter. Mrs. Dearly's friendship with Cruella de Vil is as head-scratching as ever, but in the book she invites the Dearlys to a dinner party. We learn that Cruella loves purple, covers all her food in pepper, has an equally dastard (if less flamboyant) husband, and owns a mean white cat who ends up being part of her demise. Her associates are Saul and Jasper Baddun, rather than Horace and Jasper as they are called in the film. I was impressed that the book described them as one tall-and-skinny and the other short-and-rotund; I would have just assumed that was purely an animation conceit (as it makes for good design and comedy, ala Laurel and Hardy). The midnight bark dog communication network is still an important part of the story, as is covering the puppies in soot to hide them, but there are many additional elements. An old dog who helps hide and feed Pongo and Missis, a brief hideaway in a church, a fire that burns down a waystation, and so on. Perhaps most shockingly of all (spoiler alert?), the Dearlys end up buying the house where the dalmatians were detained for death and deskinning and rehabilitate it as the place to raise their now 101-strong collection of dalmatians (Perdita's lost litter was part of that group).

This will be a fun read for anyone who loves the film (it's my wife's favorite in the Disney opus, and she already owned the book) or anyone who loves dogs. It's one of those books that winkingly asserts dogs are in actuality much smarter than people, and those silly humans only think they're the owners and the dogs the "pets". If that kind of thing delights you, it's even more your type of book. *eyeroll* Still, good fun, and the kind of book that you'll be playing cinematically in your head as you craft your own alternate film version.