Rating: 2/5

This book was not originally on my list of things I wanted to read, but it was out on display at my local library advertised as a "haunting fall read, perfect for halloween."

Having finished the novel I believe it was mis-shelved. I gave this two stars only because my initial expectations might have been off; judging by the books displayed by this one I was expecting more supernatural/horror elements within the story.

This story revolves around Nancy Kincaid and Oliver Perkins. Nancy Kincaid shows up to work after waking up feeling ill. When she arrives she finds that none of her co-workers recognize her and insist that she is not Nancy. Interspersed through Nancy's struggles to discover who she really is and what is happening to her is the story of Oliver Perkins. Perkins is a washed up poet who wakes up from a hangover to find his Nana had called about his missing drug abusing younger brother. Unfortunately both stories are slow to build and hard to get into. Nothing about the characters made them immediately likable and it was a struggle to get through the first 70 or so pages. Things seemed like they were going to pick up and improve when  they find the murdered body of the real Nancy Kincaid but shortly there after the book returns to its slow pace. I felt the story could have been as effective much shorter, and a quote from page 173 accurately describes the writing style throughout the story "... Time, he thought, was a-wasting."

I didn't find the motivations of the brother very believable, especially since he has been supposedly both sober and very religious since moving into the mews and meeting with the psychiatrist paid for by his Nana.  Then the ease in which he is able to get his hands on Nancy and her FBI double despite there being so much interest in Frank Woodlawn just didn't ring true. The broken typewriter as motivation for his killing his mother and so many years later his idea to frame his brother also seemed far-fetched. 

So with a plot that is slow moving and full of holes I'm not sure this book is worth the amount of effort it takes to get through it.