Rating: 5/5

The best miracles of private libraries happen in old bookstores, and it was in such a bookstore that I found Send Bygraves, tucked into a box of poetry books for $1. I committed for my own reasons -- a renewed interest in poetry, and a temporary fascination with illustrated books for adults -- but once I was fully engaged, I found myself caught up in a truly revelatory reading experience.

Send Bygraves is by Martha Grimes, apparently a mainstay of detective fiction... a name I wasn't familiar with, being a novice in that genre. This book of poetry is a small attractive hardback (at least my copy) with illustrations by Devis Grebu... the illustrations being wonky donkey little montages that have a sort of cubist simultaneity to them.

Send Bygraves is less a story than a poetic sketch of a certain place at a certain time -- a surreal mystery town with murder and paranoia baked right into the brickwork. The town is populated by caricatures and enigmas: the local gossips, the bumbling police, the shadowy figure always at the margins, and the protagonist detective who makes himself known through patterns of absence. Victims are plentiful, everyone is the murdered, and nobody is Bygraves. It's a demented masterpiece of a puzzle-box, and I felt blissfully lost in every section.

I was going to compare this to Edward Gorey, feeling very clever about it, but I see others have already made the association. It is warranted -- like Gorey's work, Bygraves is sprightly and lyrical, illustrated with a childlike morbid charm, and suffused with a sort of understated, grotesque delirium. I would add: Bygraves is what you might get if you kidnapped Edward Gorey and forced him at gunpoint to dig deep, instead of working at the surface. Whereas Gorey had this as a style, Grimes writes it as a philosophy... something she embraces as a challenge to her reader, her genre, and herself.

Enter this book with an appreciation for ambiguity and play. Stay until you're dizzy with the toxic fumes. If you've found Bygraves, you've stumbled upon something very distinctive indeed.