Rating: 4/5

Encouraged by other reviewers and knowing I had this volume in my collection somewhere, it became my nightly winter-ish read. I didn’t really know anything about the Chinese poets included in this book, so the poems were fresh and alive for me. And it’s a good season to read this poetry, as they are perfect for these days of wet and dreariness.

The icicles on the eaves
Drone in the wind like swords
Of murderers.

The poems start with Tu Fu, who is ranked by editor Kenneth Rexroth as the greatest of the Chinese poets. And I can see why. His poems ring with the melancholy and frustration of his life, after losing favour and being exiled for much of his later years in the 700s. 

I am like a gull
Lost between heaven and earth.

Because I am not an expert of metre and all that, when I read poems it is to see if they affect me in some way. The Tu Fu poems certainly did. The translation is enough to understand how he can be ranked with Virgil and Ovid as one of the greatest.

Tomorrow in the sunlight
I shall walk in the manured fields,
And weep for the yellow dust of the dead.

I was worried that the Tu Fu poems would set such a high standard that the rest of the book would be a letdown, but it was not to be. Su Tung P’o’s poem about the end of year was vivid (he was also a wandering exile).

The year about to end
Is like a snake creeping in a field.
You have no sooner seen it
Than it has half disappeared.
It is gone and its trouble has gone with it.
It would be worse if you could catch it by its tail.
Why bother to try when it will do you no good?

There is also a section devoted to the Chinese poetess, Li Ch’ing Chao, whose translated words are simply beautiful. She, too, suffered in her later years when her husband died of typhoid fever and she wandered aimlessly. There is hope yet wistfulness in her poems.

O bright pods of the pepper plant,
You do not need to bow and beg pardon.
I know you cannot hold back
The passing day.

Kenneth Rexroth did a grand job of translation, at least as far as I am concerned. It’s perfect for someone like me. His introduction states, I make no claim for the book as a piece of Oriental scholarship. Just some poems. And that’s just fine.

NOTE: The printed book I have was obviously loved and read by others before it hit my greedy hands, which is the way it should be. My copy also has a front-page inscription from someone to their love. This in a small way expresses my love today, which will increase tomorrow and endure in the future. That’s lovely and it’s why I will always prefer the printed book over an e-read.

Book Season = Year Round (feed the crumbling years)