Rating: 5/5

I finished this book a couple of days ago, and I'm still thinking of the last line of it. A book that can get that response deserves five stars.

This book, in addition to that, also did the very difficult job of telling a story that was compelling and moving while at the same time starring and unlikeable character. Beatrice Lacey is a young woman with her while life ahead of her and only one thing she wants: her father's land, Wideacre. As this is a story set in the eighteen hundreds, Beatrice comes to realise very early that this land she loves, this land that's a big part of who she is, will be handed to her uncaring, sickly and largely absent brother, Harry. This sets off a chain of events that, in my humble opinion seemed, at least in the beginning, reasonable.

The story is so much in Beatrice's head that I at least couldn't help but feel sympathetic towards her ongoing plights, though she definitely causes the worst of them later on. However I've read many negative reviews of this novel and so I know this isn't the case for everybody.

One of the reviews I read early on pointed out how this story could not have been written from Celia's, or indeed any other characters's, point of view other than that of Beatrice. The beauty of this book for me was in seeing the layers of character that made up Beatrice, her decisions, her conflicts with herself over her actions, how she backed herself into a corner. Writing this story from anyone else's view would have been to lessen Beatrice's character and flatten the entire narrative. It is the thought behind the action all the way through that kept this story alive for me.

Notable character mention in this book goes to John MacAndrew, the character who I expected to be most bland who had the most interesting turn around. I screamed out and cried at some of the things that happened between him and Beatrice. As for the invariably mentioned incest between Beatrice and Harry, I think it is a well positioned part of the story that's handled without sensationalism and is there simply because the story needed it.

I bought this whole series unseen on just the strength of Philippa's Tudor writing, and now I'm glad because my local library doesn't have a copy, but I do.

~
Similar to:  The Dark Descent of Elizabeth Frankenstein