Rating: 2/5

Read as part of my ongoing shelf audit. Verdict: From library book sale we come, and to library book sale we return.

The more I talked about this book to my girlfriend after finishing it, the more I realized that it had swindled me into assuming that, because it was 'old', it had inherent value. Which is weird because this is something I find perennially frustrating in the way people treat the mainstream literary canon, but when I get into my personal hobby horse of SFF genre history, I apparently have some blinders on. 

Here is the crux of my problem with this book: it is a post-apocalyptic narrative which doesn't actually care about the apocalypse. The characters aren't particularly interested, which to a certain extent makes sense since this is 1000 years post-event, but also, are there no legends and no archaeologists? There are ruins, but these seem to be far fewer than they should be, and characters either avoid them or only interact with them by accident, and then for a very short period of time. There's no knowledge about the ancient world but also no curiosity, other than Jestak's insistence that everyone must have been part of one shared culture before the apocalypse. The narrative, too, doesn't really engage with this unique setting; post-apocalyptic fiction can invoke emotions by showing a place or thing that the reader recognizes but the characters don't, but that hardly ever comes up, and indeed the author treats much of the Great Plains as if they are completely empty, without mentioning even subtle ruins or landmarks.

There is no sense of place in general (I genuinely can't tell you if Northwall is all tunnels like an anthive or if parts are open to the sky), but I was especially struck by this in the portion of the book which takes place in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains because... I grew up hiking there, and yet there was absolutely nothing which was evocative or familiar in the way the landscape was depicted/described. What's the point of setting a story in a place your readers may have been, if you're not going to bother to invoke that place? Like man, throw me a bone here. I'll take, I don't know, a reference to diagonal uplift layers or something. You don't have to mention Long's Peak but aspen trees wouldn't have been a stretch. 

Moreover, the more I think about it this apocalypse doesn't make sense. Per cover copy, it was an 'atomic holocaust', but there are still cities on the Eastern Seaboard. Somehow horses are limited to the Rockies and the parts of the plains closest to them - what the hell happened to Kentucky? There's an archipelago in the Atlantic which at first I thought might be the Bahamas, but it's volcanic and yet doesn't match any of the extant volcanic archipelagoes, which is a timeline problem. 

This book would have been better off as second-world fantasy, because it's not really connected to the real world in any way that matters. Maybe that gets fixed later in the series, but this is not an intriguing enough start for me to make an effort to track down the rest. Two stars because the prose was readable enough to propel me through it quickly, once I sat down to focus on it.

(And all that doesn't even MENTION the fact that a good 30% of this book is different people fawning over how great Jestak is. That part is just obnoxious.)