Rating: 5/5

I greatly enjoyed this book. It surprises me a little that a piece of fiction this beautiful is not more widely popular.

Like its prequel, The King Must Die, this book is a partial retelling of the Greek myth of Theseus. The story is unique in that the author reframes the supernatural events of the original story in a way that makes natural causes plausible. Theseus himself continues to believe in the gods, but instead of worshiping them he blames them for his misfortunes.

The story is also remarkable for its frank inclusion of homosexuality. Renault herself was a lesbian, and same-sex romances feature in most of her historical fiction. Theseus himself is portrayed as straight, but several minor characters have lesbian relationships. Very unusual for a book published in 1962!

I appreciated that Renault was able to include these details without becoming revisionist in her overall treatment. Indeed, this ability to tell a story that is substantively the same as the old familiar myths, while very different in tone and style, is one of the book's greatest strengths.

Beyond these details, though, this book is simply an excellent piece of historical fiction. While the first book was the story of Theseus' ascension to kingship, this is the story of his betrayal and eventual downfall. The story is honest and sad, but also beautiful. Even as king, Theseus can't always succeed; he blames his fate on the gods, but I would just say "that's life".

Some other reviews have criticized Theseus' character, in particular his behavior and attitudes toward women. And I would agree that Theseus is not intended to be perfect. However, part of it is simply that Theseus is an unusually honest picture of what an ancient Greek actually would be like. He is not intended to live up to the ideals of our own culture; he is intended to present an idea of virtue in a society very different from our own. Making Theseus a modern-day man in an ancient Greek's skin would have just been dishonest.