Rating: 4/5

“If there’s one thing Saskia knows, it’s that you absolutely do not blow the chance to buy a Mysterious Book That Comes From Who Knows Where.”-Page 127

How ironic. I found this book through an insightful blog, Winnowing Oar, which I found, in turn, through someone’s Facebook page.

I think it’s important that we read books we normally wouldn’t. For example, this novel largely centers around a precocious thirteen-year-old girl who daydreams about Homer’s Odyssey while living in what could be described as the remnants of a hippie commune that’s undergone a few cultural makeovers. On second thought, bildungsromans, The Odyssey, and being childishly oblivious are all things I enjoy, so maybe this was a book for me after all, just strawberry instead of my usual vanilla.

On third thought – this was definitely a book for me.

Brian Hall has a gift for animating his characters. It’s a limited third-person narrative; we experience Hall’s world through a not-quite-bird’s-eye that hovers just a few feet above our eponymous heroine (…) Saskia. Saskia’s thought patterns feel genuine, even to the degree that she models others’ beliefs on the state of her world given what limited information she has. More and more I’m beginning to feel that this is the mark of a great author.

See: Saskia’s habit of disguising everything behind a veil of fairytale euphemisms, demonstrating her intelligence, yet her reality distortion field isn’t quite strong enough to loop others in (she is no black hole), and we readers are privy to the show in which it is broken apart, piece by piece, by the hard evidence of her reality. Does that make you want to read this? You might be like me.

Clever: The Saskiad possesses a distinct, mathematical narrative structure. One can read the book in reverse and receive a very different story – just like Christopher Nolan’s film Memento. Unfortunately I don’t have the time for that, but I can tell you without any doubt this is a good book. It can transport you to a different time, place, and make you feel things. Just read it in 4 solid sit-down sessions, not 10 like I did.

P.S. That one allusion to Allen Ginsberg's Howl won some brownie points with this one.