Rating: 3/5

In all, this book falls into the category of "books that blew me away in my twenties, but don't really seem to hold up anymore." It isn't actually bad, and some of it is even pretty good, but I took one star off from my original review, because the overall effect is middling. Below are the reviews I wrote for each of the novels in the tetralogy, as I completed them over the course of the past half-year or so.

The Final Programme is a remarkably short book, and even less of it (maybe 120 pages) is really about Jerry Cornelius as Jerry Cornelius. He is, as established, a kind of devil-may-care 60s hipster super-spy and super-lover, with no allegiances save his own pleasures. There are gunfights and intrigue, sex scenes and fast cars, and rock and roll parties that last for weeks. Cornelius seems to be a man who is always on top, always in control, always winning. Apparently he became an instant hit in the New Wave sci fi community, and was used as a character by many other writers in the fanzine Moorcock published. His femme fatale adversary in this novel is Miss Brunner, who plans to use an advanced computer to make herself into a god. Once entropy starts to destroy the world he has always known, he tries fleeing from, then is seduced into, Ms. Brunner’s Project, which has the effect of cancelling his personality, or at least his status as ultra-competent protagonist. He becomes increasingly a victim, although by the end it is implied that Ms. Brunner’s programme has given him equal status.

There are two scenes that really stood out to me on a re-read, both involving depersonalized “crowds.” In the first, Jerry is visiting London as the crisis is escalating, and a crowd enters one of his favorite hangouts. This crowd is described, not as a group of individuals, but as an amorphous mass, menacing, possibly interested in absorbing Jerry into its brainless unity. A “piece of the crowd” detaches itself and Jerry recognizes it as a friend, now somehow de-individuated and possessed by the crowd. In the second scene, near the end of the book, the Godlike Brunner-Cornelius being is hefted by a jubilant crowd and carried throughout Europe, apparently picking up more or less the entire population as they go, then leads them Pied Piper-style to drown in the ocean. In both cases, Moorcock seems to be making a statement about the loss of individuality through group activity – a kind of ultimate expression of the introvert’s worst nightmare. 

Similar but different is Ms. Brunner’s (and, ultimately, Jerry’s) strange vampiric ability to consume people, leaving behind their clothes, gaining their energy and apparently some of their personality in the process. In the ambiguous morality of the text, it is harder to identify this as definitely “evil” – Cornelius is horrified by it at first but comes to accept it, but it also speaks to a kind of fear of losing oneself (one’s Self, that is) in another. 

The Cure for Cancer is a more typically “experimental” work, but one which I find doesn’t seem to work for me as well as it probably did in my youth. The chapter titles are all newspaper headlines (some chapters are short clippings), apparently selected for their bizarre or salacious content, and then thrown into a box and pulled out at random. At the beginning of the book, I got the sense that Moorcock was trying to make the action in the chapter match the chapter title/headline, but as he proceeded, it seemed he was taking more control over the action and the titles became increasingly irrelevant. The result is a book that tells a story in an inefficient and unpredictable manner – which, I admit, I probably liked when I was in college, but now it just seems indulgent and poorly handled.

A few interesting things about this one, it isn’t quite a sequel in the chronological sense, although many themes return: the world has not been destroyed, but is rather in a kind of End Times, Jerry and Ms. Brunner are no longer a unified being, but have separated and become sort of “negative images” of themselves (Jerry is black with white hair, Brunner is now a man), Frank is alive and apparently clean enough to work for the army, Catherine is still dead, but possibly revivable, and rather than being a free agent, Jerry now has a massive worldwide “organization” to support his plans. There is more sex in this one, I think, and more of it is explicitly homosexual, but very little of it is effectively erotic. Although there are more pages than The Final Programme, I think there is actually less content.

The book is dated 1971, and it does seem to map to that odd transition period between the 60s and 70s. There is apocalypticism, mixed with a curious nostalgia (especially for the Beatles). The styles are more garish and tasteless, but still conform to 60s templates. Jerry’s coloration brings out racial issues, and the United States has become unavoidable, with heavy overtones of Vietnam as its defining motif. The only hope held out for the human race is to exterminate most of it, yet we get the sense that people never really die, just become temporarily inactive.

Death continues to be an ambivalent theme in The English Assassin, and nearly every major character dies at least twice. Oddly, Jerry is the exception, in that he spends most of the book in a kind of torpor, rising occasionally to create (rather than stem) a rising tide of entropy. I thought this book was the best written of the first three. Although there are still a few chapters given over to newspaper clippings, these seem to have been deliberately selected (most involve the deaths of children). There is more text per chapter, and that text is very interestingly composed. Time and death remain ambivalent, and there is an implication that the world is paying for Jerry’s earlier indulgences through a kind of to a sort of endless brings all eras in the 20th century together into a sort of endless conflict. Inadvertently, Moorcock may have invented steampunk in 1977, the year that real punk was first (re-)imagining itself. 

The structure of the book deserves some discussion, because to a large degree it is the deliberate structure that sets this book apart from the earlier installments and their sense of randomness, particularly in the case of Cancer. The book is divided into four “shots,” each of which contains a piece of the “prologue,” two “reminiscences,” two piece of “late news” (the news clippings), and two “alternative apocalypses.” These apocalypses, which occur outside of the main narrative, usually involve the deaths of several major characters, although they may be seen as dream-sequences or alternate realities, thus I didn’t count them in my estimates of how many times people die. The main narrative spans the inserted materials, with ten chapters per “shot,” five on each side of the reminiscences, news, and apocalypses, for a total of forty chapters. Within each shot, the chapters tend to be chronologically ordered and logically consistent. In all, Moorcock displayed more discipline in this novel than in the others. 

Several old characters reappear, although often as lesser shells of their former selves, and some new ones are introduced. Notable in this volume is that we meet Jerry’s mother, “Mrs. C,” who has a close relationship with Frank and Catherine. She is something of an anti-Catherine: she is bloated, gluttonous, over-sexed, low-class, shallow, and stupid. I think she sort of grew on Moorcock as he wrote her, however, because she actually fares better than most of the characters, not dying even once to my recollection (although she is widowed). A character I would have liked to have seen better developed was Sebastian Auchinek, a dance-hall-promoter-turned-farmer (or, perhaps it’s the other way around; I don’t trust time in this book), who develops a great love for Una Persson. 

If the first two books don’t appeal to me as much as they used to, this one may redeem the series somewhat. Moorcock definitely put time into it, although I feel as if the second and third “shots” didn’t hold together as well as the first and fourth. If nothing else, this book takes more time to be introspective about the role of Cornelius and the world he lives in, which encourages the reader to think more about what it says about the twentieth century in general.

With the final book, The Condition of Muzak, the series finally resolves into a deliberate parody of itself, revealing itself as both more and less than it had seemed. The title is based on the 19th-century art critic Walter Pater’s quote that “all art constantly aspires toward the condition of music,” a concept which fascinated Schopenhauer, among others. In Moorcock’s twentieth-century reading, however, this aspiration toward evolution is turned into a devolution through laziness and popular pandering to art’s lowest form. That form, it seems, is Muzak, although actually a lot of the book deals with “low art” in the form of the traditional pantomime, with Jerry as Harlequin, his sister Catherine as Columbine, and his brother Frank in the role of Pierrot (although he and Jerry switch, from time to time). 

Much of the book deals with the consequences of success, and the degree to which success destroys the creative artist or idealist, making them betray their own art and creativity. Jerry Cornelius in this book is made, against his will, to live in his own fantasy world, a world in which London in the only real city and there are no powers on Earth with the might to threaten it. It becomes a kind of fusion past-future-present (again, allowing some proto-Steampunk to creep in), but moreover, becomes his prison. The wraparound story suggests that all of these adventures and time travels are actually a fantasy of a grubby teenager living in 1970s London and struggling to make it with a Hard Rock band when all anyone wants to hear is Soul. 

I think I’d have liked the book better if it had stuck with that story, instead of only giving us a few pages at the beginning and end, with pretty much the same old thing from the last two books as the bulk in the middle. It’s less disciplined than the previous book, although less crazy-experimental than A Cure for Cancer. Except for the wraparound-story and last section of the middle, most of the chapter titles are arbitrary clippings from Guns &amp; Ammo-type magazines, again seemingly chosen at random or for their shock value. The wraparound story is undermined when Mrs. Cornelius gives an improbable and unnecessary death-bed confession that implies incest and time travel, even in the midst of the “real” story of the “real” Cornelius’s sell-out.