Rating: 2/5

I'm definitely conflicted on this book. There was a lot of interesting information and theories, but it also frequently felt problematic to me. Part of it was the language used. I understand that Fisher wanted to avoid using the same words over again, but I felt like she too often resorted to vocabulary whose connotations were inappropriate for a scientific work. Examples include words like dulcet to describe women's higher voices and streetwalker to specify a particular kind of prostitute. I frequently felt like she could have both chosen her words better as well as repeated her main points less doggedly and avoided the variety question altogether. Though small, I was also bothered by the book not revising Zaire (probably in the first edition) to the Congo.

I was more bothered by the section on innate differences between men and women due to evolution. While she acknowledged it can be hard to separate out social convention when determining what boys and girls do better than each other, she basically determined that there are just certain differences we can see. For example, she noted males can't thread a needle because they lack fine dexterity. Why on earth she would pick such a viciously gendered example is beyond me. It only took me a moment to think of stereotypically male past times like making model airplanes and painting small figurines to make me question whether men really struggle with that. And girls don't run and jump and throw things because they just aren't inclined to do so, which again seemed as much socially determined as not. Fisher also spent a lot of time backing up the theory that men are better than women at math naturally. She did admit there is more variation of ability within the sexes than between them, begging the question, is the difference between them statistically significant? She didn't address that.

The last area that was a little odd was the way gays and lesbians were frequently missing. When focusing on how mate selection with an eye on procreation, the choice made sense. There was a short section on possible biological determiners of homosexuality that was interesting and started making use of more recent experiments. At the beginning, though, she spent a significant amount of time on how men and women flirt and signal their interest to each other. Not once was there any data on what happens when the couples aren't heterosexual. In addition to the problems of leaving them out of the relationship equation, it simply would have been fascinating to know how their flirting patterns compare. If our flirting behavior is evolutionarily driven (as Fisher suggests), wouldn't observing gays and lesbians add valuable data to the question?

I definitely felt like I learned some interesting things, but I still feel like this book could have done better.