Rating: 4/5

Reiterates the constant theme of Passing Through, the drifter who feels morally obligated, or inspired by clear gray eyes on a tall slim redhead, to administer deeply needed justice. 

July 1983, L'Amour refused to sign unauthorized editions, unlike Harry Harrison in Galactic Dreams proud autographing illegal underground translations because they trumpeted world-wide reader demand. (Canada copyright 50 years &lt; US 75.) LL included last story to set this frontier law collection equal to fake, and added pre-ambles from personal experience specifying locales, gunslingers, and old bandit tales to surpass. History channel may be reviving one feud, but L'Amour has the goods.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pleasant... 
http://www.history.com/shows/hatfield... 

Dedication reads "To my loyal readers, who will know how to read a brand." Quality here is high: girls with spunk or ignored; not a flaw in spelling, grammar, style, plot, flow, or focus. Magazine submissions from 1942-53, most 1949-51 glow with polishing from originals, reason enough to try for legal version. Internet may facilitate copies, fill when real unavailable limited, encourage demand for honest access. 

1 Law of the Desert Born - "Wild dangerous men who went into country where nobody else dared venture.. killed and robbed to live" p31 conquered the West, good and bad". After three days on the run, Shad Marone leads pursuit into dry ashy Sink, where Navajos found hidden spring, but following Apaches perished.
 
Last survivor, tracker Lopez with Apache mother, saved when Shad digs away rocks blocking spring. Shad asks him for coffee in truce.

2 Riding On - Reb Farrell shoots distant rustler, finds own honest father Jim dead. Fired by Nathan Embree, father of sweetheart Laura, Reb follows clue of pa's missing rifle. Wounded Lon fingers Joe Banta. 
 
Cleared, Reb sells out, leaves faithless Laura "she had never loved him" p60, and takes Lon west. Hoorah for dumping the pretty face.

3 The Black Rock Coffin Makers - Jim Gatlin, new Tucker arrival mistaken for Jim Walker, takes on missing farmer's claim against town bigshot Wing Cary. Tall pretty Lisa has rounded slim figure, wide clear gray eyes p68. L'Amour has a strong preference for gray eyes. 
 
Lisa can claim land when backed by money from Gatlin. Dying Walker wrote killer Cary's name in blood. Gatlin climbs free via Hell's Chimney and fetches sheriff for justice, finale in barbershop.

4 Desert Death Song - Handsome Nat Bodine framed for holdup murder by rich Pete Daley, jealous over quiet pretty Mary Callahan, has to hide in rugged country. 
 
When he quietly sucks water through reed p116, why not siphon or slurp enough mouthfuls to fill canteen? Real outlaw caught, Nat takes home to Mary the small red-spotted toad that led him to life-saving water, and explains turquoise source of his mystery wealth.

5 Ride, You Tonto Raiders! - Matt Mathurin (from Latin, saintly) Sabre didn't want to draw in response to drunk foolish Billy Curtin, so agreed to boy's dying request to carry thousands home to wife Jenny, slender "tall for a girl, yet she came no farther than his lips" p168. Big tall L'Amour does like slim tall girls. 
 
Marshal Rafe Collins knows nasty Prince (name not title) McCarran drugged drink, murdered former owner and stole ownership proof, so Matt clears Jenny's land claim, shoots it out with Prince and his gunman Sikes, and will stay until she sends him away, so "a very long time" p213.

6 One Last Gun Notch - Morgan Clyde 35, peaceful until returned with antelope haunch, found Diana "wife and smoking ruins" burned out by big cattlemen. Now a similar bigshot hires him to take out the Hallams. The girl, almost the size and prettiness of Diana, says Vic is out for antelope. "It was all the same" p227.
 
Morgan fixes Hallam's window, quits Sherman, but injured in shootout offers Vic grandfather clock for corner "through the blood that frothed his lips" p231. Vic agrees on condition they be partners. Hard to believe Morgan survives, but happy redemption without his own girl, unusual.

7 Death Song of the Sombrero - Stretch Magoon 6'5" reckons if rustler "ain't dead, he'll be some sore when he wakes up an' finds all that dirt in his face" p236, sees how Sombrero brand superimposes on Lucky S cattle he guards. But Tinkerville newcomer handsome Paul Hartman convinces lovely red-haired (another L'Amour weakness) owner Kelly "named for her pa's favorite burro" p255 Jarvis 21 to fire the "itinerant range detective" p240. 
 
Memories of Paul's first day in town from town loafer Chicken Livers p249 leads Stretch to suggest honest Sheriff Rowsey cable for bank robbers' descriptions, and fast shootouts in town "a bullet through the teeth.. was immedialtely apparent that he found the lead indigestible." p254. Corny fun amidst the danger. Kidnapped Kelly diverges from L'Amour's emphasis on the safety of women in the West.

8 The Guns Talk Loud
http://www.blackcowboys.com/boseikard...
Drifter Sonora, big man with two guns, invites narrator Dan Ketrel, equally big and like-armed, for a drink. Dan remembers latest bandit description "very big man wearin' two guns" p263, as does town boss Harvey Kinsella. So Dan invites him to help pretty Mary Belton by tearing down big cattleman fence starving her cattle.
 
Mary gives bed to Sonora injured during shootout. Both big men thought the other the robber, but Harvey was the villain. 

9 Grub Line Rider - Kim Sartain, stopped by hostile trio riding for big cattleman Jim Targ, decides to buy cattle from Tom Monaghan, especially after sighting "the swell of her bosom" p291 (closest to X-rating L'Amour gets) from his daughter Rusty, slim redhead "apt to be bossy" who will "feed anybody, stray dogs or no-account saddle bums not barred" p287. 
 
Bushwhacked ambushed and left for dead, Kim defeats Targ and his gunslinger Clay Tanner. Rusty bakes him his requested thick juicy apple pie "I knew you'd be back" p309.

10 The Marshal of Painted Rock is world-travelled Matt Sabre back again. Rafe Berry is set to hang, but the real criminal mastermind yet to be uncovered, despite allure of Claire Gallatin, actress masquerading as suspect's sister. 
"To clean up a tough town without killing, that takes a man!" p341. 

11 Trap of Gold - Weatherton finds rich gold under soft spire that will crush over-eager digging through base. Suspense. Rock creaks and groans warning. Will he quit before the weight above falls down?
 
He gathers thousands worth in sacks over days, retreats barely in the nick of time and "did not look back again" p358.