Rating: 4/5

A book where most reviewers got it right! No Passing Fancy, was very much to my fancy. Maybe it was the right place and timing, but the plot was engrossing and heroine was so frustrating and selfish she was found relatable instead of despicable. Humans are flawed, are we not? 

The way I see it, even though Claire had claimed she’s a changed woman and commonly she would improve in time, I’m also glad the author didn’t fully change Claire’s attitude after marrying Rod. Deep down Claire is still that spoiled, rich girl. And that’s alright; it’s believable because one doesn’t change that quick or to that extent in matter of days. A small fraction at a time is possible. Tough luck, hero will just have to put up with his young, bratty wife and he does! He does handle her well! But with that being said, I have never been more nervous for a hero. Despite Claire’s strong pursuit and thousand love declarations for Rod, I do believe it was mostly an obsession and not quite love she felt for him. Which he have a foresight of the novelty and tried to explain it to her and also resist the physical attraction but truth be told, Rod knew he never stood a chance. Claire was hunting him and so with no other choice Rod pragmatically accept his fate. I was like damn she really did it! He caved in after all and a part of me immediately wanted the hero to take back his words and let her suffer a bit more but then we wouldn’t have a romance. Let them marry, as Rod really took a risk when he sealed it! But he knew that all along, therefore in their new marriage we see him tolerating Claire yet firmly standing his ground, handling her as needed but also showing self-restraint and patience when dealing with her tantrums. And that’s how you knew he really loves her! 

But I must admit, it was the most nerve wrecking thing to see how their differences and small compatibility will play out til the very end. If Claire wasn’t end-game, I could easily see her becoming the lousy, clingy ex-wife while the hero would probably pursue his efficient and attractive blonde secretary instead. Good thing, he was her man! She was near tiring at the end and that lost a star for me but indeed, love conquers all!