Rating: 4/5

At the age of 53, baseball legend, George Herman Ruth, Jr. known as “Babe Ruth” originally nicknamed same when he was a young minor league player for being a naïve, “babe in the woods,” passed away from cancer in New York City, on August 16, 1948. This book gives an excellent history of Babe Ruth’s life. I felt like it was also a good "history" book, in that not only is this book about Babe Ruth and his baseball achievements, it gave a good overall of what baseball was like in the mid-1900's through 1948, and how WWI and WWII and the Depression affected the sport. It also showed how some things have changed and how some things have not. For instance, Babe Ruth was able to get a huge salary early in his career because of his status and fame as a prime baseball player. When the Yankee stadium opened, a news reporter claimed that it was "The House that Ruth built," because of his popularity. Today, players still bring in huge salaries, and even much more than Babe Ruth would have imagined. Babe Ruth also invested some of his money in a cigar business and starred in a fictitious movie about a baseball player called "Babe Comes Home" which is now a "lost" film which was made by a now defunct American movie picture production company. Today some athletes end up in film and/or television shows, and some invest their money in other things, such as restaurants. I liked this book and it did sadden me that Babe Ruth had died at such a young age. Fortunately today there are more ways to help people with cancer. Babe Ruth did allow himself to be a genie pig for some experimental drugs hoping it might help others in the future and perhaps it has, directly or indirectly. Additionally, he was involved in charitable events and was very respectful of his fans. He responded to their letters personally and was happy to give his autograph. He was not perfect as he liked to party and had his share of affairs when he was young, but overall he loved his sport, was respectful of his second wife, and seemed like someone I would have loved to have seen played the game of baseball.