Rating: 5/5

UPDATE
One would easily be led to conclude from Jacobs book that the abduction/alien phenomenon is a contemporary thing. Take a look at this Egyptian mummy and then reappraise things up,... temporally*.

  

 "We have been invaded. It is not an occupation but it is an invasion. At present we can do little or nothing to stop it.”

David Jacobs in Secret Life: Firsthand Accounts of UFO Abductions (1992)

  

 “It is disturbing that the aliens and hybrids are primarily concerned with the Earth and not with human beings.”

David Jacobs in The Threat ...(1998)

  

In 2013, in Oxford, Doctor David Jacobs gave a conference on the theme “Psychology and Alien abduction”; starting with the recognition that he was not a psychologist (rather, a historian), he pondered at length on the limits of the methodology used to study the object at stake: alien abduction. To begin with hypnosis itself, he proceeded into the human psychological apparatus stating: “memory is inaccurate”, “memory is unreliable”, “people lie”, “people confabulate” (“make things up”) , “most US courts don’t accept testimony derived from hypnosis”, etc, etc….adding “the evidence is weak”.

At the top of the explanations for the phenomenon he put psychologists “reasonable explanations” (1): childhood sexual abuse; and then the list continued: (2) sleep paralysis; (3) popular cultural osmosis; (4) hypnotic suggestion; and so on. 

  

This book is a methodology-at-stake still, an abundant collection (and discussion) of cases, but also a leap into the unknown: what are the real intentions of the aliens? What are they up to? 

Being a historian, Doctor Jacobs found himself doing a rather challenging task of seeing into the future: he called it “the uncomfortable position”, the future divination. 

His points of departure are these facts: since 1975 the number of reports increased; the data gathered became huge. Nonetheless, certain conclusions were apparent: “the contact has already occurred-…on Alien’s term and in secret”; “the UFO’s behaved as if they wanted to keep their distance from us”. 

In a brief historical perspective we had: 1957 Antonio Villas Boas case in Brazil; the fishing-men case of Pascagoula in 1973; the Travis Walton 1975 case…; but maybe most puzzling for Jacobs, was his interview with Betty Hill (1961 abduction) in 1976 and her revelation (kept secret that far) that the aliens had collected semen from her husband Barney. 

  

(Walton case)

Still relevant: in 1993 UFO researcher Karla Turner had called the attention to the fact that some abductees were claiming about the role of the American military in cooperation with the aliens, in the abduction. Budd Hopkins had already pointed the interest of the aliens in the reproductive area; and more recently “they were pairing young abductees for long term relationships”. 

Doctor Jacobs was for some time a reluctant Ufologist as to the use of hypnosis. It was his contact with Budd Hopkins (and Hynek) that made him learn and apply the technique. “Anybody can do it”; trouble begins when “asking the right questions at the right time”. He performed his first hypnotic regression in 1986. By 1992 he had performed more than 300. 

  

And now the curious data he collected; out of 700 abduction cases:

-150, involved egg-taking procedures

-400, physical examinations

-375, mind scans

-180, baby and toddler contact.

Jacobs points to the Hopkins data and his own: the aliens were “ova harvesting” and doing “fetal extraction”. They were really engaged in a “Breeding program”; their agenda. Setting “extra uterine gestational units”, justified the collection of sperm and egg; truly, the production of “hybrids”. 

That’s the “threat”, you may wonder.

  

  

  

(Sealand skull, Denmark)

  

  

  

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S2YN8...

"Interview with Brien Foerster -- Unravelling the Genetics of Elongated Skulls"
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Qsj5...

*https://deusnexus.wordpress.com/2012/...