Rating: 2/5

This review is of “Pirate’s Promise” by Bobbi Smith.

The book begins in the Gulf of Mexico, 1849. It is here that ruthless pirate Shark is planning his latest attack, on the Windwood, a ship captained by Adam Trent, owner of Crescent Shipping, and the hero of the book. Also aboard the ship are Beau Hamilton, Adam’s first mate and best friend, and Adam’s fiance’, Elise Clayton, whom Adam just became engaged to. Their marriage will not take place, however, as Shark and his men attack the ship. Multiple cremen are killed, Adam and Beau are seriously injured, and Elise suffers a gang sexual assault. Adam and Beau return to their hometown,Charleston, South Carolina to recuperate, under the care of Adam’s sister, Becky, who is in love with Beau and he with her. Adam puts Elise in long-term medical care while he sets out to find Shark and kill him. 

Adopting the guise of Captain Spectre, Adam tracks Shark to New Orleans. There, he meets and romances Suzanne Labadie, Shark’s business partner and lover. Adam later gets another break when he wins a plantation at a card game. The plantation, Belle Arbor, borders Suzanne’s property, giving him a base from which to work to find Shark.

When Adam and Becky go to visit Belle Arbor, they are met at gunpoint by Lianne Ducharme, the heroine of the book. (Backstory: Lianne’s uncle Antoine wagered and lost the plantation to Adam. He was supposed to manage the plantation until Lianne, 20, turned 21 or married. Lianne is the middle of three Ducharme children from a marriage of Antoine’s brother, Richard, and an unnamed wife. Lianne’s older brother, Mark, was killed in a duel over Suzanne. Lianne also has one younger brother, Alex, 8). Lianne tries to get the money to buy back the plantation, but is rebuffed at every turn. Soon after, however, Lianne and Adam become lovers. This results in Lianne’s pregnancy. To make matters more complicated, Adam “proposes” to Suzanne (This is not a real engagement; rather, Adam is using her to help him find Shark). Upon finding out that Lianne is pregnant, Adam marries her. Their marriage is not a happy one, as he believes she trapped him into marriage to regain ownership of Belle Arbor. 

As Adam juggles his relationships with Lianne and Suzanne, he comes to realize that he actually loves Lianne; she also realizes that she loves him. However, there are many issues for them to work through. Among them: Adam’s relationship with Suzanne. Suzanne discovers that Adam is just using her to get to Shark, so she enlists the help of evil banker Cyrus Shackelford-whose advances Lianne rejected earlier-to help her get rid of Lianne so she can have Adam. Shackelford, however, has other ideas. He hires two of Shark’s men to kill Adam; this fails, as Adam kills them, then kills Shackelford. While this is going on, Shark and his other men are kidnapping Lianne and Becky, with plans to sell them into white slavery. (Shark is already involved in Black slavery; that’s how he makes his money). Adam and Beau rescue the women, and Adam kills Shark. Adam then confesses all about what he was doing with Suzanne, Lianne forgives him and they have their Happily Ever After. 

Upside: After reading the book again-I first read “Pirate’s Promise”back when it was first published in September, 1988-,I’m not sure there is much of one.

Downside: Let’s start with Lianne. She is a very milquetoast heroine. My favorite heroines are those who have jobs/careers and can take care of themselves, and the love of the hero makes them stronger and better people. Lianne is NOT that type of heroine (To be fair, there aren’t many of Mrs. Smith’s heroines who fall into this category). Examples: When Antoine sells Belle Arbor, Lianne goes to him to try to compel him to buy it back; when he refuses, she cries. Lianne then goes to Adam to try to buy the plantation back. When he refuses to sell it back to her, she cries. When Adam disappears multiple times without telling her where he’s going after their marriage, she cries. Notice a pattern here? I get the emotional aspect of all these things, but the fact that Lianne doesn’t have a plan B beyond crying about what is going on gets very old after the first time.Lianne appears to only be good at two things-besides crying, that is: gardening and looking good. 

Adam is no great shakes either as a hero. After the attack on his ship and Elise’s rape, he becomes completely uncaring about anything other than finding and killing Shark; again, understandable, but not good for a romance novel hero. He accuses Lianne of entrapment, claiming she got pregnant to regain ownership of Belle Arbor, CONVENIENTLY forgetting his role in her pregnancy. Adam is uncaring and unfeeling toward everyone except Becky and Beau until about ¾ of the way into “Pirate’s Promise”, when he realizes that he indeed does love Lianne.

Then, there is his treatment of Elise. I work in the emotional health field, and work a lot with trauma survivors (and I am a trauma survivor myself). In my personal and professional experience, I have learned there are things that trauma survivors need to rebuild their lives. They include, but are not limited to: compassion, love, support and understanding. Adam shows NONE of these things to Elise. He buys a house, provides her with round-the-clock doctors and nurses, one of whom, David Williams, she falls in love with and they plan to marry, a clear ethical breach, but I digress. However, other than a few visits, Adam gives nothing of himself. The phrase “trauma-informed care” was not a thing in 1988, but it is now, and that type of care may have helped Elise gain some semblance of her life quicker. A couple of other points: The blurb on Goodreads about “Pirate’s Promise” states that Adam’s fiance’, Elise, was killed. Unless there is a difference between the ebook and the print versions, this is an error. Second, the title is a misnomer. Adam is NOT a pirate per se, although he does disguise himself as one to track and kill Shark. He is a ship’s captain, and 90% of the book takes place on dry land, not at sea. 

I can also point out that there isn’t a great deal of romance between Lianne and Adam, with little chemistry and almost no real passion. 

Sex: The love scenes are mild and nowhere near graphic. Readers who love spicy love scenes: Bobbi Smith is not your author. 

Violence: Most of the violence takes place in the last 3rd of the book and, like the love scenes, is not graphic. Readers who like graphic violence: Mrs. Smith is not your author. 

Bottom Line: Mrs. Smith is capable of writing good books. “Pirate’s Promise” is not one of them.