Rating: 4/5

This is an epic length read. The first half, or nearly so, all occurs in the summer of 1902 in Kent countryside town. On the day when Mr. Barshinskey and his family arrive to live in the abandoned cottage next door to the Wiloughbys, we meet nearly all the characters. Contrast, conflict and interchange between the two families cores the book. Each has 3 children. Each has 2 female and 1 male offspring. There is where the exactness ends. Peers in age, but not in any faction of temperament or economic condition. 

No more of plot or outcomes, more of themes. It's long with the second half of the book occurring mainly within the Russia of 12 to 14 years after the first summer of Mr. Barshinskey coming to be the new cowman. And it is focused almost entirely on the children from that first summer and not the adult parents from that 1902 bright idyll.

My most enjoyed feature was the relationship between Sophie and Daisy Mae. How that progressed and defined itself. Not just from the early days, but the entire time. Until the very last page. The love interests and the moral strictures of appearance, clothing, manners that defined their "class" for both families- that interested me much less than the relationship between the two girls. This was really 2 whole books, and that's why the Sophie chapters had to be added at the end, IMHO. There certainly was continuity and connection, but both books of 200 plus pages each here, they hold entirely different focus, style of writing, mood. All three. So for me the first was almost a 5 star and the last was much closer to a 3. Edwin's actions and reactions, plus the path taken for the choices given- a lot of that Russian leaving course from Petrograd did not make sense to me. Logically. Not for Galena or for Edwin. I doubt immensely that she would have chosen the route out she did, not even by last default. She had been too street smart not to have used another way, ill or not.

But what was absolutely 5 star was the skill of Diane Pearson in 1000 facets of underpinning feelings and reactions describing the experience of being the recipient of charity. Both initially and also over great spans of time. Actually from both ends of CHARITY and in both Part I and Part II we find this "beholden" quotient in the fore. From the self-righteous warm self-congratulationing perks of the giver to his/her own self-importance, all the way to the self-defining (belittled and feeling inferior and in debt) results for the core emotion of the receiver. It was supreme. Superb. Best I ever read for this aspect. How Ivan responded to that in his own self-definition. How Daisy Mae did. How Mrs. Barshinskey did. How Edwin did in the posh super clubs with Galena's rich benefactor. What that charity process enabled in Lillian's and Mrs. Willoughby's ideas about their own roles and "place" in societal hierarchy and personal worth, doubly so.

The men in this book, even Mr. Barshinskey himself, IMHO, were never revealed to the full extent as the women were. Not even Edwin. And certainly not Mr. Willoughby or Ivan. 

If you love tons of flowery or rancid detail- both ends of beauty/ugly. Can appreciate the petty as well as the exuberant. Do not mind loads of redundancy in order to capture every minutia of nuance or ambiance, then you will like this read. Real people do emerge. I thought the Quaker group gone to Russia for the refugees during that 1914-17,was captured to the supreme. The length, and the attraction of such depth by Sophie for Mr. Barshinskey because he was such an emotional font compared to her stringent and remote family? That lost an entire star for me. I find children are quite aware and quite quickly respond to anyone who holds a revolving mood or capacity for violence. Even down to slaps. So at 6 or at 11 or at 14? Despite the pet names and the attention? Doubt if Sophie could have overlooked as much as this author assured that she did in order to trust for the "fun" times.

Good book, and I'll read her other- but not for some time. It would be best in a much less busy and much smaller TBR pile summer slot. It's a 600 pager, the next one. Pearson might have been better to make these series or trilogy fare? Now, perhaps not then when they were published. 

Lastly, many readers, especially women, are interested in the "downstairs" aspect of stories in these eras for the "BIG" houses in England. Downton, Upstair/Downstairs- that kind of thing. This relationship for their work and measure for those times working for the Fawlett's in this book! They were as real as real gets for the endless hours of repetitive servitude, over the passing of years. How Daisy Mae was treated and her wage. How Sophie progressed and why- and what her wage and job became for her abilities. Much closer to service and servant class reality, IMHO, than the ones of tv series and drama fame.