Rating: 5/5

“One Is the Sun” by Patricia Nell Warren is a book from my personal library that I’ve chosen to re-read and review. I am pleased to see that it is still available in the paperback edition, as well as in audible, though not in e-book format. It was published in 1991, and definitely belongs in the category of classic feminist historical novels. 

The basic narrative deals with what might be called the last gasp of traditional earth-goddess thought in the 19th Century, before it was in fact reawakened as a result of the feminist resurgence in the 20th Century. Although it doesn’t deal in any way with the modern-day revisiting of Wicca, it definitely resonates with other aspects of planet-focused non-Christian teaching and mysticism as they are currently understood and practiced. 

As the story begins, a group of aristocratic Bavarian neopagans are commissioned by the matriarch of their family, Oma, to go to America and try to make contact with a rumored female “Medicine Chief”, or at least to try and discover if there is, in fact, any surviving vestige of belief in the earlier “Mother-centered” religion among the native tribes of that continent, as there still is in Europe. The group includes the brothers Klaus and Fredi, Klaus’ wife Christine and daughter Helle, and two retainers, Bärbl and Siegrund, and they arrive in San Francisco in the autumn of 1857. From there, guided by trader Richard de Garcy, also known as “East Deer”, they launch their expedition into the Deer Lodge Valley in the Idaho Territory to meet up with Earth Thunder, a wise woman and healer originally from Mexico, who has escaped from the final destruction of the Mayan Water Temple by the occupying Spaniards and has connected with various tribes in North America during decades of wandering.

Other major characters include Earth Thunder, her apprentice River Singing whom she rescued from slavery by trading axes for her, and numerous other individuals and families who come to the Deer Lodge Valley to be cured of illnesses and join the ceremonial and teaching circle at the Mother Wheel they construct. The narrative is powerfully descriptive, the characterizations vivid, and the plot gripping as the peace-and-life-loving people struggle to survive the greed and cruelty of the gold rush and the violent territorial life during the western expansion, slaughter of the buffalo, and suppression of the native people during the run-up to the Civil War.

Other marvelous aspects of this book include extraordinary illustrations by Warren herself, helpful maps, meticulous attention to history, and a sensitive touch with respect to the cultural and racial tensions resulting from the drastic changes brought on as colonization, land acquisition, and industrialization rapidly replaced free range and free trade in commodities with a gold-based economy. We are now aware of the way in which missionary efforts by both the Catholic and Protestants added to the extreme disruption of Indian culture, not only killing untold thousands but also forcing survivors onto Reservations and brainwashing their children into forced assimilation. Warren, herself a native of Montana, is both honest and sensitive in dealing with all these issues, meanwhile providing extraordinary insight into the most important key issue, which is the divide between those who cherish the Earth and care for other beings, and those who exercise an ethos of racist and misogynistic domination and destruction, creating a wasteland in the wake of their profit-mongering exploitation.