Rating: 2/5

Initially, I wanted to give four stars since this book gives a decent summary of the precursors of the movement and the foundation of the PRB. The problems started with Hilton highlighting Rossetti as the only worthy artist while also morally degrading him for having a hard time after his wife, Elizabeth Siddal's death making references to surrounding himself with alcoholics as Swinburne and Bell Scott, and engaging with "whore-ish" models as Annie Miller and Fanny Cornforth. Then, the author must speak of the second wave and he does so with such a deep disgust and utter boredom sometimes when he describes Morris's revolutionary work or Burne-Jones's early works that I couldn't help but gasp at some of his points. But the truly upsetting part for me was the following paragraph:

„ Perseus slaying the sea serpent has a fine slimy monster, and the added advantage of an extremely fetching naked girl. Here is an aspect of Burne-Jones's art which deserves manly commendation, for even if he did it with something of a sly, voyeurish quality, Burne-Jones did put an end to the latitancy of the mid-Victorian nude. (Nude painting had unfortunately disappeared during the Pre-Raphaelite years; Queen Victoria bought an Etty nude, but nakedness was almost always covered up during the years of her widowhood.) It is always nice to see a breast in a painting, or as delicately glorious a bottom as Andromeda's, like a pale peach at sunrise. There are many such pleasantnesses in Burne-Jones's painting.”

After reading this I'm not even sure this book deserves the three stars I gave. There are better surveys into the history of medievalism and the PRB, which are more accurate and up to date. It's much better to read the work of an author who enjoys the topic they write about.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Hungarian review:

Te szentséges jó ég, erre a könyvre 4 csillagot szerettem volna eredetileg adni, mert ugyan meghaladott és régimódi, de az elején szépen ismerteti a preraffaelitizmus előzményeit és a PRB alakulását. Aztán jöttek a gondok, amikor Rossetti vált az istenné Hiltonnak, a második hullámot Morrisszal és Burne-Jonesszal pedig csak muszályból tárgyalja és le is szólja. Itt lett a négyből 3,5 csillag. A könyv során eltűrtem, hogy minden nőt szinte vagy butának vagy egyenesen „r*bancosnak” állít be a szerző, de a következő hímsoviniszta szöveg borított ki végképp:
„ Perseus slaying the sea serpent has a fine slimy monster, and the added advantage of an extremely fetching naked girl. Here is an aspect of Burne-Jones's art which deserves manly commendation, for even if he did it with something of a sly, voyeurish quality, Burne-Jones did put an end to the latitancy of the mid-Victorian nude. (Nude painting had unfortunately disappeared during the Pre-Raphaelite years; Queen Victoria bought an Etty nude, but nakedness was almost always covered up during the years of her widowhood.) It is always nice to see a breast in a painting, or as delicately glorious a bottom as Andromeda's, like a pale peach at sunrise. There are many such pleasantnesses in Burne-Jones's painting.”
Ezek után nem érdemli meg a két csillagot sem. És nem értem, 1970-ben egy ilyen mondat hogy mehetett át egy szerkesztőn.