Rating: 3/5

I have recently read “While the Patient Slept”, written by Mignon G. Eberhart in 1930, the second book to feature Nurse Sarah Keate and handsome police detective Lance O'Leary. Having enjoyed that classic mystery, I tracked down the first volume in the series from 1929, “The Patient in Room 18”, another suspenseful gothic classic murder mystery. Ms. Eberhart was at one time one of the most popular novelists in the US, and from this volume it is easy to understand why.

We are introduced to St. Ann’s Hospital, a converted old mansion which had a few wings added and is now a private hospital treating those who can afford it (plus some charity beds). Our main narrator is once again Nurse Sarah Keate, a spinster nurse who is quite good at her job, and quite an inquisitive and observant amateur sleuth to boot. The book starts with a dinner party, held at the home of the hospital director Dr. Letheny and his cousin, Corole, to entertain a visiting engineer, Jim Gainsay. All the doctors from the hospital are there, as well as Nurse Keate and her coworker Maida Day, a stunning colleague who Gainsay falls for pretty much immediately. During the party there is talk of the recent purchase of a gram of radium that is used for medical treatment, at a cost of $65,000, and what each of the guests would do with that kind of money.

As the dinner party breaks and the nurses return to the hospital for their night shift, a storm that has been brewing finally breaks. The nurses quickly find that one of their patients, Mr. Jackson in the titular Room 18, has been murdered and the gram of radium stolen. With the arrival of the police, including handsome Lance O’Leary, the body of missing Dr. Letheny as also discovered, bludgeoned to death.

And so the gothic moodiness continues. Missing syringes. Unknown people sneaking around the grounds of the hospital. Missing keys and unlocked doors. Power outages. Muddy shoes and missing raincoats. A janitor who knows more than he tells, who is also killed before he can share his secrets. Will O’Leary and Keate solve the mystery before the killer gets away and the radium is found?

A fine mystery from the past, with vivid characters and a palpable sense of dread. Very well done for what it is and the time it came from.