Rating: 3/5

Levinson blends 2 very different plotlines together here, and sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't. It is a particularly bad flu season, but there is a new drug out there that seems to be excellent at stopping the bug in its tracks, and even better, it is effective against meningitis too because it crosses the blood-brain barrier, which is notoriously difficult to do. In the midst of this, Phil D'Amato, a forensic detective with the NYPD, is called in to try to find clues related to the strangling of a young college student found in a park. When the officer who was the first to the scene is later questioned by D'Amato during his investigation, she suddenly has no memory of being there or processing the case. When both D'Amato, his girlfriend, and his boss get the flu and discover that entire days have been erased from their memories, they realize this could explain what happened to the officer, as D'Amato's questions had to wait until she returned from sick leave. This 'memory bug' strikes again when another young college student is attacked while out walking. Although she survives, when she is brought in to identify her attacker, whose description perfectly matches a woman the police found in the neighborhood with no solid alibi for the night of the attack, the victim instead picks one of the 'red herrings' in the lineup, and admits that she can no longer recall what her attacker looked like.
Now, D'Amato has two very different cases to work on. His primary focus, according to his boss and city officials, should be to provide investigators with evidence that could lead to the capture of the strangler, who causes more understandable public outcry and fear with every victim. However, D'Amato feels convinced that the new miracle drug is causing the memory loss running rampant through his circle of contacts, and perhaps nationwide too, without people realizing it. Somehow, in order to prove his point, D'Amato ends up researching ancient cultures with the thought that written language came about because there are bacteria in the brain that stimulate our memories, these ancient cultures found something with antibiotic properties that also killed those bacteria, the people realized this was happening, and thus figured out that by developing a way to write thoughts down, those thoughts would not be lost when their brain bacteria were killed.
I liked Levinson's way of tying it all together and eventually that the focus returned to the stranglings and medical side of the 'memory bug', but when D'Amato was learning about the Phoenecians, the Vikings, who discovered the Western world first, etc., etc. I found myself spacing out, remembering how little I cared about ancient history when I was in school and realizing that my opinions on the subject haven't changed over the years. D'Amato's role as a forensic investigator intrigues me, but I would have to see what area of expertise his investigation requires before I commit to reading another of Levinson's books in the series because if it's less science and more on the history side of things, it may not hold my interest.