Rating: 5/5

An entrancing, howlingly funny, informative, exquisitely written novel about a trip around Great Britain by a country squire and his retinue during the reign of George III.

Matthew Bramble, a country squire whose seat is in Gloucester, embarks on a tour of Britain including Bath, London, York, Scarborough, Edinburgh, the Scottish Highlands, among other places, returning eventually by slow stages to his estate. He is accompanied by his sister, niece and nephew, and his sister's servant. Along the way, they add to their retinue the eponymous Humphry Clinker, a poor and pious young man who becomes Bramble's servant, and Lieutenant Lismahago a Scottish soldier recently returned from the American colonies.

The entire book consists of letters written by Bramble, et. al. to their friends, describing their own observations of and reactions to a multitude of events that occur along their journey. The personalities, educations, and stations of each writer are beautifully developed through their letters as the journey continues. The events themselves can be edifying, sad, enraging, beautiful, and more. But many of them are outlandish and utterly hilarious. With the exception of Bramble's sister and her servant, the letters were written in the style of university-educated people of that time, which to me is like the finest of wines. (The exceptions were functionally illiterate, and their letters included many malapropisms that were always funny and almost always smutty.)

The book was also very valuable as a travelogue, which was all the more fun for me, as I visited many of the places they did, some 210 years later on my first trip to Great Britain.

At first, I was reminded of the Pickwick Papers. But despite his talents, Dickens' works were infinitely more subdued and "proper" compared to the general vitality, bawdiness, and fun behavior of the mid-1700's. I wouldn't think of reading Pickwick Papers again, but I look forward to revisiting Humphry Clinker sometime soon. I'm sure I'll get more out of it each time I return.

The book has no plot to speak of. However, woven through the book is a continuing narrative of intrigues, misunderstandings, and mysterious personages of dubious intentions, all of which resolve themselves in a glorious final 30 pages, reminding me inescapably of Shakespeare's "All's Well that Ends Well".

I haven't had so much fun reading a book in I don't know how long. It was difficult at the beginning due to the daunting number of footnotes one is required to go through to make sense of vocabulary in use then that has long disappeared from the language. But it truly worth the effort.