Rating: 3/5

This book was interesting, but the authors went a bit further than evidence permits in theorizing astrological underpinnings for numerous world myths. I would certainly be willing to acknowledge an astrological influence in some of the myths they explore, just not in all of them. 

The discussion of the myths themselves was certainly engaging. I was not aware that Shakespeare had been influenced by an earlier Scandinavian myth revolving around a person named Amleth. Other discussions like that on the legendary primeval Persian king Yima were equally interesting. I had noted the parallels between the fall of Yima and that of Lucifer before, but the writers show convincingly that Yima parallels the Roman god Saturn as well. Both Saturn and Yima (also known as Jamshid) ruled over a primordial golden age. Both also were superseded by another ruler and another age. Philosophy that utilized myth is also referred to. Ancient philosophers such as Plato, Plutarch, Macrobius, Proclus, etc, are great sources for myth and astrology. 

The myths and literature that they explore is rather wide, spanning different continents and civilizations, so one could argue that when drawing from such a vast well of information, they could find seemingly relevant data to support many theses that would be quite untenable given a more appropriately restrictive criteria. One must accept the assumption that civilizations separated by oceans had some contact. If one does accept this supposition, it simply begs other questions such as: how does stock astrological myths get shared by civilizations that are also separated by language? On the strictly human plain, the presumption seems to face more than one obstacle. 

It can hardly be denied that astrology was incredibly important to ancient civilizations, but the theory that even seemingly un-astrological myths also contain oblique astrology would be a difficult thesis to maintain without substantial evidence. That disparate civilizations shared this base astrology would be equally difficult to prove. I'm not sure the writers prove that case convincingly across the board, but the investigation and discussion was worthwhile. I give the book around 3 to 3-and-half stars.