Rating: 4/5

I'm reading Narratives of Empire in chronological order, and I'd forgotten than Washington DC was published in 1967, way before the others. So, it was a little strange reading forward, yet backward at the same time, without the rich background of the rest of the series. Knowing the relationship between Blaise Santord and Burden Day, and their families for instance, made Washington DC seem rather empty--but then it hasn't happened yet. Since, I know so much more about the characters written after 1967, it was--shall I say, like reading separate "biographies" about them. I almost had the feeling that the characters were wearing masks or this was (in my head) some kind of Kabuki. Yes, Blaise is an SOB now, but there's the rest of him waiting to be created.

That said, Washington, DC is truly Burden Day's book. We have a deeper understanding of him here than we do in subsequent books that go back in time, which simply expand on this. Blaise, however, though fully realized in Washington DC is not the complex nuanced character that he becomes in later books. Well, I'll take that back a bit. He's definitely complex here ,but we don't know his backstory. There's no Caroline or Hearst no reporter. No...hmm... tryst with Burden. or Burden's with Frederika. He is an inhumane power broker now, not the nuanced Blaise from the later novels. If Caroline had been around she'd surely have something to say about his behavior. (On to The Golden Age to see!)

Clay Overbook is clearly based in part on GV's sorta in-law, JFK as Elizabeth is Jackie. The betrayal of Enid is drawn from Joe Kennedy's treatment of his daughter Rosemary. I can't help but see GV himself in Peter Sanford. 

Washington, DC marks the end of the last vestiges of the Old Republic that managed to hang on in Hollywood. (Burden Day and Caroline ,though forward thinking-- Caroline especially modern.) Now, all memory is gone, and we have the full blown American Empire of media-created overblown politicians. The ordinary has won.

Although Washington ,DC is certainly a stand alone, and a good one, it's my least favorite of Narratives of Empire mainly due to the disjoint of time context. It is, however, timely. If you think Clay Overbrook is bad, just wait for Newt Gingrich and Rick Santorum. The reader has no trouble identifying today's malaise in the post-war America of Washington, DC.