Rating: 5/5

How many of you know an Ebenezer Scrooge? How many of you are Ebenezer Scrooge?

Written in 1843, A Christmas Carol is a novella that has stood the test of time.

This year, we didn’t put up a Christmas tree, and I haven’t been feeling the “Christmas spirit.” But this book squarely right sided the situation. 

A Christmas Carol hits on some important societal issues, and it has iconic, unforgettable characters. It also has some laugh-out-loud moments. 

Here is one of my favorite quotes:

“What shall I put you down for?”

“Nothing!” Scrooge replied.

“You wish to be anonymous?”

“I wish to be left alone,” said Scrooge.

As Scrooge explores what each of the ghosts has to show him, I loved how the ghosts use Scrooge’s own words against him. 

This year, A Christmas Carol hit very differently. Over the past few years, I lost my ability to control my left leg due to a genetic defect.

Tiny Tim talks about going to church and says, “it might be pleasant to them to remember upon Christmas Day, who made lame beggars walk, and blind men see.”

This passage really got to me, and I started to cry. In February, I started an experimental treatment, and I was able to walk again. When I go to church, there are usually no seats left except in the front. As part of my genetic defect, my body can’t process protein. There are extremely high levels of protein in my blood including my brain, and it makes me unbearably tired. 

What do people see when they see me sleeping in the third row of church? Do people see me as someone who gave what little energy they had to God? Or do they see someone lazy and disrespectful? Or should I not care and just be happy that I made it to church and that I can walk again?

A Christmas Carol is a great reminder to bring Christmas cheer. When talking about Scrooge, so many people choose to go positive and wish him a Merry Christmas. Who can we show kindness to this holiday season?

2025 Reading Schedule
Jan	A Town Like Alice
Feb	Birdsong
Mar	Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Louis De Berniere
Apr	War and Peace
May	The Woman in White
Jun	Atonement
Jul	The Shadow of the Wind
Aug	Jude the Obscure
Sep	Ulysses
Oct	Vanity Fair
Nov	A Fine Balance
Dec	Germinal

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Facebook Insta My Bookstore at Pango