Rating: 5/5

Her prayer was scarcely ended when a deep languor took hold of her limbs, her soft breast was enclosed in a thin bark, her hair grew into leaves, her arms into branches, her feet that we're lately so swift were held fast by sluggish roots, while her face became the treetop. - the transformation of daphne  ִֶָ

There is scarcely anything I've read that has so much beauty and so much gore all at once. But then, Ovid is one of a kind. His words mingle and dance in this beautiful harmony of excessive, all consuming beauty that shakes you to your core and bloodshed, violence that it envelopes and hides. 

Did you know he's also one of the (few) classic writers who actually called Zeus out on his bs and were relatively kinder to the women. And I know that's the bare minimum, but Ovid the man you are, you were way ahead of your times. 

This book offers so many lesser-known myths! And it's honestly fascinating cuz as a greek myth fanatic I'm ways hungry for more. So i rly appreciated some lesser-known ones sprinkled within the popular ones. 

But my absolute favorite part abt it will have to be the continuity of all the myths. Let me elaborate- the book is divided into smaller "books", but most myths happen in an almost continuum, where the end of one myth is joined with the other. And another fun fact- YES, the title does hold a lot meaning cuz most (if not all) myth end with the transformation of metamorphoses of one character in punishment/ escape/ gift and I find that absolutely beautiful, don't you? 

I'd once heard someone call this "the ancient classic handbook to all the gods and heroes" and I would say I agree for the most part. This works as a wonderful guide to greek myths as an amateur and a beginner. It's fantastic! But remember that myths are but your interpretation on them that's all I'll say, ever. 

Reading this book almost feels like a dream, cuz I've been dreaming of reading this book for so long it almost doesn't even feel real that I've read it now. That all that this book has to offer me, i now actually know.

ִֶָ. ..𓂃 ࣪ ִֶָ🦋་༘࿐𝐩𝐫𝐞 𝐫𝐞𝐚𝐝
Ovid. Ovid. Ovid. 

This is the SECOND instalment in my Greek Geek Era Series! 
1. The Song of Achilles 
2. Metamorphoses
3. Iliad 
4. Odyssey
5. Troilus and Cressida.