Rating: 5/5

“In spite of this, please believe that I love you… You will no doubt get over this and be a brilliant woman. Don’t let me stop or delay you.”

In the aftermath of her mother’s suicide, twelve year old Yuki can’t believe this. Not through packing away all the favorite blues and greens of her mother’s closet before the funeral. Not through her father’s suspiciously prompt remarriage to his secretary. And in the years that follow, even as she appears as the accomplished track star and class president to her peers and as the silent contrarian to her vindictive stepmother and emotionally-absent father—she struggles with the pain of trying to understand.

Shizuko’s Daughter was and is still one of my go-to coming-of-age novels. In short chapters offering windows into Yuki’s growth (mostly through Yuki’s eyes, but also from the perspectives of her father, stepmother, and loving grandmother), it unfolds a rich emotional journey I find I can keep going back to. Yuki is a very remarkably strong and resilient young woman, and refreshingly frank even as the world around her tries to make her resigned.

The novel has been described as semi-autobiographical: unsurprisingly it shows its strengths as such in how the characters react in such vivid cultural specificity of 20th century Japan while confronting universal human pains and joys. More surprisingly, it avoids the pitfalls as such in its balance- for example, even as Mori condemns Yuki’s stepmother actions, she shows an almost sympathetic fairness in the dissection of how such a bitter person comes to be.

I love Kyoko Mori’s use of language throughout. Her straightforward prose becomes almost poetic in how it uses descriptions of nature to unfold the complex internal experiences of the characters. At the convergence of memory, intention, and belief, there really underlies the oneness in our physical and emotional experience. 

To live well, we make peace with transience and rise amongst the cruelties. And so it is fitting the most experienced character, Yuki’s grandmother closes out the novel with sublime bittersweet hopefulness— “She laughed and cried copious tears, until her chest and shoulders ached from joy.” Rating: 5 stars (Reread 2/12/2010)