Rating: 4/5

The title of Michael Connelly’s eighth book to feature his hero-detective Harry Bosch, “City of Bones”, refers to a term used by crime scene investigators to describe the sight of an old crime scene, where the body has deteriorated down to the bones. Oftentimes nature will scatter bones throughout a general area, especially if the grave is a shallow one, and the resultant grid that CSI forms is dubbed a “city of bones”.

The title has another, more metaphorical, meaning, as well. It refers to the fact that, like bones in a shallow grave, everyone has a secret story to tell. Everyone has skeletons in the closet.

When a dog brings his owner a human bone back from the Hollywood Hills, Detective Bosch is called to the scene. It’s New Year’s Day. Bosch isn’t expecting much. He doesn’t even think the bone is human, but he is required to check anyway.

Unfortunately, Bosch finds the rest of the body. It is that of a child. It’s been in the ground for roughly 20 years. 

The case affects Bosch emotionally, for reasons that he can’t even explain. It brings back memories of his childhood as an orphan, shuffled through foster homes. It forces him to remember how lonely and depressed he was as a child and how those feelings haven’t really gone too far. 

The case also quickly becomes a media-driven spectacle.

When news of the case leaks to the press, it results in the suicide of a potential suspect, a man whose horrible secrets---while having nothing to do with the present case---have inadvertently come back to haunt him.

Now Internal Affairs is breathing down Bosch’s neck. They think he either purposely leaked info or accidentally let the info get to the press. In either case, it’s a total fuck-up and a serious impediment to the case.

On top of all this, Bosch has begun dating a rookie cop. Besides being a violation of departmental regulations (Bosch is, after all, a senior officer), it also may be interfering with the case. He also suspects that she is hiding something pretty bad from her own past, something that has repercussions on her present state of mind.

Everyone involved in the case seems to have some secret from the past that haunts him or her. Skeletons are pouring out of closets. 

For once, Bosch isn’t the only one dealing with a turbulent past.

As always, Connelly creates a gripping and emotional story. His police procedural is, as always, fascinating and probably more in-depth and realistic than any episode of CSI or Law &amp; Order. It’s the human element, though, that truly breathes life in to this “city of bones”.