Rating: 4/5

Chasing Forgiveness Book Review.

The novel I read in my book club group, is called “Chasing Forgiveness”. The novel was written by Neal Shusterman, and was previously published as “What Daddy Did”. The book was published in 1991.

I don’t really read books, because I am more into documentaries, but I did not mind this one. I really like true-crime stories, so this novel was right up my ally. The novel is about a young boy, named Preston, whose father killed his mother. The novel is written from his view and experience. I like that he is very raw and honest about how he feels and what he experiences, whether it is about his father’s crime, or about being a young teenager going through the stages of puberty and hormones. Preston struggles with forgiving his father, and if his mother will forgive him. He wants to forgive his father because he loves him and believes his father was not mentally well, making him do this terrible thing, but he struggles with his mother not forgiving him for having these feelings about his father.

Preston also has the struggles of being in the public eye and moving with his grandparents. I really like how his grandparents were able to forgive his father for killing their daughter. I learned a valuable lesson from this. I learned that hating someone does more damage to you, than it does to them. The novel has many good messages, and his grandmother is very wise, but it is mostly based from religion. I am not religious, but I can apply her knowledge to my own life. I also like that the grandparents did not teach Preston and his brother to hate his father, but to embrace him. They taught them that their father needs them the most, and he will recover much faster. 

Although the novel is really easy to read and sends some really good messages and points, there are some things I do not like. Sometimes I would lose track of where certain events were taking place. Sometimes flashbacks were not that clear and it made it confusing. Maybe it is just me, but that was one thing that made it less enjoyable. I also did not really like the ending. It seemed really rushed and kind of corny. They end the book by talking about how Preston was running a race, and his father wanted to race him, since the last time he did, Preston was eleven. I feel there could’ve been more to say about their relationship and what Preston learned from everything that happened. I feel is just ended abruptly. Also, in the afterword, I feel that they could’ve put more information on how Preston turned out and about his father’s life now. I have just read novels that include more detail, but maybe it was just easier to end the information there. 

Overall, I would recommend the book. It was easy to read, and was very detailed, and if you are into true crime stories, you will enjoy this novel.