Rating: 2/5

I gave this book two stars just for the Hart brothers mania for biscuits. They were kinda cute. 

Let's meet the H/h: 
Callaghan is a broody and silent man who doesn't want any sort of relationship. Tess is the new housekeeper and BISCUIT-MAKER who is scared to death of Cag for half the book, then discovers that under all those glares and frowns there's just a man scared of hurting again and so after ups and downs they have their HEA.

Actually the story wasn't so bad, I just couldn't stand the main characters. I encounter this problem in every Diana Palmer's book (with a few exceptions). I keep reading her books hoping to find an enjoyable couple and more often than not I'm disappointed.

Callaghan is an asshole. I never felt the need to reach into the book and strangle him, so I guess he wasn't too much bad. He was cold, incapable of expressing his feelings and sending confusing signals. He kisses her, then mocks her, then he feels bad and starts all over again. I can forgive him because in his fucked-up way he thought he was doing the right thing.

Tess. Ah... I have no words. Is she for real? At twenty-two she isn't exactly a child. Ok, she is naive and innocent, but her level of naiveness borders on stupidity. She doesn't know anything of the facts of life, she is totally clueless. She nearly faints whe Cag speaks the WORD. Yeah, he says BRA in her presence, isn't it unbelievable? I just couldn't buy it.

But what really gives me the creeps about this book (and the majority of the others) is the closed mentality.

The heroine is quite always a virgin. Now there's nothing wrong with this and I totally respect her choice. What I can't stand is the fact the the author makes it look like an unforgivable sin, a you-will-burn-in-hell kind of sin. If God forbid a woman sleeps with a man outside of marriage she is labeled a whore, but for the man there's nothing wrong. A man has his needs after all. Right. It makes me grit my teeth.
&lt;"These days, most girls don't care what they do and they're clued up about how to take care of themselves. It makes it rough for the few of us who don't think it's decent to behave that way. Men seem to expect a girl to give out on the first date and they get mad when she won't."
He traced a cut on his chaps. "So you stopped going out." She nodded. "It seemed the best way."&gt; Tess and Cag. WTF??? I don't comment on the decent part. As for the rest, not every man gets mad and even if he did just cut your losses and move on. There's no need for all this drama. Seriously.