Rating: 4/5

My brother Mike described this as the only book I've ever given him that he didn't like. I can understand why: lots of literary references, lots of in-jokes for English majors, graduate students, and anyone who's ever suffered through a course in literary theory. But I'm all of those things, and as I read Small Word through for the second time--this time in preparation to teach it at the end of my British Lit class--I found myself liking it even more than I did the first time. It's more than just a very funny satire on the pretensions of literary geeks; it's also a cleverly plotted, semi-allegorical critique of love, Romance, and sex, as well as a lucid primer on the very critical theories whose self-important adherents it mocks. It has its flaws, of course. All satire can get cartoonish at times, but I'm disappointed by the xenophobia with which the book surrenders to the most superficial stereotyping in order to depict its non-anglophone characters--the German critic is a Nazi, the French critic a lizard-like homosexual, the Japanese translator a humorless, mechanistic stiff who sings karaoke. English, Irish and American characters do not escape mockery, of course, but they tend to be depicted with more sympathy, their vices more charming than repugnant. Persse McGarrigle, the virgin Irish poet whose romantic quest drives the novel's plot, remains irretrievably (and delightfully) naive from beginning to end, playing Candide in the conferences and dupe in the bedroom. I identify with him less than I did on my first reading. This time, I find myself liking Morris Zapp and Philip Swallow. For all their infantile self-importance and infidelity, each emerges from his experiences chastened and restored to humanity. The book ends comically--all marriages and reunions. And the marriage between Philip and Hilary Swallow--the fragile, at times tediously mundane cohabitation that is the subject of some of the novel's least funny, most poignant scenes--somehow emerges as normative. Joy isn't elsewhere as the young or would-be-young imagine it--somewhere one must fly to in a never-ending quest--but at home with the windows open, letting the breeze blow in.