Rating: 4/5

I'm so torn here as to rating ... I wasn't in love with the writing, but the author did make some very astute observations and I was completely sucked into the story. Let's call it a 3.7 rounded to a 4. 

full post here:
https://www.readingavidly.com/2020/07...

The dustjacket blurb for this novel notes that An American Tragedy is a "monumental study in character, and a stunning jeremiad against the delusions and inequities of American society," and I don't know that I could improve on that description. 

I admit I that I was completely glued here -- reading An American Tragedy this time around was like watching the proverbial train wreck you know is about to happen but feeling unable to look away. I can usually find some sort of sympathy for characters I don't particularly care for, but it was difficult here, especially with the central character, Clyde Griffiths. His feelings of entitlement lead him to make some pretty bad choices, while he spends too much time blaming his own situation on his childhood, his parents and society in general for its class conciousness in which poverty is a mark of weakness. Responsibility is not part of his working vocabulary. His hopes for advancement keep him on the lookout for a "very remarkable" man who "might take a fancy to him and offer him a connection," one who just "might lift him into a world such as he had never known." His problem, as we're told, is "a lack of mental clarity and inner directing application" which in other people

"permits them to sort out from the facts and avenues of life the particular thing or things that make for direct advancement."

On the other hand, Dreiser makes a very good case for pointing the finger at the societal values and forces that helped to shape Clyde's vanity, ambition and ultimately his destiny, as he offers some pretty stinging criticism of American culture in general. As the dustjacket also reveals, the novel is

"an extraordinarily detailed portrait of early twentieth-century America, its religious and sexual hypocrisies, its economic pressures, its political corruption and journalistic exploitation."

 Detailed indeed, and even though I am a patient reader, Dreiser's prose style here is often cringeworthy, so for me it was all about story, and it's a page turner. It won't be for everyone, but sheesh -- I couldn't put it down.