Rating: 5/5

Fathers and Sons stands toe to toe with the other Russian greats, in my opinion. One of the advantages it had going for it was the length – coming in at 1/5th the length of your typical Russian tome, it had to pack a punch. It did that superbly. In a way, it was easier for this novel to do so. There is the experience of finishing a book that is 1000 pages, reflecting back on your time with it, and realizing that it has changed you slowly. Bit by bit, the scenes and characters blend into one giant sphere called War and Peace, for instance. Here, you have a few main characters, several secondary ones, and nothing but the exploration of generational disharmony.

I felt almost unbearable pain while reading this book. I was thinking about the disconnect between each successive generation, how the young think they are at the summit of wisdom and understanding, how they continue on that path until the circle of life attacks. One day, they wake up; they are no longer with it and they are hearing the sass from their own kids. It’s a Ferris wheel in motion. This cycle is also often responsible for the behaviour of the youth toward their parents. Being cross, short of patience, quick to anger, minimal empathy. I was reminded of Rilke telling the young poet to calm down, listen, and be compassionate. Give the older generation the benefit of the doubt. You will be there before long…

As for “Bazarov the Nihilist”… I have known many like him. As I continue down the winding road of my years, I have begun to weed out these characters. I am not a fan of discussing atheism, Neitzsche, or free will if I feel that I am being used as a pawn in the conversation. You can always tell these characters’ intentions right away: they may have an hour or so to spare, and they are willing to come down off of their high horse to bestow you with the light of their supreme conversation. This conversation is usually made up of them posing weighted questions, seeking a specific answer. God forbid if you don’t provide that answer. I felt that I have shared lots of characteristics with Bazarov (from a past life, certainly), but just as many with Arkady, the young, impressionable, eager to please friend of Bazarov. I can remember relationships that had a gravity of their own. Looking back, I was caught up in a vicious cycle of wanting to individuate and become my own personality, but also to please the person who meant so much to me intellectually. I don’t fault either of the two. All I can say is this: experience has given me the chance to see the Bazarovs coming a mile off.