Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars

A lighthearted romp with a heavy dose of historical facts, I picked up Virgin Fire half-jokingly for its back cover blurb, promoting itself as a 'bathtub romance'. Even though the presence of this sanitary furniture turned out to be relatively minuscule, I still had a fun time being along for the ride with its over-the-top characters, shenanigan and scheming, as well as an overview of the Texas oil boom during the early 20th century.

It's definitely worthwhile doing a quick Google search regarding the oil field Spindletop, located in Beaumont, Texas, where a good chunk of Virgin Fire takes place; the landscape of densely packed oil derricks is dystopian and nightmare-inducing — and the story captures the chaos and excitement during that moment of endless possibilities perfectly. It is refreshing reading a historical romance that allocates so much page count to rendering its setting with seeming accuracy and vibrancy. On the contrary, I can also understand some readers being disappointed as the romance is perhaps the least complex among its many plot lines (a revenge story, a rise-to-wealth story, family drama, etc.). While I enjoyed both the hero and the heroine as characters (a lot of good, cheesy banters), with the overall tone leaning more comedic, the stake was not high, thus the romance never truly felt hard-earned.

One small note, being an older release, there are some outdated vocabularies regarding Black and Native Americans by today's standard, but nothing overtly racist or problematic.

Overall, Virgin Fire is enjoyable as an immersive storytelling; it reminds me of 70s western TV shows (like Bonanza), with caricatured, but endearing characters (except for the evil villain with absolutely no redeeming value), episodic events, and more focus on world-building 'vibe' than thorough emotional journey. As something that was picked on a whim, it could've fared a lot worse—wished there was more bathtub, but I'm not at all mad about this experience.

p.s.: the e-book edition of Virgin Fire has a glaring error of missing paragraph break throughout; so scene change is not visually visible in the formatting. While context clue is enough to distinguish, it is still a distraction nevertheless. 
 
***Historical Hellions Book Club | April 2023 Selection***