Rating: 4/5

“What shall I call him?” he said to himself. “I think I’ll call him PINOCCHIO. This name will make his fortune.

The Adventures of Pinocchio was a compelling reading that brought me back to my childhood, since I used to be a huge fan of the classic Disney movie when I was a little kid. Besides, my father gave me an abridged edition of Pinocchio (I was probably 6) as a gift, and I remember how I loved spending time reading it every now and then. This edition belongs to me so far, and it is still in my bookcase.

Now, reading this book as a young adult, it has been a beautiful, fun and quite remarkable experience. Pinocchio’s behavior and personality sometimes reminded me of that child who we used to be way back when. Perhaps I am wrong if I say everyone’s behavior was exactly the same as Pinocchio’s one – actually, I hope so; however, the fact that a book evokes memories of your childhood, for instance, when you just wanted to have fun and nothing else cared, to go outside and spend hours playing with your friends, and the like, actually means that that book is worth giving a try as soon as you can.

I'm sure everyone knows what The Adventures of Pinocchio is about: it's basically the story of an animated marionette, made by a carpenter named Geppetto, and how he (Pinocchio) ends up having exciting adventures and visiting so many places. That's it, simple but not plain.
Every chapter of the novel is really short and precise (5 or 6 pages per chapter on average), which makes the story easy to read, and furthermore, you certainly want to know the events that are going to take place in the next chapters. The narrative, as I said before, is concise and straightforward, yet really entertaining and enjoyable.

There is a particular sense of humor which reminded me of another book I've read recently: Candide, or Optimism. In fact, not only the sense of humor, but the way both books are written as well as their similar structure were some elements in common as well.
Maybe I am wrong about my last statement, but the fact that both Candide and Pinocchio are protagonists who were going through a series of events throughout their own novel, and whose lives ended up being different from what they used to be at the beginning, made me think about how similar their stories are. (By the way, how is this genre called in English? Bildungsroman, isn't it?)

In short, The Adventures of Pinocchio is a story about a marionette (or a child) who has to learn how to change his mind and attitudes in order to become a responsible and sensible person. Obviously, I'd wholeheartedly recommend reading this book.