Okay, I knew going in that this was an 80's bodice-ripper, which I often (sometimes) love. But, sweet baby jesus and all his little angels, the opening chapter alone has:

1. Beautiful, aristocratic girl who disdains feminine pursuits, which yeah, fine, sure, if you don't wanna dance and stuff don't dance or whatever, but you know, being feminine isn't necessarily a bad thing. 

2. Dead mom, and loving over-protective father who raised his daughter like a son, but she's not at all boyish (see no. 1).

3. Beautiful Girl fighting with Loving Father about whom to marry, because she's 19 and god, that is so old, her ovaries have practically withered and fallen out, but she wants to marry for love just like Daddy did, have some sympathy.
 
4. Allusions to suspense-y sub-plot, more info later.

5. Aristocratic Lordly-Lord, who is also a spy, who is also a mega dick-wad, whinging to himself about how Dear Old Grand-Dad wants to see his heir married and procreating, yadda yadda, marriage is for losers, all women are deceitful betrayers, blah blah blah.

6. Coincidence that Lordly-Lord's Dear Old Grand-Dad just happened to be thinking that Beautiful Girl would make the perfect wife for Lordly-Lord, seeing as how they're neighbors and such; Lordly-Lord thinking that she's probably a total dog and anyway, he's not marrying some ice maiden who hasn't just married the first dude to ask her, clearly she's a total bitch and god, 19 is so old.

7. Rape, not forced seduction if you were wondering, since plucky Beautiful Girl was asleep when it started and when she woke up in the middle, Lordly-Lord was like "Welp, I've already begun, might as well finish since you're not a virgin anymore". 

6. Lordly-Lord making excuses, since you know, Beautiful Girl shouldn't have been asleep, naked (while her nearby pile of clothes obvs belonged to some kind of plebe), asleep, kissing him back whilst asleep, beautiful, asleep, breathing, and/or asleep, oh no the temptation was just too much. 

I'll give it another chapter, but I'm pretty sure I'm done. 

ETA 8/20/2013: Yep, made it to chapter 5, it's over.