Rating: 4/5

2022 Review
Reading this one for book club opened my eyes to another dimension of the plot. It isn't just how each suitor sees Laura. It is what each suitor represents about men. This is a very rich novel for themes and motifs. 

And now I've finally forced someone to read the book before watching the movie so I am very curious what the reaction will be to the movie. 

2017 Review
I have watched the movie Laura (1944) so many times that even my absent-minded mother has begun to object. She forgets she has seen the film until the movie starts playing and then she protests, "We just watched this!"
I then make her watch it again anyway because I love the movie so much. Needless to say, I was excited to discover my favorite film was based off a novel. 

I. Wanted. To. Love. This. Book. So. Much. 

And I did! Sort of. But not enough. There is something about the scene in the movie where Det. Lt. Mark McPherson, played by Dana Andrews, is staring at the portrait of Laura and falling in love with her even though she is dead that wins my heart every time. I wanted more of that. I set such high expectations on this book that I don't think it ever could have lived up to them. What a masterpiece it would have been if it did! 

This book was really wonderfully written. I liked the changing viewpoints. I like the story. The twists are good. Yet, it wasn't the movie. The pacing felt off. Lines were delivered in different settings and certain, critical scenes from the movie are non-existent in the book. 
But...I'm going to try very hard to separate myself from the beloved movie and think of this book as a book completely separate from the film. 

It was a really good book. I think it was one of the most enjoyable noir reads I've found in a long time. The author uses light and darkness, shadows and storms, flowers and foreshadowing, to highlight scenes and create atmosphere. There were many wonderful themes laced throughout the story. The romance was somewhat more believable than the movie (oops, not comparing those two anymore) and I thought the balance of the three suitors and what they represented to Laura was interesting. Laura herself is a very complicated character. We get glimpses of her from a few different perspectives and it is interesting to try and figure out what is false and what is real. Womanhood itself gets examined in this story. Is Laura a doll? Dame? Femme fatale? Society woman? Country girl? Are the women around her grasping, slutty, innocent, or confused? This isn't so much a whodunnit as a examination of human character. I think that is why there is less "shock value" in the twist at the end with this story (or maybe I'm just so seeped in the story line that I failed to be distracted.) The point isn't so much "who killed Laura?" as "Who was Laura?" 
I liked the ending. It is so...twisted. 
I'd definitely buy and re-read this book. 

I came to this book hoping it would be "amazing" "five stars" and "MY NEW FAVORITE THING EVER" and instead I got a solid, very enjoyable, four star read. Am I a little disappointed? Yessss but I doubt I would be if I hadn't seen the movie a million times. I definitely recommend this book. I am glad it exists and I really think it stands on its own feet as an excellent work. 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This is one of my all-time favorite movies and I am now discovering IT IS ALSO A BOOK?!??!?!?! OHHHHHH where has this been all my life! :O