Rating: 3/5

Leftover Love is the story of a young woman desperate to find her birth mother, who gave her up as a baby. Heroine was raised by two wonderful adoptive parents who told her that children like her had been “left over” by God to bring happiness to families who otherwise wouldn’t know the joy of bringing up a child. But despite having a happy childhood, heroine still has an intense desire to find her birth mother and find out what she was like. The only thing she has of her birth mother is a towel that she was wrapped up in as a baby when she was handed over to her adoptive parents. She lovingly preserves that towel for 26 years in the hopes of one day reuniting with her birth mother! 

After an 8 year search, she finally tracks her birth mother to Nebraska. She goes to her birth mother's ranch and lets the woman assume she is looking for work. Birth Mom hires her and the heroine starts living at the ranch. For three months, she works with Birth Mom and gets to know her, sharing chores, talks, and fun times alike. Birth Mom is a widow, having had by all accounts a wonderful twenty-year marriage, but she never had any children of the marriage. She never talks about having given birth or given up a baby for adoption. Heroine figures Birth Mom had her out of wedlock and when she eventually married, she kept her past a secret. 

Birth Mom's business partner at the ranch, and the hero of the piece, is a big bear of a man riddled with insecurities due to his aggressively ugly face. The author makes no bone about it, this isn’t your typical, craggy, Marlborough Man or an unconventionally attractive, rugged cowboy, we are almost in Quasimodo territory! Quasimodo is angry that his partner hired a pretty city girl. He sets out to make her life hell so she’ll quit. Much to his surprise, heroine stands firm, showing true grit, wether it’s milking the cows at dawn in the freezing cold, or moving bales of hay that seem to weigh as much as an elephant.

Heroine is both repelled and fascinated by Quasimodo’s looks but when she gets to know him, she starts really falling for him. Quasimodo shuts her down. He just can’t believe this beautiful woman would really like him and he is always fighting a suspicion that she is just playing with him. He has never had a “real” girlfriend though it is hinted he may have paid for a few “girlfriend experiences” in the past. Eventually, heroine and Quasimodo give in to their volcanic level attraction. Outside of bed though, he remains very weary of her.

Things come to a head when Birth Mom accidentally finds out heroine is her bio daughter. There is a very ugly scene where Birth Mom kicks her daughter out of the house, calling her names, and even flinging her baby blanket at her feet. Quasimodo is zero help and blames heroine for having lied. When the heroine, in despair, tells him she is pregnant, he scoffs, calling it one more lie. So the poor distraught young woman is rejected not once but twice. She goes running back to her adoptive parents, who welcome her and her out-of-wedlock impending bundle of joy with open arms.

It is up to heroine’s adoptive mother to smooth the path for both Birth Mom and Quasimodo to re-enter heroine’s life. Birth Mom mumbles a half-hearted apology for her behavior, that she was projecting her own guilt and shame onto heroine, and that is why she reacted so viciously to being faced with her Seekret Illegitimate Daughter. The heroine instantly forgives Birth Mom and apologizes for befriending her under false pretences. As for Quasimodo, he humbly asks heroine to marry him for the sake of their baby, with the hope that she can have some love left over for him, to which she responds he’s got it the wrong way around, it’s because she loves him so much that she’s got so much “left over love” for the baby.

Sweet right? But not that sweet for me. I couldn’t forget how terribly Birth Mom and Quasimodo treated the heroine, like she was some sort of criminal mastermind who had infiltrated their ranch in order to plot their murder, not like she was a young woman plagued with lifetime insecurities of being rejected by her flesh and blood and went about getting to know her birth mother in the best way she could. They sure knew how to wallow in their own self-righteous misery of how the world done’em wrong, but they had no compassion "left over" for the heroine? I found that really hard to swallow. That it was left to heroine’s sweet, classy, long-suffering, adoptive mother to basically humble herself to these two rubes who had hurt the daughter of her heart so brutally did not sit right with me. 

 Birth Mom was terribly chilly. She never gave a thought to her baby, never even admitting to anyone close to her, including her husband of twenty years, that she had had a child. She seemed to still carry around the hatred she had for the boyfriend who pumped her and dumped her, leaving her an unwed mother. Her first reaction to heroine’s identity was cold rage and huge resentment. I couldn’t believe she would throw out the baby blanket the heroine had lovingly preserved for 26 years, the only thing she had ever received from her birth mother, as if it was trash. That was extra cruel. Who does that? Would you not feel compassion and understanding or even gratitude that your long lost child would have thought of you and loved you for a lifetime, to the point of tracking you down simply to get to know you better? She treated this young woman like vermin that she was repulsed by and couldn’t wait to kick out of her home. No tears, no emotions, no how have you been all these years, just cut her off and got rid of her like yesterday’s stinky garbage. When people show you who they are, believe them!

As for Quasimodo, though I had compassion for his insecurities initially, that quickly faded because of the vicious way he treated the heroine. It’s not just how he treated her around the farm dumping chores on her without giving her even basic instructions and ruthlessly setting her up to fail. More importantly, he let her down on every occasion she needed moral support. When heroine needed emotional support vis a vis Birth Mom or when she told him she was pregnant, he ICED her out completely. Even in a situation when she was being sexually harassed by two men who randomly followed her around, he not only failed to respond to her plea for help, he told her to fight her own battles. 

 That is not an Alpha hero to me. An Alpha hero protects his woman, physically and emotionally. He doesn’t throw her under the bus. He doesn’t take sides against her. He definitely doesn’t abandon his pregnant girlfriend only to be brought around through the intervention of a third party, months later, and an “explanation” that he thought she lied about her pregnancy or that she got an abortion. He was as cold and emotionless as Birth Mom. It's a wonder those two didn't get together, they were two peas in a pod. I shudder for the heroine’s future having to deal with people who withhold their affection to punish what they judge as transgressions and can pull the rug out from under you at any given moment. She is going to walk on eggshells all her life, deal with their blow hot, blow cold attitude, and blame herself if anything goes awry, all this while trying to raise her baby…*sigh* So that’s why I wasn’t left satisfied with the conclusion of this story, though admittedly it was very well-written, with a relatable, multi-dimensional protagonist who deserved a better man imho.