Rating: 4/5

New Age Propaganda or Truth?

Ruth Montgomery might be what is considered one of the ‘old school’ psychics like Edgar Cayce. Because she was active in the early to mid 60s and even into the 70s and later, my mother read her voraciously, and passed on several of her earlier books to me, saying: “Here! You need to read this!” As a young pre-teen and teenager in the mid to late 60s, the type of material Ruth Montgomery was known for channeling became commonplace in our house: the paranormal, the supernatural, life after death – Ruth Montgomery channeled and wrote about it all. 

Unfortunately, I was never aware that she had also begun connecting with her Guides and the Guides of her friends and acquaintances regarding UFOs and Extraterrestrials circa 1985. And I say ‘unfortunately,’ because my mother had also talked to me about UFOs and extraterrestrials, which she was not only fully convinced existed, but with which she had had her own experiences and encounters, as have I. So I would have loved to have read her books on this subject then. 

But that was not to be. 

Now, what makes me wonder about Ruth and what’s been written in this particular book is that her Guides’ predictions of what was then referred to as the Axial Tilt or The Shift which was supposed to have happened at the end of the 20th Century, did not actually come to pass as of the year 2000. But then it seems that many things that were predicted to have happened by the end of the 20th Century and a decade along into the 21st Century have not occurred either. 

But then, even Edgar Cayce’s Earth Changes prophecies for the year 1998 did not occur, while many more of his prophecies DID happen. So, it makes one wonder: are events happening or not happening as the result of … timeline shifts? That is, have the recognition of these prophecies caused humanity to change their overall trajectory, which altered the timeline to the point that once it had been predicted to occur, if the danger was recognized and changes made, those predictions would not, then, come to pass?

But that’s another tangent. 

As far as Ruth Montgomery, one of the first things that occurred to me about half way through the book – especially after her numerous references to ‘The New Order’ into which we would be moving after the shift at the end of the 20th Century – was: are Ruth Montgomery’s teachings and books really just a New Age psy-op? That is not to say that she was purposely being misleading. But many of us have been led down the proverbial primrose path by those who are controlling this scenario, especially by and with the so-caled ‘New Age Propaganda.’ And what Ruth Montgomery, et al, talked about could very likely have been part of the New Age propaganda.

Still, she has channeled some interesting information, from the interactions with her friend in the astral, Arthur Ford, to her Guides and others. Which is still – in my opinion – worthy of another look.

Still an interesting read, if nothing else.