Rating: 4/5

Truthfully I did not expect to like this book. I expected a heavily handed tale about acceptance. But here's the thing: I did not like Star Girl. 

The story is about a free-spirited girl whose named herself Star Girl who shows up for her first year of public education as a sophomore and the typical apathetic student body doesn't quite know how to respond to her. Normally when I read stories about the quirky outcast, I want to shield them from cruelty of the popular crowd, but I found myself sympathizing with students at a loss of how to interpret this strange girl. When Hillari told Star Girl that she ruined everything, I concurred. And when Star Girl equated being normal with the most popular girl in school I sighed heavily at how little she understood the workings of high school friendship. It never was about blending in and finding common ground with her. She wasn't happy unless she was blazing her own trail without consciousness of who she plowed through in the process.

Having too much personal experience with people who don't understand social cues or possess the mental valve to filter, I know what it's like to be embarrassed by people on social thin ice. I didn't find Star Girl a rare charming bird that should be bottled unaltered. I found her disrespectful and obnoxious. OK, her goodwill was charming, but interrupting a football game to climb the goal post or showing up at a funeral and interfering with the grieving is not. Being different is one thing, but interfering with other's choice to follow social guidelines is just as unaccepting as those who shun anyone who doesn't follow the crowd. There has to be a balance between keeping your individuality and allowing other's to chose theirs, as well as respecting the social proprieties that make people feel comfortable. 

I found myself siding with the crowd and I know had I met a girl like that in high school I would have rolled my eyes at her theatrics and ignored her too refusing to allow her to always be the center of attention. I was not sad for her but angry at her for what she did to Leo. To just assume he would make a decision and not give him the means to make amends. This girl created her own drama. I have a feeling the author intended readers to be charmed by Star Girl and experience her social roller coaster on her emotional level, but I didn't. I experienced it from the conforming crowd. And that's exactly why I liked it.