Rating: 3/5

5/10

This book is so bland and devoid of life I thought I was consuming a sack of flour raw.

The main problem with this book in my opinion is how little it says in 650 pages. Like the American Revolution is a juicy piece of history, creating a historical fiction novel based on it should have something interesting in it but there is no excitement in this novel, leaving this story dry. Reading Wikipedia can get you better invested in a storyline than this book.

So because of this failure to create an engaging plot, or dynamic, our main characters suffer as well. I don't know how the author killed Abigail and John's personalities, but he did. Every era in this book is just "look how perfect we are as a couple and the interesting turned bland things that happened to us" even their courtship.

For the most part I can see the author did his research in the subjects he was covering but I do not believe he read their letters because if he did he would know how John and Abigail were basically enemies then friends then a couple. In real life they had strong personalities that came into conflict first before they learned how become friends. John made fun of Abigail's appearance and she insulted him back in their courtship, that's something that can be incorporated into this book. The author does nothing with this!!!! They just meet and become perfect lovers! Dollar store romance novels have more conflict than this!!!!!!!!!!! Like does everything have to be historically correct? No, but give the readers something to keep us interested.

We see the relationships they have with other people but there's no dynamics to play off of, just "Hi family friend, nice weather we are having!". When there is conflict, nothing is important enough to drive a plot or keep a reader reading. Like why didn't the author use 650 pages to show us the conflicting of John and Abigail's view's on Abigail Smith's (their daughter) marriage beyond, Jones is making us broke lol. What about the pressure they placed on their son John Quincy to succeed like his father, so much so he went into depressive episodes, didn't get a career in his personal interests, and carried a sense of constant failure through his entire life even as he became one of the important figures in early American history? Nothing! He's the most perfect kid! Jefferson was a huge family friend of theirs, why didn't they include Abigail's distrust of him and John's frenemy relationship? Jefferson is just a cool guy! We get glimpses here and there of interest characters but nothing comes of it. Some settings and histories are interestingly written that pretty much it. I finished this book only because I skimmed the last 150 pages.

Honestly you really like the Adams family and thought this book might have been for you, just watch the John Adams ministries. It is not perfect by any means but at least they nailed John and Abigail's relationship, the core of the story. The scene where John and Abigail reunite in France in the giant house is so good it almost got me to cry and I'm no big crier.