Rating: 4/5

“I’m not asking for tomorrow. All I’m asking for is tonight”. 

After the death of her only employee and friend, Olivia desperately needs a couple of extra hands to help her on the farm or she will have to give up and sell it. But she loves the land; it's the only thing left of her family, the place her daughters call home, so she prays to God to send a man to help them. 

Olivia stared down at the unconscious stranger, and she wondered if he knew how to patch a roof and pick peaches. Right now, he didn’t look capable of much at all. She sighed and pushed back her hat, glancing at the dark skies above, blinking at the rain that hit her face. “Lord,” she said heavily, “this isn’t exactly what I had in mind.” 😂

Connor knows a prizefighter needs to lose if they tell him to, but he doesn’t want to. So he wins the fight, and they beat him and leave him in the street to die. But surviving seems to be his special talent for the next time he wakes up he’s in a bed. Even if he owes Olivia his life, he can’t stay to help her and the girls. He can’t stand loving and losing another person in his life. But while he gets better, he really should do whatever is in his hand to help them, even if that makes staying a little longer, right?

Lately I've been trying to read something that it’s not by Laura Lee, but I’m so tired of dnfing books I always end up giving in. I don’t know what I love more about her books: the coherent plot, the writing style that gives me all the feelings or the heroines that are responsible and clever, but also daring when it’s needed. I’m still not thrilled about the lack of epilogue but you have to choose your wins. 

I was a bit weary of picking this up because this book is older than me but the promise of cute children convinced me to give it a try-and I’m happy to say it stood the test of time. It takes place in Louisiana around 1850, which was very refreshing after reading so many regency romances. The heroine came from what used to be a very rich family before the war and now all she had left were the lands and three orphans to take care of. As for the hero, Connor, his family died during The Great Famine in Ireland, so he joined the Irish rebels and ended up in prison. Sometimes I feel his character suffered way more than his share but, taking into account the historical period, I can imagine it happening in real life. 

The book goes back and forth between past and present. While my favorite part was the present, which is where the romance was taking place, the mystery of what happened to Connor and how he ended up in Louisiana creates the kind of suspense that made me unable to stop reading. 

I usually hate tortured heroes because the authors tend to use their trauma to excuse their poor behavior. In Connor’s case, it was only used to explain why he didn’t want to stay in Olivia’s house-and not wanting to have a family after you have seen yours die of hunger, sickness and beatings seems pretty understable for me. Don’t get me wrong, he was a hot head at times and that got him beaten, but he wasn’t too much of a hot head. In fact, I would say the heroine was much more stubborn than he was and drove me a bit crazy sometimes. She’s lucky this was a romance novel, that’s all I’m going to say. 

I was really surprised that I ended up loving Connor as much as I did. After everything he had suffered, he still had a huge heart he wasn’t able to hide, and I adored how he ended up using his wit to save the day. As for the heroine, despite being a bit naive and very stubborn, I admired her selflessness. It didn’t matter if she was in love with Connor, if she and her daughters needed him, she always let him be. 

   She was filled with desolation at the idea of spending all the days of her life loving him, knowing he did not love her, knowing he might even hate her for what he had been forced to do, knowing that one day she could wake up and find him gone.
 

Overall, Connor’s Way has a rich argument that keeps you on your toes but also the homey vibes that make you want to live in it. I would highly recommend it if you are in the mood for a single mom romance with kids you are going to adore and don’t mind a caring but tortured hero who needs to realize he cannot keep running from love forever.