Rating: 2/5

This was a book that my sister recommended to me some years ago and one that has gotten me started on making a bucketlist using bucketlist.org. The unfortunate part of it is that the book itself didn't really interest me since a lot of what they have mentioned is stuff that I am truly not interested in nor would even want to find a way of doing.

 The one thing that I will give for book itself is the fact that there are some wonderful quotes. If they would just take the quotes out of the book and make them into their own booklet then add that along with this book I would truly think it would possibly be worth it since I would keep the booklet while getting rid of the book. The other thing is that if you are interested in keeping the list going there are pages that are included that will allow you to add more items or you can check those that may have been included in the pages.

 As for the suggestions what turned me off. Most of it was based upon if you have a bunch of money that you could just throw away without a thought or being focused on the popular side of society or even what may be considered impossible. The latter were actually intriguing for me in the end since I keep thinking of smart-aleck answers to do for those such as sleeping with Brad Pitt or Jennifer - cut out a picture of them, put them to bed and voila you have done it since there are no guidelines stating how to do it.

 Another thing is that the second time I was going through the book I did notice that a few of them started actually repeating themselves. Yep it is hard to write down 2001 things without repeating yourself unless you are really organized.

 All in all I can see where the book would get one started who may be interested or just wanting to compare their own life with what is suggested. In the end though I would tell the reader to add what attracts them instead, make their own list and leave the pre-made lists behind. And if you are really interested in compiling a list there are wonderful sites such as the one mentioned above that are interactive and have many interesting ideas that weren't even mentioned in this book.