Rating: 5/5

11th edition
p 5
Public speaking is a vital means of civic engagement. It is a way to express your ideas and to have an impact on issues that matter in society. As a form of empowerment, it can--and often does--make a difference in things people care about very much. The key phrase here is "make a difference." This is what most of us want to do in life--to make a difference, to change the world in some small way. Public speaking offers you an opportunity to make a difference in something you care very much about.
p 34
contrary to what some people claim, avoiding racist, sexist, and other kinds of abusive language is not simply a matter of political correctness. Such language is ethically suspect because it devalues and stereotypes ... helps reinforce attitudes that encourage prejudice, hate crimes, and civil rights violations. (Steven Heyman, "free Speech and Human Dignity" New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008)
p 35
"Being ethical means behaving ethically all the time--not only when it's convenient."--Kenneth Blanchard &amp; Norman Vincent Peale, "The Power of Ethical Management" NY: Ballantine Books, 1988 p 62
p 81
(great free-association examples)
p 125
"this" + "that" -&gt; limits Google search to both
p 143
Dr. Mario Molina won the 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his research on the formation and decomposition of the ozone layer.
p 146
Personalize your ideas: People are interested in people; add human interest. The abstract becomes more meaningful when applied to a person. e.g., Let me tell you about Arturo. Arturo is four years old. He has big brown eyes and a mop of black hair and an empty belly. In all his four years on earth, Arturo has never once enjoyed three square meals in a single day.
p 175
utilize hypnosis to help break addiction or help students improve their academic performance
p 185
overture--an orchestral introduction that captures the audience's attention and gives them a preview
p 197
musical crescendo
p 228
good novelists create word pictures that let you "see" the haunted house, or "hear" the birds chirping on a warm spring morning, or "taste" the hot enchiladas at a Mexican restaurant. 
p 233
for comedic effect reverse two situations (appropriateness to situation)
p 248
Greek historian Herodotus, "People trust their ears less than their eyes." When speaker's body language is inconsistent with his or her words, listeners often believe the body language rather than the words. (Mark Knapp &amp; Judith Hall "Nonverbal Communication in Human Interaction 7th ed, Boston: Wadsworth, 2010 p 12-15)
p 252
Concentrate on gaining control of the ides; don't try to learn the speech word for word.
p 269
research showing that extraneous images distract listeners and reduce comprehension of the speaker's point (Richard Mayer &amp; Cheryl Johnson "Revising the Redundancy Principle in Multimedia Learning" Journal of Educational Psychology, 100, 2008 p 380-386
p 271
When you finish, place the object or picture back out of sight
p 300
By age 20, the average American has been exposed to one million television commercials--an average of 150 every day.
p 301
It's not possible to bring about a truly beneficial result by using unethical methods--King
p 310
Seek action from your audience whenever possible. The listener in not making much of a commitment by thinking, "Sure, I agree with you." Within two days they will forget entirely--and about agreeing. Action however reinforces belief. If you can persuade them to make some kind of action--even if it's no more than signing a petition, putting a bumper sticker on a car, or attending a meeting--yo
u've gained a more serious commitment. Once one acts on behalf of your position, they're more likely to remain committed to it. (Richard Perloff "The Dynamics of Persuasion: Communication and Attitudes in the 21st Century 4th ed. 2010 p 259-261
p 328
Most of us have no idea what it means to be poor and hungry. But before returning to school last year, I spent three years working at local assistance centers. I can't tell you everything I have seen. But on the basis of what I can tell you, I hope you will agree with me that government help for the poor and needy must be maintained. 
p 334
[play within a play] And what does this story prove? No matter how strong your evidence, you will not be persuasive unless listeners grasp your reasoning. 
p 344 http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~sbenus/Te...
Nathan was only five years old when the fever struck him. At first, no one knew whatwas wrong. No one knew that parasites inside his body had infected his red blood cells.No one knew those cells were clumping together, choking the flow of blood through hisbody and damaging his vital organs. No one knew his kidneys would soon fail and seizures would begin. No one knew he would wind up in a coma.
The parasites in Nathan's body came from a mosquito bite, a bite that gave him malaria. And Nathan is not alone. The World Health Organization tells us the horrible truth:In Africa, a child dies from malaria every 30 seconds. 

words
-----
poignance - piercing quality

germane - relevant to a subject under consideration

cadence 1. a modulation or inflection of the voice. "the measured cadences that he employed in the Senate" synonyms: intonation, modulation, lilt, accent, inflection; More a modulation in reading aloud as implied by the structure and ordering of words and phrases in written text. "the dry cadences of the essay" a fall in pitch of the voice at the end of a phrase or sentence. rhythm. "the thumping cadence of the engines" 2. MUSIC a sequence of notes or chords comprising the close of a musical phrase. "the final cadences of the Prelude"

inoculate - treat with a vaccine to produce immunity

symposium - several people present on different aspects

ethnocentrism - believe that one's ethnic or cultural group is centrally important

residual message - what you want them to remember after they forgotten everything else

Monroe's motivated sequence - attention, need, satisfaction, visualization &amp; action (p 315)

question of -fact -value -policy

false cause = causation without correlation

internal previews &amp; internal summaries

implied leader || emergent leader

appeal to novelty vs appeal to tradition

Qs
--
How can a speaker motivate listeners to act?
How do you react?