Rating: 3/5

It only earns the 3rd star because of underlying truth of her basic message: calling for the education of the women, as well as the men, to raise the race to their potential. As far as the rhetoric in which she attempts to deliver her message, however, I would only give this a tepid 2 stars. Cooper drowns much of her argument in waves of florid writing, strained and extended metaphors, and constant quotations and allusions to historical figures or writers, which seem calculated more to evince her erudition than to bolster her argument.

And in fact, much of her argument is itself reliant on weak, or unsupportable beliefs, including a heavy reliance on the christian god and religion as underpinning much of her righteousness (not unaccompanied by certain dismissive and belittling bigotries of her own, regarding muslims, Chinese, etc.). She also undermines feminism itself, and the presentation of the equality of woman, by lauding chivalry (though placing women on pedestals does not elevate them when the pedestal is furnished with chains or is an altar for sacrifice; just ask Andromeda or Iphigenia) and stating that women are not the equal of man but are a necessary counterpart to man, offering the compassion and moral sense that man apparently lacks. Continuing to present women as "different" in kind will continue to allow those in power to treat them differently.

What is most odd is that an entire century earlier (exactly, as it happens), Mary Wollstonecraft was making stronger feminist arguments based primarily upon logic and philosophy (though still tainted with religion). Alas that Cooper's many references did not include her, or Olympe de Gouges, or many other writers on the subject. It is only in the essay "What are we Worth?" that Cooper adds sufficient factual and practical elements to her arguments, for instance pointing out that trade schools are more needed by her community that attempting to force a typical classical education with Greek and Latin, in order that with skills the workers can develop sufficient wealth to have leisure time, which itself may then begin to allow for even broader education and other benefits (not to mention that the growing trade labor movements were imposing exclusionary barriers of access not just to work but the very acquisition of trade skills). 

A voice raised in pursuit of a truth that is perhaps going unheard, is a valuable thing. Unfortunately, that doesn't make this book a success, where the support for that truth and the logical arguments are lacking.