Rating: 3/5

After being challenged in ways I have never expected in 2020, I decided 2021 was going to be the perfect year to (also) get out of my literary comfort zone and take some risks. 

Because I believe taking risks is the best way to broaden your horizons, both literally and metaphorically, here I am now reviewing a book I wouldn’t have read before 2020 (stay tuned for a few more “jumps off the cliff” and “rollercoaster rides” for me in the next few months). 

Picking up Mildred Pierce was a real “jump off the cliff” as I didn’t have a clue what this novel was about. For some reason, I actually thought “Mildred Pierce” was a place and not a woman’s name. Aha.

Another thing I’ll have to admit is that I had no idea that this novel belongs to a category/genre usually called hard-boiled crime fiction. Hard-boiled?! Really?! What the heck!! 

After a bit of googling I found out that this literary genre of fiction is characterised, for example, by graphic sex, violence and “vivid but often sordid urban backgrounds”. 

I don’t know about anyone else but I had a really hard time placing this novel in the murder-mystery-crime category and most of the time I felt like I was reading something more in the likes of a soap opera than anything else. 

For me the only really sordid things about this novel were the number of pages I had to read about mortgages, other bureaucratic procedures and too many unrealistic characters playing the business type; gosh, how sordid can that be?! 

Also very sordid was the number of times the story (conveniently) jumped forward only to get to a very predictable ending. Unfortunately, I could see that coming two hundred pages before *rolling eyes*. 

It was too long, boring, predictable and completely irrelevant but because the writing wasn’t too bad and made for some really vivid descriptions of places, I’ll stick to a three star rating. 

Now I’ll have to try a different hard-boiled author (aha) as I need to know for sure if this was a good example or if the genre is simply not my thing. 

I think I’m quite a strong (or lucky) person and so far I handled (quite well, I’ll have to say) a lot of nasty stuff in my life but give me a form to fill in and that’d be me done. 

Bureaucracy kills.