To those who study it as an isolated phenomenon the French Revolution can but seem a dark and sinister enigma; only when we view it in the light of the events preceding it can we grasp its true significance. And, similarly, without a clear idea of the old order, its laws, its vices, its prejudices, its shortcomings, and its greatness, it is impossible to comprehend the history of the sixty years following its fall. (p227)

The Old Regime and the French Revolution, written in 1856, is a short book (just 206 pages in this edition plus an appendix and endnotes) with a contemporary audience in mind. Despite this Tocqueville's insights and understanding mean that the book is still interesting and provides a model for thinking about revolutions as a whole.

Part of his intention was to take issue with interpretations of the revolution current in his own time and also to address what he felt were short comings in French political life. Primarily the lack of political liberties and the absence of an aristocracy or something very like it, some powerful, self-confident group, not dependant on the central authority of the government and able to resist it in the interests of the locality in which they lived and so guarantee liberty.

Tocquevilles view was not that these deficiencies were the result of the Revolution, but rather that they and the Revolution itself were the result of long term trends in French history. Tocqueville was interested in the longue duree long before the annales school. His final conclusion is that given the long term tendencies in French history the Revolution was not a “sinister enigma” but a “foregone conclusion”. Tocqueville's key to understanding this was to grasp the mentalite of the pre-revolutionary generations. Once you are in tune with the Zeitgeist the paradoxes of the pre-revolutionary period are resolved. This is why the book is valuable. What Tocqueville is doing is taking down and smashing a simple mental model to explain revolutions in their social and historical context.

Revolutions don't occur because the living conditions of people are harsh – quite the contrary. They occur in his view in times when living conditions have been improving (p196). Countries in which serfdom was a complete system did not have revolutions, it was the very fact that there were only nonsensical remnants that rankled the peasantry (pp52-61). It is not the extent of arbitrary power that is resented, but its inconsistency. It is not that the state is hated, but rather that the idea is wide spread that its power can be used more effectively. When Tocqueville read through the cahiers of complaints submitted to the Estates General what he found was that cumulatively if you followed all the advice and recommendations then the whole of the Old Regime would be swept away.

In other words from Tocqueville's perspective it was no surprise that the Soviet Union collapsed under Gorbachev when living conditions were reasonably good but the government made clear through its actions that the way it had been running things was deeply flawed and invited public criticism while it stood firm under Stalin whose government was harsh, brutal and did not admit to shortcomings.

That is perhaps one of Tocquevilles central paradoxes, that the way that the government itself tried to change and reform undermined faith and confidence in the regime. The limits of its effective power were unclear. In his image it groped forward until it met opposition before which it would withdraw (p133).

Tocqueville is surprised that the writers on economic issues under the Old Regime looked to China as their model of an ideal state. But taking into account that impressionistic image of an uncertain, hesitant government this makes sense as China was, at least in how educated opinion in Eighteenth Century France understood it, a uniquely self assured and stable authority, wisely governed thanks to a class of civil servants selected through competitive examinations. There an articulate body of opinion that did not seek to increase political liberty but instead “sought to increase the power and jurisdiction of the central authority" (p.50) and so we should not be taken aback to find that one of the results of the breakdown of the authority of the Old Regime was the creation of a stronger regime that built on the existing centralising tendencies with the result that "since '89 the administrative system has always stood firm and amid the debacles of political systems...The same duties were performed by the same civil servants, whose practical experience kept the nation on an even keel through the worst political storms" (pp219-220). His key point being that the new regime is built out of the material of the old regime and was not an complete and absolute break with the past.

What strikes Tocqueville as new and different about the French revolution is that it was not restricted to France. "The French Revolution, though ostensibly political in origin, functioned on the lines, and assumed many of the aspects, of a religious revolution" (p.42). It looked abroad and sought converts beyond its boarders. It had a gospel, based on 'natural' and 'universal' principles in his words and sought to propagate it. Perhaps this is his final paradox and one that he doesn't fully explore in this exploration of the causes of the collapse of the Old Regime, how the ideas developed in a specific local context were assumed to be transformative beyond the limits of France.