Rating: 3/5

My book club wanted to read a book by Terry Pratchett. Pratchett is of course the widely beloved fantasy author and creator of the legendary Discworld series. Naturally, we chose one of his other books. I am sad to report The Dark Side of the Sun does not live up to the expectation of Pratchett’s work.

The Dark Side of the Sun was Pratchett’s second novel and the first aimed at adults. It really shows. It lacks the tremendous humor and wit of the Discworld books. I get the feeling the setting was intended to be comically absurd, but it never surpassed the bounds of serious science fiction and did not include any straight men like Arthur Dent for contrast. It has some puns (mainly playing off the creepy Creapii) and obscure references, but they fall flat (the one exception being a funny joke about Asimov’s Laws of Robotics).

This book is really a common pulp adventure of the 1960s and 1970s. It has all the hallmarks of the era: a fast-paced romp through colorful settings with almost no character or thematic depth. There are lots of hasty action scenes with acts of derring-do by our courageous hero Dom Sabalos, though he usually escapes by quirky chance rather than solid planning or skill. I do appreciate some of the many concepts it throws against the wall. The living planet First Sirian Bank, the living water Chatogaster, the five classes of robots, the endlessly variable Creapii, the tech - all of these were interesting if not mindblowing. It reminds me of the superior Norstrilia published the year before (not to suggest any inspiration). The Dark Side of the Sun is ultimately a fun, low impact story.

Unfortunately, this book has many of the flaws of pulp as well. It has a plot that jumps from set piece to set piece. Those jumps do not always make sense. Sometimes one scene just ends, and the character wakes in the next scene. Other times, Dom suddenly has knowledge that leads him to the next step. Those jumps are particularly frustrating, as they seem contrived to cover up that the author wanted the previous scene to last a certain length and had no believable way to transition to the next scene. It creates the sensation of fits and starts with the character being restrained or accelerated artificially. The story also manages to have far too much exposition without actually explaining the universe or plot or character motivations well. I find myself asking why certain plot points happened or why characters involved themselves, and the answer is ultimately “the plot said so.” Characters are plot devices. Conversations make no sense. The abrupt ending slams into the reader. The story is as disjointed as it is flashy. 

I think the core of this story is poker. The entire plot is driven by p-math, which is effectively statistical magic. The future can be told by p-math down to an individual level. It works perfectly for the 52 known races, but the Jokers throw it all into doubt. Dom relies heavily on intuition and luck in his search for the Jokers. I am not sure how this ties into the themes of discovery and perspective that are explicit with the Creapii and others, but there are too many connections to ignore. I wish Pratchett had gone farther with it to the point of real satire or parody. It would have been much more unique.

I will admit, The Dark Side of the Sun is my introduction to Pratchett’s written work. The others in the group had all read Discworld books previously, and their reactions were much less favorable. I can only imagine it would be like me finding a standalone book by Douglas Adams and discovering it to be a bog-standard pulp space opera. I could not recommend that book, and I do not recommend The Dark Side of the Sun. Still, I find myself wishing that current writers would publish new stories that combine the fun of pulp adventures with the quality we expect from modern genre novels. Sometimes I want books that are just fun, but I never want books that are bad.

CHARACTER LIST (abridged)
Dominickdaniel “Dom” Sabalos - human, from Widdershins, multiple attempted assassinations, saved from one by googoo which turns him green, prophesied to discover the Jokers,
Korodore - human, security chief, killed on the day Dom becomes Chairman of Widdershins
Hrsh-Hgn - phnobe, Dom’s tutor, adventure partner
Joan - human, Dom’s grandmother, tries desperately to stop Dom from searching for the Jokers
Ig - swamp ig found by Dom after the opening assassination attempt, kept as a pet throughout the adventure, discover to be one of the Jokers
Keja - Dom’s sister, wife of Emperor Ptarmigan of Laoth
Isaac - Class Five robot with Man-Friday circuitry, given to Dom by Keja, adventure party
Abramelin-lincoln-stroke-Enobarbous-stroke-50.3-Enobarbous-McMirmidom - sundog, brings Dom et a. to the First Sirian Bank
First Sirian Bank - Dom’s godfather, living planet, earthquakes among huge silicon deposits created his intelligence, acts as a bank, can change orbit at will, sends Dom to Band
Ways - Class Five robot, assassin in the employ of the Joker Institute, sent to kill Dom, fails repeatedly due to manipulation by the Jokers 
Chatogaster - sentient water, lives on Band, Dom takes it to Widdershins
CReegE + 690° - high Creapii, meets Dom at the Chain Stars, tells Dom that the riddle may be about perspective and thought processes rather than a physical world
Tarli - human girl, beats up Dom on Laoth