Rating: 1/5

This review is of “Prairie Paradise”, a standalone by Emma Harrington.

Part 1: “The Wind”.
				
The book begins in Montana, 1834. Here, Margarethe Duvalle, hereafter known as Blue Feather, a half-white, half-Shoshoni Indian maiden and the heroine of the book, has been abducted in a raid by Crow Indians. (Blue Feather’s father, Pierre Duvalle, is a French-Canadian trapper who married her mother, Running Moon).

Across the pond, in Cornwall, England, lives Adrian Herenton, the hero of the book. Adrian is the second son of Lord Thomas Hereton, fourth Duke of Herfield. As this part of the book begins, a party is being held. Among the guests is Madame Josette de Jessupe, a psychic (And also Blue Feather’s aunt). Madame de Jessupe predicts one of the guests at the party will die the next day, as well as predictions for Adrian’s life. The guests scoff, but the next day, Elizabeth Shelley, a neighbor woman who was affianced to Adrian’s older brother, John, does pass away. This loss will also affect Adrian, as, per an agreement between the Herenton and Shelley families, John has to marry the next eligible Shelley female. That female is Elizabeth’s younger sister Eleanor, or Nell as she’s known, whom Adrian is in love with. He tries to get Nell to elope with him, but she refuses, as she wishes to be a duchess, and can only achieve that by marrying John, who, as firstborn son, will inherit his father’s title. Rancor ensues between the Herenton males, and Adrian is disowned by Thomas. After this, Adrian decides to go to America (This was part of Josette’s predictions for his life).

Part 2: “The Storm”.

Fast forward one year. Blue Feather has married her Crow kidnapper, Young White Buffalo, but he is killed by Piegan-Blackfoot Indians. She is later rescued by Adrian, who has joined up with a party of trappers and explorers. Blue Feather’s presence, however, creates tension, as another member of the party, Ramone Jardin, picks a fight with Adrian for her. Adrian wins the battle, but that doesn’t end the dispute between the two men. Blue Feather and Adrian become lovers, but she is later taken from him by her cousin, Gray Eagle, who is taking Blue Feather to see her grandfather. While trying to find them, Adrian is attacked by Blackfoot Indians, and made to run for his life. He survives, but he and Blue Feather are apart for more than a year.

Part 3: “Prophecy Fulfilled”.

Adrian and Blue Feather reunite, he discovers he is a father to twin daughters, and they marry. However, all is not good. Jardin is still around, and Richard shows up, wanting Adrian to go back to England with him. The girls look white, but Blue Feather doesn’t, and the Herentons are concerned about her being accepted in their society. Blue Feather decides not to go with Adrian, but the decision is taken out of her hands when Jardin kidnaps her and the girls.

Adrian, his manservant Harry-who traveled with him from England-and Gray Eagle rescue Blue Feather and the girls; in the process of doing so, Adrian kills Jardin Adrian decides to remain in America with his wife and daughters and they have their Happily Ever After.

Upside: The best part of “Prairie Paradise” comes in the last third of the book, when Blue Feather has to make the decision of whether or not to go to England with Adrian. This is when the book hits its high point.

Downside: What happens before that, however, isn’t much. There are no real storylines here, only fragments of storylines. Ms. Harrington also falls into the “readers are supposed to care about the hero and heroine because they’re the hero and heroine” trap without actually giving me, as a reader, a reason to care about Blue Feather, Adrian or any other character here. There is no character development, and not much in the way of anything interesting happening here.

Sex: The love scenes between Blue Feather and Adrian never get anywhere close to erotic or interesting.
				
Violence: Assault, battery, shootings, stabbings and killings all take place in “Prairie Paradise”. The violence is not graphic.

Bottom Line: This “Paradise” was not lost, it was never found.