Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars. Sarah Fletcher, age 28. Small and thin with pansy eyes. Hair color? Has a cat named Charles at her bed-sit. Mother dead, father remarried then died. Stepmother kicked her out five years previously. Outpatient Receptionist at St. Cyprian's.

Professor Radolf Nauta was previously engaged to a Veronica who instead ran away with a South American millionaire. His mother comes to visit him at his clinic and decides Sarah would do as companion to her MIL, who is terminally ill. Radolf asks her to do so and volunteers to make sure Charles is cared for in her absence. She agrees. 

So Radolf's plan is put into effect. The old lady dies 2 days before Sarah's leave is up, but she is asked to stay for the funeral. She writes a letter to the hospital to let them know about the extra days, but due to a postal worker's strike, it never reaches them. Thus, Sarah is fired. 

Being unsuccessful at finding a new clerical job, she takes a job as housemaid to a Lady Wesley. Coincidentally, she is Radolf's godmother. Meanwhile, Radolf has discovered Sarah has been fired and realizing it is his fault, frantically tries to find her. Of course when he visits his godmother, he sees her. He is furious she is working as a domestic. Lady Wesley is well aware he is interested in Sarah "that way" and takes every opportunity to twit him about it. 

Lady Wesley's household moves to London for a month. On her day off, Sarah becomes involved with some young thugs and is injured. Radolf happens upon the scene; he tells Sarah she will be admitted to hospital and "don't fuss." She replies, "if this is your bedside manner, I am surprised that you can make a living." He laughs.

He arranges for Sarah to act as his mother’s companion while she is visiting him at his house at Minster Lovell. Sarah is convinced that Radolf does not like her and doesn't want to see her. So when he comes to see his mother on Sunday, Sarah lies and says she has been invited to Sunday lunch at the vicar’s. She really just goes for a long walk only to discover she has no money to eat. So poignant! The professor finds her and takes her to tea. She admits to wanting to avoid him and he doesn't come back during the rest of her stay with Mevrouw Nauta. 

She returns to Lady Wesley's and does extra duty because one of the other maids is off sick. She is given a day off in London as a reward. Of course she runs into the professor and he takes her to his house for lunch where she meets his dog, Trotter, and his staff. She overhears part of a telephone conversation about a wedding and assumes that the professor is going to be married soon. 

The waters become muddied even further when the Professor brings his houseman to Lady Wesley's. The houseman is coincidentally a young man that Sarah knew from her home. Radolf incorrectly assumes they are a couple and Sarah does not disabuse him of that notion. 

Meanwhile Sarah has become more and more despondent and has grown thin and pale. Likewise the professor is ill-tempered and short with his staff and others. When he learns that his houseman has an understanding with a nurse at the hospital, he becomes quite determined to marry Sarah. His butler and housekeeper notice the difference and realize which way the wind is blowing. 

One of the staff leaves the door to Sarah's cottage open and Charles escapes. He is missing for three days and Sarah is distraught. On her day off, Sarah scours the countryside looking for him. She finds him caught in a rabbit snare, but unfortunately falls and catches herself in another snare. She's unable to free either of them. Lady Wesley calls Radolf because she is concerned that Sarah has been missing for more than 12 hours. He immediately drives down and searches for them with his dog, Trotter. He finds them in the snares and frees them both. Sarah goes to sleep in his arms. "They were very still but from time to time the professor dropped a kiss on to Sarah's tousled head." *The cat rescue scene is possibly my very favorite in this book full of lovely scenes.*

Back at the house, Sarah is taken off her duties and commanded to rest. She tells Charles "I can manage quite well until he smiles at me, but then I go all to pieces."

She is sitting in the sun on the grass shucking peas when the professor arrives. He tells her he is taking her home - to their home. Sarah asks who is Lisse about whom she overheard the conversation. He explains that Lisse is his sister and is getting married very shortly but he says "I think we shall marry before then." Sarah tell him he has started at the wrong end and that he hasn't even asked her to marry him. Radolf tells her that when he first noticed her, he had no wish to get married but found himself thinking of her a lot. He finally had to admit that she was his dream girl and he wanted her in his life.. 

Kisses – they are to be married in Minster Lovell by special license!

This book is really delightful. Sarah is plucky. Her character is shown through the fact that she is willing to work hard as a domestic even though she comes from a genteel background. We get to see Radolf’s point of view – at first he doesn’t notice her at all; then merely as someone in the background; then when he can’t stop thinking of her, she is an irritant; finally, he has to admit she is his dream girl. The characters of Lady Wesley’s staff are well drawn and interesting as well and Sarah considers them her friends. Mijnheer Nauta we meet only briefly; we don’t get as clear a picture of Mevrouw Nauta as we do of other RDD mothers, but TGB lets us know she likes and approves of Sarah.