Rating: 3/5

The Wind Singer was one of my husband's favourite books when he was young and he has been trying to persuade me to read it for almost 5 years now. His love of the series is such that, against experience and better judgement, I expected to be blown away. As is often the way with expectations, the promise was better than the reality. Which, I hasten to add, is not to say that this is a bad book. Rather, I intend for it to serve as an explanation for my more critical judgement of it.

The book opens in the fictional city of Aramanth, which (like a certain era of YA dystopias) is segregated into concentric colour-based districts. The citizens' lives are governed by unending examinations, which give them a family rating that determines in which district they are to live and what sort of lives they are to lead. So far, so tyrannical, but then one day young protagonist Kestrel decides that she has had enough. She rebels against the rigid ranking system, flouts the authorities' attempts to force her back into line, and is swept up in a fantasy adventure at the heart of which is the Wind Singer: a monument from ancient days that seems to be the source of all the city's ills.

There are many things that The Wind Singer does right. As a children's book, its fast-paced action and quirky but charming characters are quick to engage the reader. Nicholson's imagination is well exercised. From an underground mud city to Mortal Engines-style roving cities, to the ruins of an ancient highway that would be a dream for any fantasy artist, this is a book begging to be illustrated. The enemy (there must always be an enemy) is genuinely frightening - great for those adult readers among us - without being in any way inappropriate for a younger audience. The structure of the book owes much to older fairy tales, with a quest laid out in stages and then followed with dangers to overcome at each point. That gave it an almost familiar feeling that instantly makes the reader comfortable enough to accept later stranger flights of fancy.

Perhaps my favourite choice Nicholson made with this book was in the bonds between the protagonists. Kestrel and her twin brother Bowman are not only close to each other, but also to their parents and younger sister. Many parents in children's fiction are written as placeholders: they give the protagonists a setting, or they exist as vague disapproving figures to be outwitted, or they died a long time ago, leaving our protagonists orphaned. Hanno and Ira, in contrast, are not only alive - a rarity in fantasy - but deeply supportive of their children's choices. They are written with just as much care as their children and when Kestrel and Bowman set off on their mission, the story does not forget the parents. Chapters from each of their perspectives show how Kestrel's act of rebellion continues to shape lives back in Aramanth and how her parents choose to act in the face of such changes. It made for a very refreshing change, and Hanno and Ira ultimately ended up being my favourite characters.

Refreshing is not always perfect, however, and there were a number of aspects of this book that I would have liked to see done differently. Nicholson has a habit of putting his protagonists in predicaments and, rather than letting them use their own skills and intelligence to escape, introduces a deus ex machina solution which, often, feels somewhat random. For me this lowered the stakes, as I knew that at the next sign of danger there would be some other rescue that would come along. It also didn't allow the characters to grow as they might have done had they been permitted to save themselves.

In addition, the pressure to keep the book moving meant that much of it felt very rushed and I was left with a lot of unanswered questions about the nature of the world and the importance of certain key elements of the plot. We have very little time to appreciate one scene before being whisked to the next. I would have preferred to see some key scenes in the plot dug into a little deeper, or written with time for us to process their implications , particularly the ending, which was over in about two pages and left me feeling rather unsatisfied by how easily all the wounds of the past were healed. 

I will be interested to see how the remaining two books in the series fill in these gaps and how the characters grow as they get older. Already in this first book we have seen the start of a promising character arc for Bowman. I would like to see a deeper delve into some of the many questions I have regarding the soft worldbuilding and lore that Nicholson has already hinted at, though with the target demographic of the book I am aware that I cannot expect as much detail as I perhaps would like. 

For those with children who enjoy escapist adventures, or for adults willing to put aside their critical brains and simply enjoy a good fantasy story, The Wind Singer is worth a read. It is perhaps better appreciated if experienced first at a younger age, but it does many good things that even a seasoned SFF reader might be able to appreciate. The key messages - courage, kindness, acceptance - are all there and the twists will keep you turning pages. This probably isn't your new favourite series, but at 350-ish pages of large print, it was a quick and enjoyable adventure.