Rating: 1/5

Okay, first things first: SPOILERS SPOILERS SPOILERS. Not that there's much plot to give away.

Well, I saw this book on the library shelf the other day and picked it up. I'd been feeling like some brainless action for a few days, and this seemed to fit the bill, so I happily sat down and started reading. And, at first, it was great stuff. Not in any cerebral sense, of course, but entertaining enough. I mean, come on: Antarctic research stations, mysterious metal things buried in 400 million year old ice...it was addictive!

But then, about two hundred pages in, I began to have misgivings. I guess, in retrospect, I should have seen it from the very beginning, when characters are worried because of a nearby pod of orcas (in the book, only referred to as killer whales) might attack some divers. And then said pod of whales sinisterly appears and start attacking and devouring humans. That's when suspension of disbelief broke down. Because here's the thing: in all of recorded human history, orcas have only attacked humans on five or six occasions, none of which resulted in death. There have been captive attacks, but that's not the point. THIS WOULD NEVER HAPPEN, which Mr. Reilly would know if he'd bothered doing even a little bit of research. 

And the list goes on: French special ops attacking everyone with...crossbows? American special ops retaliating with...grappling hooks? A massive flurocarbon leak which makes the air extremely flammable, but also doesn't suffocate anyone. A kid who's been at the ice station for all of a week and already has a pet seal? People without pressure suits surviving below 1000 feet in Antarctic waters? And, of course, super massive, radiation-mutated elephant seals, which, for some reason, live in the center of an ice shelf. I could go on, but there wouldn't be a point. 

Now, I realize that this book was in no way intended to be great literature, but merely a fun action romp, but there is suspension of disbelief, and then there is suspension of disbelief which requires a full lobotomy for one to enjoy the effects. Reality seems to have completely flown the coop in this one, and it is difficult to stick with it because of this. I guess I'd suggest it for a long airplane trip, when you have nothing better to do.