Rating: 4/5

The naked intellect is an extraordinarily inaccurate instrument.

I read the first story a long time ago; it was interesting to read it again this much later (I’m mainly doing so in preparation for reading the next two.)

A Wrinkle in Time is a very nice combination of fantasy and science fiction—in some ways, very much like Star Maker in that not only does it posit a universal divinity but that stars are also intelligent; unlike in Star Maker, however, stars do take part in the great fight between good and evil (though they have only a backstory role here).

The story is very much focused on Meg Murry, the oldest child in a family of four children, whose father has disappeared. He works for the United States government, and they say he’s fine but he hasn’t contacted them in a long time—I’m not sure they ever say exactly how long, but I get the impression for over a year. Everybody else in the community thinks he’s never coming back.

Meg would probably be a trouble-maker even without that burden; with it, she’s miserable.

IT, the incarnation of evil, offers solace and relief from that kind of pain by enforcing equality as uniformity. But it’s a lie. “IT could only give pain, never relieve it.” But IT has convinced those it takes over that the pain it gives is better than the pain that comes from knowing that other people have different opinions about you.

A Wind in the Door continues on the same theme, introducing strange new beings and traveling inward, rather than across the universe (though there’s a little bit of that, too, at least in imagination).

Both evil and good have new allies, and evil’s message is similar to that of IT in A Wrinkle in Time. Evil makes nothingness sound awfully nice, stating that “We are the ones who are glorious.”

When everything is nothing there will be no more war, no illness, no death. There will be no more poverty, no more pain, no more slums, no more starvation…

Stated like this, it is very reminiscent of a story or two in Stanislaw Lem’s The Cyberiad, though here it is deadly serious. Evil is unNaming the world a piece at a time, and while this puts everyone in eventual danger it puts Charles Wallace in immediate danger. So Meg must join the song of life and Name or reName what evil endangers.

We are the song of the universe. We sing with the angelic host. We are the musicians. The farae and the stars are the singers. Our song orders the rhythm of creation.

A Swiftly Tilting Planet starts more clumsily than the first two, getting us caught up with all of the changes in the characters’ lives; where A Wind in the Door happened a year after A Wrinkle in Time, this third book takes place seven to ten years later. Oddly, where the previous books seemed to be placed somewhere in the near future, this one seemed to be more in the present or near past. The creatures are less imaginative, more standard fantasy, and Charles Wallace appears to have forgotten what happened in previous books.

I noted the similarity between A Wrinkle in Time and Star Maker, and here the similarity comes from a different direction: this is a series of travels through time, some real and some “projections”, which are mostly observational. To the extent that Charles Wallace affects the story, it is by shuttling information across generations, and the information is not exactly hidden from the people he’s shuttling it to anyway. Still an interesting story, but (a) confusing, and (b) less intriguing than the previous two.

My take on Many Waters is that it takes place around 1998 or so (“half a century” after the atomic bomb was first used) when scientists routinely travel to outer space. In this case that’s mostly just a frame around the real story which unravels in a different time and place altogether. It was a little hard to get into at first, because of the semi-paradisal nature of the place and time—it took me a couple of chapters to ignore the ahistorical elements. But once I realized what the author was doing, it made sense and turned into a very good story in a world halfway between an initial paradise and the modern mundane world.

The creatures are also interesting, again; though they draw on familiar ideas, L’Engle gives them all an interesting twist; and she also combines science with fantasy in a very nice way to both get the story going and to end it.