Rating: 4/5

This novel by Elizabeth Jolley was first published in Australia in 1988 and in the UK by Virago in 2000. The cover of this edition gives only an approximation of the characters in the book. Edwin is described as handsome and well-groomed. He is an indecisive and lonely intellectual not a frumpy nail-biter. The female on the cover is neither the woman who coins the term 'Sugar Mother' nor her daughter who performs the rôle. Maybe a weird hybrid of the two, with a cake. 

My first impression was that this felt like an Australian Barbara Pym - the same kind of restricted milieu and domestic setting, observations of the small things that mean so much, characters who speak and do according to their own unfamiliar logic. It feels like it belongs to an earlier era - and concerns not Australians of longer pedigree but a community of ex-pats. Edwin and Cecilia met the couples in their set on board ship as they sailed away from England and towards a new life, Dr Edwin to take up an academic post at a university, Dr Cecilia to work at a clinic. Two of the men, 'Buffy' and 'Tuppy', are defined by the time they spent in India, interrupted by the end of British rule. But when Cecilia leaves Edwin alone for a year to further her career in obstetrics, the world has moved on and the old kind of leisurely journey has been replaced by the horrors of plane travel. Jolley also includes a naughtier element - Edwin and Cecilia, 'enlightened', go in for a sterile kind of swinging with the couples they have befriended (the barren ritual of the keys). It all becomes something of a burden to Edwin in Cecilia's absence.

The novel begins with a passage that is repeated somewhere in the middle, when it is re-read with greater understanding and interest. Chronologically the story begins with Edwin wondering how he will manage while Cecilia is away. Within a few hours he has been captivated by the new neighbours, a mother and daughter, who soothe him with praise and attention and seem to offer him the future he longs for, so that he almost forgets his old life. The one consistent element turns out to be Cecilia's old schoolchum Daphne, a character with excellent lungs and a sense of integrity he increasingly appreciates. 

One day, inevitably, Cecilia will return. And what then? How will Edwin manage when he has to wake up from the lovely dream? The questions are left hanging in a way that proves disturbing.