Rating: 4/5

Well, the Show Me State showed me.

Showed me how you do it. How you write stories so colorfully and so well-crafted, you could almost cry from reading them.

Paulette Jiles took me all over the state of Missouri this week, in her 2002 publication of Enemy Women, a historical fiction novel that takes place in 1864, and then Mark Twain took my daughters and me to St. Petersburg, Missouri, to the real world of 1876.

And what's in that world of 1876 Missouri?

Well. . . riverboats, wagons, poor white boys, overprotective aunts, pretty girls, adventures in caves. . . and talk of orgies, knives, guns, pipe smoking, and a frequent use of the “N” word.

As the narrator of this novel to my daughters, these qualities necessitated an immediate discussion at the start of the book. We needed to talk about this, before we went any further in this read.

Here's the deal: I don't use the “N” word, and I don't hang out with people who do. 

I made my boundary clear right as we started. I am clever enough to read ahead and say what needs to be said without making myself uncomfortable by using language that twists my intestines.

However, I made something else clear to my girls: just because an author depicts their characters authentically does not make them a racist, nor does it make the book racist.

My children have a writer for a mother. They know more than they want to know about the writing process, and they've also watched their mother eavesdrop on more than her fair share of conversations. They know by now how obsessed I am with authentic dialogue. I can't stand any writer sugar-coating or contriving what they hear. 

But, as a mother, would I have enjoyed either of my girls reading the “N” word, over and over again, in this book? 

No.

As the narrator and the mom, I chose to leave out all references to the “N” word, skip over the boys' curiosity about “orgies” and leave out about half of the talk about smoking. 

And focus on the good. 

The best parts for me: watching my daughters laugh at what a drama queen Tom Sawyer is, and being reminded of how many “death scenes” Tom conjures up in his mind, so he may convince himself that he's a good person, when he visualizes how many people will mourn him! I loved watching my girls cover up their faces in disgust when Tom, Huck and Joe stripped down to their birthday suits on the island, doing handstands and sword fights and whatnot. I couldn't help but be reminded of Out Stealing Horses. My middle child mumbled, from behind the hands covering her face, “boys are so repulsive.”

Yes, this is a boy's world for sure. These barefooted boys with the ringworm on their scalps and rings of dirt around their necks are a bunch of river rats.

But I must give Mr. Twain the credit he deserves here, for bringing these authentic characters to life, though I do understand the difficulty we face reading some of these classics. They are snapshots of how people behaved (how some people still behave), and sometimes those are painful reminders.