Rating: 2/5

This tale immediately reminded me of others of its ilk, such as Snow White and the Seven Dwarves, Sleeping Beauty, East of the Sun and West of the Moon and The Enchanted Pig. In this story, as in the latter two stated here, there is a gender switch; the damsel in distress is actually a man, a sleeping prince enchanted by a wicked magician.

While the illustrations are expressive and realistic, featuring a determined, brave and selfless princess and the kindly old women she meets (this story is heavily distaff oriented), many aspects of the story left me unsatisfied. The prince himself (who goes unnamed) never makes an appearance until the very end of the story. We know he is kind and selfless because we are told so, not through any shown or specific action on his part. There is a broad hint that Florecita may have met him before she begins her epic journey. But she basically sets out to help because a bird tells her to do so, with such difficult conditions laid out you wonder why she bothers.

Is she bored, restless, lonely, looking for a husband? What, exactly, spurs a pampered young princess to leave her comfortable home without notifying or consulting anyone except some random avian to go gallivanting off to find a distant unknown snoring royal? Princes do it all the time in other stories but there is at least some impetus—they seek fortune, have to slay a dangerous beast, help an ailing parent or they’ve seen a picture of the said beauty and are madly smitten with it. Going after someone sight unseen seems a little idiotic.

There’s also no explanation about the magician’s enchantment save that he did so out of envy. Envy of what? The prince’s good looks, his kingdom, his reputation? A baffling excuse, really. Also, Florecita and the prince fall in love at once, with hardly any conversation or even a kiss!

Taking all this into account, I started considering other fairy tales of this sort. Princes fall in love with silent or slumbering women all the time but at least the story gives us some insight about the ladies first. We know Snow White was envied by her stepmother because of her great beauty. We also know that SW is a hardworking, good, kind girl by her caretaking of the dwarves. In The Enchanted Pig and East of the Sun and West of the Moon, girls are forced to marry animals but they spend time together with their bespelled husbands and get to know each another before tragedy befalls.

None of that is present in this tale, which places it among the more trivial fairy tales of this sort. Princess Florecita and the Iron Shoes squeaks by because of the reversal of the usual gender roles but that earns it only a grudging pass not wholehearted recommendation.