Rating: 5/5

Spoilers ahoy! I'm writing this from the perspective of a starry-eyed fan, 

It's a world where bodies are simply another sort of costume, and gender is a matter of personal taste, but also one where living in heaven comes with a life of perpetual praise and worship for smothering coddling. In the first book, the nameless protagonist learned that they could make nothing, do nothing and be nothing. She (for this is her dominant self identified gender, though not her body at all moments) has matured a bit, having spent a non-specific amount of time hiding in the fantasies of the past as a coping mechanism.

Sapphire Wine follows the further misadventures of her hapless friends as well, and adds new characters for interesting and funny social interplay. A lot of the book's strength is not in external occurrences but in people's reactions to each other and even the novel's explosive climax is again, most interesting in how it effects the characters and not even in their sort of peril.

Most of the book is based on her mellowing out and getting an ability to look after other people, so if I had to characterize the coming of age aspect other reviewers have commented on, there's a maternal theme (delightfully neutral "makerish" in the character's post gender vocabulary) and a lot of forbearing patience with other people's dysfunction without being a doormat. If you like really pretty, Tanith Lee's descriptions are also a joy to read. If your sci-fi needs spacewars and an ending more exact than getting your stuff together and making the best of a lousy situation, this book is going to bore you to tears.

One thing I disagree with is the garden of Eden motif people apply to the books- there is a garden, but Lucifer's choice to rule in hell over serving in heaven fits better here. I'm normally not one for an intentional Abrahamic religious allegory, but the protagonist explicitly examines it in both books when she discusses god. Her observation is that the QRs that order and regulate the paradise for the humans prevent god from functioning, and implictly they replace them. It not at all heavy handedly written that the payment for all goods and services required is hysterical thank yous and that all pleasures are possible only in the stricture of completely arbitrary social rules. For example May/December romances or actual homosexuality are not forbidden, per say, but gently and firmly discouraged because breaches in conformity might leave the people of the society content with their lot in life. The culture facilitates selfishness at the cost of human connection- everyone has the bodies they find beautiful and spends all their time trying to have sex with whatever people they consider the best mirrors on themselves, so everyone is lonely. Neediness, and the silly ineffectual acts of rebellion people in the dome cities get up to is actually preferable to being useful by the QRs.

Humans are functionally banned from anything they could feel true passion over- Danor's sexual dysfunction, rather than just a character quirk of frigidity, it's a symptom of the society, as is the complete suppression of the desire to create... even the total control over their human reproduction lets the QR's insert themselves completely into the needs and lives of their subjects. A repeated theme is frustrated desire- Hergal in the first book is not allowed to be a bird, Thinta's cat obsession is twarted even though there's no reason she shouldn't get to have the cat body she wants. Citizens of the dome cities take meddling for granted, but the QRs have had a note of sabotage in everything they do for a long time. They are loving gods, but nonetheless parasites, bribing people with their birthright at the cost of the one thing the humans have that they don't- it's not the eternal spark or soul that can be body swapped, its the internally generated capacity to really be into things. Indeed you almost get the sense in this post scarcity society, that emotional energy is a redundant invention that doesn't literally power the QRs as much as keep them in power.

That the protagonist committed murder, even if it was an act of self defence, might give the QRs pause that people's feelings might be hurt if they were constantly getting offed by other people and needing a new body, but even consensual, harmless war also undermines the QRs monopoly on being the only thing to feed you and make you feel; if you can fear death even as a moment's irritation and the people in power can't stop it, the monopoly is lost.

The protagonists iconoclasm and contentment with creating her primitive back-to-the-land dictatorship (she's the defacto leader, it's really more a personality thing) disguised as a commune is not about rejecting technology, its new citizens embrace whatever they can scrounge or rediscover, and its not about scarcity or property rights, its functionally about self determination. She doesn't look forward to say, resuming natural childbirth, and I think if it were an option nobody in the garden really wants an artificially shortened lifespan, but being in a sort of lesser place is the current price for not living like pampered pets. It's a compromise, much like everything else the humans get stuck with in the exile ends up being. I get the sense that they're in more danger of eventually staging a coup against the domes than regressing into barbarism.

The next bit is a MAJOR SPOILER

A note, before I conclude, about Hatta. We've got the theme of compromise here, and it's something worth unpacking in his case. Hatta begins expressing his unrequited love through a mask of deliberate physical ugliness (a representative of his own rebellion against a world where everything is perfect and pretty), wanting the protagonist for her mind and not her every changing parade of bodies, but she has no interest in sharing herself with him- she certainly doesn't need him and he has nothing to share with her other than more smothering QR style nurturing. Love in the Tanith Lee book is about giving, for example Danor and her Older Person lover work because they're able to offer something the other needs to complete each other and Hatta isn't able to give more than fussing in the safety of the domes. Discarding the Hatta identity for the protagonist's old male body, the protagonist's ideal for that gender, Hatta desperately compromises his own identity to get the upper hand with her, for once enjoying being desired but losing the ugliness that was part of who he was. I was a bit worried this was too close to being a story about a girl finally giving into the advances of a "Nice Guy" who always treated her right, given Hatta's constant usefulness, but thankfully they didn't go there.

When the body is disfigured Hatta decides that he's lost the ability to be wanted along with his looks and plans a real suicide- the baby she uses as an argument to stay his hand is symbolic of actually having a shared project, but there's more than that, she also declares a feeling for him as a person and his looks become a compromise, half her sexy poet, half the ugliness he likes to wear. She has become able to love him because he, like many others, is now able to act like an adult.