Rating: 5/5

The joy of an audio book is that if you are lucky, not only do you get to listen to a fabulous book, but it is also narrated by a talented person. Cynthia Wright has written an amazing story. Aimee de Fleurence is being forced into a marriage to a horrid man, and she will do anything to escape that fate. That escape comes in the form of joining the King's court using her sister's invitation, and keeping herself well hidden to evade discovery. Her sister was to become one of the King's 'women' and although Aimee admired her King, she hoped he wouldn't discover that she had taken her sister's place. He would either be furious at the deception and force her to return home, or he would expect her to take her sister's place in his bed. Neither option was acceptable to her. She just hoped she could get far enough away from home to be able to slip away from the travellers before that happened.

Unfortunately for her she is discovered before that, not by the king, but by his good friend Thomas St. Briac. He is infuriated with her for putting herself at risk, and despite her being a thorn in his side, he does his best to keep her hidden from the King. His plans go awry though, and in order to keep her from the King's bed St.Briac tells him of Aimee's plight and then does the unthinkable, tells the King he wants to marry her. That keeps the King happy, but he is shocked to discover that Aimee is less than pleased. Even though she won't go through with a wedding, she knows that now she must find a way to break off the engagement without damage to either of their reputations.

She wouldn't be adverse to marrying him, IF he loved her. But knowing he barely tolerated her made her determined to get away from him as soon as possible. Circumstances occur that turns the situation around, and St.Briac is the one needing her help by remaining betrothed to her. 

Their relationship is a fabulous one to discover, either they absolutely despise each other, or they are in the throws of passion with each other instead. St.Briac is a fabulous character whose wit and cheekiness had me smiling many times throughout the book, especially when he was teasing Aimee.

Not only was their the romance aspect of the story to keep me intrigued but also there was some skullduggery, possible treason, and deception afoot that could lead to an innocent man being hanged. There was never a dull moment in this story and the only thing that could make it better, and indeed did, was the superb narration by Tim Campbell. He portrayed each character fabulously, from the deep, sexy, sometimes cheeky and playful timbre of St.Briac's voice, to the gentle sweet voice of Aimee. The voices of the King, children, the villains, and even an old crone were superbly done as well.

As I said at the start of my review, the joy of an audio book comes from an equally good story and it's narration and I am happy to say that this book definitely had both. I can't recommend it enough. There are only a handful of narrators that I feel are worthy of a 5 star rating, and Tim Campbell is definitely one of them. A 5 star novel with a 5 star narration.