Rating: 5/5

This is a 1957 book by Dutch diplomat &amp; author Robert van Gulik who, between 1957 and 1968 wrote a series of Chinese historic mystery novels featuring Judge Dee, a crime-solving magistrate in ancient imperial China during the Tang Dynasty. Van Gulik’s famous Judge Dee (Dee Jen-djieh) character is a semi-fictional character modeled after a real historic figure Di Renjie, who was a magistrate and statements in the Chinese Tang court. His exploits were featured in a 18th century Chinese crime novel. Similar to the original Chinese book, all van Gulik’s Judge Dee books contain three separate mysteries, sometimes interlinked. The Chinese Maze Murders is the first book in the Judge Dee series. This book has an interesting publication history. Van Gulik finished writing the manuscript in English in 1951. He got the book translated into Japanese and published it in Japan in 1951. Then, he got the book translated into Chinese and published it in Singapore in 1952. It was not until 1956 (or 1957 depending on your source) that the book was published in English. The story here has a setting in Tang Dynasty in China in an imaginary northwestern border town in China during the seventh century A.D called Lan-fang. I find the book very well plotted, well written, fast-paced and interesting. It has quite a bit of twists and turns and its share of red herring. It also includes many ancient Chinese style illustrations of the type seen in old Chinese books to give readers a sense of authenticity. New readers might easily believe the Judge Dee books are English translations of old Chinese mystery classics instead of original works written by a Dutch author in the 1950s and 1960s. The Postscript of this book also provides some good background information on the imperial Chinese government system at that time. Van Gulik noted that the district magistrate is at the bottom of the colossal pyramidal structure of the ancient Chinese government organization. He must report to the prefect, who supervises ten or more districts. The prefect reports to the provincial governor, who is responsible for several prefectures. The governor in his turn reports to the central authorities in the capital, with the Emperor at the top.

Spoiler Alert. Van Gulik lay out for the readers the three mysterious that are in the book: (1) the case of the murder in the sealed room, (2) the case of the hidden testament, and (3) the case of the girl with the severed head. The three cases are, to some extent, intertwined with similar casts of characters. In addition, there are quite a few minor mysteries and side stories. The backdrop of this book is Dee got demoted from a higher position in a bigger town to become magistrate to this much smaller border town because he offended some rich and corrupt merchants in his former post. In this story, Van Gulik created a good historic background on Lan-fang and life of a Chinese western border town that faces the Uigur region. During that period of Chinese history, foreign militarized tribes sometimes raided Chinese border towns like Lan-fang. That historic backdrop was integrated into the story by describing how a local tyrant Chien Mao took over the town and tried to commit treason by helping barbarians to raid the town by opening the city gates, a scheme that was foiled by Dee. The book also comes with a map laying the town with all the key buildings relevant to the story which is quite helpful.

The first case, the case of the murder in the sealed room, is a classic locked room mystery. The murder victim is a retired army General called Ding Hoo-gwo. He was found murdered in his locked room study, killed with a very short and slim knife that has hit his throat. It turns out General Ding was actually murdered by ex-Governor Yoo Shou-chien, who died 9 years ago but has lay a mechanical death trap for Ding. Many years ago, General Ding was in charge of a war against some barbarian tribes. General Ding, however, colluded with the enemy and deliberately sent a regiment of 800 troops under his commend to be ambushed and massacred by the enemy. Due to political considerations, the imperial government covered up his crime and only forced Ding to resign. Ex-Governor Yoo, a very righteous person and a friend of Ding, decided to avenge the massacred soldiers. Yoo created an ingenious spring-load mechanism made of rattan and held down by dried resin inside a Chinese writing brush. He presented that exquisitely designed writing brush to Ding as an early 60th birthday present and asked Ding not to use it until his 60th birthday. When Ding used the pen for the first time on his 60th birthday, he has to burn off some loose brush hairs. When heat is applied to the pen, the resin dissolved and it fired the spring-loaded mechanism and the knife built into the hollow tube flew out and killed Ding. The pen is so cleverly designed that the hollow tube would close once the knife is fired so it is not easy to detect it as the weapon. Dee, however, were able to figure that out. By that time, since the murderer ex-Governor Yoo is already dead and exposing the crime would mean exposing Ding’s treason which the government wants to hide, Dee decided to close the case and called it an accident.

The second case, the case of the hidden testament, deals with the hidden will of ex-Governor Yoo (the same person who murdered retired General Ding). Ex-Governor Yoo’s first wife died many years ago and he remarried his second wife Mei. Right before ex-Governor Yoo died 9 years ago, he bequested a Chinese landscape painting to Mei; and told his elder son Yoo Kee (who Yoo had with his first wife) Yoo Kee will get the rest of the estate but asked Yoo Kee to take care of his stepmother and his baby stepbrother Yoo Shan. After ex-Governor Yoo died, Yoo Kee promptly threw Mei and Yoo Shan out of the family house and left them penniless. Mei has tried suing Yoo Kee in court to no avail. After Dee arrived in town, Mei asked Dee to reopen the case. Dee, who knew Ex-Governor Yoo by reputation, was surprised a brilliant statesman like Yoo would make an oral will, knowing it was invalid under imperial law. Finally, Dee discovered the truth. It turns out Yoo knew that his son Yoo Kee was of a very bad and vicious character. Ex-Governor Yoo therefore resigned at the height of his career and moved to this small town to try to spend time with Yoo Kee to reform him. He was also afraid if Yoo Kee knows his father’s will is to split the estate between the two sons, Yoo Kee might murder Yoo Shan. Ex-Governor Yoo therefore devised a complex scheme. He hid his true written will (splitting the assets between the two sons) in a maze he has built outside his country estate. Hidden in plain sight on the landscape painting he gave Mei is the turn-by-turn instruction on how to navigate the maze and where in the huge maze is the will hidden. The steps are written in code and are part of the painting. For example, first you reach the three pine trees, than turn right when you reach the two other trees, etc. As an additional red herring to his scheming elder son, Yoo also created a distraction. He wrote a fake will that hinted that his second wife is an adulteress and his second son Yoo Shan might not be his heir. He then hid that fake will in the back of the painting. Ex-Governor Yoo knew Yoo Kee would discover that and thought that is the secret of the scroll painting. As such Yoo Kee would not destroy the scroll painting and would allow Mei to keep it. Finally, Mei showed the painting to Dee and he cracked the secret code on the face of the painting. It led him to a hidden pavilion in the maze of Yoo’s now abandoned country house. There, Dee found the real written will of Yoo. By that time, Dee has also discovered that Yoo Kee has been scheming with the barbarians outside the border to try to take over the town with help of the local tyrant Chien Mao. Yoo Kee was then convicted of treason and executed. Ex-Governor Yoo’s estate than was given to Mei and Yoo Shan.

The third case, the case of the girl with the severed head, is about the case of a missing girl White Orchid. She was later found dead with her head severed. White Orchid is the young daughter of local blacksmith Fang. It turns out she was kidnapped by an old widow Mrs. Lee, who was an artist who gave painting lessons to girl students. Mrs. Lee is also a sadist who kidnaps and tortures young girls and forces them to serve her as slaves. Mrs. Lee, who is very clever and was a friend of ex-Governor Yoo, has independently solved the riddle of the maze by looking at Mrs. Yoo’s painting. She were able to enter the maze with that knowledge and tried to hide the body of White Orchid there after she has murdered her, thinking nobody would ever find her. When Dee entered the maze the day after Mrs. Lee was there because he was following up on the case of the hidden testament and to go there to dig up ex-Governor Yoo’s hidden will, Mrs. Lee’s crime was uncovered. She was convicted and later executed.