The book Little Bear’s Visit written by Else Holmelund Minarik is a chapter book that includes four different chapters. In the first chapter, ‘Grandmother and Grandfather bear’, little bear goes to visit his grandparents where they feed him all types of good food, such as cake and cookies and milk and honey. Then, little bear and grandfather sit down outside where little bear wants grandfather to read him a story, but upon his return, he is already asleep. Little bear then goes on to find his grandmother, where he asks her to tell him a story about his mother, and that’s when the chapter ‘Mother Bear’s Robin’ begins. This story is about when mother bear finds a baby robin in the garden but cannot find it nest. Mother bear takes the baby bird inside and builds him a nest by the window and with time, the baby grows enough to fly. One day though, the robin was very sad because it could not sing a song so mother bear takes him outside and makes the difficult choice of letting the bird go, so it can fulfill its life as a signing bird. Little bear was so happy to hear this story that his mother made the selfless decision to let the bird go and says he would have done the same thing. Finally, grandfather bear wakes up and tells little bear another story called ‘Goblin Story’. In this chapter, a little goblin gets so scared after hearing a noise in a cave he jumps out of his shoes and begins to run away in fear that something is chasing after him. He finally reaches a hole in a tree where he jumps in to hide but the noises came closer. The little goblin finally peaks out of the tree to find the noise was only his little shoes chasing after him because they didn’t want to get left behind. Little bear and his grandfather giggle about the story and little bear heads back inside to sit on the couch and wait for his mother. Little bear pretends to fall asleep and listens to his grandparents and parents talk about how much fun they had, and gets caught for faking sleeping, but soon enough little bear was fast asleep. This was a very entertaining book as it included two stories by both grandmother bear and grandfather bear, which children in a classroom would enjoy listening too.