Rating: 2/5

Argh!!!!!

And again I say, “Argh!!!!”

I had forgotten why I had stopped reading Michener books. I still have this lingering memory back 40 plus years ago of having absolutely loved The Source, so much so that I read it twice, back then. But when I read it a third time more recently, its flaws are what stood out to me. 

Now I remember: So formulaic. I swear he must have had a huge file of everything he wanted to give a mini lecture on and categorized them by what story they might fit into. And thus we have the construct: each chapter a mini lecture on chromosomes, euthanasia, rattle snakes (he got this one wrong – rattlers can strike without either coiling or rattling, it’s just not very common), nobility in Great Britain, betting at horse races, HIV, yogurt machines, cancer treatments, etc, etc etc, some of which are no longer even accurate.

So much for the plot, now for his handling of the characters. Each one introduced with a full physical description, which if a woman must include how beautiful, if a man how physical. Often characters are given a label, for example, cracker, and from then on we are reminded of said label each time the character appears. And these poor characters are so flat they are transparent. It’s so boring!!

Finally, I would like to complain of the lack of spontaneity. For just one example, I could tell at the instant of the accident that she would be the woman the doc would end up with. I confess, though, I got one prediction wrong. Right at the beginning it seemed certain sure that the big climax would be a powerful hurricane to prove the “chain of small islands” could not always protect The Palms from its effects. But no, that didn’t happen, because actually, there was no climax….

So why, I hear you ask, did you read this book? Well, it was offered to me with a strong recommendation, an insistence even. You see, my mother had just moved in to a very similar facility (except at the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains in Los Angeles County, California – you can see what climax awaits them). This kind soul thought this novel would help me understand what my mother was up against. Sigh!