Rating: 5/5

Rollo May is wise and inspiring. The Courage to Create makes me long for a time when psychology was richer, full of life, and fed so much more by the humanities and mythology as compared to the sterile, narrow-minded field we have today. He retorts "I do not use this term myth in the common present-day deteriorated meaning of 'falsehood.' This is an error that could be committed only by a society that has become so inebriated with adding up empirical facts that it seals off the deeper wisdom of human history. I use myth as meaning, rather, a dramatic presentation of the moral wisdom of the [human] race. The myth uses the totality of the senses rather than just the intellect." 

May brings together art, religion, psychology, and science in a powerful way. All rise from the same bed of creativity. 

This book shows the empowering side of existential thought, showing that life is an act of creation. We cannot be without creating. "We express our being by creating. Creativity is a necessary sequel to being...We are called upon to do something new, to confront a no man's land, to push into a forest where there are no well-worn paths and from which no one has returned to guide us. This is what the existentialists call the anxiety of nothingness. To live into the future means to leap into the unknown, and this requires a degree of courage for which there is no immediate precedent and which few people realize." As Joseph Campbell often noted, if you can clearly see the path ahead of you, it certainly belongs to somebody else and is not your own. 

He draws from other thinkers like Carl Jung, Otto Rank, Karl Marx, Leibnitz, Alfred Adler, and William James, and from artists and writers like Cezanne, Shakespeare, Picasso, Keats, Joyce, and Rilke. Artists are prophets and revolutionaries: "but the commandment also expresses the timeless fear that every society harbors of its artists, poets, and saints. For they are the ones who threaten the status quo, which each society is devoted to protecting...the creative artist and poet and saint must fight the actual gods of our society--the god of conformism as well as gods of apathy, material success, and exploitative power." 

Creativity grows out of the rage, chaos, and mystery of the unconscious (personal and collective). May chastises us for our own busyness which prevents us from more complete living. "Of course, when an individual is afraid of the irrational--that is, of the unconscious dimensions of experience--he tries to keep busiest, tries to keep most 'noise' going on about him. The avoidance of the anxiety of solitude by constant agitated diversion is what Kierkegaard, in a nice simile, likened to the settlers in the early days of America who used to beat on pots and pans at night to make enough din to keep the wolves away." Take off those ear buds and put down your damn smart phones. Face your solitude with courage! 

He then hurls a challenge at our mechanized world, explaining why artists are so distrusted or feared. "Irrational unconscious phenomena are always a threat to this mechanization. Poets may be delightful creatures in the meadow or the garret, but they are menaces on the assembly line. Mechanization requires uniformity, predictability, and orderliness; and the very fact that unconscious phenomena are original and irrational is already an inevitable threat to bourgeois order and uniformity...We cannot escape our anxiety over the fact that the artists together with creative person of all sorts, are the possible destroyers of our nicely ordered systems."

May affirms the tortured artist stereotype and praises them, over their conforming counterparts, for they ability to live with anxiety and ambiguity. "Creative people...are distinguished by the fact that they can live with anxiety, even though a high price my be paid in terms of insecurity, sensitivity, and defenselessness for the gift of the 'divine madness,' to borrow the term used by the classical Greeks." 

I wish he would have kept out the final chapter of the book (Passion for Form), which felt flat, and closed with his musings on the benefits of human limitations (death, place of birth, height, illness, past decisions, resources). This is where his tempered existentialism really delivers. "I propose that it is the experience of this-is-the-way-things-are-meant-to-be. If only for that moment, we participate in the myth of creation. Order comes out of disorder, form out of chaos, as it did in the creation of the universe. This sense of joy comes from our participation, no matter how slight, in being as such. The paradox is that at that moment we also experience more vividly our own limitations. We discover the amor fati that Nietzsche writes about--the love of one's fate. No wonder it gives a sense of ecstasy!" 

Western Civilization in the 21st century sorely needs more hearts and minds to continue the tradition laid out by Rollo May.