Rating: 5/5

This was truly an interesting read, despite the very datedness of the articles featured herein. I was directed to this book by an article that covered modern scams which prey upon writers' insecurities. Mitford is well-known among publishing circles as the journalist who took down the Famous Writers' School, which was sort of the grandaddy of writer-scams. I wasn't born until 1970 but my grandparents saved a stash of old readers' digests and Saturday Evening Posts. Every summer when I'd visit their farm for two weeks (and every Christmas, Thanksgiving and Easter) I'd devout those old magazines. They were like time capsules, with timely articles about events in 1964 or 1952. The other interesting feature was the advertising. Scattered among the girdle and oven-cleaner ads were the ones offering you the opportunity to submit a brief essay to be considered for enrollment in the Famous Writers School. If selected you could begin your journey down the road to phenomenal riches and glorious fame, or so they said. In my mind this school and writing as a career were thus inextricably linked for years. Thankfully I got common sense enough to not commit funds to it myself...not that it would have mattered because Mitford's exposé on the school effectively shut the place down. Awwww. 

That expose is in here, along with many other of her articles. Mitford was 20/20 and Dateline before those shows were dreamed of, and it's enjoyable to read her various pieces. Not only because you see the precision with which she used her pen to destroy the destroyers but also because most of the events are very much of their time. It's a glimpse of a certain part mid-20th century life that one doesn't find many places. 

Writers will find special interest in the both the book's introduction and the afterwards appended to each of the collected articles. Mitford introduces the book with an overview of her start in the business, her advice for journalists and anecdotes about her successes and failures in that career. She then collects several of her most noticeable articles, ending each article with a summary that critiques the piece with the experience of hindsight. She also offers details about how the piece played out in the real world and the various consequences that resulted. I highly recommend this for pretty much anyone with a curious mind.