Rating: 3/5

Hirsch is really hung up on making cultural literacy a partisan issue (80s culture wars?). Also, his assertion that one can become fully culturally literate by learning and comprehending just current mainstream culture seems woefully ignorant and willfully suppressive of multicultural America. This does a major disservice not only to women and people of color, but to the white males who benefit from this narrative. 

His scientific and historical reportage are where this book shines. It's a shame that it's mired with his bitter political commentary and perpetuation of white nationalist narrative. A truly odd read that can alternate by paragraph from objective findings of the how literacy or illiteracy affects the individual &amp; groups as a whole; to narrow-minded and generalized interpretation &amp; offerings as how to how to increase literacy &amp; what information is needed and when to be a fully culturally literate person. 

Hirsch emphasizes the need for a good comprehension of mainstream culture, without addressing how his concept of "mainstream" is male-dominant, Eurocentric, and that that is problematic for attaining widespread literacy across populations. Perhaps there exists later, updated versions of his canon where this major problem is addressed. He does admit that contemporary language and culture are constantly evolving with antiquated details fading to the background as new concepts emerge, so it's not beyond reason that he could expand his criteria for what makes a person fully culturally literate. I also appreciated his acknowledgement that children of lower socioeconomic backgrounds arrive at school age without necessary knowledge to learn at the established pace and that this problem snowballs as the child ages. However, he does not look deeper into why this might be or how it can be prevented, only peripherally corrected. 

If anything, this outdated book offers a good conversation piece, and starting point for a more evolved concept of cultural literacy in today's world.