Rating: 5/5

Student
Professor, please, I need some assistance;
I have a question, that, despite my persistence,
I can’t seem to solve, even after many hours.
It appears it is utterly beyond my powers.

Professor
No worries, lad, just tell me the question;
You have my full and complete attention.

Student
Thanks! Well, I want to know why
I think it’s funny when some beefy guy
Yells at a child, “It’s not a tumor!”
Essentially, what is the essence of humor?
Why do some things consistently make me laugh?
Fart jokes, word play, an embarrassing gaffe,
Buffoonery, silliness, the occasional pun,
One-liners, satire, and jokes about nuns—
Why, I ask you, do I find this amusing?
I’m telling you, I find it confusing.
What single quality do all these things have
That elicit giggles, chuckles, chortles, and laughs?
What is the difference between a story and a joke?
Why is “die” serious, but it’s silly to say “croak”?
Why are some people funnier than others?
Why are we so fond of jokes about mothers?
Why does some humor grow stale with time,
While some remains perpetually in its prime?
Why do some people bore me more than I can bear,
But I find it hilarious to read Molière?

Professor
You ask many interesting questions;
Perhaps too many for one lesson.
And, besides, many are still mysteries;
So I hope you will be appeased
If I offer only my own opinion;
Whether you agree or not, that’s your decision.

Student
I’ll be grateful for anything you say.

Professor
Alright, my lad, here is my best assay.
We tend to laugh at things out of the ordinary
Something strange, unusual, fantastic, or just very
Odd; something that we’re not used to seeing.
I think at this point you’ve got my meaning.

Student
Maybe that’s true; but that’s not enough;
In a given week, we see lots of odd stuff.
Not all of it makes us laugh or giggle.
Some makes us cringe, some makes us wriggle;
Some makes us scream, or smile, or cry;
Yet some makes us chuckle. Why?

Professor
Yes, yes, you interrupted me, my lad.
I wasn’t finished, there’s something I’ll add.
We laugh at things that simulate danger.
So when you are accosted by a strange-looking stranger,
And it appears at first like there might be peril;
Like the man had gone feral, or was pointing a barrel
Of a gun—A robbery, a murder, a rape!—
But it turns out the man only wanted some tape,
The situation goes from serious to comic;
Because the man you just thought was dangerously psychotic,
Only turns out to need a strip of adhesive;
To make two pieces of paper cohesive.
There’s no danger at all! How wrong could you be?
And this, I think, is the essence of comedy.

Student
Your answer is interesting, if not very original;
Yet that may just be the fundamental principle.
This leads be, however, to another doubt;
This one is much harder; can you help me out?

Professor
If the question is within my capacity,
I will tackle it with utmost tenacity.

Student
The question is this: What is the purpose
That comedy plays? What is the service
That comedians render? Why pay legal tender
For comedy? What does laughing engender?

Professor
This question is, indeed, very much harder
And I’m afraid that, despite all my ardor,
It’s a question that I cannot decide;
I haven’t been able to pick a side.
Some people say comedy pushes boundaries,
By pointing out absurdities in people’s surroundings
And bringing up social ills in an acceptable way;
This is what makes jokes daring or risqué.
This might explain why humor is often offensive,
And jokes tend to make people defensive;
Why many comedians are always getting into trouble,
And life for them is often a constant struggle
Against respectability. But some disagree
With this, and consider comedy to be
Essentially conservative, reinforcing the status quo
By mocking novelty and change, by aiming low,
Punching down, and legitimizing the way things are.
Now you might think that this judgment is harsh
But it would explain why, after millions of jokes
People are still struggling under the same yoke.
But I will say that even if this were true,
It wouldn’t lead me to write off or eschew
Comedy, for I’ve learned as I’ve gotten old
That progress is great, but laughter is gold.