Rating: 5/5

I imagine when an author sets out to write a work of Christian non-fiction, their heart is set on teaching and impacting their audience in some life-altering way. But, depending on the book, we readers experience varied levels of engagement and connection with the material. Some books completely miss the mark, right? Have you ever read a book, just to check it off your list? You slog through the material because you're in a book club, or a class, or someone recommended it. But it doesn't speak to you especially. 

Frankly there are other books we read that totally rub us the wrong way, but we keep reading anyway, partly because of a morbid curiosity ("Can this really be as bad as I suspect?"), or a private pleasure in critiquing the material, or maybe even a hope that if I just keep on a little longer, it will improve. 

Then, there are books that merely say what we want to hear. All good things, mind you. But preaching to the choir. "Amen, brother, Hallelujah." Reminding us afresh of a truth we'd lost sight of. Or saying it better than we could say it ourselves. We even read books like this with someone else in mind, imagining how some third party could benefit from the material.

And then, finally, the most blessed of books--one that hits the mark. A book that acts as an instructor, a mentor. One that opens our eyes to something we've never considered before. These are the books we dig deeply into. And in spite of the work they take to digest (or perhaps because of it), these are the books we cherish the most. They change our lives! 

The Children for Christ by Andrew Murray is just such a book in my life. Mike and I are reading it aloud together a couple of chapters a week after we get the kids tucked into bed. And even though I have been raised on "Covenant Theology" all my life, this book is blowing my mind. I am understanding the blessings of God's covenant for our children in a way I never have before. Not every chapter is theologically flawless, but there is so much helpful content and the theological differences we find have made for lively discussion. But the meat of the book has informed my prayers and my attitude toward my family like nothing else. 

~Jen

P.S. Incidentally, one book summary recommended this book as appropriate for family devotions. I would suggest it instead as an adult devotion for parents.