Rating: 5/5

When a play is considered the best ever written by the greatest author in history, well a serious reader ( maybe not too serious) must take a look and see, I for sure was not disappointed, a marvelous written view of human nature the good and the bad. Hamlet is a kindly man, and longtime student (over ten years not too dedicated it seems), at the University of Wittenberg, Germany . But his carefree life is destroyed, when his father dies suddenly. Having the misfortune to be a Prince of Denmark, he just wanted to have fun...Duty demands, going back to the royal palace at Elsinore immediately, the royal castle overlooking the 
 cold Baltic Sea, which controls its entrance. The new King, his uncle has married Hamlet's mother the Queen! And thus gaining the throne, just a month after the King's funeral quite shamelessly thinks Hamlet. The ruler was an elective office then so the Prince is still the Prince not the King. More shocking still, the ghost of the late sovereign appears (or the devil), above the walls of the castle in the depth of night and tells his son that he was murdered, can you imagine how his son reacts in the darkness in the creepy setting . By his own brother, what a situation for poor Hamlet to be and his mother involved too, the family honor demand revenge however the family are the killers...Others, the royal guards witness this frightening episode. The father wants satisfaction you can guess what... And you think you have problems! What will Hamlet do. The Prince becomes very melancholic, procrastinating, condemning himself for his weakness, relatives and friends become concerned about the behavior, is Hamlet insane? Telling Ophelia his sweetheart, he loves her, nevertheless later to her face to become a nun. She the daughter of Polonius a counselor to Claudius, the new ruler such a quandary. Spying for Claudius, Polonius is slain by the Prince who kills the wrong man. Who mistakes him hiding behind a curtain, for the odorous King. Claudius plots with the help of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, two former school friends of his nephew , an inept pair of halfwits. To eliminate Hamlet, he has been making threats against his uncle .A long voyage to England with the evil two, which the Prince, will never return home .Sounds good to Hamlet, he needs to get away from the vile machinations. Besides Ophelia's brother will come back soon to Denmark and he wants blood. And on the horizon possible war against Norway , also becomes a very real possibility. Time to get out of town of course. But he does come back, mysteriously alone you need not wonder how. The first thing the Prince sees is the digging in a graveyard, with friend Horatio by his side. The skull of Yorick his father's jester is uncovered, Hamlet remembers him. Holding the clown's head in his hands he tells Horatio and the gravedigger how Yorick used to carry him on his back, the pathos flow out over the site unashamedly . Making jests to everyone he met Yorick was a merry man but no more. Sadly no more...."The Rest is Silence". A beautiful end to an unmatched skillful product of human endeavors.