Rating: 1/5

"Strange People" would be a better title! There was nothing appealing about any of them, the h in particular. The expression 'cold as ice" fits her to a tee! If Dina had a heart, I'm convinced it was in the form of an iceberg. She looked through her (supposedly) late husband's belongings without emotion, she got engaged to his best friend without emotion, she discovered the presumed dead H was still alive (when she came face-to-face with Blake) without emotion, she heard of all he had gone through during the two years he was lost in a jungle (after a plane crash that killed the other passengers) without emotion, she gives Chet (the OM) back his ring without emotion, and the only time she shows any emotion is when Blake decides to get back to work as CEO of the family business, and then she throws a hissy fit! (She and Chet had been running the company, since they needed a family member to take over and keep it from going under and there was no one else available, so she had the name and Chet had the experience.) Instead of being glad her husband was back from the dead, she has the nerve to start whining about it being "her office, her secretary, her job", etc.! Ironically, for someone who wanted to come across as a mature businesswoman, she sounded like a spoiled teenager!

To make matters worse, later she wants to meet with Chet of all people, to have a good bitch and cry fest! Glad he didn't show up and sent Blake instead!

Blake was no saint, either! Almost as soon as he got home, he started going on about how horny he was! He went from demanding to know if Dina had slept with Chet (she hadn't) to demanding she sleep with him! As for work, while I can't blame him for wanting to be in charge again, Dina had managed to do a good job, and he only thanked her as an afterthought, and didn't give her prior warning that he was taking over again until she showed up to work and he was already there!

As for sex, she needed time to adjust, he was too impatient, they end up going at it like animals in heat (which surprised me, since they both seem such cold people, especially Dina), but she regrets it because there was lust, not love and he resents her attitude.

The other characters aren't so great, either. Blake's mother wears mourning like a badge of honor, and after Blake's return, continues to wear her black outfits because her husband's still dead, even if her son's alive! (My aunt showed her love for my late uncle by never getting married or involved with another man again, not by going around in perpetual gloom, looking miserable, and forgetting how to enjoy life.)

Chet was a real sycophant, who likes to be where the power is and bask in its glory, hence his friendship with Blake and engagement to Dina. He accepted his ring back without a problem, because in truth, with Blake back in power he didn't need marriage to Dina anymore. Yet, he still wanted to be friends with them both, and why neither one kicked him to the curb is anyone's guess.

This couple's "love" seemed as genuine as a seven-dollar bill, counterfeit all the way! They were two self-centered people, who both wanted to be the alpha boss! The two of them needed a quick trip to divorce court, as their having a HEA was a joke!

So was this book!