Rating: 4/5

Having this 5-volume set of The Diary of Virginia Woolf (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virgini...) is seemingly like an unthinkable odyssey to me. I first came across the set on display majestically one morning inside the Asia Books bookstore on Sukhumvit Road in Bangkok around late 1960's during my undergraduate years, I had vaguely known Mrs Woolf as a famous writer but never read her so I picked up Volume 1 to browse a few pages and thought I definitely wouldn't read any volume at all. However, on November 1, 2002 I found it again in a secondhand unnamed bookshop on Adelaide Road in Woolloomgabba in Brisbane on my way to an official appointment; so I couldn't help buying it due to its reasonable price and friendly welcome from a kind, helpful male shopkeeper. 

For some reason, I have gradually read some of her shorter works and gained interest in knowing her more since a decade or two ago. That's why I started off and on reading her diary; it took time (2 years for this volume) to keep going amidst few enjoyments and most lengthiness of her vast narratives in terms of her daily entry in which some or many, I think, have professionally been edited by Mrs Anne Olivier Bell. 

Before telling you on some interesting points we would gain by means of her texts, ideas, anecdotes, etc., I would like to say something on the nature of a few lines of a daily entry as extracted below:

Tuesday 1 April 
And we have got to go &amp; dined with Raymond now, this very potent, astonishingly exciting warm evening. . . . And I dropped in at the dressmaker. She has no teeth. She was stitching. She said like a friend Mrs Woolf we are going to move. And I thought you wdnt mind if I left out the stitching as my eyes ached. All that is said tonight is gentle &amp; happy &amp; seems to thrust into some soft tide. I cant get it right, naturally. (p. 298)
First of all, the time-saving symbol '&amp;' has generously and ubiquitously been used (first line &amp; thousands of them which we can find in every page) instead of writing 'and'. From line 3 onward, her highly-personal style is that she writes like talking to her reader [. . . she writes for, and talks to, each reader directly . . . (back cover)] 'wdnt', 'cant' deftly stand for 'would not', 'can't'. The sentences in lines 5-7 [. . . Mrs Woolf we are going to move. . . as my eyes ached.] are what the unnamed dressmaker said to Mrs Woolf while the last two sentences denote her own casual intimate opinion. I sometime wondered if many entries in her diary narratives could be categorized as a kind of her pioneering stream of consciousness. 

Something I like from her diary, a few of them:

1. Her information on the area where she lived is seemingly familiar in any country in the 21st century VS the then 20th century. 
Wednesday 20 August
. . . 
I am writing while my potatoes boil. It has been a hot heavy ugly crusty [?] day; still, sulphurous; &amp; the dogs have barked all round the village, one starting another. . . . (p. 312) 

Barking dogs have understandably long been known as a merciless sort of notorious annoyance at night (or even in the daytime) due to their lack of discipline or dog training school attendance, let alone their owners' wisdom and consideration to their neighbourhood. 

2. Her adoption of some famous literary phrases,
Wednesday 22 October
. . .
Winter has set in; draw the curtains; light the fire; &amp; so to work. (p. 325) 

The three-word phrase is obviously an applied one after so to bed by the famous diarist Samuel Pepys. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_...) 

3. Her mention on a literary celeb/one of my favorites,
[? Wednesday 5 November,]
. . .
A slight inaccuracy, if applied to the past few days. Ethel Lyn &amp; Hugh Walpole to tea on Monday; . . . ; Hugh again later, &amp; his piteous, writhing &amp; wincing &amp; ridiculous &amp; flaying alive story of Willie Maugham's portrait.[1]
. . . 
[1.] The character of Alroy Kear in W. Somerset Maugham's novel Cakes and Ale was closely based upon that of his old friend Hugh Walpole. (p. 328) 

I immensely enjoyed reading this novel by Mr Maugham without knowing anything on the friendship between himself and Sir Hugh Walpole (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hugh_Wa... therefore, I would reread the novel to know more on Alroy Kear's character as described in Sir Hugh's biography. 
. . .