Rating: 4/5

When I finished this book I described it to my husband, and ended my summary with "And so THAT'S why we still have Jews." He said that would make a neat Facebook post but perhaps he wants me to lost the few friends I have. 

But that's what this book gave me. It scrupulously follows established scripture (it was written in the 70s for a mass-market, they weren't trying to blow anyone's mind) and fills out all the history needed for a full picture of what it was like to live under the Roman Empire in Jewish states. (anyone who zero stars this for humanizing Judas is the WORST. It's a Bible-study class in novelization form. Your pastor's Dad probably LOVES this book). 

Turns out life for Roman Jews was rough. REALLLLY rough. 

The book filled in what the Jews were expecting in their Messiah according to what they were taught through centuries of text and prophecy. Judas and the rest of the Jews felt pretty sure that the Old Testament was promising them freedom from having Rome's boot on their neck, from slaughters in the street. From being hated everywhere by everyone. The Messiah was going to literally deliver them from slavery, like Moses did. 

And then this really charismatic hippie wanders into the party, (blue eyed...but fine, fine whatever it was still the 70s) and yes! does things that are incredible! He's starting to claim He's God which is...a bit much for both Jews and Romans but a lot of people believe Him. Problem is He only speaks enigmatically and does mild miracles for select audiences...He says brilliant stuff that can be interpreted five ways and that's WITHOUT a 2000 yr game of telephone and multiple politically motivated translations! 

So Judas, who loved Jesus but figured He needed one last push to get His holy wrath on...and as a Pharisee (which he never pretended not to be) was sure that being arrested and sentenced to death would bring the True Messiah, through off the oppressors, and God's Chosen would reign. 

Jesus didn't do that. In the Jew's eyes...this book made it completely clear He dropped the ball. He was not their Messiah. Not the one they were looking for, anyway. 

And it addressed the question very elegantly of whether or not Judas was basically framed. Because God's plan was that Jesus had to be betrayed and died and someone had to do it. Someone had to be the a-hole. Jesus lets Judas know "if not you, it would have been another." But Judas wasn't forced, it was organic in his personality to demand action and try and force God's hand. So he was framed, but he was gonna do it anyway, so...moot.

I loved this book. It gently and thoroughly sussed out one of the many, many questions that make college-aged Christians start to squirm and leave church (like I did. And never went back. I'm not a Christian but I really respect the work that went into this book). 

It was too wordy but...y'know welcome to religious study...they like lots of words and discussions. It had no axe to grind, just laid out one of the most likely scenarios I've encountered to explain how anyone could have hung out with Jesus, seen His miracles, believed He was a Messiah, and still made sure He was arrested. 

Not out of a black treacherous heart (though the author established Judas as impatient and selfish and TOTALLY the sorta guy who would think he could make an omnipotent power do what he wanted when he wanted) but because...Jesus was farting around and Jews were dying and it's time to call down the Heavenly Host and do some slewing like in the old days. It's what they'd been promised! For the time and place...it was reasonable! 

So I see why the Jews didn't believe Jesus was their Savior. He didn't do it right. 

And...so...yeah! That's why there's still Jews!