Rating: 5/5

I can genuinely only think of two books which have made me want to cry. 

The first was My War Gone By, I Miss it So, which is Anthony Loyd's brilliant story of covering the wars in Bosnia and Chechnya, The second is this book, another reporter's story of covering the Balkan conflict. 

Loyd's book focused on horrific stories of personal, human loss, something which is inescapable in books about the disintegration of Yugoslavia, but Peter Maass's book - as you might expect for one written in 1995, so close to the events - also conveys in depressingly stark terms the extent of the horrible failure of the United Nations, the US, the European powers, the 'civilised' West, to do anything to help while Bosnia was being torn to pieces.

Maass makes it quite clear where his loyalties lie, whose side he is on, and you could say that that is to some extent an abrogation of the responsibility to impartiality that you expect of a journalist, but the fact is, sometimes the distinction between good and so bad is so sharp, that you have to be 'biased'. The failure of greater powers to understand and admit this is the depressing theme of the earlier years of the war in Bosnia.

This book is fantastically written, conveying not only the well-covered horrors of the war, such as the snipers picking off civilians on Sniper's Alley in Sarajevo, or the re-emergence of concentration camps at places like Omarska, but also the sheer mind-blowing insanity of the crisis we stood by and watched on the edge of Europe. 

A British soldier sums up the situation brilliantly succinctly, in three words, as he and Maass watch an overweight pensioner cycle, at snails pace, past a firefight between Croatian paramilitaries and the Bosnian Army - "Bosnian mind fuck". 

Unfortunately, one of the most prolific deliverers of 'mind fucks' was the United Nations, and, even with the benefit of almost twenty years worth of hindsight, it is hard not to be shocked and depressed as the extent of the negligent failure not only to intervene, but even to acknowledge openly some of the war crimes which went on under their noses, is laid bare.

What are we to think, for example, of the way the United Nations allowed a situation to develop where, every night for months, they stopped Bosnians trying to escape the siege of Sarajevo by crossing from one side of the airport's runway to the other, the airpot marking the boundary of the siege. Effectively, stopping people from escaping the slow, systematic murder of a city. 

As if that were not bad enough, not only would they stop these people desperate to escape, they'd also stop people crossing the other way to get food into the city. The food would then be confiscated, and ultimately end up with the Serbian forces.

As if that wasn't enough, when the UN forces stopped the would-be escapees / food smugglers, they'd do so by bathing them in light from their searchlights, at which point, Serbian forces at the end of the runway would take the opportunity afforded by the light to shoot them. 

That's United Nations soldiers illuminating refugees so they can be shot by the forces besieging their city.

A really engrossing, upsetting read, and it is depressingly difficult to conclude we've learned much in the intervening two decades.