Rating: 3/5

Should we evaluate instructional books based on how nice they sound or on how they impact our lives when applied in the real world? Don Greene is a well-respected and proven teacher, coach, writer, among other roles. However, I find myself facing the same issue again and again when I reflect on Performance Success: do the methods and exercises within the text actually work? Personally, and only in my personal experience, the answer is "no." Here are three gripes for the reader to consider.
	One, authority. If a ten-year old child from Nashville, Tennessee manages to solve the Riemann hypothesis and prove his findings, are his results more or less valid than the smartest mathematician in the world arriving to the same conclusion by the same set of procedures? Ask yourself whether the question matters and what it implies. Now go and read the accolades of Don Greene. He has worked with wonderful people. His wonderful people have done wonderful things. My first issue with the problem of authority is that we are all looking at the accomplishments presented as if they are proofs of the theorem, rather than credentials of the mathematician. We can see no distinct connection between the methods presented in this book and the causal outcomes from the high-performers who use these methods. We see only outcome and authority.
	Two, potential covariables. Let's go ahead and consider some alternative possibilities for how high-performing people who use the methods covered in Performance Success may have become successful. The achievers may have: already put in the sufficient effort to become great performers, tried alternative methods in addition to the text, studied a level of practical psychology at a personal level to overcome specific and non-generalized problems, learned new insights into personal belief structures, enhanced practice routines and identified key weaknesses in performance, tried harder, and so on. We must evaluate the text in light of our own personal experiences and the effectiveness of the methods in our own particular cases.
	Three, outcome-oriented arguments. My third central problem with the text is simple. We are far too concerned with incomplete vectors for analysis: namely, the achievements rather than the qualitative and quantitative methods that we ought to be using to determine "Performance Success." Who is to say that an olympic gold medal is the result of superior preparation or performance? Maybe everyone else did a terrible job. Maybe the winner is in the unique position of having developed a proprietary competitive advantage over his colleagues (col-losers). We need to consider which achievements matter and why they matter. One great way of doing that is to figure out where you are, what you are trying to do, trying out the methods from this book, repeating over a large time-scale, and perhaps reviewing the text on goodreads after at least a few years.
	In sum, read if you'd like. Try out the suggestions. Let me know if they worked out for you. My problem is not with the book, but with my understanding of self and my analysis of which methods I have found real "Performance Success" with.