Rating: 3/5

The rating should really be four stars for part two and one star for parts one and three. The sections of the book that take place in "modern times" (i.e., the 1950s) are both poorly written and commit one of the cardinal, unforgivable sins of storytelling, namely the pimping of the book that is supposedly being written as a supposed bestseller; these sections are indeed so amateur that I was surprised to learn that this was not Mr. Costain's debut novel.

However, the failures of the odd framing (i.e., parts one and three) are more than atoned for by the much better written and much more interesting part 2, which is set at the turn of the thirteenth century. Here, Thomas Costain's real strengths as a writer emerge; his ability to seamlessly blend history and a fictional story in a way that gives rise to an exciting narrative that hooks the reader's interest while at the same time giving them a fairly accurate picture of real historical events. His writing and historicity definitely owe a great debt to Sir Walter Scott (particularly Ivanhoe), and in at least one respect, Costain is Scott's clear superior: Costain makes a great effort to portray his historical characters as they actually were, with both their faults and their virtue manifest, something Scott is less inclined to do. 

The only real flaw in part II of Below the Salt is the lack of a real resolution (something, by the way, that is not in any way mollified by reading the frame story in parts 1 and 3). In some respects, this can be considered an advantage, for the narrative is portrayed as a realistic memoir, and in a realistic man's life loose ends do not (and cannot be expected to) all tie themselves up in a way satisfying to the outside observer. But while I admire the idea behind Costain's ending to part II, I still leave it with a little disappointment, a disappointment I don't feel when reading the works of a Walter Scott or some other author of historical fiction who, while not necessarily as well versed in the history as Costain, is much better versed in the methods of effective storytelling.

Nonetheless, Below the Salt is well worth the read, if you can locate a copy (I am told it is out of print and has been so for years, not being one of Costain's more famous novel). If you do so, though, I would suggest skipping parts one and three as well as the "interlude" that comes towards the end of part two and also takes place during "modern times." I guarantee that this will vastly improve your reading experience.