Rating: 3/5

Unhinged Sweet Valley is always fun. And for once Jessica is the twin in peril and not Elizabeth. 
Photography has taken over Sweet Valley High. The photography club is on a mission to take pictures of everything and it's putting their relationships in trouble cause they are so obsessed with it.
Liz is gifted Regina's old camera by Mrs. Morrow. Despite the title there's not much of Regina here except she was pretty and apparently took pictures. I was hoping her ghost returned to haunt and torment her killers Bruce and Amy, but they don't get into the supernatural stuff til much later in the series.
Anyway while out on the beach Liz takes a photo of something suspicious and is caught by the guys doing the nefarious thing and chased. They proceed to trash the dark room at the high school in order to find the picture and negative but are unsuccessful. Since one of the criminals is young and cute of course Jessica can't help herself and latches onto him thinking he likes her but he just wants that picture.
Of course she gets kidnapped by Chad (of course his name is Chad) who takes her to school to raid Liz's locker for the picture. Todd and Elizabeth were following her and after getting pulled over for speeding get the cops to join the chase and Jess is saved and a drug ring uncovered which sort of closes Regina's case since drugs killed her. 
The photography club unveils a mural project and all the squabbles and worries are forgotten cause of course they are.
I did laugh at Todd's brand new fancy BMW having all sorts of issues, I know people with 30 year old Honda Civics that still run as good as the day they rolled off the showroom floor so it proves expensive isn't always best. 
While SVH has done unhinged before most were a bit better than this one, still quite fun to read.
The book ends hinting that we're dealing with an eating disorder next. Since it's Robin who cheated with George behind Enid's back I can't say I care that much, but as an 80s and 90s kid I do love a good after school/ very special episode.