Rating: 4/5

I have struggled to articulate the pleasure I derive from rereading to those who wonder why anyone would bother. My rationale has always centered on the joy of revisiting characters I love, appreciation of the author's ways with language or storytelling abilities, or both. Having finished Lesser's book, whose subtitle is Rereading and Remembering, I come away with a new appreciation for revisiting beloved titles. I have always thought of rereading in terms of bringing the book back to myself and my consciousness, but she flips that and discusses bringing ourselves back to the book, a now older version of ourselves, with more living having been done, remembering ourselves and the circumstances of our lives during each visit to it, and how those visits may differ. Personalizing those visits is a wonderful quality that adds to the depth of the experience and the pleasure of a meaningful reread. 

Lesser's essays are not only personal musings on titles she has reread, but literary critiques that make for interesting reads themselves. From the opening essay - The First Novel - on Don Quixote, and on, she offers insights into many books I know, and visiting them with her as a guide was a nice little journey. The Tempest, The Idiot, Paradise Lost, especially stand out. Her take on Huckleberry Finn was discomfiting but that was no less than what Mark Twain intended for it. The chapter on Orwell was almost cringe worthy given that today the Senate trial on the Trump impeachment begins in earnest.

The love of reading is like the love of music or movies. If you love music, you probably have a soundtrack of your life - musicians or composers you have listened to again and again over the seasons and years; if a cinephile, films you quote or rewatch for the stories, characters, actors or film makers you love. Books are unique in that they are products with older provenance - the Bible or Gilgamesh is older than any film or musical recording, and so critiques of them have accumulated over the years - centuries or millennia - that can add to our appreciation. But in the end, our relationship to the books we read are personal, and rereading them, for whatever the reason, adds to the texture of our life. Lesser's book adds to that appreciation as well.