Rating: 2/5

Mary Braddon wrote The Doctor's Wife in 1864. It is said to be a retelling of Flaubert's Madame Bovary. Isabel Sleaford is 17 when we meet her, a commoner who dreams away her days with her head stuck in novels and poetry, imagining a dashing hero, and perhaps an early and dramatic death for her, the heroine. Instead, she marries physician George Gilbert. He is the antithesis of her heroes. While he is devoted to his patients, he hardly inspires hero worship or undying love from Isabel. Sadly, she doesn't even love him. He loves her, but after an impassioned declaration of his feelings for her, he doesn't have the disposition to inspire love. 

As the days, weeks and months roll by, Isabel continues her daydreaming, and one day meets the man of her dreams, the wealthy, dashing poet Roland. He is literally a man of the world, but after a time, he falls hard for the simple but beautiful Isabel. Unfortunately for the reader, these few events are about all that happens in the first three quarters of The Doctor's Wife. While Braddon creates naive characters in both Isabel and her husband George, I'm afraid the level of George's blindness to things that occur and Isabel's surprise at the potential outcomes of her behavior defy belief.

However, Braddon is otherwise an accomplished writer. Here, she describes Isabel's feelings when her husband George is very ill:

"The thought that she might step across the darksome chasm of his grave into those fair regions inhabited by Roland Lansdell, could not hold a place in her heart. Death, the terrible and the unfamiliar, stood a black and gaunt figure between her and all beyond the sick-room."

We are told more about Isabel's unlimited romanticism and sentimentality that exist alongside her strangely undeveloped practical imagination:

"She only wanted the vague poetry of life, the mystic beauty of romance infused somehow into her existence; and she was as yet too young to understand that latent element of poetry which underlies the commonest life."