Rating: 4/5

I studied Russian History for a year at the University of Chicago in 1960-61. I became a fan of Tolstoy and Dostoevsky during high school years, and fervently believed Russian authors knew more about human nature than any others. At the end of the academic year (May 1961) I was invited by my Russian History Professor, Tomas Riha, to an event at his apartment hosting Russian Poet, Yevgeny Yevtushenko. The poet was known to me only through my Professor and reading I had done about cultural life in Russia. At that time, the book under review, the first volume of poems by Yevtushenko translated into English, had not yet been published. The event was small and quiet. I was a very young 20: small town girl from Minnesota and not yet "experienced". Yevtushenko, seven years my senior, was handsome, dashing and very impressive. As I recall, he spoke no English - I did not speak Russian (I enrolled in a Russian class for the next academic year). We drank champagne and had horderves. Late in the evening Yevtushenk0 said to me, in broken English, with appropriate hand gestures, "French voman, Marianne, French voman" and insisted that champagne be poured into one of my shoes from which he drank!

In the years since, I have maintained my interest in Russian History, and poetry of all sorts. I purchased the volume under review in 1963, while attending graduate school at the University of Minnesota.

It is a small book, but both of his most famous poems are represented -Zima Junction and Babi Yar.
I wish I could read them in Russian - my studies did not progress enough to do so. I like his voice, his courage to speak out about Jews in Russia. his connection with nature, and what I perceive to be a zest for life (perhaps I see the young man I met in 1961). I've read about his complicated relations with the Soviets and the controversy about whether he adequately supported fellow Russian authors.
I reread the poems in this 1962 publication and am convinced he was a poet of valor, talent and history.

Epilogue

In 2010 my sister and I traveled from Bejing to Moscva on the Trans Siberian Railroad. We stopped in Irkutsk (near Yevtushenko's birthplace), and while lunching in a hotel I saw a man who very much resembled Yevtushenko. I asked him if he knew the poet - he was a relative!