Rating: 1/5

god that was a boring book. my struggle to get through that was so real, WHICH IS SO UPSETTING BECAUSE LIKE A FEW BOOKS I'VE READ THIS YEAR, there was actually a really promising start and a promising plot. THE BLURB actually sounded good. but this, this just ruined it all. starting from like a fifth into the book, everything went downhill, and it got so boring. i was straining just getting through the meaningnless description, the constant complaining of mia and her problems, the society and that 'tiny village' and their problems, and lystette. 

OH MY GOD. 

lysette. the whole reason this book even started. she pissed me off so much. she has problems with her life, she takes (presumably) drugs, she has relationship problems, grief over a dead friend, unable to process her words, and she can't think before she speaks. GOD LYSETTE, she was irritating. defintely one of the more annoying characters. 

kimberly. the queen bee. the bitchy woman who couldn't shut up. and worst of all, she had some questionable motives. like wtf was she even doing. what was she in the whole book. she was cornering mia the whole day, back and forth up against a wall, rubbing everything she had to make mia feel as disgusted as possible. 

even worst of this book was I STILL DONT REALLY KNOW WHO THE KILLER WAS ?! it was just super glossed over, the whole actual killer was just super brief that i'm still flustered. like who's the killer?! what actually happened? because all i know is that the village is messed up and has a bunch of bitchy women, cheating husbands and wives, affairs and illicit affairs. literally a bunch of randos bitching each other the whole time, and a lack of plot. if i could, i wish i could unread that, because it was the greatest waste of my time. 

im frustrated and complaining. sorry to those who enjoyed it, but I DIDN'T LIKE IT. 

Overall rating: 1/5
Genre: fiction, adult, thriller, horror, suspense, mystery-thriller, crime, contemporary
Dates read: 29/6/2023- 8/7/2023 (9 days, in reality 2 days)
Time period: 4-5 hrs (extremely slow read)
Amount of pages: 441 (physical, book copy, rectangle, small font, small book)
Word count: unknown.