Rating: 4/5

I have to say that my pleasure in reading L'Amour is less in the playout of his stories and much more in reveling in the sense I get that I am in the Old West with its tough people and its rugged beauty. He lingers in his loving descriptions of the land - here he lays out the view of the surroundings in a desolate place:

"... Bodine had lost himself in that broken, rugged country known as Powder Basin. It was a region of some ten square miles backed against an even rougher and uglier patch of waterless desert, but the basin was bad enough itself. Fractured with gorges and humped with fir-clad hogbacks, it was a maze where the juniper region merged into the fir and spruce and where the canyons were liberally overgrown with manzanita. There were at least two cliff dwellings in the area and a ghost mining town of some dozen ramshackle structures, tumbled in and wind worried."

Even though the place is forlorn and dangerous, his beautiful description makes me want to walk in it. 

L'Amour loves to let his heroes show the reader tricks of the trail. In one of these 11 stories of the collection titled Law of the Desert Born, published in 1983, a hunted man rubs the barrel of his rifle down with dirt to make sure there is no glint of shining metal that could give his location away. After reading quite a few of L'Amour's books I have an appreciation that he insisted on accuracy in his historic tales; I know that he worked hard through both book study and personal travel all over the west to make that happen. 

These are the short stories included in this volume, with a star for those that I particularly enjoyed, and two stars for my very favorites:

Law of the Desert Born: A man has killed a sheriff's brother in self-defense and is on the run from a gang of 8 men. He leads them toward certain death in the dry desert.

* Riding On: A cowboy shoots a man in the dark who he suspects of rustling cattle, and to his horror, he finds that it is his own father. His ranch fires him because they suspect that he and his father were among the cattle rustlers.

The Black Rock Coffin Makers: A man in a saloon is drawn on and kills his assailant. He learns that he himself is a doppelgänger for a wanted man.

** Desert Death Song: A wanted man has a posse of 200 men after him, but he has holed up in a deadly maze of canyons.

** Ride, You Tonto Raiders!: In a familiar L'Amour trope, a young widow realizes that she has the fight of her life coming when bad men in town gang together to take her ranch from her. But a stranger seems bent on helping her defend it.

One Last Gun Notch: A man whose wife was murdered and whose cattle were stolen became a gunslinger to exact revenge, but now, years later, he finds himself hired to do the same kind of evil.

Death Song of the Sombrero: The cowboys on a secluded ranch are told by a stranger that he's killed their boss fair and square in a gunfight, and that they can work for him now or get on down the road. 

The Guns Talk Loud: Once again, the story of a man determined to defend a young woman whose ranch is about to be overrun by dishonest men. He finds an ally in a tall stranger who comes along. 

*Grub Line Rider: A new man comes into the ranch and announces that he needs 600 head of cattle to start his own outfit up on the ridge, and, by the way, the owner's daughter is welcome to come be his cook! Men at the table nearly choke on their food.

The Marshall of Painted Rock: The Marshall is approached by a beautiful woman who has just arrived in town. She tells him that she is the sister of the man condemned to hang there tomorrow, that she is certain he is innocent, and that she will do anything to get him back to their ailing mother. 

Trap of Gold: A miner traces gold in a creek to a leaning rock tower high above. There is a jackpot of gold twisting through quartz at the base of the tower. He is experienced enough to know that removing the gold at the base will almost certainly eventually cause the tower to collapse, crushing him. How much should he take?