Rating: 5/5

There is but one word which can describe this work, and it is as British as it gets: superb. I don’t know where to start, but I guess a little background information on Manning is necessary. Olivia Manning was a British writer who married an English teacher posted with the British Council at the University of Bucharest in 1939, a few weeks after Germany invaded Poland. Due to the movement of Germany’s army and the escalation of conflict in Romania, they escaped to Athens, and from there on to Egypt and Palestine. She has written two different trilogies in the Fortunes of War series, this one, The Balkan Trilogy, and The Levant Trilogy, mirroring the experiences she had. By all accounts and purposes, what she wrote is historical fiction; the characters and happenings at a personal level are fictional, but the overarching context is the factual one in which Europe was in 1939, 1940. 

Manning’s writing is some of the best I’ve ever seen. Her character building skills are insane. Often times, between two lines of dialogue, you discover who an unimportant character is with the same depth you would an important one, and she seems to do this just to add colour to the story. At other times, the simple description of someone’s physical features, focusing on one particular element, gives you more insight into that character than their dialogue ever would. I mentioned dialogue – Manning has an uncanny ability to imitate the rhythm and cadence of actual, natural dialogue. I personally am very sensitive to that, because one of my biggest complaints when it comes to any work is that the dialogue sounds either forced or bland. When I write I also have a very hard time writing dialogue, so I consider it one of the hallmarks of great writing. Manning hits the nail on the head spot on. Not only does the entire book creak under the weight of pages upon pages of dialogue, but she manages to make it sound like prose. The entire reading experience is very pleasant, but these two things – character building and dialogue – deserve to be mentioned on their own. 

And now let’s talk about what actually impressed me about this book. I myself am Romanian. I was raised in Bucharest. Manning managed to teach me a lesson about my own city – and that I am ever grateful for. She uses actual Romanian words to paint the picture authentically; she describes the beggars and poverty I am so accustomed to, but in a way only a foreigner could; she talks about the Romanian women and men and character in a way which I can instantly recognize; most importantly, she grounds the entire story in a place that she describes in its reality, not in a fictional way in which a foreign author who’s never been there would. I was more than impressed. I could look at my own city through someone else’s eyes, and it was a beautiful experience. 

This is a long read, and you do need some patience to go through it, but it is absolutely worth it if you enjoy historical fiction.