Rating: 4/5

3.5/5
  But the problem begins with trying to reduce them to all the same measure of coin in the first place: skilled time, unskilled time, the talk of a clever woman, nature's gifts of fish and fruit, the invention of a craftsman, the strength of a laboring woman—one simply cannot measure weight, coldness, the passage of time, and the brightness of fire all on the same scale.
This one was a debacle to rate. Eventually, I gave up the holistic scale and settled on the Delany scale, indicating a number of stars greater than that of the disappointing Babel-17 and lesser than that of the magnificent Dhalgren. THe beginning story/cycle/chapter was the strongest, much as the first film is often the best after being birthed out of the longest gestation period compared to its hasty younger siblings, and while the later bits did fill in various plot holes rather teasingly, there were too many moments of similarly voiced characters and uncharacteristic monologuing near the end for me to engage in this deeper than I would with a particularly unusual thought exercise. As for the tail end pseudo commentary, my recent read of 'The Princess Bride' exhausted me with such finagling contrivances, and it is a thin line that that appendix walks between invigorating contextualization and blowhard pretension. In light of that, will I be reading the rest of this quartet? I'll certainly acquire the next one if I stumble across it, and considering Delany's one of the few reasons I even bother with the Sci Fi/Fantasy sections anymore, so he has a better chance of being indulged in than most. I won't be adding it to my digital shelves just yet, though: irrational fear of commitments and all.

As I said earlier, the beginning of this was definitely the strongest, the bits and pieces of PoMo accentuating rather than conflicting with the fantasy mainframe, playing with conceits of the genre in a tone of satire as well as sincere exploration of themes. Indeed, thinking back, I beginning to better understand the driving motivation where certain philosophies were brought to a barbarian plain, inseminated, and then studied in vivo, from patriarchy to capitalism, radical feminism to Marxism, slavery to freedom (I wouldn't assign relative worth based on my chosen orders and pairings if I were you). The problem, I suppose, is when the chapter epigraphs began weighing too heavily on their respective skeins of narrative and the characters started sounding a bit too much like uniform 20th century mouthpieces, and a flaw that reached its most discordant peak in the final chapter and plays a major part in my decision to not officially add the sequel to my stacks just yet. All in all, this wasn't nearly as lazily harmful as 'Babel-17' in its ideological underpinnings, but that story was admittedly tighter and more deftly balanced in its mixture of plot and dialectic; on the other side of the spectrum, this was nowhere near the grandeur of 'Dhalgren', whose strength often lay in not bothering to explain things and just letting the queer (in all senses of the world) times roll. I also don't like narratives with sexualized children in them, but there're bigger, more mainstream fish to fry on that note (*cough* Disney *cough), so honestly, if you're planning on obsessing over it in this work, you best be prepared to take it on with those who don't engage with it nearly as critically as Delany does.

Did this work start coming apart at the seams at the end? Yes. Do I fear a similar increasing lack of cohesion in the succeeding three volumes? A tad, despite reading an entry excerpt of the sequel provided at the end of this edition. What I'm really hoping to get my hands on is Delany's nonfiction in the form of The Motion Of Light In Water: Sex And Science Fiction Writing In The East Village, as I find nonfiction works better with certain authors when I've had a trend of not so brilliant fictional interactions with them. This strategy's currently working splendidly for Nin, and my reading of Wolf's Cassandra would not have been nearly as worthwhile without the four contextualizing essays included in my edition. So, here's hoping that one shows up soon. I'll still purchase the more fantastical sequel if it comes my way, but I could use a better sense of Delany's directional efforts before I dive back into the results of such.
  He was learning that power—was like a fog over a meadow at evening. From any distance, it seemed to have a shape, a substance, a color, an edge, yet as you approached it, it seemed to recede before you. Finally, when common sense said you were at its center, it still seemed just as far away, only by this time it was on all sides, obscuring any vision of the world beyond it.