Rating: 3/5

I would have enjoyed this book more if I had read it in French, since I don't read French well. 

To call Baudelaire's poetry dark would be an understatement. In a novel I recently read, one character suggested to another that he read Baudelaire's _Les Fleurs du mal_ to understand the mind of a sadistic serial killer, and by extension, the madness that enveloped Nazi Germany. Baudelaire's poem "Spleen" is specifically mentioned as appropriate.

Knowing virtually nothing of Baudelaire except that he wrote in the mid-19th century, I was intrigued enough to buy this book. While I can't say that I enjoyed it, it was like a visit to the dentist -- much better after than during. 

I often hear people remark on how the world is deteriorating and how much worse society is now than in the past. I want to tell them that exactly the opposite is true. Our world, and our treatment of one another, has never been better. Society has evolved in many respects and the velocity of the improvement has been increasing in recent years in unprecedented ways. 

As Hobbes noted, the life of man is solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short. Without resorting to a Panglossian tautology, I will point out that, at a minimum, the life of man is less solitary (thanks to the internet) and less short (thanks to advances in medicine) than it was at any time in recorded history.

Did Baudelaire open the gates of Hell and unleash its evil on a previously pure world? Of course not. Nor did he invent the ugliness and horror of the world. What he did do is enshrine for posterity the fact that the horrors of sadism and murder, and the fascination with ugliness and death have been with us as long as we've writing about ourselves. There is nothing new under the sun nor in the pits of Hell.

If one were to read these poems with one's mind set in the context of Baudelaire's life, certainly they would be shocking. In the context of today's world, though, you'd likely find the same or worse in the journal of a goth-obsessed adolescent.