Rating: 3/5

The farmers of Paradise County are encouraged by the Government to plant garlic. When the warehouses fill up and the taxes rise, the garlic begins to decompose, causing the farmers to starve. Mo Yan earned the Nobel Prize in literature 2012. The Garlic Ballads is loosely based on the true story of a revolt, taking place in 1987, against the Chinese government. The book was banned due to it's regime criticism, and I find it strange that Mo Yan has received critic as to being too vague in his claims. I think his anti government opinions are rather evident in this book. 

I got close to Gao Yang and Gao Ma, both of which were carefully crafted. However, I didn't understand all of the characters, especially the oldest Fang brother. There was something with him that wasn't consistent and that made me confused. What bothered me even more was the fact that is wasn't only the regime that was unfair and ruthless, the fellow prisoners were as cruel. A man's life wasn't worth anything. Perhaps, if told all your life that it's the truth, one begins to behave that way.

The stench of garlic is everywhere and symbolizes the boiling unhappiness that eventually turns to hatred. I have never read a book with that much filth, urine, excrement and vomit, serving as a big contrast to the fractions of love and kindness. The expressive prose is rare and drags you into the story. You can feel everything with your own senses. You can smell the rotting garlic, sometimes too much. You can feel the crawling lice from the mattress, always too much. But you can also feel the beautiful things, the determinism of the farmers having enough, the beautiful relationship between the young couple, the green, resplendent, living and breathing crop fields, illuminated by the moon. Few authors has the ability to alternate their writing in this way, What I couldn't figure out was what the little foal represents. That questions, Mo Yan didn't answer when visiting Sweden to receive his earned Nobel Prize. Hope, perhaps. Or the tiny bit of freedom left, the very souls of the characters.

My review
http://www.thereaderdiary.blogspot.se...