Rating: 4/5

I've said it before and here I am saying it again: nobody writes candy mysteries like Francis. His protagonists are likable, the villains appropriately dislikable, and you always learn something. The formula is simple and consistently adhered to, but the books are not the worse for it. This is a fine example of the form.

The formula is pretty simple. The genial and easygoing 30ish hero stumbles onto dark conspiracies in the racing world. He's beaten up, but bravely faces down the villains. He narrowly escapes, bringing down their plot and winning a girl at the same time. The occupation and conspiracy vary from novel to novel, but always there's a new bit of insider knowledge that helps lend the novel a ring of authenticity: the chemistry of photography, magnetic tapes from computers, the complexities of flying by instruments.

I've read them all at least three times and, while the names don't stick in my head, I get a flash of the protagonist, the villain, the occupation, and maybe the set-piece battle by the end of the first page. "Oh right, the photographer! There's coloured smudges and bizarre developing chemicals, and blackmail."

This time, though, I set out to study the craft of the book. What words does Francis use to paint a scene? Why those words? What patterns can I detect? My notes comprise the rest of this "review". I doubt they'll surprise anyone who's studied literature or been a fiction writer, but it's all been eye-opening to me.

I began paying attention to sentence length. It varies, as it should--lots of sentences the same length and structure are dull. He's fond of stitching short observations together into a longer sentence. Here's the opening paragraph:
Winded and coughing, I lay on one elbow and spat out a mouthful of grass and mud. The horse I'd been riding raised its weight off my ankle, scrambled untidily to its feet and departed at an unfeeling gallop. I waited for things to settle: chest heaving, bones still rattling from the bang, sense of balance recovering from a thirty-mile-an-hour somersault and a few tumbling rolls. No harm done. Nothing broken. Just another fall.
Lots of small observations, but only a few short sentences. Generally he finds ways to string the short observations into longer sentences:
He soared around the whole thing with bursting joie-de-vivre, even to the extent of passing the favorite on the run-in, and we came back to bear hugs from the blue hair (for the benefit of television) and an offer to me of a spare ride in the fifth race, from a worried-looking small-time trainer.
The "and ... and ... and" throughout the book generates the sense of a relaxed and informal description of the story, even as the word-choice and grammar indicate careful and mature writing.

I noticed the characteristic Francis descriptions of the hero's reactions to provocation: "flatly", "mildly", "calmly".

You construct a sentence with a colourful words, which tell the story, and essential filler words. The story is told by the adjectives, nouns, and verbs that leap out of the page at you: "soared ... bursting joie-de-vivre ... passing ... favourite ... bear hugs ... blue hair ... worried ... small-time trainer". The rest of it is there because it has to be formal English, to fully specify meaning, to permit variations in sentence structure and length. But the story is brought to life by the selection of those colour words.