Rating: 5/5

Come away from the water, Shirley is a fantastic book depicting the power of imagination. Shirley is visiting the beach with her mother and father, as seen on the first page. Both the first and the last pages are the only ones where all three characters are together. Shirley’s parents remain on the left hand pages throughout the book, whereas Shirley is always on the right hand side pages. Her parents are stationary and do not move far between pages; a hand there, a head turn here; they are not on a journey. Shirley is very much on a journey, drastically moving between pages, we see the life and adventure between each scene. Battling pirates, diving over board and hunting for treasure. 

A key feature within John Burningham’s picture book is the use of colour. To start with on the first page, in which we have all three characters the colours are slightly washed out. Originally bright colours, but almost faded, with the excitement taken out of them, but still present to represent the adventure that’s about to happen. Although diminished we can feel the looming exhilaration and discovery, it is just slightly quietened (representative of perhaps Shirley’s minimalised imagination around her parents?). The illustrator very much favours the colour white, which we begin to associate with images of the mother and father. We come to the second page and the colours seemed to have faded even more. It seems with the removal of Shirley from the frame the colour has diminished. On the third page is the first frame where Shirley is by herself and the contrast is paramount. The colours are no longer washed and faded, and she now has colour to her arms and legs, the excitement of what’s to come is palpable. The theme of strong and weak colours continues throughout the book. The left hand side remains to be washed out whereas the context, colour and vibrancy of the right hand sides are constantly changing, with each new scene becoming more detailed and exhilarating than the last. There are dark ominous colours of the pirate ships, stimulating trepidation and bright yellows of the sunset triggering happiness and success. The last page returns to a similar style of the first page, we do however have slightly more colour to the frame. 

With regards to framing and perspective all the pages are framed but with such small frames they almost look full bled. None of the images break from the frame, representative of Shirley’s parents being far from adventurous and Shirley, although she has a vivid imagination, is never actually that free. She remains safe within the frame of the picture book. One of the key differences between the images on the left hand side of the book and the right hand side of the book is the horizons. All the pictures of Shirley’s mother and father have no horizon, there is no further perspective or adventure; they are present within the moment lacking open mindedness and adventure. The horizons in Shirley’s pictures are all vast and colourful; we are invited into her adventure and exploration. 

The words are all on the left hand side of the page, all of which are spoken by her mother or father. They complement the pictures by providing such a stark contrast to what is being depicted. A truly fantastic book showing the power of a child’s vivid imagination compared to that of an adult. It does make me wish I was that age again, to be able to conjure such images into my head, so real you almost believe it yourself.