Rating: 4/5

I’ll characterize this novel as ‘haunting.’ 

A boy grows up with his British parents in the enclave of Shanghai where all foreigners have to live. It’s around 1900. Much of the first half of the book involves the man’s reminiscences of his childhood, particularly time spent playing with his next-door buddy who was Japanese. The boy learns bits and pieces of intrigue from conversations among his mother, father and uncle. His mother was an active anti-opium crusader through her women’s clubs. Yet his father’s big British firm may secretly be involved in opium trafficking. When the boy is about ten years old both of his parents disappear in separate incidents. He’s now an orphan sent back to London to live with an aunt.

Contrary to what we might expect from the title, although ‘orphanhood’ is mentioned throughout the book, it’s not really a well-developed theme. He is courted by a socialite in London who is an orphan, and he adopts a young girl who is an orphan, but we don’t really get much insight into the theme. 

Eventually the main character becomes a famous detective in London. We learn nothing of the cases he has been involved in. He read Sherlock Holmes as a kid and played detective with his Japanese friend. He also learned about and from Chinese detectives when his parents disappeared, so that makes sense as a career path for him. 

Years later (1937), when his detective skills are sharpened, he returns to Shanghai to find out what happened to his parents. Here the story takes a turn to fantasy. Even though his parents have been missing for more than 20 years, he and others start to believe that he will actually FIND them and rescue them from ‘kidnappers.’ One official at the British embassy starts planning a party for their return. The main character finds clues that lead him into neighborhoods of the city that are actively being bombed by the Japanese. He comes to believe he has found a dying Japanese soldier who is his old childhood friend. In the end, -- I won’t say ‘solves’ the mystery -- but he does learn what happened to his parents -- different stories for each. 

Another large part of the story revolves around a socially prominent woman who initially avoids the main character but essentially throws herself at him after he becomes famous. While he’s searching for his missing parents, she has married and is coincidentally living in Shanghai with her husband. The marriage is a disaster and she and the main character make plans to run off and marry. 

A good, not a great, novel. A psychological novel about memory. There’s good writing and some suspense. 

Here are links to my reviews of other books by Ishiguro. The number after the title is the rating I gave that book: 

 Klara and the Sun - 3

 The Remains of the Day - 5 

 A Pale View of Hills -4

 The Unconsoled -4

 Never Let Me Go -4

 An Artist of the Floating World -4

From top, photo of Shanghai in the 1930's from cdn1.i-scmp.com/sites/default/files/styles
Chinese people in 1900's from dailymail.co.uk
The author from nobelprize.org