Rating: 2/5

Kind of in awe of this. It's a virtually plot-free novella of sorts where the protagonist, a Major in the U.S. Army, is about to head to a Senate hearing for his involvement in friggin' Iran-Contra. (The role is never explained whatsoever, but we know that our boy has done some major war crimes because all he'll say about it is stuff like "I believed I had full authority to do what I did" and "I was motivated entirely by the love I had for my country." Real psycho shit, you know?) But it turns out he's got a pedigree that dates all the way back to the American Revolution and a family tree full of (fictional) historical figures. His family has signed the Declaration of Independence, served on the Supreme Court, fought in the Civil War and World War II - and it's on this basis alone that his lawyer suggests, "they can never lock you up when you point out your family's proud legacy of patriotism and service." Cool, sure. So then the rest of the book is just this good old boy (who may have personally armed or commanded Central American death squads) recounting the very American deeds of his great-great ancestors, and oh my God it is an embarrassing parade of authoritarian yes-men. The first one died trying to put down Shay's Rebellion. The next one died in a duel defending Alexander Hamilton's honor. The next one served on the Supreme Court and the narrator-protagonist openly derides him as a stupid man who didn't understand legal theory but served as a lapdog of sorts to John Marshall. They're all slave-holding Viriginians, by the way, and the next one fights for the Confederacy in the Civil War after turning down a promotion in the U.S. Army, citing his displeasure with "radical abolitionists." Major Contra's grandfather bankrupts his family through poor financial decisions in the 1920s and still has the gall to blame FDR for his personal failure. The whole thing reads like a who's who of, I dunno, "the wrong side of American history at every goddamn turn." Now, some necessary context here, lest anyone think I just picked out an obscure title by a vehemently conservative author to dunk on thirty years later - I've read two Michener titles before this one and enjoyed them both. His historical fiction is among the most varied and detailed I've read, and I figured this would be a easy and enjoyable story about American military history. Hell no! I have no idea what Michener was even doing here. Dude was a Pennsylvania Quaker who ran for congress as a Democrat in the 1960s - almost assuredly a New Deal Democrat, almost assuredly not prone to Lost Cause mythology. Why did he write this? There's genuinely no story, just a recounting of a fictional family's horrible history. They say that perfect satire is indistinguishable from that which it satirizes, but I don't think that's what's going on here because the characters, in spite of everything I've said so far, are painted with care and nuance and even occasional contrast from one another. The best sense I can make of any of this was that in the late '80s, the very old and accomplished Michener was asking himself, regarding then-current events, "what kind of deranged sicko would sell arms to the Iranians after the hostage crisis, and then use the proceeds to fund a red purge in Nicaragua?" and then thought, "ah, I can probably invent such a monster and flesh out his whole sordid family history in 150 pages." But that doesn't seem very likely, does it? Anyway, glad I read this and I'll never forget it.