Rating: 2/5

storygraph

(reviewed 2026-03-12)

i picked this up when i was having a nonfiction moment...... and tbh i dont think i was quite ready for this book LOL -- so this review is more of a reflection on my own reading experience rather than the work itself.

i found this book overall a touch incomprehensible LMFAO (probably made worse by how long it took me to get through the last 50 pages)... and could not really figure out if it was bc of my own comprehension skills, the translation, or descartes being a yapper... but upon skimming the book to write this review, i think it's a mix of:

1.   my lack of familiarity with the philosophy + methods that descartes uses to explain his ideas
2.   the translator being very thoughtful, nuanced, and thorough despite descartes being rambly as hellllll LOL
3.   descartes being a guy who prefaces and over-qualifies his statements too much before getting to the point/while getting to the point... (but maybe this is his method... see issue 1 lmfao.)

that said! maybe one day this will get a reread from me... i can appreciate the earlier sections more in hindsight (after reading 'the rules'). and my shallow, plebeian thoughts on the sections, in brief: 

●   discourse: i quite resonated with this overall! (in how to explain yourself accurately and have others receive what you communicated as you intended.) but oh man to anyone who thinks they pre-qualify their statements too much (myself included)... u have yet to meet rene descartes final boss lmao
●   selected correspondences: i'll never not find personal correspondences to one's contemporaries not interesting to read. i think i wouldve hated texting descartes (very formal, walls of text, a bit overly self-deprecating in that uncomfortable to watch way)
●   the world: tbqh i forget that i even read this section lol. upon a re-skim this reminds me that it was around here where i started to get a lot of "it came to me in a dream" vibes.
●   rules: lowkey a heruclean reading effort to get through this, on my part lmao,,, genuinely i found the text so incomprehensible sometimes LOL like... where tf was the sentence going... how did we end up here.... shoutout to the footnotes. (i think it was a me issue more than anything.)
●   the footnotes: special shoutout to these. i always laughed when there was a footnote for some mysterious phrase descartes used only for the footnote to briefly explain its reference to some philosophical/renaissance era idea that i had no prior familiarity with...

the verdict:

"Besides, the habit [people] will acquire by searching initially for easy things and moving gradually to more difficult ones will be more useful to them than all my instructions. Just as, for my own part, I am convinced... if I had learned [the truths from my youth] without effort, I might never have known any others; at least, I would never have acquired the habit and facility that I think I have for always finding new truths as I apply myself to search for them." (Discourse on Method, pt 6)

this was a hard read for me as someone who picked this up mostly for funsies... not sure how much will stick with me LMAO. my enthusiasm definitely started to fade by the end of this lmao but if anything, i think the most memorable (as i go through my notes) was descartes' descriptions of needing to slowly grapple with your thoughts/ideas to understand them (and the world) fully... what a refreshing sentiment in this day and age lol where it feels like the world is actively working to smooth my brain out.

===

post-read: oh god finally lmao. maybe like a 2.5. rtc