Rating: 5/5

The second of Ross Macdonald's full-length novels about the adventures of private eye Lew Archer - think a more introverted version of Philip Marlowe and you're not far off - sees him journeying to a Southern Californian resort town going through an urban renewal financed by a local oil baron. The story's main conflict revolves around a series of blackmail letters and mysterious deaths afflicting a dispossessed upper-class family that happens to oppose said renewal as a consequence of old money looking down at the nouveau riche. Few authors do the entire "festering moral decay underneath a shiny idyllic surface" theme better than him... who once again also displays an excellent sense of capturing the cultural zeitgeist of the United States during their post-WW2 economic boom.

The intricate descriptions of the architecture, cars, fashion and interior design actually make me nostalgic for that era because I like the aesthetic so much... even though the story also makes clear how much of a dark underside there was to it all! Same effect as the TV series "Mad Men" has on a lot of people, or for that matter several of David Lynch's films though they comment more on the nostalgia for the 1950's that American culture in the 1980's flirted with - in similar ways that pop culture right now flirts with 1980's nostalgia, I might add. Come to think of it, I get kind of that vibe from James Ellroy's use of the post-WW2 US setting in the novels he wrote at the same time Lynch made "Blue Velvet", which again are much more obviously a continuation of the same tradition that Ross Macdonald belonged to. The reason I dwell on this so much in my reviews of Ross Macdonald's books is that it results in them having a very different feel than Hammett's or most of Chandler's novels, where the characters usually know their world's a mess as a result of being in the middle of either the Great Depression or World War Two.

On a thematic level there's also an interesting Great Gatsby-style commentary on the class conflict between the established upper class and the upper-middle class nouveau riche displacing it. Likewise when Lew Archer goes to investigate things in the blue-collar neighbourhoods, where the city's working class faces the worst consequences of the rivalry between the elites, the tone flips from a pulp F. Scott Fitzgerald to something almost like a more "safe-for-work" Charles Bukowski - a shift between two different atmospheres Macdonald pulls with great effect.

My favourite thing about "The Drowning Pool", though, has to be a scene near the end which functions as a microcosmos of the author's attention to the most important small details in the central structure of the story's underlying conflict: The climax features a well thought out twist on the "villainous mastermind captures protagonist and explains entire scheme to him" cliché where the main antagonist of the story does that because he genuinely thinks he can buy off Lew Archer into working for him, and doesn't even attempt to kill him until later when Archer attempts to escape. There's a real sense of mutual admiration between two characters regarding each other as worthy opponents, that Macdonald communicates perfectly in just a single very short chapter, rather than the bad guy coming across as a narcissist seeking confirmation of genius from his enemies. 

That represents a very different approach to how say Raymond Chandler or Ian Fleming handled similar scenes, in the process demonstrating the kind of sharp psychological insights behind character motivations that Macdonald's stories are full of.