Rating: 4/5

A pretty book with a pretty cover and some pretty prose. It felt so fluffy and lacking. I don't know exactly what I didn't like, probably nothing. It would be correct to say there was not enough to like, nothing particularly practical. Fluffy pretty words. Perhaps this is just not the right time for me to read this book. I shall read it again later when I grow up.
9-14-11 so i returned to this book after reading about St therese and somehow everything has changed, it seems like a new book. Perhaps i am a new person? You know how they say you can't step into the same river twice? Sometimes books are like that too. Jasper Fforde says alot in his Thursday Next novels about the reading experience and how a part of that is what each reader brings to the book as he reads, his own life experiences, opnions, emotions even. That is never more true than with spiritual books. We are always learning, growing and sometimes simply a changed attitude will effect the way we look at and feel about the whole big world, even little books. This time, just a few days after writing that this book was "fluffy" i find so much to help me, educate me, comfort me. Here's a bit about worry. If you worry, you know how NOT helpful it is to be told to just stop it. How nothing seems to help. I turned to the Buddhist technique of breathing thru it but it always came back. Just now I found this in this book and it does not at all seem fluffy once I slow down and quit judging it before i even finish reading.

One of the least helpful ways to stop worrying is to try hard not to think about the things we are worrying about. ..jesus' advice is ...if you worry, worry about that which is worthnthe effort. Worry about larger things than your family, friends, ...worry about the things of God: truth, life, light. 
 As soon as we set our hearts on those things our mind stops spinning because we enter into communion with the one who is present to us here now and is there to give us what we most need. 
 And so worrying becomes prayer, and our feelings of powerlessness are transformed into a consciousness of being empowered by God's spirit. 

WELL! I only disagree on on one point. We should begin praying our way free of worrying with exactly what we are worrying about. If I am worrying about my Asperger son (boy if I had a dime for every minute of those worries) then I should begin with praying about that. Then My burden is shared with God who is more capable than I of thinking clearly and dealing with things in the best way. I also surrender control. That's hard to do for the likes of me. It begins in prayer I think. Then I can move on to "worrying" about the rest of the planet. And I do, God help me since I was 9 years old I do. Mother Theresa said all charity, love and the like should begin AT HOME.