Rating: 5/5

What do we understand when we say gender?

Is it biologically our innate gender? We were born and realized ourselves in society either as a woman or as a man. This gender on the basis of "memorization" is the perspective, says the author of the concept of biological sex and gender, the concept is unique, the economy, politics, psychology, history, social identity is active, it differentiates it by evaluating numerous under the hood.

Author Connell, who re-establishes the concept of gender both on a theoretical basis and on a political basis, both discusses the historical development of the social roles of men and women and puts forward a critical theoretical analysis for the emergence of gender politics...

I also liked the fact that he indirectly focused on social inequality, which is one of the main problems, under each heading, forcing the reader to think about the essence of the problem.
Is our biological differences the source of this longest-running inequality in history? System? Or is it just our inequality-based perspectives? In this sense, how do we learn to be a woman or a man socially? How much have we thought about the validity of these teachings, which vary greatly from society to society? Was the matriarchal path sustainable, contrary to the patriarchal idea that established dominance with the transition to an agrarian society? as such, the work became enormous by encouraging people to think about vital questions at their historical point.

Our author says that patriarchal thought should be erased from history and can an egalitarian, democratic understanding and system be created literally as a whole (human) of men and women? by asking, he gave a meaningful answer to this historical problem.

Of course, it is out of the question to solve this historical problem overnight, to eliminate it easily, of course. It is necessary to give a serious and patient struggle for this. Whether people and humanity accept it or not (it doesn't matter what we say), there is also an evolution in the sense of social equality, and while time continues to transform us, the systems we have established continue to resist it. No matter how much we go out of the system in thinking, look at someone the way they want to see, and evaluate life with our own will from a broader framework, at that moment we will realize our commitment to time and realize the evolution that humanity is undergoing in every sense.

I think the book is one of the great resource books in terms of the flow of human history and the way it will establish the future. One of the must-reads...