Rating: 4/5

Mia Cosgrove is back, and is tackling a whole new case, although this time, arguably she perhaps shouldn't get herself involved in a professional capacity. She is a psychotherapist, who goes to Little Copping to support her best friend Lysette, after Lysette's other good friend Sarah appears to commit suicide. 

However after being with her friend for not long, she senses, although she tries to ignore it, that there may be more to the story that meets the eyes, but it isn't until the police ask her to be involved and offer support to the small community that Mia becomes truly involved. 

This is the second book featuring Mia Cosgrove, and does work as a complete standalone to A Daughter's Secret, however if you have read the first one you will have a more complex understanding of Mia, and her background. 

Mia tries to be a friend to everyone while supporting Lysette and trying to work out just what is going on, even though she isnt investigating, but trying to make sure everyone is ok with has occurred mentally. As Mia is incredibly intelligent though, she knows that things don't add up, but just can't quite put her finger on the reasoning. 

Lysette is a complex character, who seems desperate to unload her secrets but can't quite bring herself to reach out fully to Mia, and her behaviour starts to become more and more erratic. 

As the story progresses, I got to meet all of the main friendship group that Sarah was involved with, but I didn't really like any of them that much. When the truth finally comes out, as it always tends to in fiction, I couldn't help but feel marginally confused as to various motivations, or explicitly what happened. 

This is a very readable book, I was definitely interested in Mia and her thoughts, and the way the story was told, was enjoyable. I loved the small hints at Sarah's diary spread in between some chapters, as well as small asides at the end of chapters, from Mia, implying something was big was coming, but that she couldn't tell you what it was yet. 

Thank you to EDPR for my copy of this book which I have reviewed honestly and voluntarily.