Rating: 3/5

(I would award this book 3.5/5 if I could, but it seems I can't!)

This was the 4th novel for adult readers that Mary Wesley published, of a total of 10, and the 4th I read. No, I'm not quite as methodical as you may think! - that's explained at the outset of my review of "Second Fiddle" https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/8... ...

The first point I'd suggest is that this was perhaps the author's first clearly defined *comedy*. 

Even though, if you know Wesley at all, this story too is never without depth, complexity or some very dark areas of human life - it starts after all with an odd death, &amp; odder funeral - it proceeds at a rapid pace, brisker even than "Harnessing Peacocks". Psychologically too, it moves along more "on the surface" than most of her novels. Furthermore, the eponymous main protagonist is - or at least is shown to us readers - less inclined to contemplative soul-searching than perhaps any other of this writer's female central characters. I'll come back to Poppy in a bit.

What however above all marks this novel out as a "comedy" is the classical sense of that term: for me, it's the first so far to move (in mysterious ways) towards what may well be an unambiguously ... happy ending. 

(Or so it seems! One can rarely be entirely certain of the development of Wesley's shifting, socially and psychologically kaleidoscopic novels!) 

Very few of the ten novels end unambiguously UN-happily (there is one very obvious exception!); but the general tendency is rather towards emotional cliffhanger endings, with lives still in the balance. This much has been achieved, and/or decided, e.g. towards the end, two people meet - once again, or for the first time, or at long last - but how will this turn out, after the last words of the novel come to a close? And often, we are left a bit unsure at the end of it all, wondering, perhaps hoping. As if in such cases it's left to the reader to take up the pen &amp; ink, and sketch in for her/himself the subsequent fate &amp; fortunes of the character(s) presented in the denouement.

An interesting aspect of this novel, to me at least, is that it seems the novelist makes fun of her main character. 

True, Matty (in "Jumping the Queue") is subjected to a brutish time, in a concatenated comedy from hell, in that first novel for adult readers. Surely there is some working-out there by the author of deep hurt, emotional wounds &amp; still-burning aggressions from severe emotional difficulties suffered in her own life. If the horrendous hand Matty is dealt in life may seem sadistic on Wesley's part, I wonder if in fact there's not a therapeutic procedure at work there: 

A fictitious character is after all NOT a real person (I tried to make a point about "dis-identification techniques" in Wesley's novels in a previous review). And the intolerable, numbing extent to which Matty is cruelly deprived, and cheated, and deprived again in her life may strangely have a liberative value: in helping free the writer, and readers too, from vicious-cycle ruts of unrelieved suffering in our own hearts and minds. Is this too complex?

Back to the fourth novel, "The Vacillations ...", the comedy at Poppy's expense is of a lighter hue. Ms Carew too is put through the mill emotionally-psychologically, and used heartlessly by others, in this novel (unusually) only by mean. By one man ruthlessly (the complete cad), by others merely thoughtlessly, selfishly, inconsiderately. We can - via the traditional empathetic "identification" with fictional characters - feel with Poppy, sympathise with her tribulations &amp; vicissitudes, her repeat experiences of male chauvinism (for want of a better term): and wish her a better life than the one obsessively mapped out for her by others who - in the end - think only of themselves. ...

However,I feel there are also elements of "dis-identification" at work - alienation may be a more common word - which, for what it's worth, I believe the novelist intends. 

Given every opportunity finally to break free of the cad that has callously torn up her heart - and even if it is to spite that cad's new girlfriend; even if the sex he imposes on her is ... well, perhaps acceptable; even if the Cad is terribly handsome and very occasionally charming (when he "turns on the charm", and is not his usual repulsive, charmless, gimme-gimme self) - why on earth does she give him yet another chance to use &amp; abuse her totally - body, mind and spirit - to please only his own desires and vanities? Why too does she also let other men sort her feelings and her body, sort her mind, once it is clear this is really not working for her? 

Needy? - perhaps. Stuck in a subservient, submissive, supposedly "natural"female role of obedience? -maybe. But sooner or later, surely most of us readers - and as far as this matters, I believe this is also the novelist's sense and design - start calling: this is INSANE, Poppy Carew! And you're insane to let them keep dominating you and using you, this obviously - this outlandishly. 

Two caveats: it's not that Poppy is without self-interest, too. Vital, self-affirming self-interest is viewed in Wesley's novels - or so I deduce from characters, plot developments &amp; outcomes - as a healthy thing, a good thing. (Not so either a hypocritical denial of this, or a monstrous taking over, puppet manipulation &amp; domination of others.) 

Second, the key problem is not having a lively sexual interest. Sexual appetite, desire &amp; an untroubled glad enjoyment of sex appear in Wesley as life-asserting, part of life lived to its fullest. Different however is a (desperate) acceptance of sex essentially to please others, or worse: hopeless submission to the desires of others, including - not uncommonly in Wesley's stories - sexual abuse. The latter, though often passed over quickly in the pages, tend to be a source of grim, enduring emotional-psychological wounds &amp; untrusting silence, which prove difficult to heal). 

The thing with Poppy Carew is that she imediately appears a bright young woman, with strong feelings &amp; physical and emotional sensibilities, and with all the intelligence, spark &amp; drive to fend for herself, look after her her life and seek happiness on her own terms - who however keeps allowing herself to be compromised &amp; stunted, who keeps falling for blandishments, and falling under the thumb and will of a variety of men. 

She thus comes across, more often than she might, as a flighty, for men all too easily controlled flibbertigibbet - the name "Poppy Carew" itself, with its sound of light but superficial ebullience, might even suggest a habitual - for her fortunes however potentially fatal - "ditziness". 

And in that context, "Vacillations" in the title might emerge as a satirical euphemism for "Imbecilities". 

Not that Poppy is an idiot - far from it - but she keeps selling herself short, with men in particular.

Of course Ms Carew is not the first central character to be ridiculed by an author. Gustave Flaubert for example took a pioneering, merciless rise out of Frédéric in "L'Éducation Sentimentale", exposing a huge gulf between the character's subjective self-perception &amp; demonstrable, objective fact (and how others, including the reader, might view him). 

Mary Wesley is nowhere near so merciless. She presents her part-heroine as essentially engaging, likeable, intelligent &amp; (potentially) full of character. 

But: OH, WHAT IS SHE DOING?!? - And that, I feel, is the fulcrum of the book.

Like at least three other central characters in Wesley's novels, Poppy comes very gradually to full self-knowledge - and to a recognition that she's been deceiving herself for ages as to what she really values and wants in life. 

To explain this further would be a proper "spoiler", so I will leave that there. 

Suffice it to say: the search for self-understanding (Poppy's story might be called an "accidental Bildungsroman"!), &amp; an eventual discovery of one's true feelings and fullest desires, is a wonderful, vital if sometimes bittersweet element in Wesley's novels. 

And where such a self-epiphany finds an opportunity to fulfil such discovered wishes, to live a properly "earthed" dream - not some fantastical, airy-fairy dreamland, whilst led by the nose by others, but a gladly chosen, wholehearted life, often involving getting one's hands dirty with practical work, too - the novel can conclude in an unambiguously happy ending.

That sense of comedy - a hard-won, eventual happy ending - is certainly a great relief &amp; release in the plot of this novel: and not only for Poppy herself.

Personally, I would not call this novel one of my five favourite Mary Wesley novels - but that rather bespeaks the excellence of other, for me even more enjoyable works, than suggesting I did not enjoy this one! 

A couple of points to end with:

Where others felt exasperation with other Wesley novels (it's sad if they found no characters at all sympathetic - could this be partly because they expect to find, or seek, too complete an identification with main characters, with no satirical, ironic, comic or "therapeutic" space between?), I did feel quite a bit, during the course of this plot: "Oh come ON Poppy - COME ON!" When she struck a blow for freedom, I have to admit I smiled broadly. Also at her courage.

One element that detracted a little from my reading: I read the paperback edition. A weakness for me in Mary Wesley's first few novels (up to the 6th - "Second Fiddle" - if I recall rightly, where this is suddenly, miraculously cured), paragraph spacing might be clearer: 

At times a night or week passes, or a change of location, or it may be someone else speaking - and if it's not the same paragraph continued, then that change of time, place, speaker is not set apart on the page with any great clarity. An extra line - or a dividing bar of some sort for time or place shifts - would be useful. I am unsure if this was the author's oversight, or simply poor typesetting!