Rating: 2/5

I made a Goodreads account specifically for this book, because honestly how can I read this and not say anything? I'm afraid that Bill Clinton, myself, and the 16 other reviewers are the only people on earth who have read this book. I mean it's not very good, but it's an experience. 

So this all started because my friend and I decided to watch all 31 Elvis movies for basically the same reason people do Lent (don't let Elvis hear that though, or he'll get down on his knees and pray 3 separate times.) I don't remember exactly how, but I was doing some googling about the movies and came across this series, and immediately ordered physical copies of all four books. To be clear, I'm not an Elvis fan. I think his music is only alright and I'm no fan of him as a person, I just have some sort of fascination with him as a cultural icon. He's like Barbie to me in a way. 

In this series, Elvis realizes that his career as a singer is holding him back from his true passion, being a detective after he starts personally investigating the deaths of two teenage fans of his. The first death brings him to a predominately black city, where we hear a lot about how not racist Elvis is and every black character has it mentioned that they're black about a dozen times per page. Here, Elvis meets his love interest for the book, Selma. Now, I'm not black, so it's not really for me to get into the nuances of what can be considered fetishistic language, but I was cringing every time Elvis described Selma. Lots of "African princess" and "cocoa-colored skin" when he's thinking about how hot she is. 

Now granted, Elvis/Selma is better than basically every Elvis movie romance, but the bar is in hell. After knowing each other for about a week and doing the deed all night every night, Elvis is thinking about leaving everything to be with Selma, and you don't really hear a whole lot about what he sees in her other than how hot her cocoa skin is and how good her biscuits are. I guess it's not every day that you meet a woman who can do it all night, make biscuits afterwards in 30 minutes while even Elvis must get some rest, and then go to work as a nurse all day while helping Elvis out with detective work on the side.

The second death that Elvis investigates brings him to a family of Nazis who are really mad that their dead Elvis-obsessed daughter was dating a Jewish boy, and it becomes pretty clear that prejudice is the main theme of this book, which makes the ending all the odder, but we'll get to that. In her room, Elvis finds a statue of himself as Jesus Christ, which makes him fall to knees and pray 3 separate times, which I only mention because I thought it was one of the funnier parts of the book. Elvis also finds a photograph of himself which he hates because of how feminine it makes him look, it is signed with a jagged E by his assistant, Arthur, whose perfectly smooth chest Elvis makes a note of twice. All of this is relevant, by the way. 

I will say there are some pretty clever red herrings, I could feel myself being gripped by the mystery as it unfolded. I also thought the Colonel taking Elvis being in jail as an opportunity to broadcast a ratings grabbing live show from the jail, during which Elvis reveals the whole murder thing, was very fun. 

But now we get to the ending. The killer, as it turns out, is Elvis's assistant, Arthur, who has a split personality and a female alter who is in love with Elvis. The signs leading up to this, from what I can remember, seem to be that he has a smooth chest, long hair like a beatnik, light mascara, and he likes that photo of Elvis looking feminine. Now, I don't necessarily expect an Elvis book from 1999 to have the wokest views on dissociative identity disorders or transgender people, but man it's a jarring ending. I'm sure there's more signs of Artie being the killer which I'd only notice on a reread, but the guy has a smooth chest so I'm supposed to predict that he has an evil transgender alter? Ok. 

Did I mention Bill Clinton allegedly read this book? I can't stop thinking about it.