In the '50s, there were the angry young men, writing about working class life, but before that there were the rather aggrieved lower middle class young men, living in dingy boarding houses, cadging drinks in Soho pubs, smoking off-brand cigarettes, and trying to seduce women who twist their wedding rings on their fingers, whilst scratching a living on the edges of the literary world. Patrick Hamilton, the early works of Graham Greene, Julian Maclaren Ross. Having read his Bognor-set masterpiece of vacuum cleaner salesman, Of Love and Hunger, and his surreal novella, Bitten By The Tarantula, as well as his war time stories, his (unfinished) memoir seemed like the next logical step, although logic is not something you’d associate with JMR.

He seemed to have an awful lot of bad luck: manuscripts go missing, banks refuse to cash cheques, printers refuse to print the swear words in his stories, his adaptation of A Gun For Sale is accepted but not put into production because Germany invades Poland, his literary career (such as it was) is curtailed by being conscripted, his literary agent is killed, the film studio he's working for goes bust, he comes down with pneumonia after being offered a top secret mission in Africa, but at other times, he creates his own bad luck: writing to a Times journalist to complain that the BBC aren’t paying him 50 guineas for his radio play, and his contretemps with various people at the BBC unfortunately brought to mind Alan Partridge and Tony Hall’s argument about a second series (some of it is very #AccidentalPartridge: JMR comments that Cyril Connolly did not buy him lunch at the Cafe Royal but he ate a Welsh Rarebit on the train back to Bognor Regis). I suppose his worst bad luck was being more famous now than then.

But he is very funny, easily viewing the absurdities in life, whether that be in the army or the literary world. His meeting with the publisher Jonathan Cape, in which JC himself tells him that they have no problem with bad language but there are "Two words I will have to draw the line at: Fuck and Cunt."
"Shit?" I said hopefully.

Or when he accidentally starts agreeing with fascism because he can't hear what someone is saying in a loud pub.

Or the episode when an over enthusiastic lieutenant tells a new recruit to hit him on his new tin hat with a rifle to demonstrate the hat’s durability; the new recruit accidentally knocks him out and then is too scared to use a rifle for the rest of the war.

The London literary world has changed a lot since 1938 (for one thing, women other than Stevie Smith are allowed into it now) so be prepared to spend a lot of time on Wikipedia looking up who JMR is referencing: obviously I’d heard of Cyril “pram in the hall” Connolly, but only vaguely recollected Norman Collins who wrote London Belongs To Me (later made into a film starring Richard “Dicky” Attenborough) and Henry Green, G.S. Marlowe, Arthur Calder-Marshall, W.S Graham, Cyril Karel Jaeger, were all new to me.

JMR writes that he was ignorant of how the literary scene worked, but this seems to work in his favour: when he wants to adapt a Graham Greene novel, he just writes to him about it and is invited to lunch - in a memorable passage he and Greene walk across Clapham Common in the midday sun to buy jugs of beer from the Windmill pub. His frustration, and bad behaviour acting on said frustration, is understandable when you consider that literary London was run by smooth, mannered, connected and confident Oxbridge men, amongst whom he didn’t really belong; but neither did he really grub down with the working man (or woman, although I think he would have liked to) and to his credit he despised the bully boys of the BUF and was very much a non-proselytising socialist. There are also beautifully observed moments of social history: whilst looking for the Horizon offices in Bloomsbury, JMR finds himself in a block of flats populated by Asian poeple (presumably students at UCL or SOAS), none of whom want to speak to him, closing the door in his face. He later finds out that the authorities are rounding up “Asiatics” as there has been sedition in the then colony of India. The war was not, contrary to Brexit opinion, our finest hour.