Rating: 4/5

“A strong woman who recklessly throws away her strength, she is worse than a weak woman who never had any strength to throw away.”
-	Thomas Hardy, Tess of the d’Urbervilles 

On the opening page of Thomas Hardy’s classic Tess of the d’Urbervilles, a semi-impoverished alcoholic and schemer named Jack Durbeyfield is met by a local parson, who calls him “Sir John.” Uncertain as to why he is greeted in such a way, Durbeyfield demands an explanation, whereupon he is told that despite his current position at the bottom of the social hierarchy, he is a descendant of an illustrious and noble family. 

With this information at the forefront of his mind, Jack Durbeyfield returns home, where he and his wife quickly hatch a plan to send their beautiful daughter Tess over to a nearby family with the d’Urberville name. The hope is that Tess can make a good impression on her “relatives,” thereby improving the family’s position. 

I mention this mainly to point out that Hardy is very quick to set the wheels of his famous novel in motion, starting a sequence of events that will climax (quite abruptly) some 500 pages later. It must be noted, however, that this is just about the only thing that happens quickly in Tess of the d’Urbervilles. While this is a very fine book, and well worth the read, it is also incredibly, sometimes frustratingly slow. In terms of pacing, this is glacial, moving only slightly faster than a three-toed sloth trying to prove the Riemann hypothesis. 

Despite its prodigious – even somewhat intimidating – length, not a lot happens in Tess of the d’Urbervilles. Unlike Charles Dickens, with whom Hardy shared a serialized style and penchant for inflated word counts, this is very self-contained tale. There are no digressionary storylines, no large gallery of colorful supporting characters. Instead of sprawl, Hardy keeps us on a rather straight path, albeit one that is stretched to its limits, like a child playing with a rubber band. 

Because of its paucity of eventful moments, Tess of the d’Urbervilles is difficult to summarize without giving away all its secrets. Suffice to say, the arc that Tess follows passes through two men: Alec Stoke-d’Urberville and Angel Clare. Both are immensely flawed, though for very different reasons. 

Following an ambiguous incident with one of those men – a scene that can be read as a seduction but is likely a sexual assault – Tess is left as a “fallen woman,” her reputation tarnished, her prospects destroyed. How she tries to move forward from that moment is Tess of the d’Urbervilles’s central narrative concern. 

Since saying anything more threatens to take us into the realm of potential spoilers, it’s probably best to confine the balance of my remarks to general observations. 

First, Hardy has a marvelous sense of place. Tess of the d’Urbervilles is set in fictional Wessex, a place closely modeled after the south and southwest of England (those with a better sense of English geography have not found it hard to find the real-life analogues to Hardy’s made-up villages). Over the course of his career, Hardy returned several times to Wessex, and he knows the place well. There is a keen observational talent on display here, as Hardy evocatively describes the rhythms of rural English life in the late 1800s. Whether it’s a May Dance or a summer harvest, a day at a dairy farm or a trip to market on an old wagon, you feel like you are there. 

As to characters, there are no more than a handful of important ones. Most of the story – told in the third-person omniscient, with a godlike narrator who likes to issue vague and portentous warnings – flows through Tess, Angel, and Alec. There are numerous secondary roles, but with the exception of Jack and Jane Durbeyfield (immensely flawed yet strangely lovable), they are not super memorable. 

Tess is the main attraction, and she is a compellingly frustrating protagonist. At times she is strong, proud, and fiercely independent. At other times, she seems to spontaneously lose her spine, becoming indecisive, self-pitying, and reactionary. About the only consistent thing about Tess is her inability to discern the motives of other people. 

Frankly, there were stretches during which I really didn’t like Tess. She often seemed to have selective, plot-contrived stupidity, in which she did something unfathomable simply to keep the dramatic wheels spinning. For instance, Tess’s fluctuating relationship with honesty – first she lies, then decides to tell the truth at the most inopportune moment imaginable – belies all notions of common sense. Yet, as is often the case for me, the very fact that I had such a strong reaction to Tess – even if it was sometimes negative – is a testament to how well she worked as a heroine. Certainly, she holds center stage. 

The final thing worth noting is Tess of the d’Urbervilles’s modernity, at least in relation to its 1891 publication date. Railing against the conventional ethics of the Victorian Era, Hardy presents Tess not as a sinner, but as sinned against, not simply by men, but by a society that is almost pathologically obsessed with the sexual histories of women. He attacks – sometimes a bit pedantically – the uneven morality that allowed men such as the libertine Alec to do as they pleased, but then sentenced Tess to a purgatorial existence for having transgressed the communal code of conduct. Hardy is also scathing towards the hypocrisies of organized religion, devoting several well-constructed scenes to showing men-of-the-cloth choosing the abstract dogmas of theology over basic human compassion.

One of the important things I have learned when reading brick-sized works of English literature is to have patience. If you start something like Tess of the d’Urbervilles expecting – or even hoping – to breeze through it, you will likely be disappointed. This is an incredibly slow burn, unfolding at an unhurried, even languid rate. A twenty-first century editor would undoubtedly have pared Hardy’s manuscript down to three hundred pages, having everything coalesce around five or six crucial scenes, and excising the long passages in which Tess is doing nothing more than walking from one place to another. This would have made Tess of the d’Urbervilles more concise, more efficient, but it also would have greatly reduced the novel’s impact. The emotional punch that comes at the conclusion of Tess’s journey ultimately derives from following her for so long, and from spending so much time at her side.