Rating: 5/5

This book is the perfect combination of biography and American history. Walter Lippman was a journalist who for decades wrote an opinion column syndicated in newspapers throughout the United States, dealing primarily with international affairs.

Because Lippman came up via a privileged path with money no problem and finished his schooling at Harvard, he was from the start an insider who made the usual network of friends who were either influential at the time or would become so. Incredibly, before the age of 30 he had the ear of a President (Wilson). Toward the end of his career he had the ear and then the enmity of LBJ. Throughout he mingled with just about every known political personality not only in the United States but in Europe as well. Trips to Europe were frequent and always put to good use with visits to such as the Pope and heads of state. Not simply formal visits, friendships were maintained through intelligent conversation about the pressing issues of the day, Lippman's second wife, Helen, not only taking copious notes but often acting as translator.

The reader could not ask for more vivid portraits of the powerful, the people that the public know only as images. For example, in a visit by the Lippmans to the USSR, Khrushchev invited them to play badminton and, surprisingly for a short and portly man, won. This is a book filled with personal encounters. LBJ, known for his domination of others in conversation, remarked of Lippman, "as soon as I pull my chair toward him, he pulls his away"

This was a perfect sign of Lippman's high standard for journalism. The journalist should remain aloof from the danger in relationships with power. The reporter could not let personal relationships interfere with reason when deciding on the value of this or that political policy. By adhering to this, he established himself as a person both in the know and worth listening to. His readership was vast and influential because he wasn't a toady to anyone and would quickly speak out against bad policy with good reasons to shun it. Politicians attempted to cultivate him and he enjoyed the attention, connections and socializing this made possible but kept his columns dedicated to suggesting the best policies based only on the facts of the matter. He was a public intellectual unlike any journalist today.

Not only did he write his column, Today and Tomorrow, several times a week, he also wrote books that were well received and remain highly regarded. He had no respect for the mythology of democracy: that each citizen is omnicompetent and that the collective will of the citizenry is capable of making the right policy choices through the vote. He felt that only an impartial group of technical experts on specific subjects, groups that could only offer advice without a say in policy making, could make a democracy workable. We the people would be limited to voting in qualified people and voting out those who proved to be poor choices.

With a good income and the companionship of a second wife that fully supported him and helped him engage fully with emotion, Lippman flourished, rewarded with the respect of the powerful, living an expansive life of travel and intellectual challenge that will awe any reader. Lippman lived exactly the life he wanted. Though he did not always suggest the right direction for policy, he arrived at his views honestly with a sincere desire to offer the best path for his country.

As for the American century, Lippman's intellectual lifetime covered the period from before World War I to the Vietnam War. Starting with Teddy Roosevelt, Lippman had something to say through the terms of Wilson, Hoover, FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy and LBJ. Ronald Steel gives an excellent background on all the issues throughout. Any lover of history will find this book a delight.