Rating: 3/5

Welcome to Mark Twain’s cranky, bilious period! 

Beset by financial problems, bad investments and the complete failure of his meth lab experiments…

…Twain looked to work off some steam.
 
He was too old for hookers, so he wrote this book.

The blurb on the back of my edition throws a lot of prospective literary terms at the reader: Satire? Utopian vision? Romantic fantasy? Hilarious Comedy? Well, the fact that all these are bandied about should give you pause for thought, because this book is difficult to pigeon hole and as a result it’s somewhat of a hot mess.

Emphasis on “mess”.

The gist of it: After getting into a brawl with a guy named Hercules and getting a lead pipe upside his head, the Yankee ends up in a faux Medieval Arthurian times. Because he’s a self-righteous, smug prick, who happens to be handy with just about everything, he sets about trying to modernize medieval England.

Utopian, satirical, romantic, chivalric hilarity ensues.

Along the way, Twain gets on his soapbox and rants unendingly about the Catholic Church, monarchies, the Ruling Class, rich people, braggarts, the Catholic Church, people who don’t bathe, the Catholic Church, phonies, people who endlessly tell the same old jokes…

…and the Catholic Church.

I honestly thought this book would have been a lot more fun than it was. I was probably basing that expectation on the movie version, the Bugs Bunny cartoon and most of the rest of Twain’s body of work. Twain’s wit (it can be dark, scathing and twisted at times, kids) is in evidence, but the jarring tonal shifts and my inability to suspend disbelief kind of left me with a dull headache. I had a hard time believing the Yankee was capable of making such radical technology changes all by himself and keeping many of his factories in secret.

The devastating ending brought home one of Twain’s many core points, this one about the futility (and tragedy) of trying to bring technology and values to a time and place that they don’t belong, but by that time I was pushing myself to read it. 

Subtlety thy name isn’t Twain.

The takeaway: If you somehow get transported into the past, don’t be a presumptuous asshole and try to change everything, go with the flow for a while, then use your knowledge from the future to appoint yourself Grand Emperor of Earth. Also, stay in school and don’t do drugs.

This was a rogue pantsless buddy read with the likes of Hog-washer and Bacon Breeder Ginger, Everyone’s favorite diaper-wearing Canadian – Evgeny, Holly Go-Lightly and former director of A.I.M. – Boise, Anne. She was let go for pantsing M.O.D.O.K.

If you want to read a tale based on this book minus the humbug whining, try L. Sprague de Camp’s Lest Darkness Fall. 

If you want your Arthurian legends better served, there’s plenty of better options as well.