Rating: 5/5

from Sunday
About here. All along here. All along here. All the soft coercions. Maybe black and shiny, wrinkled. A sky marbled with failures. A patterned revision. And got here about one o'clock. And got here wet to the skin. And here are houses too, here and there. And luck, too, whenever. And here experienced the benefits. And here again wisps. And here gained real knowledge. And here got into the wild. And here, too. Arrived here about two o'clock. Here alone the length. There is a bed of chalk under this. The fresh water falls here. Clumps of lofty trees. Dictions of deficit. Maybe we bristle. Came at the fact here. Everything has been done here. Every system's torn or roughened. Every surface discontinuous. Everywhere we are tipping our throats back, streaming and sifting. Got at work here, streaming and sifting. Got here to breakfast. Got here to sleep. Here a streak of light, there a streak of dark. Here and there a house. Here are all of the causes. Maybe a flesh that reverse. (2-3)

from Wednesday
You've always wanted poetry, our slimy harness and soft restraint. Now look; we embed ourselves in immateriality. Of course it rained! We chuck gravitas. Pinkish-green, and grey with yellow tints; look at the thin metaphor. Pockets of fog; compositions do desire. Pulsing lights; our attention is glass. Rain pelts the glass; we seek to produce delight. Skin hinges the light; this is a conceptual war. Smoke ribbons up from the city; we are splendidly desolate. Snow fills the footprints; we abruptly coincide with neurosis. (35)

from Friday
Not we persons are breaking open. The real is not enough to pleasure us. We rest thrice in the advance of zestful agitation or on the confession of conflict unheedful and hard and as the distant world forbidding within ourselves as rivals. Body of cloud like an inundation. We are sexual peninsula. Body of cloud from the bottom of buildings. How is it now to be a lady. Tacit. Like the future is relevant. We rest on deep vacation and no sorrow and we speak amazing upward structures plumped. Construct the uninhabitable streets of our life. Body of cloud arrive at their maximum. We rest on the bafflement. Great empty ballrooms of the future. We explore water and air also alabaster pigment and stainless steel. Construct the most radical banality. The hurts felt. New golden face. Body of cloud personified. If we abandon a pronoun an argument is lost. We rest on the fringe of a vigorous architecture fighting and sliding as the orange lights of description therefore we're inflected by the site. (57-58)

from Porchverse
Each leaf a runnel
the roofs now skiffs in green
I've never done anything
but begin. (78)