Rating: 1/5

This one starts off with the heroine assigned by her publishing company to ghostwrite the artist hero's biography. She moves in with him for the five working days of the week at his secluded, little beach house and goes back to her home in the city on the weekend.

Hero’s ocean-themed paintings are very famous in South Africa and he is working on his new upcoming exhibit at the same time that he is working on his bio with the heroine. From Day 1, hero starts making heavy passes at heroine, leaving her little pencil portraits on her bed, unfastening her hair, kissing her, caressing her even as she constantly (and half-heartedly) says no.

Hero thinks she is reluctant to start an affair with him because she has a lover waiting for her at home on the weekends. But there is no Mystery Man, even though the heroine lies and says there is. Heroine's Big Mystery is that she is a single, unwed mother to a beautiful, sweet little girl.

After the shock of being abandoned by the baby daddy, the heroine promised herself that she would never let herself get involved with a man again, that she would become self-sufficient in every way including a well paying career, and that she would henceforth live only for her daughter.

Now why exactly did she think it was a good strategy to hide her status as single mom and instead let the hero think that she was a skittish virgin and that she had a Mystery Man back home, I will never know. That lie really irked me because not only was it unnecessary, but it seemed the heroine was keeping her daughter hidden away like a dirty little secret, which didn't fly with her inner monologue that was forever repeating the mantra of how much she loved and missed her daughter.

After repeated, thwarted attempts to get heroine into bed, the hero finally consults the Harlequin Manual, specifically Chapter 8 regarding the old "dangling an OW to make heroine jealous" card. Applying theory to practice with vengeance, he surrounds himself with not one but several fawning, gorgeous OWs who are all terrible, snobby, condescending witches to the heroine.

Well, the Manual paid off because that very night, the formerly prim and proper heroine, seething with jealous rage, agrees to skinny dip with the hero and ends up having sex with him on a beach towel. Idiot!

Once they consummate their relationship, hero asks heroine to stop seeing her Mystery Man and instead to move in with him on a full-time basis. Heroine is still keeping her daughter a dirty little secret so she refuses. Hero secretly follows her back to the city to confront her Mystery Man and instead he discovers the heroine with her little girl. 

To my complete and utter disgust, heroine STILL tries to pass the child off as her niece until the little girl calls her "Mommy" in front of the hero. The hero berates the heroine for all her lies and slut-shames her to boot.

At this point, I was so disgusted with both of them that I skimmed through the few remaining pages: Yaddi, yaddi yadda...The HEA is arrived at by hero suffering an accident and heroine rushing to his bedside to declare her love.

Honestly, I shudder to think of the heroine's treatment or rather mistreatment of her daughter once heroine marries hero and gives birth to a bevy of "legitimate" half-siblings that she won't feel like she has to hide :~{