Rating: 5/5

'Couldn't Keep It To Myself' by Wally Lamb is a sad book of short autobiographical stories written by eleven imprisoned women attending a memoir-writing class. They are racially White and Black. They come from the underclass and the middle-class. Their writings are edited, but unfortunately the real lives of these women were not.

The convictions?

Credit card fraud
Embezzlement
Assault
Drug trafficking
Manslaughter
Homicide

Commonalities:

Childhood traumas, mostly because of shit parents, even if those parents didn’t mean to be terrible. Some of the writers' parents supposedly loved their, generally in number, four kids, some totally didn't. Some of the prisoners claim to love their own, generally numbering about four, kids. Generally the moms of the imprisoned writers worked hard at either outside jobs and/or at trying to guide their kids without much ability, time or knowledge about talking to their kids. Some of the incarcerated women also worked outside the home before their convictions, holding down jobs. Dads generally did not act as if they loved their kids despite their stated vows of deep affection and honorable intentions. Sex education appears to be non-existent, being limited to parental threats without any explanations or efforts to give their daughters birth control. In reality dads, and some moms, acted either with constant punitive violence or selfishness, and often both. Dads almost never provided any funding or time for their kids, despite their claims of eternal love of family and their significant other. 

Actions speak louder than words, parents...

-Most of the women had been raped before age twelve, several by dads, stepdads, or adult friends of the family. 

-All of the women were involved with a boy or a man in a sexual relationship before age sixteen, feeling it was true love. 

-All of them were deserted by the fathers of their children.

-Most of the women dropped out of high school, primarily because they hated school. 

-They clearly did not read much before being incarcerated - I can tell, as probably most Goodreads members can when meeting new people - lack of perspective and introspection being the primary clues, especially when these women were in their teens. Plus, excessive reliance on ignorant passed-around social and family tropes and beliefs, without examination or educated knowledge.

-Most have four children, and a couple of divorces/separations or several true-love relationships before they were convicted of crimes and imprisoned.

-Most had many many many ‘homes’, their parents moving a lot.

-Most have ADHD, or learning disabilities, or personality disorders.

Stereotypical, you may be indignantly thinking? Absolutely. Because most real prison inmates often actually do have the same type of family dramas again and again, as verified by outside family members and described by researchers and journalists. The details differ, but not the outlines. Many stereotypes are based on reality, sometimes exaggerated, but real nonetheless. If we want to hear different stories from and about prison inmates, we need to finally fix the causes of criminal behavior. What are the causes? DID YOU READ THE ABOVE EXPERIENCES I RELATED ABOUT THESE WOMEN?

So far, America has little to show in improving the situation despite many thousands of so-called fixes I have seen, read about or tried, by religious authorities, NGO's or government programs. 

Republicans generally think more beatings, punishment, shaming and blaming will fix criminals - as if that hasn't been the child education methodology go-to that most of these women's parents already have done. 

I do not understand how a substance-addicted or learning-disabled high school dropout coming out of prison decades later still unable to read, write or add figures will somehow be able to become a tax-paying, morally-respectable citizen [and parent] after being warehoused, raped, neglected, deprived, punished and beaten while imprisoned; and never having used an up-to-date computer or smart phone or having been given a meaningful education or mandatory psychiatric treatment. Accept it that the punitive actions many conservatives DO, even if not publicly admitted, actually result in a permanent population of those who are driven to resort to criminal behavior through either mental problems or financial poverty.

Many progressives almost never follow through or continue the often fantastic success-proven educational prison programs they initiate, since they dry up funding after a quarter of a year or after they've been reelected, dropping the ball. 

Some progressives and conservatives are fucking crazy, believing in granola- or prayer-lifestyles is all it takes.

Very few businesses truly want an ex-prisoner for an employee, given the issues enumerated above. Women also must face gender discrimination and predations of men bosses and peers, especially if they have children to support and a criminal record, an easy blackmail opportunity. The women in this book who no longer are incarcerated, alas, all seem to be working for NGO’s as councilors, a notoriously low-paid employment, for other women who are substance-addicted and abused by their male lovers.

I am using the term “male lovers” satirically, given the evidence of these women. 

We demonize and condemn the mothers for lack of moral values, while wink-wink, excuse the fathers because 'boys will be boys', both genders actually acting out often in the same behaviors (as well as in gender-specific behaviors despite whatever we liberals do to erase some female/male differences).

But, we do almost nothing (except relying on using moral misdirection or Pollyanna fixes of temporary hope), to resolve the actual dysfunctional family foundation of generations: No. Financial. Or. Enrichment. Resources.

We refuse, absolutely refuse, to provide any real laws or enforcement of laws, or any long-term funding, for mandatory psychiatric care. 

Personally, I am beginning to believe all parents should be absolutely licensed, with proofs of having the ability to support children financially and psychologically, particularly since we are tending to make abortion a moral issue and illegal, or as nearly impossible to get as a free college education. If you think abortion should be illegal, then why is crap parenting not made illegal? Crap parenting is absolutely a crime, too, despite Pollyanna thinking. 

SUPPORT WOMEN AND THEIR CHILDREN WITH FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND EARLY EDUCATION. MEN, KEEP YOUR GD PENIS IN YOUR PANTS UNLESS YOU USE BIRTH CONTROL AND SUPPORT YOUR KIDS COMPLETELY FOR EIGHTEEN YEARS WITH GD MONEY AND TIME WITHOUT ABUSE.

Wally Lamb is a well-known author, and Dale Griffith has taught at the York Correctional Institution School, both supporting writing workshops at prisons.

An example of ‘involved’ fatherhood: https://youtu.be/jHPbOGEUvZA