Rating: 2/5

Hmmm, well, I guess I can't honestly recommend this. Undoubtedly the journeys were fascinating and worthy of a certain amount of awe, but I didn't enjoy the writing. For starters, Thesiger devoted little energy to visually describing things. There was the occasional remark about the color of the dunes, and a some attempts at describing camels, the all-important ships of the desert. But when I read a book about a trip I'll probably never take, I want to feel like I'm there, and Thesiger either didn't know how to do that, or didn't think it was important.

But my bigger complaint is with Thesiger's thorough, oft-stated dismissal of everything and everyone not Bedu. To admire the grit, generosity and loyalty of his nomadic traveling companions is one thing, but to repeatedly tell me, the reader, that they are finer human beings in every way than his European peers and my American ones, and that any lifestyle other than theirs is fundamentally flawed and worthless... is another. Because Arab sensibilities were so rankled by his repeated (illicit in their eyes) traverses of the "Empty Quarter" and surrounding areas, he eventually became so well known that he was effectively barred from ever returning to the lands that he repeatedly pledged unabashed love for throughout the book. As the book was written after this realization had sunken in, perhaps a significant amount of bitterness was inevitably interjected into his prose.

Some examples:
"In the desert I had found a freedom unattainable in civilization; a life unhampered by possessions, since everything that was not a necessity was an encumbrance. I had found, too, a comradeship inherent in the circumstances, and the belief that tranquility was to be found there. I had learnt the satisfaction which comes from hardship and the pleasure which springs from abstinence."

I could argue most of these points with Thesiger, particularly the freedom that he seems to treasure. I would argue that he had less than he thought. He certainly couldn't go wherever he wanted. Availability of water, where his guides were willing to take him, boundaries imposed by warring tribes, weather, were all things that constrained his movements, whereas I can get in my car and go see almost any type of geography I want, and hop on a plane and fly to those I can't get to by car. If Thesiger's nomadic comrades had wanted to go skiing, they utterly and completely lacked the freedom to do so. And while I agree that our lives are often TOO dominated by possessions and the pursuit of them, that doesn't make possessions themselves bad. Many of our possessions (like, books for example) enhance the quality of our lives tremendously, and the notion that eschewing all possessions somehow makes a life purer and more nobly lived is something that I just can't begin to agree with. Besides, you know what possession (second to their camels) is the most important and treasured of the nomads? Their guns. That's not my analysis, it's all throughout the book. Is a life where your gun is your second most important, treasured possession really so free and noble?

"But there was a deeper reason that had prompted me to make this journey. I had done it to escape a little longer from the machines which dominated our world... all my life I had hated machines. I could remember how bitterly at school I had resented reading the news that someone had flown across the Atlantic or traveled through the Sahara in a car..."

Sure, there are lots of people who long for a simpler life, and reject the notion that mechanical and scientific advances have improved life for mankind. But without such advances I would only have one leg, wouldn't have been able to stand on the shores of the Bosphorous a few months ago, wouldn't be able to share thoughts on books with so many like-minded people and probably wouldn't have been able to read Thesiger's book at all. This notion that all technical advancements are bad is a tired cliche that I have no patience for. Sure, it's nice to get away, and if you want to be permanently away, more power to ya', but don't try to convince me that modernity is bad for everyone just because YOU don't like it.

My final, ultimate frustration with Thesiger was his incessant, adoring praise for the positive character traits of his nomad traveling companions, and simultaneously cavalier dismissal of their faults. I certainly admire their loyalty, perseverance, endurance, faith and generosity, which Thesiger described endlessly in the book. But in the same narrative he often mentions their greed and avarice, and their quickness to war, yet these seem not to tip the character balance at all. More disturbing still, and something I'm completely unable to rationalize, is their utter disregard for human life. The book is sprinkled throughout with stories of retribution killings, of completely innocent people, often children. In one case, a story is almost admiringly told of a Bedu who had seen a relative killed while conducting a raid against a rival tribe, and his satisfaction at later avenging that death by killing the a boy from that child that he happened upon, herding some goats. This, and a dozen similar stories in the book, seemed not cause Thesiger any dismay, and certainly didn't influence his perception of the people.

I intentionally didn't read any biographical information about Thesiger until I finished the book, but nothing I subsequently read surprised me. He spent his life eschewing modernity, bitterly railing against it whenever he had an audience. While I would have been fascinated to ask him questions about the places he went, I'm confident that we would not have liked each other at all. And weary of his bitterness and frustrated at his lack of objectivity, I definitely won't be reading his other best-known work, The Marsh Arabs.