Rating: 4/5

Mission impossible…

1943 – The Aegean. Twelve hundred men are trapped on the small island of Kheros, off the coast of Turkey. Soon the Germans will arrive in force, and the men know that they will either die or be captured. All the forces of the Allies are unable to get to Kheros to evacuate the men, for on the island of Navarone, a few miles away, there is a massive cliff-top fortress guarding the channels between the islands, complete with a battery of massive guns…

  “The guns of Navarone.” Jensen paused for a long time, then repeated the words, slowly, expressionlessly, as one would repeat the name of some feared and ancient enemy. “The guns of Navarone. They make everything equal. They cover the Northern entrances to both channels. We could take the twelve hundred men off Kheros tonight – if we could silence the guns of Navarone.”

Capatain Jensen, Chief of Operations for SEO in Cairo, has tried to silence the guns with raids from sea and air, but each time they have been repulsed with deadly force. Now he has put together a small team, each with special expertise, and tasked them to get onto the island of Navarone and spike the guns before the German force arrives to take Kheros. The team is headed by Captain Keith Mallory, a New Zealander who in pre-war days was probably the most famous mountaineer of his time. He has been fighting in the mountainous regions of Crete, alongside his Greek friend and companion-in-arms, Andrea, a ruthlessly courageous man who has personal reasons to hate the Germans and whose loyalty to Mallory is complete. Then there’s the American, Dusty Miller – an explosives expert, whose expertise as a field medic will come in useful too. Casey Brown, the Glaswegian, is an engineer, his skills developed in the shipyards of the Clyde. He’s the one who will have to get them to the island and who’s in charge of the vital radio equipment that will keep them in touch with HQ. And then there’s young Andy Stevens, another mountaineer and fluent in Greek, but hiding the secret of his own cowardice. As they make their way through hazards on sea and land, this group of disparate people will meld into a team, each reliant on the skills of the others to survive, and each with the knowledge that not only their own lives but the lives of twelve hundred men depend on the success of their mission…

With this kind of adventure thriller, there’s a kind of sweet spot in the characterisation that makes the book either succeed or fail. Firstly the characters have to be likeable, but they also have to have flaws or they become unrealistic. Secondly they have to be heroic, but their heroism has to be at a level the reader can just about imagine achieving or they turn into superheroes – still fun, but no longer inspiring that feeling of empathy that brings the suspense of caring about their fates. Thirdly, they need to be in genuine jeopardy – this usually necessitates killing one or two of them along the way! On the whole, MacLean achieves all of these objectives, although Andrea rather falls into the superhero category and so never felt as real to me as the other characters. I also rather quickly tired of Andy Stevens’ obsession with his own feelings of cowardice – it was such an obvious ploy that he was going to find bravery at the crucial moment and redeem himself, so there was no real element of surprise to his story. The other three hit the sweet spot nicely, though, each having moments of failure to make their moments of heroism and success stand out more, and MacLean does an excellent job of showing them each gain more respect and admiration for the others as they learn to work together.

The book was first published in 1957, which was probably too soon after the war for the patriotic jingoism to have completely worn off. MacLean does point out the futility of much of the death and destruction a couple of times, and occasionally he hints that a particular German might have been a decent man in civilian life, but on the whole this is a story of brave and righteous Allies fighting against evil and rather stupid Nazis. He gives a slightly odd depiction of the Greeks, as brave undoubtedly, but still not quite the equal of the English-speaking nations. It’s of its time and not nearly as off-putting as some writing of the era, but it still jars a little now. I was glad that he avoided making the Glaswegian either a comedy drunk or an aggressive fighting-cock of a man – being Glaswegian himself may have helped him avoid those stereotypes!

Of course the story becomes incredible – don’t they always? These men are bashed over the head, shot, stabbed, blown up, starved, frozen, fall off cliffs, and yet they bounce back each time to carry out feats most of us couldn’t do even after six months of intensive training. They develop an all-for-one mentality which is in contrast to the nasty German habit of sacrificing their soldiers cheaply with no compunction. And again, so soon after the war, when most of the readership would either have served or had a father who served, there was no way that the good guys wouldn’t win – people still had to convince themselves that the sacrifices had not been made in vain, which for the most part was probably true. But MacLean does show the hard-headed heartlessness that those in charge sometimes had to adopt – sacrifices made for greater gains. 

Overall I felt the setting was done very well – the rugged terrain, the sheer cliff-faces, the angry sea, the snow – no idyllic Greek island vacation this! The characterisation too is good, with the exceptions I’ve already mentioned. And while the outcome of the plot is never in much doubt, it’s an exciting adventure getting there. Definitely a classic of its genre although, to me, that genre of WW2 adventures feels a little more dated than others now.

www.fictionfanblog.wordpress.com