Rating: 4/5

The title to this one is a cunning play on the fact that the heroine, Charlotte is a solicitor and will find love with head honcho solicitor, Daniel, in a sleepy backwater solicitor's office. Unlikely, I know, but Charlotte has been a high flier, having had her own practice, but then fallen a victim to the recession (the one referred to in the book is the one that took place in the early 90s being as this was originally published in 1992) and feels an utter failure that she's had to give it up and go back to being a humble employee. In fact for a good 45 pages she spends the time with a massive chip on her shoulder, pretty much resenting and hating anyone who hasn't failed in business. Then Daniel's charm starts to win her over and despite a few little hiccups, they prove that they really love each other (although she's so embittered during the early part of the book, it's hard to see what Daniel actually sees in her at all, and his claim that he fell in love with her at first sight is particularly incredible) and presumably live happily ever after.

I didn't like this book at all during those first 45 pages - Penny Jordan is so good at sketching a lovely heroine that this one, who was foul to start with, was a bit of a disappointment. However, the story really picks up as the heroine falls for Daniel and it's all terribly romantic. There's a bit in it when he asks her in for "supper" and makes clever use of a hostess trolley during this incident (now who wouldn't fall for a man who is not only a careful driver, but can also handle a hostess trolley deftly?)

This book really is a very good example of Jordan's work - She wrote for Harlequin Mills and Boon for four decades and all of social change during that time is recorded in those books. People might say that these slightly trashy romances have no value but there's a chart in these books of the society of the 80s, 90s, 2000s and 2010s. There's a bit of everything in here from the 90s - power suits, yuppie flu and the recession which meant that so many people had negative equity in their properties. Being as she was a middle-class woman writing from a village location, Jordan is portraying this as any ordinary person would. It's not the view of a politician, or a philosopher, or a movie star - it's the view of the average person - something that normally just gets glossed over or forgotten about. How valuable is that? Realise I'm banging on a bit about it, but am thinking of justifications for writing a theses on these novels.

Anyway, in short, there's not too much rumpy-pumpy in this one, but the hero is nice, the heroine comes good and it's an enjoyable read. Plus at a penny on Amazon, it's worth it for the scene with the hostess trolley alone.