Rating: 3/5

2.5/5

I’m not sure where to start. Well, I’m still ambivalent about this one. On the one hand, it was undoubtedly an entertaining read. On the other hand, the romance aspect of this book failed me big time.

This one had an interesting plot. Not quite as original as the author’s other books I’ve read, but still good. For the most part, it was a decent read but there were a few things that ticked me off.

As I already mentioned, I wasn’t impressed with the romance part. In my opinion, Jack and Amanda’s chemistry felt totally forced. And frankly, my major problem with this aspect was Jack. I hate it when the hero chooses not to fight for the heroine just because he thinks he doesn’t deserve her. I was very disappointed in Jack. He loved her. Wanted her badly. But he dumped her! And then tried to convince himself that he did it for her own good. Why did he let his tough upbringing keep him from having a happy future with the only woman he loved? That was weak and stupid! Argh, I hate this kind of hero!

Well, perhaps he was right. Amanda deserved better than him. She deserved someone who would fight to the end of the world for her. Someone who wouldn’t hesitate at the chance to be with her every day. Someone who would never ever let her go!

And speaking of Amanda, I must admit I didn’t know what to think about her at first. She was sort of meh for me. But as I read further into the story, I began to warm up to her a little. I can’t say I totally enjoyed her character, even so, somewhere towards the end of the book, she really got better.

Due to my high expectations, this one fell somewhat flat. Although many parts of the story were good, I wanted something else. I wanted to feel the real chemistry between them. I wanted a little bit more excitement and drama. I just wished Jack could be a desirable hero whom I couldn’t say no to.

Sadly, I got none. I felt like I expected a lot but got less in return.

I’m not quite sure whether to rate this one 2 or 3 stars, but since I never once felt like putting it aside and started reading something else, I think I’m going with 3 stars.

Please note this is only my personal opinion. If you’re a fan of historical romance, don’t let my review discourage you. You may enjoy it more than I did.