Rating: 4/5

ARGUING WITH ARISTOTLE

This book is a highly selective and impressionistic view of/guide-book to Aristotle's philosophy. Ackrill’s aim in this book is not just to impart information, but to arouse interest in the philosophical problems Aristotle tackles, and in his arguments and ideas.

To Ackrill, what really characterizes Aristotle as a philosopher is not the number and weight of his conclusions / ‘doctrines’, but the power and subtlety of his arguments and ideas and analyses.

It is as well that this should be so. For having to learn a doctrine is a boring task, and specially depressing when you know that it is false; but interesting arguments give pleasure and profit whether or not they really establish the alleged conclusions. Aristotle's key ideas have provoked and stimulated philosophers over many centuries, precisely because they are not cut and dried doctrines, but can be applied and interpreted and developed in various ways, still relevant to problems that confront us.

Ackrill shows us how enjoyable and rewarding it is to engage in philosophical arguments with Aristotle. Even as we enjoy the refinement, conciseness and suggestiveness of Aristotle's arguments — we should know that we would enjoy them even more, the more we engage ourselves in them.

Ackrill’s next point was what I found very personal and invigorating:

Now if our aim is only to understand Aristotle, this 'engagement' will have to be carefully limited; we must enter into his thoughts but not go beyond them, we must try to relive his intellectual journey, taking care not to carry with us any twentieth-century baggage or equipment. To achieve such an understanding is certainly a worthwhile aim, calling for both imagination and intellectual power. However, we may desire not only to gain some understanding of Aristotle, but also to understand better some of the philosophical problems he confronts. In this case we are entitled to engage him in argument as if he were a contemporary. 

It is not in itself a fault to use modern notions in discussing arguments in ancient philosophers, and to argue with them as if they were contemporaries. It is a fault (the fault of anachronism) only if one's aim and claim is to be doing purely historical work.

To argue with Aristotle, and to learn from him, is not difficult. For the problems he struggled so hard to formulate are still central to philosophy, and the concepts and terminology he used in trying to solve them have not lost their power. Keeping to the aim of the book — to rouse active interest in Aristotle’s philosophy — Ackrill raises many philosophical questions and makes philosophical comments of his own, in order to remind the reader that what Aristotle says is there to be argued about, and to provoke him into further thought on the various problems.

This approach of argumentation is precisely what Plato allows through his Dialogue form, and it is encouraging to hear from Ackrill that a reader might expect the same from Aristotle as well, even if with extra effort.

While I am sure that the exposure Ackrill provides will come in handy, I have a feeling this sort of engagement with Aristotle’s ideas would be more useful for a seasoned reader than for a mere beginner like me. I will be coming back to this often as I go through Aristotle’s works.