Rating: 5/5

Lady Serena Spenborough wants nothing to do with Ivo Barrasford, Marquis of Rotherham, one of her father’s best friends and her former betrothed. But her father thinks differently and after his death, Lord Rotherham becomes her Trustee and, if Serena will want to marry, he will have to give his consent. This is preposterous to Serena but unfortunately she must accept her father’s will. After a while she goes to Bath with her stepmother (who is younger than her) and meets a man whom she has not seen for seven years, a Major Kirkby, her first love. With the arrival of other interesting people and the unceasing quarrels with Lord Rotherham, Serena’s life will be full of emotions and particular events. But will her heart make the right decision when it comes to choose the man of her dreams? 

*Sigh*

That is exactly how I feel after reading an extremely good book. “Bath Tangle” is definitely an excellent one! I did not know what to expect actually, because I had read some bad reviews of it, so I was a little unsure, but then I thought “It is Georgette Heyer! It cannot be horrible!” And it was far from that. It was amazing!

The main characters, Serena and Ivo, were totally maddening and tiresome but I loved them to pieces! That was probably the first time I liked two characters so exasperating so much but I could not help it, they were wonderful. And, most of all, they outshone the others! Although everyone was necessary to understand that incredible tangle Ms. Heyer contrived. I am aware that because of their personality, readers either adore or hate Serena and Ivo. They are both very strong, independent and stubborn and it is very difficult to find them just nice or be indifferent to them. They drove me crazy sometimes, but these are the characters I love most, the ones that involve you in the story and you feel a part of it, you are not just a reader, it is more than that. When your only thought is to keep reading a book because you want to see more of them and you hope they get what they want, you are in love with them. That is what happened to me, I fell in love with Ivo and Serena immediately despite all their flaws and imperfections. They are perfect just the way they are.

As for the others, I cannot complain at all. I loved Fanny (I so wanted her to be happy!), Hector (the sweetest of them all), Mrs. Floore (I had a lot of fun every time she was present!), Emily (alright, maybe I did not like her that much), Lady Laleham (she is a very sly person, I warn you), in other words I loved everyone, both the bad and the good ones! Because all of them contribute to make the story fun, romantic and engrossing. But my absolute favourite was Wilton, Lord Rotherham’s steward. He basically appears just in one scene, he only says a few words, but those are the most significant words of the entire story. I believe that his remarks about a certain person and situation made one of the protagonists act for the best, and I loved that moment! 

Georgette Heyer never fails to surprise me. She always makes my reading time enjoyable and I love spending my hours with her characters. “Bath Tangle” is a lovely Regency story I would recommend to people who love misunderstandings and intricate relationships!