Rating: 5/5

This one will probably always be on my currently reading shelf. Right now I am working on scenes from Richard III and Twelfth Night and monologues from Cymbeline and Henry IV, part ii, also the sonnets. My least favorite play so far is the Merry Wives of Windsor - the opening scene makes no sense and if Shakespeare wrote it he must have been drunk.

Now I'm working on a new scene from Twelfth Night and one from All's Well That Ends Well. The latter one I have never read so more on what I think about it later this week. 

All's Well is nice, not my favorite comedy but nice nonetheless. Interesting use of rhyming couplets between Helena and the king. This play is awkward for me because Bertram and Helena seem ill-matched but maybe that makes it more realistic than some of the other plays about love. There also seems to be a stronger female presence than in other plays but the women are not very three dimensional for the most part. I think this play succeeds or fails based on the vision of the director and cast more so than one like Twelfth Night.

Measure for Measure is interesting. The "virtuous" characters have serious flaws and the villains are charming. Especially Lucio. There is a very similar subplot to All's Well whose moral runs along the lines of "If you have a wife or fiancee who you are avoiding while pursuing a virtuous maiden, don't make plans to deflower the maiden at midnight in the garden because the woman you meet will probably be your wife." 

Tempest: Just revisited for the first time since a production in college (cast as Miranda turned it down to play a spirit in an ugly mustard leotard...) It is surprising to me what language stuck and what didn't. I have part of a song that often runs through my head that evidently comes from this play but I had forgotten where I learned it. It is much shorter than I remembered. Prospero is by far the most dimensional character but the other characters are nice archetypes. Love the comedy between Stephano, Trinculo, and Caliban. I think it is interesting that Caliban speaks in verse I would have expected prose from him. Anyway. lovely play. I hope I have the chance to play Miranda before I get too old. 

Twelfth Night: Just revisited this for an audition. It is a wonderful comedy that holds up with few alterations in the modern world. Also three great characters for women. I was surprised by how much of the play is in prose but I suppose it makes sense because it is a comedy and so much of the action takes place between the servants. I remember seeing a wonderful production of this show at UCSB when I was in high school. I feel badly about how the audition went and I just realized it is making me reluctant to spend much time thinking about the play so maybe I will return and review it more objectively at a later date.

Coriolanus was a wonderful surprise. I wanted to read it because we were going to the opening night of OSF's production of it. In general I am not much of a history person and despite the fact that this is considered a tragedy I was pretty sure it was Roman history cleverly disguised. Anyway, I found the play to be very accessible, if rather long. The language, perhaps because so much is spoken by and with commoners, is very visceral. Lots of land and animal imagery (is a dragon an animal?) that I found to be particularly appealing. I also found the play to be philosophical particularly about the role of government and tension between classes, certainly a relevant discussion in any society and time period. I didn't find Caius Marcius, later Coriolanus, to be particularly likable, but he does say some wonderfully inflammatory things and his journey was interesting. The real revelation for me was Volumina, his mother. She is incredibly powerful and interesting, right down to her intriguing child-rearing philosophies. What a role. Can't wait until I am old enough to use her monologues as audition pieces. Also lots of humor in the play. Class tensions makes for some funny disagreements. I look forward to being surprised by other works in the canon. 

Henry V: I chose the love scene in Act V as my final in Shakespeare class this year. I ADORE this scene. It is so sweet and romantic since the Henry doesn't speak much French nor Katherine much English but they both want it to work. It would be a thankless role in actuality since it is one of exactly two scenes that Katherine has in the play but it was perfect for in-class work. I enjoyed the play as a whole too. I know this is very dense of me, but this was the first play where I really began to understand how the histories are inked. It is really fun to watch characters (like Henry V) grow and develop throughout the plays. If I were actually in this one, I would probably want to be Pistol for all of the comic scenes. Speaking of the comedy, I think the French insult of sending Henry tennis balls when he wants to fight them is silly and delightful. I also like the pervasive use of dialects throughout. 

Henry VI, Part 2: I'm working on a monologue from this play - Queen Margaret (who shares my exact birthday and exact wedding anniversary). It's actually quite interesting so far, perhaps one of the most delightful aspects is the number of insults. Virtually all of I.3 is a volley of viciousness. Fantastic. And then the play takes a turn for the bloody. I am really looking forward to seeing this staged.

Cymbeline: I had been planning on reading all of the plays set in Italy before my trip, but I don't think it's going to happen somehow. I am starting work on a monologue from this play so expediency trumps lofty aims.

Richard III: I just got cast as Lady Anne so I've read this play twice recently and will be reading it lots more in the New Year. I'm drawn to the number of roles there are for older women in this play. I think it will be fun to work with a group of accomplished actresses. I also love the two murderers and the constant wordplay. Richard seems to be having the most delightful time being rotten person. I hope our performance conveys the deliciousness of his actions. Lots about fate and prophecy in this, a feeling for the truth of the curse"may you receive everything your wish for".

Two Gentlemen of Verona: This is the summer show for SF Shakes. I think I want to audition for it but I need to read it first. Just finished and it's fine, lots and lots of plot similarities to other plays, some "All's Well", a touch of "Romeo &amp; Juliet", a little hint of Arden forrest. My favorite character was Launce, a servant who has lots of clever dialogue and a priceless monologue about the trials and tribulations of being a dog owner. 

Macbeth: Had an audition for an incredible production of this yesterday. Just re-read it. There's a reason this is a classic. Love all of the opposites ("fair is foul and foul is fair"). I was surprised by the relationship between the Mackers, there's a lot of love there. My impression going in was that Lady Mac was pure evil and Mac was weak, but they're so much more and I can totally see how things got out of hand. Reading this was like a treasure hunt because there are so many famous lines and I have seen so many pieces of this show in class. I'd read this again in a minute.

The Winter's Tale: I just re-read an edited version of this play for an audition I am attending. Still some lovely monologues and charming scenes. I have a hard time with some of the character's choices, they seem illogical to me but I think that means they are well written because they are behaving in that messy way things happen in real life. with such a large time span between the beginning of the play and the end, it is a challenge to know what character to try for. Will the characters be cast as they are at the start and aged for the second half or the other way around? i would really, really love the chance to work with this play in greater depth.