Rating: 5/5

My interest in reading this novel was sparked back in the 90's when I watched, and really liked, the 1995 sort-of movie adaptation, A Mother's Gift, starring Nancy McKeon (https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0113859/ ). "Sort-of," though, is a necessary qualifier; while the film has the same basic premise, lead (and some other) characters and setting as the book, and includes some motifs from the latter, there are VERY significant differences in plotting, and where the book covers protagonist Abby Deal through a very long life, the movie omits her childhood and ends about at the halfway point of the book. So the one experience didn't give me as good an idea of what to expect from the other as I thought it would. (I also distinctly remember reading somewhere, and took for truth, that Aldrich based the book on her own grandmother's pioneer experiences. That was apparently some reader's inference, derived from the relationship in the book between Abby and her 12-year-old granddaughter, budding author Laura, who was thought to be Aldrich's fictional alter ego. The inference was a reasonable enough hypothesis --it just happens to be totally untrue.) But although the book differed a good deal from my expectations going in, I nevertheless came to appreciate it deeply.

Our fictional heroine was supposedly born ca. 1846, and died ca. 1926. (That's not a spoiler --in the prologue, which Aldrich calls the Introduction, she's already just died, and her family's conversation in the parlor of her home frames the tale.) The author was born in 1881, so her real life overlapped with some 45 years of her character's. Nevertheless, I've classified the novel as historical fiction, because the part of the story set from 1854, where the first chapter begins, up into the 1880s provides the matrix and grounding of everything that follows.

This is the story of a girl whose parents, a wealthy young Scotsman and a poor Irish peasant girl, met in Scotland, went from wealth to penury, and crossed the sea to America; a girl who came to the Iowa frontier with her family after her father died, and a young woman who married right after the Civil War, and shortly after that accompanied her husband to homestead on the virgin Nebraska prairie (even though she herself didn't think that was such a great idea). Musically talented, gifted with an artist's eye though lacking training, and yearning to express her feelings with a pen, she was a young woman convinced that she could do great things with her life. Does she? Well.... That's for the reader to decide. But she definitely does build a marriage and a home, raise kids, and contribute to the peopling of a new state, the forming of a new community, and the transformation of hostile prairie into fruitful farmland, in the face of drought, blizzards, rattlesnakes, hordes of grasshoppers, prairie fires, and grinding poverty. While not a homage to Aldrich's grandmother, the book is a very real homage to a generation of pioneer women whose courage and sacrifice made the western part of the Midwest what it was in Aldrich's time, and even what it is today.

Bess Streeter Aldrich was born in Cedar Falls, Iowa (where we meet Abby), the last of eight children, and born late to parents who pioneered in that part of the state in the early 1850s. She grew up hearing and absorbing the tales of pioneer life from her parents, older siblings, and extended family. In preparation for writing this 1928 novel, she also researched extensively into the written and oral records of the Nebraska pioneer experience (having moved to the state in 1909 after her marriage; the couple settled in Elmwood, the model for Cedartown here.) Other aspects of her own life experiences are reflected in those of various characters here.

Like Willa Cather in My Antonia and O Pioneers!, Aldrich is writing here in the Realist style, about rural and small-town Nebraska in pioneer days; comparisons and contrasts between the two writers are natural. The main contrast is that Aldrich covers the entire sweep of a life in about 206 pages, so that sometimes a few years are treated in a couple of pages. There are longish passages that read like a regular novel, and very moving and character-revealing dialogues, with a wealth of vivid vignettes all through the tale. But some of it is more like a chronicle than a conventional novel, though some experiences are related in much more "real-time" detail than others. (Narration is third-person throughout.) Arguably, Aldrich doesn't have as much vivid description of the natural world as Cather does (though it's there). She also doesn't present the same kind of climactic moral decision Cather does in O Pioneers!. Though Aldrich was a Christian, one reviewer felt that this novel has less spiritual depth than Cather's work, and that of some other writers I haven't read. I can't address the latter comparisons; but I'd say that while Christian content here is very low-key, that's also the case in the two Cather prairie novels that I've read.

On the other hand, precisely because of the long scope of her work, Aldrich's perceptive description of the psychology of aging, the sense of the bittersweet forming and gradual changing of a family culture, as the original nest first fills and then empties, and the candid exploration of the loving but often perplexing and sometimes fraught relations of parents to children and grandchildren, really resonated with me as a 73-year-old reader, and doesn't have a counterpart in these two Cather novels. As a reader, you feel (or at least, I did), the physical hardship of pioneer life more vividly here than I did in Cather's work. Aldrich's craftsmanship as a writer, at least here, isn't less; she just uses it differently, and she infuses her writing with an elegiac grandeur and emotional power that I've seldom seen equaled. I couldn't rate this at less than five stars!