A few years ago I encountered Weil and she had an immense effect on me. I try and revisit her periodically and am still very far from coming to any definite views on her life and thought. If she were fictional she'd probably be the greatest literary character of the twentieth century. The fact that she literally existed is endlessly haunting and strange. I go back and forth about whether she was serious philosopher. Her thought is violent and often shudders on the verge of utter incoherence. At the same time, real wisdom is apparent in almost every line. It's possible to read this book as a confession of madness - as no doubt modern psychiatrists would have a field day diagnosing Weil and giving her drugs; all the same I think she ultimately resists any efforts to dismiss her or explain her away.

Weil emphatically agrees with Nietzsche that Christianity is a religion for slaves. From there the two of them went in radically different directions. Reading Nietzsche one gets the impression he's frantically trying to convince himself he's not a slave; Weil came to accept the truth of Christianity after recognizing herself as one. Where Nietzsche would hysterically assert his own freedom and strength, Weil's self-loathing at times borders on a kind of megalomania.

I appreciate Nietzsche but find his rants tiresome at times. The absolute need to be an individual can lead to a lot of romantic clichés. By contrast, Weil's intense focus on what is anonymous, impersonal, uncreated in herself results in a stunningly unique self-portrait.

*
It's clear Weil was not opposed to food itself, only the act of eating; somehow she knew that was not part of her earthly vocation

The relation of hunger to food is far less complete, to be sure, but just as real as is that of the act of eating.
It is perhaps not inconceivable that in a being with certain natural propensities, a particular temperament, a given past, a certain vocation, and so on, the desire for and deprivation of the sacraments might constitute a contact more pure than actual participation.

She'd always justify her extreme asceticism in terms of a need to mingle with all of humanity. Even after coming to believe the Gospel, she refused herself the comfort of entering the Church on the grounds that it was not truly universal. She did not want to limit herself in any way or exclude non-Christians from her understanding. Her final self-starvation was meant as an act of solidarity. She literally could not live with herself being separate from the masses suffering through war.

*
"Friendship is a miracle by which a person consents to view from a certain distance, and without coming any nearer, the very being who is necessary to him as food."

"It is impossible for two human beings to be one while scrupulously respecting the distance that separates them, unless God is present in each of them. The point at which parallels meet is infinity."

*
For future study: compare Weil's 'affliction' (malheur) to Paul Ricoeur on the servile will, the involuntary at the heart of freedom.