Rating: 3/5

THE FIRST CRITIQUE OF THE WARREN COMMISSION
 
Mark Lane (born 1927) is an American lawyer who has written other books such as 'Last Word: My Indictment of the CIA in the Murder of JFK,' 'Plausible Denial: Was the CIA Involved in the Assassination of JFK?', and 'A Citizen's Dissent. Mark Lane Replies To The Defenders Of The Warren Report,' etc.

This 1966 book was the first substantive book-length criticism of the Warren Commission report on the JFK assassination. It includes many troubling observations, such as that Howard L. Brennan (the man who is said to have seen Oswald through the Book Depository window, and later identified him in a police line-up) "himself FAILED to identify Oswald in the police line-up---in spite of the fact that he had by then seen Oswald on television. Only afterwards, when Oswald was dead, did Brennan say that... (he could have picked him out) had he not been afraid of 'communist' reprisals." (Pg. 11-12)

He notes that J. Edgar Hoover admitted to the Commission that the doctors examining Kennedy "at first thought the shots had come from the front." (Pg. 12) The doctors stated that they believed the throat wound was an "entry wound" (pg. 47). Furthermore, 92 out of 124 witnesses affirmed that they believed the shots came from the "grassy knoll" in front, not the Book Depository in back. (Pg. 39) Two out of the three marksmen the Commission hired to test whether Oswald could have fired three shots in less than 6 seconds failed to get the shots off quickly enough, and none of them struck the head or neck of their stationary target, much less a moving one. (Pg. 127)

He suggests that Oswald might have been murdered because "the conspirators wanted to silence him or because his ultimate vindication would have caused a search for the real criminals..." (Pg. 272) He concludes that the Commission "failed to conduct a thorough investigation... I believe the final failure of the Commission to be that it has prepared a fertile ground for the cultivation of rumor and speculation." (Pg. 343)

Although there are many more extensive and recent books on the JFK assassination (including those by Lane himself), this early book remains of interest to those wanting to get the complete background on the JFK assassination and the Warren Commission.