Rating: 5/5

King John, my Shakespeare group April 2026 play, has a popular reputation for being Shakespeare’s worst play, but more than half of the vocal people in the group seem to think it is a wonderful play. So does Emma Smith, Professor of Shakespeare Studies at the University of Oxford, who called it her favorite of the history plays (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=06VGa...). I’m in the love-it camp. It is different than the other history plays. The kings in the play, including King John, don’t seem to be the main characters and certainly not the most noble, strong, charismatic, clever, or effective. The kings make plans and try to take actions but seem to always be foiled by unexpected actions of other people (sometimes to comic effect) or unexpected wind, weather, and waves. The actual hero stars are a fictional knight, the illegitimate son of Richard the Lionheart, who is known as Bastard, and a leading citizen of the almost-besieged-town Angiers, who both best the royals with superior wit, intelligence, loyalty, and honor. The kings are also often stymied by one or another of the wonderfully strong, assertive, eloquent women in the play, particularly Constance, mother of a competing throne claimant, who explodes in an impassioned rage speech when she and her son are betrayed by the French and Austrian kings and a gut-wrenching exclamation of grief when her son is captured and she knows she will never see him again. Unusually, this play features several mother and son relationships rather than the typical father and son. The timeless issues addressed include self-interest and corruption resulting in bad leadership, true honor achieved by resisting self-dealing, religious hypocrisy for power and monetary gain, and a country and its leadership being its own worst enemy. As usual, the poetry is gorgeous and the insults pure genius. This flexible play is amenable to serious (https://archive.org/details/bbc-shake...) or comic (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vqlUI...) interpretations.