Rating: 2/5

It's very tempting to dismiss this book and Lowen/ "Bioenergetics" in general and there are many sound reasons to do so.

First of all, he is not very likeable as a person. He comes through as narcissistic, ego driven (he even admits that his main motivation to become a psychologist was "to become famous"), dismissive and highly uneducated at times - or at least not at all well read. His dismissing attitude and his laying aside the whole tradition of Yoga in merely two sentences, his claim of having improved upon and adapted it to the west is pretty preposterous and laughable and this is a motife you'll find all throughout the book.

Secondly, the authors he quotes (which is mostly himself) are either very obscure or completely irrelevant to psychology today. He also doesn't quote many studies and he is in general very unscientific and unsystematic. His "theories" are mere metaphors, his observations remain superficial and in general he often reads like a new-age spiritual quack. 

So why do I think reading him might still be time well spent? 

I encourage you to look at current somatic approaches to psychopathology and trauma. What you will find is that there are many parallels to this early, in some ways pioneering work of Reich and Lowen, who, if I am not mistaken here, were among the first to take psychoanalysis and bringing in into the realm of the body. 

You will find, reading Bessel van der Kolk for example, that indeed, f e e l i n g is for many people the crucial step to begin h e a l i n g, and you will find there the research, a plethora of studies, to back up the importance of the body in psychotherapy and in trauma treatment. 

You will find that Lowens metaphorical concept of "falling anxiety" (falling asleep, falling in love) and his ideas about orgasm, maintaining erections, being able to digest and defecate, etc... are all linked to the modern view of trauma as a constant, involuntary activation of the sympathetic nervous system and an inability to get out of the fight/ flight/ freeze response - thus suppressing the PNS. 

Finally I hope you will find, as I did many years ago, that some of the exercises are actually quite powerful and therapeutic. They have impacted my life quite dramatically at one point and I still practice some of them regularly. 

There are youtube channels where you'll find the exercises - try and use them; for research, Bessel van der Kolk is a good starting point I think.