Rating: 2/5

This has got to be, stylistically, the worst written biography I've ever read... I've read a lot of biographies about both Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis now, plus I've easily watched and read close to a hundred hours of source material, so I'm pretty positive I can definitively say that Tosches' writing style is literally the opposite of who Dean Martin was as a person: meandering, desperately 'edgy' and straight up pretentious. It's obvious he doesn't have enough material to fill out the book he thought he was writing, so the first 100 pages are filled up with tangential information about the history of Italian American immigration, the Italian mob and every woman and minority-based slur known to man for no other reason than it's 'rock-n-roll' edgy to do. I get that he was trying to drum up some excitement for a guy who'd been long dismissed as a self parody by the early '90s, but boy does he do it in the worst possible way. That this book was praised so highly is absolutely wild to me, it reads almost like a parody comedy sketch of mobsters. 

When Tosches stops with his 'n****r whoredom of slutitude' word wankfests (always with some italian thrown in despite the fact that he even quotes Dean Martin saying he only spoke a dialect and he wasn't even that great at it), I will admit there is some good information here about Dean Martin. Tosches obviously did a lot of research and put a lot of time into compiling what he could get his hands on, even if it doesn't amount to a whole lot of detail outside of the Martin and Lewis years. I do think he made a mistake by focusing more on mob ties than on Dean's family and friends. There's barely any information about his brother here, for instance, or about his marriage or home life. You can learn more through Google and YouTube at this point, through interviews from people Tosches easily could have tapped. Then the book ends as it starts, devoid of any meaningful information. After Martin and Lewis dissolve, he positively gallops through Dean's movie years, unfortunately. It morphs into this increasingly looser sketch that just sort of peters out, like a senile Dean Martin forgetting his lines.

But Dean Martin never seemed at all like that extremely 1990s middle-finger-and-Penthouse attitude that Tosches uses as a crutch for all things "uncaring" throughout. Sure, he womanized like hell and did what he wanted when he wanted, but that was out of convenience, not malice. Tosches gets so focused on this menefreghismo stuff that he sort of misses the forest for the trees–what is all of this manly posturing than insecurity disguised as power? Tosches quotes Jerry Lewis as calling Dean Martin out as more insecure than he realized, but Tosches doesn't seem to ever acknowledge it further. I get the sense that Dean Martin was the type of guy who never wanted to truly put his all into anything for fear of failure and embarrassment. It explains why he never was comfortable with change and never wanted to do several takes in music or tv/film despite always being on time and knowing every word. It also explains why he gravitated towards comedy and especially drunk comedy (it's never a mistake, it's part of the joke!). Then when his projected easy-going attitude was mistaken for pure masculine confidence, he rode that wave straight to the bank. Of course that all backfired on Dean when he realized all that was expected of him was to show up, drink a glass of bourbon and pretend to sing. The bar was set too low and the acceptance came too readily in spite of it; he lost respect for himself and, in turn, he lost respect for his own audience. Eventually Dean did embody the carelessness everybody presumed he started with–his later years were definitely defined by a 'if that is all there is to it then fine, fuck off, that'll be all you get' attitude.