Rating: 5/5

It's funny what memories from childhood stick with us so clearly: I remember one time at our local library, my mother reached onto the top shelf to bring down a yellowed copy of "Toby Tyler" and recommended it to me. I remember that it looked so huge and the print was so small, but I was determined to tackle it because she said it was so good. I'm sure I did finish it, but having now listened to an audio version, I remembered none of the actually story (other than the fact that Toby runs away from home to join a circus, but you can figure that out from the title :P). I'm glad I have that memory of my mom recommending it though, because I can't remember any other time hearing about this title and I might not have chosen it again now! And it was a wonderfully entertaining tale: Toby runs away from an orphans' home when a circus is in town and the circus peanut-seller needs a boy to help in his stand. Toby is thrilled by the idea, but of course once they leave town, it is nothing like what he expected. His new boss is cruel, but he makes many friends among the performers: Ben, the old man who drives the wagon, the Skeleton and the Fat Lady, and a little girl named Ella who rides the horses with her mother. He also forms a very close bond with one of the monkeys, Mr. Stubbs. Mr. Stubbs acts as all monkeys would: at times almost human, but at others very mischievous. Right when Toby saves up enough money to start contemplating running away, Mr. Stubbs throws all his coins over the side of the wagon. Once they do run away together, Mr. Stubbs shreds all of their foodstuffs and scatters it around, rendering it useless. Just when I think, jeez Toby, you can be really stupid about your pet - why don't you ditch the monkey? Mr. Stubbs is accidentally shot by a hunter. Oh the feels! How did the author make me love Mr. Stubbs so much?? And why did he have to die like that?!? So suddenly, and you can just feel Toby's heartbreak! I even got a little teary myself. But enough about Mr. Stubbs - the moral of the story was that of course, there's no place like home, and Toby eventually runs away from the circus and makes his way back to Uncle Daniel and all the boys where he truly belongs.