Rating: 4/5

About 8 years ago, my wife and I nurtured the idea of running a used bookstore someday. It never fully came to fruition. We sold stuff online for a while, but maintaining and updating stock became burdensome, and really I just wanted to read everything I had gotten my hands on. This memoir was one of them. I didn't realize at the time that it had been written so long ago, before I was born but after Rather had already had a considerable career. I had gotten to know him as the anchor of the CBS evening news, but I knew little of his work as a reporter. When I began this book, I didn't know if it would hold much interest for me because I thought it wasn't really the Rather I knew, but it turns out it's exactly the Rather I know. I used to think of him as a grumpy old man, but over time I realized he is merely a serious news man. No, he's not as warm and endearing as Walter Cronkite, but Rather is a different kind of news man. He was always there to deliver tough news with a serious face. I don't think I ever saw him crack a smile on the evening news. It just wasn't his way. Little did I know that he had been weathered and seasoned by a remarkable career already as a reporter. Here, he gives his experiences from his early days in the 50s on up. He talks about how coverage of Hurricane (forget the name) and how his groundbreaking live radar updates on the weather put him in the national spotlight. He talks about reporting from Dallas on the day Kennedy was shot (and supports what Stephen King later had to say about 1963 Dallas in 11/22/63). He also covers the Nixon years, which were some of the toughest of his career. It's an interesting snapshot of some of the most tumultuous events in our nation's history, very fascinating. And I think it should be a primer of what might be expected of a reporter who hopes to make a decent name for himself or herself in this business. I personally wouldn't have the fortitude, so I'm more than happy to read Rather's recollections. The pacing of the book flags somewhat in the final chapters, which are basically an extended epilogue summing up his career thus far: what he's learned, what he'd do differently, etc. I could have done with a little less summary, especially since I know that Rather's career past this point was still pretty remarkable and would bring plenty more notable experiences.