Rating: 4/5

I like this book so much because it wonderfully portrays how life is a battle for young and old and the in-between, for all of us. The characters in the book are each fighting different battles, from the youngest of only four caught in a trap, losing a father, missing a brother and confused by the general state of the world around him, to an elderly telegrapher who cannot bear the consequences of war in his hometown (Ithaca, San Joaquin Valley, California) or for that matter the general state of the world, war 1942. Neither understands the incomprehensibility of life. Each battle is as important as the other. I saw and understood ALL the characters’ personal battles. Some die. Some falter. Some are strong. Just as in real life. In this book you see everyone’s battle, and I liked that very much. 

The common battle, that which the characters and we are all fighting, is our attempt to make sense of the craziness of the world we live in. Look at the title: The Human Comedy! We struggle; we try to reach understanding of a world that is not understandable. It is this that is the human comedy. 

There is a lot in this story that probably would not happen; for this reason alone I shouldn’t like it as much as I do.

Faith is an integral part of the story. I would love to have faith, but I don’t. This could have been a stumbling block for my appreciation of the story, but because faith is not shoved upon the reader it is not a problem either. 

I loved that each individual’s battle felt real, vital and worthy of battle. A four-year- old’s, a fourteen-year-old’s, a half-wit’s, a soldier’s, the town’s ancient history teacher’s. I saw kindness, and I saw meanness.

The audiobook narration is by Meg Ryan. I discovered that this story has just this month, September 2016, come out as a new film entitled Ithaca . Meg Ryan both directs and acts in the film. Her diverse intonations did not work for me, but she is easy to follow. The audiobook narration is not bad. 

I have read that the novel has autobiographical content, but I don’t know more than that. Neither do I understand what the author was trying to say by taking names and places from Homer’s Odyssey. Is it the draw of home? But what is “home”? Is it necessarily a place or is it more than that? Is it our need to believe in goodness and truth and kindness, the things we often associate with our earliest childhood and home? I am not sure.