Rating: 4/5

Ignore the blurb...

Christopher Richmond comes to Chesdene to check out the Manor. Miss Diana Chalfont and her mother, Lady Chalfont inhabit the dowager wing of Chesdene Manor and hope Mr. Richmond will come and live in the manor as their tenant. The ladies are badly in need of funds as Diana's Papa gambled away the family fortune. At first Mr. Richmond seems unfriendly and reserved but all Diana is concerned about is the money. Mr. Richmond agrees to lease the manor and make some necessary repairs. While that is happening, he returns to London to visit the lawyer, Mr. Dally, to sign the paperwork. When Mr. Dally's clerk, Mr. Collins, gets a look at the Chalfont file, he spies a secret unknown to anyone. Mr. Collins, an opportunist decides to use the secret to his advantage. Meanwhile, Diana's friend, Irene Langley, is invited to London for the season and begs Diana to go with her. Lady Chalfont sees this as a golden opportunity for her daughter and encourages the reluctant Diana to go. While in London, Diana runs into her tenant, Mr. Richmond, who is as distant as ever, a stark contrast to his friend John Chertsey. Diana also runs into her cousin, the head of the family, Sir Sidney Chalfont who begins to pay her marked attention. What could he possibly want with a penniless young lady when he, by all accounts, is penniless himself? Sir Sidney is eager to know more about his new mysterious tenant. Who is this man and why has he come back to England?

The publisher advertises this as a A delightful blend Georgian romance and mystery. That's rather silly. They should ideally market this as a "traditional Regency romance inspired by Georgette Heyer." It's set during the timeframe most authors consider the Regency period even if it wasn't the official Regency yet. The mystery isn't much of a mystery. I figured it all out right from the beginning. I wasn't surprised by any of the so-called mystery plot points. Been there, read them. Still, I really enjoyed this book. It's one of the better Heyer copycats while still being an original story.

I did not like Christopher, our hero. It is disgustingly unfair to hold a grudge and want to punish an innocent woman and girl who are as much victims of the patriarchal system as he is. He can't POSSIBLY fault them for what happened, especially Diana who was just a little girl. Diana benefits by accident of birth and I think she's suffering enough. Kit does acknowledge that at the end but it takes too long. I was angry with him for the whole book. He could have handled that situation SOOO differently and Lady Chalfont would have welcomed him with open arms. He didn't have to be surly and suspicious. I liked him best when he bought a painting. I thought I had actually seen that painting but when I looked up the author, he didn't seem to be a real person. I also liked Kit better when he was funning with Diana. Unlike Kit, I really liked Diana. She's intelligent and sensible. Even though she's young, she had to grow up quickly because of her father's death. He was a gambling addict and lost everything but the roof over their heads and the women are only there because of Sir Sidney's generosity (or laziness). Diana accepts her situation with good grace. It is what it is. She knows her father failed them and she acknowledges this. Diana knows what she has to do and goes after her goal. She knows her financial limits and accepts them. Diana isn't your average managing female trope though. She's pushy enough because she has and knows how to speak out and speak her own mind but isn't overly bossy. I like her sense of humor and how she draws Kit out of his shell.

There is, of course, a secondary romance. Diana has a beautiful, blond, petite best friend. Irene Langley is the opposite of Diana except for possessing a sense of humor. She isn't a emptyheaded though. She's a kind, good friend who always has her bff's back. I like her relationship plot. Christopher's best friend John is the opposite of Christopher. Jack is light-hearted, charming and fun. They seem to have had many adventures together in India. Jack is ready to settle down and be married, he just hasn't met the right lady yet. He doesn't know Christopher's background but he knows his friend is a good person. They have each others' backs too. I like these two pairs of friends, opposite yet close enough to know what the other is thinking.

The mystery plot is rather lame. Mr. Dally, the lawyer, is overworked and absent-minded. He trusts his slimy clerk Collins with too much responsibility. Collins is a bully, a sneak and probably a blackmailer. Not to mention an opportunist. (Behold, here's a villain!) Sir Sidney is lazy, stupid and selfish. He has the family trait, gambling addicting, and is not accepted as good ton. His choice of sidekick, I can't say friend, Mr. Harnby, speaks volumes. There's a reason for their relationship. Mr. Harnby is an awful person. Nothing he does is moral or ethical. I think he has encouraged Sidney and now Sidney owes him. Mr. Harby is the puppet master of the plot.

This is an enjoyable read for fans of The Unknown Ajax, The Toll-Gateand other traditional mysteries. I liked this book best of the few by this author I have read