Rating: 3/5

This counts more as a re-read than the first time, but essentially I am much older, wiser, more literate and hopefully more discerning than when I first read this, probably in late middle school shortly after it was originally published. I remember reading this and perhaps the first ten books before I moved on to other things in the years following.

I hadn't thought much about it other then an occasional fond memory, nor had I known the series went on to 36 books so far. In addition, my interests have shifted back to post-apocalyptic stories to a degree, so I decided to pick it up and refresh my memory.

The first comment I have to make, is my rating is based upon the premise of what the book is, which is a serial, rapidly written, old-style pulp fiction. 2-3 books released a year in some instances, combined with the fact that the author was also writing books in other genres. Anybody that expects this book to be literary genius is out of their own gourd.

That said, it's amusing, its a quick read, and its fun. To some degree it is an analysis of 1970s and 1980s society, certainly from a conservative political perspective, and with a lot of utopian idealism thrown into the mix.

This first book just sets the overall background for what is going to be the larger series, so if you read it alone, you are going to be left with a lot of questions, which should not be surprising since the author and publisher wants you to buy more books.

The end of the modern world due to nuclear and biological warfare, followed by the attempt of groups within the United States to re-build their own society's, some based on cooperation, some on thuggery and brutality and anywhere in between.

I think the book does speak to the fear that many people have about their government, about "the other" even within our own society, greed, lawlessness, and much more. It addresses, in short spurts anyway, the problems of a society that is split fairly evenly across pretty radical lines, and spouts anger at a society or system that allows 51% to dominate 49%, the growth of bureaucracy and massive government, debt, social ills, and much more.

It is food for thought, even if you disagree with the "Solutions" inherent in the idealistic society that is built at the end of the work.

All that said, keep reading, from memory, the other books will outrage most readers as well. In my opinion, a little outrage and confrontation of our own beliefs is a good thing.