Rating: 3/5

[A confession before I write review, I wish to admit that it kept lying on my shelf for about 1.5 years because I did not like the title. I thought this stuff had something to do with plane crash, until, I read back cover, last Saturday, when I was short listing novels to keep for my library. It lasted for three days, turned out well, as you will also witness in following lines – a good read but not for faint hearts]

The Crash of ’79 has everything from finance to banking, capital markets, foreign exchange, international politics, oil and war. At moments, it was overwhelmingly suppressing especially when Erdman dealt with oil price embargo and Middle Eastern money but in the later half story shifted to politics from finance which, although was an interesting part, but was not as captivating as first part. Nuclear weapons, war, seizure of oil fields and power clashes in one part of the world caused a financial havoc in other parts of the world which defined how closely we are correlated? And why peace, in all its forms, through out the world, is becoming necessary for survival? Balance of power on the other hand has also an important role to play as it prevents competing parties to play chicken. Most importantly, a sketch of financial model of western economies which Erdman drawn forced me to think for few minutes how far we are from complete financial meltdown? I could not come to a conclusion!

Meanwhile, between this, it had banking, capital markets, investments, forex and United States Dollar. As a banker it taught me two lessons (a) avoid asset mismatch and (b) never throw good money after bad. As a lay man I had three (a) avoid debt (b) never speculate and (c) equate power. This story has a lot to teach including financial history amid World War II. Writer commented on the nature of Swiss, Germans, Americans, British and Arabs. I also encountered Pakistan’s name twice but fortunately not for something we are famous for. 

Over all, it is a good read although it becomes sketchy at end. Had politics not overcame finance it could have been an excellent one. Do you know what sequestership is? No, Shah of Iran even did not know! It was something that Americans did to Swiss in 1941 and Pakistan did to Americans in 1998. Yes, freezing all foreign accounts.

All finance lovers are recommended a read, but, don’t take it on your nerves otherwise there would be no landing. Barely a crash! Happy reading!