Rating: 5/5

"Killing people. It makes you feel powerful and larger than life. It makes you feel you're God Almighty. But you're not. You're only a nasty bit of goods that's been found out. And when that fact's been presented to you suddenly your ego just can't stand it. You scream and you rant and you boast of what you've done and how clever you are. Well, you saw him."
When I began reading this late-career (1961), non-Poirot / Marple work, I didn't suspect that it would ultimately be (so far) among my very favorite Christie novels. (At the moment, it might even be my favorite; though there are many titles I've yet to get to.)

Two years ago, a writer for 'Time Out USA' released his own Christie ranking since - during COVID - he read all of her mystery books (not including her plays). He cautioned: "With a few important exceptions, the books she published from 1930 through 1950 are the ones most worth reading. Unless you're a devoted completist, stray from this period at your peril." He went so far as to place 'The Pale Horse' in a mid-tier Marple list (designating it as "of some interest"). 

I thought his overall ranking was generally well-thought-out and perhaps rather accurate (esp. if you have a taste for the more commercial titles). But, of course, it's only one person's opinion - and, boy, was he wrong about 'The Pale Horse'! It may not be a Christie that gets talked about a lot - but it's criminally unsung. Not only is it the author at her clever-best - it also contains (since she had then been at her job for several decades) some of her best actual writing (as well as plotting). 

~ particularly some top-notch descriptive prose:
   ... I became aware of a face peering out from the shadows of the dark hall. A queer, rather formless face, like something made in putty by a child who had strayed in to play in a sculptor's studio. It was the kind of face, I thought, that you sometimes see amongst a crowd in an Italian or Flemish primitive painting.
'TPH' is split-in-two: generally in alternate chapters, the story is divided between the 'narrative' of historian Mark Easterbrook and a police procedural charged by Inspector Lejeune. 

Individuals in a small group are systematically dying. Their destruction has been orchestrated by a shadowy force, in ways that can defy detection (which is to say - capture by the police).

What originally had me like a fish on a hook when I glanced at a synopsis was its study of black magic; something Christie had (I think) not tackled before or since. But, here, she takes to it full-throttle. She includes a trio of witches, introduced thematically by way of Easterbrook and a lady friend attending a performance of 'Macbeth'. By the time Easterbrook takes part privately in a ritual presided over by Dark Arts priestess Thyrza Grey, all is genuinely unsettling.

But, in typical Christie style, humor is spread throughout like breadcrumbs:
  "You can never argue with a redhead," said Lejeune. "Don't I know it!"
As is also rather common with the author, the pacing is breakneck, culminating in a resolution of breathless intensity. 

This is Christie in a somewhat uncharacteristic mood, in a change-of-pace gamble that's chock-full of dividends. Lady Agatha outdid herself this time!