Rating: 5/5

I'm going to tell you a secret. It's one of those unbelievable stories that people sometimes tell you and you walk away having barely paid attention until you're sitting alone in near tears because of some pain and it makes no sense. That's when I want you to remember me. 

This was my miracle. I had been a long time sufferer of back pain and repeatedly diagnosed with Scoliosis. When I say long time suffer, I am saying from the time I was 20 until I was over 30 I had daily non stop back pain. Most of the time it was just there, like walking around with a knife stuck in me in a few spots. If I didn't move too fast than it wouldn't be so bad, but if I bent to pick up a piece of paper the wrong way, I would not be able to stand up straight for days on end. A rare golf outing may or may not end me for a week. It was a crap shoot.
 I was told surgery was likely the only answer that would help alleviate the pain however it would never fully go away. I had heard about this book like many other through Howard Stern. In 2004 I finally bought it and like many others, it just sat on my shelf. 

Then that day came when I just wanted to sit and cry. The pain was bad but the frustration I felt was far worse. I could not do the things I wanted to do. I could not succeed in work or play because of constant pain. So I opened the book.

Here is the miracle part. The part no one believes. I was half way through the book when the constant pain I felt for most of my adult life just disappeared. That's it. It was just gone. I got up out of bed for the first time in days and could stand up straight. No soreness, no stiffness. It was just gone. 

I have been many many years without constant pain. I am human so there are times when I have what I would call a "normal" back ache. After moving, or 36 holes of golf, or painting my kids room. Nothing like I used to have. When pain does come up, I just re-read this book and I am free again. I continue to get diagnosed with Scoliosis and the doctors often ask if I feel any pain. Some of them I tell about the book. None of them ever believe me.

I have bought more than 30 copies of this book. Any person I know personally that tells me of their back pain, I will buy it for them. I tell them my miracle story and as you can imagine, most do not believe it. For some it has worked, for most it does not. I do not know why.

My advice is, open your mind before you read. Give it a chance. I have no idea why it worked other than Dr. Sarno's explanation. 

Good Luck.