Rating: 3/5

This was an interesting read about adultery because it did sort of a deep dive into how it happens and its repercussions. 

I'm not sure how the Joan of Arc sub-story weaves together with the main storyline. From my vantage point in the book, it doesn't do a good job, it just confuses the plot. From the beginning, I had to struggle to make sense of who all the characters are and how they're related, as this wasn't clearly delineated--although maybe that is the strategy here?

The motherhood realities and realizations and neuroses around it become pronounced and more real by the Autumn part of the book and things are starting to conflagrate. 

By the end of the book, I think the Joan of Arc weaving in could have been left out and it wouldn't necessarily have changed the arc of this book. Also, there were too many characters involved, I think, although I do see how some of them tied in and emphasized various points, like when Emmy got pregnant by Angus and how that reflected what happened between Max and Helen. 

I guess things eventually worked themselves out in the end, with people being able to be relatively happy settling for what was right for family units versus individual desires. 

This was also very British, in terms of language, and if I didn't work for a British firm for over ten years, I might have gotten lost in the British terms.

Book coincidences: the name Prudence was used for main characters in this book and in The Signature of All Things; also virgins were a main theme.

I'm wondering why/how this book got suggested as a "must read" with a stack that included self-help books like Rising Strong, Braving the Wilderness, Daring Greatly, Deeper Dating, The Mastery of Love, Loving What Is, Hold Me Tight, Real Love, and Getting the Love You Want. Was it a mistake or an oversight--maybe a different author who wrote a book with a similar title that was actually a self-help book and not a novel? Either way, it was an interesting read, although it could have had a bit more umph and less confusion with the interweaving of Joan of Arc.

"She looked more than usually worn and lustreless, not from overwork, for she lived a privileged life, but from disappointment." pg. 197

"Thus, as he made the gesture, he equated it to the terrorist's action when he or she first pulled a pin or depressed a plunger. His fingers tensed. Once the action was done the result became the only thing that could matter. From then on, normal restraints were in the past, and it was not possible to go back." pg. 199

"Jamie did not often encounter Prue's practical side. Lovers don't, which is part of the seduction for each. Between lovers, there is no need to consider surly tennagers, leaking roofs and the weekly shop. These are reserved for the spouse." pg. 256

"Even your head no longer belonged only to you. Everywhere you went . . . Violet chopped on . . . babies came as well. You could not work without thinking about them, lunch without worrying if the baby was getting his, enjoy a drink with a colleague without feeling guilty." pg. 260

"Blindness to the centre of the other was how a marriage survived. If you knew too much about your spouse, the marriage stood less of a chance when changes occurred." pg. 270

"She clenched her fingers around the wheel. The luxury of being able to do something without the rest of your life being dragged in was, it appeared, given only to a few: the very lonely and very determined." pg. 311

"Jamie registered Violet's sharp shoulder blade under his hand. He had never seen Prue in a temper (neither, of course, she him) and the experience would alter, subtly, the image he carried. Jamie was learning about flux: the mutation from one state to another of the people he loved. Or. perhaps, he was learning to see what was there in the first place." pg. 328

"Prue ignored her daugher. Another black mark. Another cold stone for Jane to lay on the wall building between them." pg. 328

"A hand grasped Prue's heart and closed, and she was not sure if it indicated fear, or a curious exultation that the worst could be about to happen." pg. 390

"Prue had an idea that the roar and buffets of the battles ahead would strengthen her power. Love, after all, was an act of will. Passion was not." pg. 436

Book: borrowed from Skyline College Library.