Rating: 1/5

This book is about to put me back in a reading slump. 

With the resurgence of Madeline Miller's stories I have been on the hunt for more clever retellings of mythological stories and historical figures from around the same era, and I thought this one would be perfect. I had recently included references to Sappho's poems in my college admissions essays and was infatuated with stories about her native island of Lesbos, and I was very excited to read a story promising to fill in all the gaps in books and wikipedia pages. So I hate to say that when I closed the book, I did so with the most immense disappointment. 

#1 The rough timeline
I did not like the story from the get go. Sappho's monologue on the cliff is meant to spark attention: A list of reasons a woman is about to die, making you want to read further to understand the stories behind it. But it was too revealing. She talks about her fame, her rumoured love for Phaeon, her daughter, her commitment to Aphrodite, her time spent in Egypt, her love affairs with Isis, the Pharaoh and Alcaeus and Praxinoa, effectively everything, before we even get into the official story. I hate knowing everything that is going to happen instead of getting to discover a new layer chapter by chapter. Even in stories like  The Song of Achilles  a retelling of an Epic most people know the ending to, there is colorful language and masterful characterization that makes it compelling, something this story does not have. 

Secondly, the speed at which the story moves as well as the transitions are extremely awkward. She speaks about her father's love for her and then boom, he is dead. Within ten pages her mother has run to Pittacus, whose tyrannical reign could have been an interesting plot point but is reduced to a love interest for her mother, she meets Alcaeus, solidifies the first of her fame, leaves to exile with Alcaeus , falls in love, jumps ship, is rescued, and immediately married to Cercylas. This is all mashed together in such a fast medley that none of the individual pieces of information have time to sink in.

Later when Sappho is island hopping there is a common trend of ships wrecking, chaotic stays and their inevitable rescue that becomes incredibly boring due to the sheer number of times it happens. I found that I didn't care about her meeting Aesop and the Pharaoh or her time with the Amazons or centaurs, or the school she opened for girls, because none of those things were explored past the surface level, and frankly, it takes effort to make such gradiose events so boring, and I really wish that instead of trying to check every exotic location off a list, Jong had taken the time to isolate the story to a few places and really develop the characters and conflicts that came with each one. That, or make the story longer to accommodate all the things she clearly wanted to happen. 

#2 Language
I briefly touched on how a retelling can be made interesting through language, and this book fails on every account of trying to read it. Everything felt very stilted and formal in a way that the dialogue was as suited to this time period as much as any other up to the nineteenth century.

I also take issue with the strange sexualization of everything. I understand that this is a story that heavily involves belief in Aphrodite and sexual healing, as well as the love affairs of a grown woman, but sometimes the sexual remarks and innuendos felt shoehorned in as a lazy reference to Jong's imagination of ancient Greece rather than anything that added to the story. I particularly feel that the descriptions of children were unnecessarily sexual. Take these quotes: 

"Her sea-blue eyes blurrily sought out mine. Her little sex a pale pink shell." 

"A little boy whose tender phallus would come to overmaster him and guide his fate."

"I was always glad I had borne a daughter. Her beauty and fragility never ceased to stir me in that secret place where fear and desire mingle." 

All of these are descriptions of children, as young as her own newborn daughter. Not the fourteen year olds who were expected to get married at that time. Literal babies. And what was the point of describing them like that and putting their genitalia before their character and physical appearance? I see no reason this should have happened, and it's weird. 

#3: Straightwashing, and Sappho's Relationships

It is still debated among historians whether or not Sappho was really a lesbian, but with heaps of evidence pointing to her lifelong love of women, it strikes me as a strange choice to make a man her soulmate and another man her downfall. Her love affairs with women also rely on problematic stereotypes: The weird power dynamic of the relationship between her and her lifelong servant that is isolated to sex rather than to any emotional attachment, Isis assaulting her, and her entering sexual relationships with multiple young students whom she had known since they were babies raised by their Amazon mothers after their flight from the island. 

Sappho's male love interests are portrayed as better, but I don't buy it. Sappho spends more than half her life chasing Alcaeus, and when she dies, it is his arms she is reunited with. All because they went into exile together and knew one another for all of two weeks. He is the father of her child, but she never tells him that, and they never share any kind of bond over it. Phaeon is not meant to be a good love interest, but I do not think his actions were compelling enough to get Sappho to kill herself. This retelling deserved a cohesive and present love interest, and fewer bad side flings. 

Conclusion

This book was boring and moved slowly despite the amount of events crammed into it, and I couldn't get personally attached to any of the plots or characters. The progression of time didn't feel well-executed and I found myself thinking Sappho and everyone around her was insufferable. She deserves a better retelling than this.