Rating: 5/5

This book was originally published about 1941, but it takes place late in the 1930's. There are references to FDR's assistance programs established to aid agricultural workers and briefly mentions the possibility of war in Europe. The story follows Sam Tucker and his struggles to feed and clothe his family during the Great Depression while living near the San Pedro river in Texas.

This period in history has always interested me because my father came of age during the Great Depression and my mother was just a little kid during those years. Both of their families were poor, but nothing compared to what the Tucker family endures in this story.

Sam's gift is knowing how to work the land for maximum production but lacks money to purchase it. He strikes a deal with Ruston, who owns 68 acres of San Pedro bottom land to grow corn and cotton in return for wages (think nickels a day), and lodging in a small falling down shack (think hovel) for his family of five.

The trials, tribulations, and triumphs Sam and his family endure throughout the story made me both laugh and cry. Granny, Sam's constantly grumpy grandmother is a hoot (think Irene Ryan from Beverly Hillbillies.) Oh, and the family that helps Sam harvest the cotton? Their last name just happened to be Clampett. 

On a more serious side note, this book speaks volumes of the hardships families had to overcome to survive the Great Depression. It makes me appreciate that much more the garden my father planted every year and the hunting and fishing he did when I was growing up. Like Sam, my dad never killed anything that couldn't be put on the dinner table, sold or traded, or used for fishing bait. And like Nona, Sam's wife, my mother spent many summers canning produce from my father's garden. Not a day goes by that I don't think about them. They are greatly missed. 

Lastly, the author captures the vernacular perfectly in the way he writes the dialogue between characters. I don't think the story would be as authentic without it. If you like this period in history, then I highly recommend this book.