Rating: 4/5

This is what you might call a partisan biography. Hough is so firmly in Cook's camp, for example, that he doesn't blanch when Cook's men kill some of the indigenous population for petty thievery. In fact they kill members of indigenous populations with distressing regularity. They also have sex with all the native women they encounter, even those covered in seal oil. The only thing his men believe worth rioting over is a cut to the grog ration. 

On the other hand, what Cook accomplished was remarkable. He explored most of the Pacific Ocean. He was fearless in a way that only one who feels the world deserves his footprint can be. All this on a a small ship with a crew of less than 100, none of whom got scurvy thanks to Cook's belief in "antiscarbarutics" such as sauerkraut. 

There is a lot of great nautical terminology in the book and only some of it is explained. On the other hand, as you plough on, you get a sense of it and you can sort of suss out what's going on. Topgallant mast, close reef the topsails, stand off, launch the jolly boat. Have some sea biscuits. 

The last voyage of Cook's life has an epic sweep. It's obvious to the author (and the reader) that Cook was seriously ill and it was affecting his judgment -- he would force his men to eat walrus meat (which tasted like "train oil"), navigate recklessly, and puzzle his subordinates. 

His final month in Hawaii was so amazing that I'm astonished it hasn't been made into a Napoloeon-scale blockbuster movie (or at least I'm not aware of any). He sailed into the bay and was welcomed as a god because his actions coincidentally exactly matched the Hawaiian myth of their god "Orano." 

He sailed out of the bay as a god too but unfortunately had to go BACK to the harbor because the main mast broke. This time, thieves pilfered his boat, and Cook, again behaving rashly, went ashore with marines, with the intention of forcing the king back onto the boat so he could hold him hostage until the stolen items were returned. This provoked the Hawaiians to war and they killed Cook and some of his men. 

In return, Cook's ship fired cannon on the Hawaiians, torched their villages, and killed hundreds. A truly tragic ending. 

Captain Bligh of the Bounty was one of Cook's crew members on the final voyage. His story of the experience would be worth reading, I think.