Rating: 3/5

"I see so many people around here just going through the motions, like. They don't care what goes on in other parts of the world. They don't care about anything, in fact. They just want to get through their day with nothing out of the ordinary happening. That's a good day for them- a day when everything happens exactly the way it's supposed to, and they don't have to learn anything new" 

I was sorting out my bookshelf the other day, and my eyes fell upon the hardcover edition of Kowalski's  The Adventures of Flash Jackson . I figured since this book is the first book I had ever bought with my own money, the first book I ever owned, it deserves its own review. So without further ado, here is my review of the book- or what I remember of it, at least (because I read it years ago) I suppose I could just reread it, but seeing as I have gazillions of unread books on my shelf, I won't.

 "That's life. You can work and work to get to the top but you never know when everything is going to collapse under you" 

The main character of this novel is Haley. She is, as they say,  something . She's witty, sarcastic, bad-ass, a feminist, and the i-won't-tolerate-any-of-your-bullshit kind of girl. In short, she's everything I love in a character. It is pretty clear that she doesn't feel as comfortable in her skin as she wants herself (and the reader) to think she does. Aside from her, we have her British neighbour, her mother, her witch of a grandmother (get it?), her half-loony friend, and a love interest (if one might call him that). The characters (including Haley) are nicely written, if a little cliche. 

 "Fear is a useless emotion, one that will map your life out for you if you let it" 

The novel is set in the country, which is a place I am familiar with. The depiction of the country lifestyle is very real and makes it feel like one of those places I wouldn't mind visiting once in a blue moon.

 "I don't give two craps in the woods what anyone thinks of me, whether it's ill or good or whatever" 

The plot is just basically Haley's journey of self-realization and how she learns to accept herself for who she is. The first half of the book is way better than the second half of the book. The first half is a solid three stars. On the other hand, the second half is kind of boring and just plain. The ending is very.....corny.

 "Sometimes a person just needs to run off for a while, when things get to be too much" 

All in all, this book shows that Kowalski does have a lot of potential, and he is a nice enough writer. But I would only read another book by him provided it has a strong plot.