Rating: 4/5

Recently Sophie Hannah, an author I admire greatly, wrote a piece for the Guardian in which she gave her top ten twists in fiction novels. She was not talking about the current trend for screaming "WITH A TWIST YOU WON'T SEE COMING" on anything and everything that could vaguely be called psychological thriller, those are not twists but rather unexpected resolutions or, it has to be said most of the time, simply resolutions. No she was talking about those subtle lies woven into a seemingly truthful narrative that either, at some point in the book, make you shout out loud or those novels that overall twist up your perception of things. 

I'm a sucker for a good literary twist whether that be from an entire story when you think about it or that one drop jaw moment within a story - and despite outward publicity shrieks from novels and publishers who are desperate to find the next Gone Girl, the clever literary twist is very very rare. I find one in about every 300-400 books I read and even some of those are on the cusp, a promise rather than an execution. So I was very interested in Ms Hannah's list (in which I should be clear she gives nothing away of any value thus spoiling the books, no she is the queen of subtle too) I was pleasantly surprised to find three novels on there that I had not read - so immediately purchased all of those, this being one of them. Of "The Secret House Of Death" Ms Hannah stated that the murder itself is the twist but you won't know what I mean so you'll just have to read it. I have. And she's right. You won't know what it means either so I guess....

This is a classic version of domestic noir - marriages going wrong, a double death, what the neighbours saw, what people thought about those involved and it is also an absolutely fascinating relationship saga, with some memorable characters and that subtle execution of plot that meant it found itself on what I now fondly refer to as Sophie's "Twist List"

It is highly readable, very intriguing and indeed earns its place on the list of those books that I have taken something different away from than I expected in the first place. I'm now looking forward to reading the other two I have somehow, in all the books I read, missed out on.

Recommended.