Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars
Non-Fiction&gt;US history 1970s
This was a great book! I am a huuuuge fan of Follett and I had put every one of his books on my TBR. This year, I went to look at my TBR here on GR and decided I'm going to read the longest-sitting non fic and fiction. I assumed this was fiction because that's what Follett writes. I found out it was non-fiction but still a novel-style story not a text book or academic work. I was apprehensive since it was unexpected. I was encouraged by fellow members of the Non Fiction Book Club to read it and we set up a Buddy Read for April 2022. 
If you enjoy spy thrillers, war stories, revolutions, international politics, are/were a fan of Ross Perot, have enjoyed learning about The Iranian Hostage Situation under Carter, or have read Follett before and think it sounds fantastic to read something 100% true and see what he can do--- this book is for all of you!

Ross Perot runs a Dallas company EDS--they work to computerize health records and other boring but necessary stuff like that. They are branching out internationally and have an office in Iran...in 1978. A revolution is coming but they provide a service and have a contract and want to use this model to expand elsewhere in the world so should they really all leave? This is the story of a whole US company coming together under a great leader to rescue 2 American hostages in revolutionary Iran. Follett does a great job conveying the stories of the large cast of characters involved.
Perot goes straight into action mode over Christmas break and gets personally involved, putting himself in harm's way numerous times to aid the effort to help his employees. I found myself wondering, 'Would my company do this for me?' uh, no!

There was a mini series made in the 80s (I think?) and I plan to watch it.

There are some dissenting views here on GR reviews and I realize that Follett worked closely with Perot to get this written but I don't think it's fabricated or that Perot's dedication was overstated or biased. I was kind of skeptical at first, but looking at the lengths he personally went to in the story, I believe he is really a wonderfully dedicated and loyal man.

One of my favorite men was Rashid and I looked further into what he's doing today (there is an Epilogue but a few decades have passed since publication). I won't spoil it here, but look him up if you read this and also were curious, start with the name Reza Saleh. Don't do it til you're done. I still consider him my favorite of the bunch. Simons was probably second for me but will be top of most people's list I'm sure.

"Ross Perot would say: 'Some people can't organize a two-car funeral.' That applied to the US Embassy staff."

"Taylor had told him that Iran was like an animal with its head cut off: the head--the ministers and officials--were still trying to give orders, but the body--the Iranian people--were off doing their own thing."

"Rashid had never imagined the revolution would be like this: just a disorganized crowd with guns they hardly knew how to use, wandering around on a Sunday morning, firing at walls, encountering halfhearted resistance from invisible troops."

"Be careful about picking a fight with people who buy ink by the barrel and paper by the ton."

"...success has a thousand fathers, but failure is an orphan."

This was a hard choice between 4 and 5 stars but I had to go with 4 and stated earlier the bump to '4.5' which only really counts if you read my review. I'm really trying to be very picky about 5 stars this year. I want to choose only books that I would universally recommend (even to non-readers) and that keep me thinking for a long time after I put it down and/or offer some new insight for at least its topic if not life in general. This was a fantastic story but it probably won't appeal to anyone who doesn't read the blurb and get at least somewhat interested and it isn't going to be my first rec for a friend to pick up a book.