Rating: 4/5

"Okay--so in some ways I'm mean as all get out. I'm going to quit worrying about it. I used to think there would be a blinding flash of light some day, and then I would be wise and calm and would know how to cope with everything and my kids would rise up and call me blessed. Now I see that whatever I'm like, I'm pretty well stuck with it for life. Hell of a revelation that turned out to be."

I have to say that I loved Stacey. She's 39 with 4 kids from 2 to 14, a marriage that has become just so-so, too much padding on her hips, and is feeling trapped in a life that she needs to escape sometimes, just a little alone time would be nice for starters. She smokes and drinks too much, always says the wrong thing to her husband's boss, and doesn't understand her kids. Even though she doesn't really believe in God, she has an ongoing conversation with him in her head because she has no other close friends. She doesn't think he's running the world as efficiently as he could be, but hates to say too much in case he gets retribution by hurting one of her kids, who she worries constantly about.

This novel takes place over a few months when circumstances dictate that Stacey has to accept the way things are instead of pining for the girl she used to be. There are a lot of men she'll never love, a lot of dances she'll never attend, and a lot of things she'll never know, but that's okay. She has what she has, which is actually pretty nice.

"I would have liked to be a great courtesan, like that one in France who went on until she was about ninety-five. Still beautiful, it is said, although personally I find that hard to credit. Well, such was quite plainly not meant to be your lot, Stacey. Never mind. Give me another forty years, Lord, and I may mutate into a matriarch."

Did I mention that Stacey has a great sense of humor?

I set out to read Laurence's 5 Manawaka novels this summer, and this is #4, so I'm right on target. I have loved them all so far. One warning about this book for some people: there are no quotation marks, which may bother a few. I didn't find it hard to follow who was speaking or the differences between Stacey's thought and what she actually says, I thought the author made it perfectly clear.