Rating: 5/5

Title: Miss Seeton Goes to Bat - Miss Seeton Mysteries Book 14
Author: Hamilton Crane &amp; Heron Carvic
Published: 11-3-2016		
Publisher: Farrago		
Pages: 386
Genre: Mystery, Thrillers &amp; Suspense	
Sub Genre: British Cozy Mystery; Humor; Paranormal; Psychics; Women Sleuths
ISBN: 13-978-1911440048
ASIN: B01LXPR3IJ
Reviewer: DelAnne
Reviewed For: NetGalley
My Rating: 4.25 Stars

I receive a copy of Miss Seeton Goes to Bat from the publisher and NetGalley in exchange for my honest review.

Miss Seeton is back home in Plummergen and the entire village seems to be wrapped up in the upcoming Cricket match against arch rivals Murreystone. Apparently no one has forgotten or forgiven last years incident following their match. We also get to see a few of Scotland Yars finest as the arrive at the match to help keep the peace betwwen the teams and their supporters, but also to look for any clues to lead them those responsible for the recent thefts in the surrounding villages. Miss Seeton is using her sketches and paintings to raise money for a village pavillion, but the Yard uses some clues in them to track down the thieves.

As always Miss Seeton brings a smile to my face and laughter to my heart. The way she seems oblivious to the bad things that happen all around us and lives a life of the prim and proper retired teacher is amazing. Although most of us knows at least one person that can only see the good in the world, we can always add one more. You will love the villagers, Miss Seeton and her friends at Scotland Yard. There are a few new faces around Plummergen to meet. A village that will remind many of us of the small towns we grew up in and look to find today to raise our families in. The plot is very interesting and you don't have to be a cricket expert to enjoy Miss Seeton Goes to Bat which can be read as a stand alone. I do recommend readingthe series in order to get a better handle on the history of Miss Seeton and a few of the references to prior events. My rating is 4.25 out of 5 stars. Pick up a copy for yourself to see how great the Miss Seeton Mysteries are.

Amazon link: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01LXPR3IJ/...

 
Barnes and Noble link: www.barnesandnoble.com/w/miss-seeton-...

 
 
GoodReads link: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1...

 
The Reading Room link https://www.facebook.com/permalink.ph...