Rating: 3/5

A Hole in Space is, like other collections of his short works, a rather mixed bag. As well as short stories, there are scientific discussions, including the calculations of the physics would allow the creation of what became his best known fiction, the Ringworld. I would certainly prefer this sort of anthology to separate them. (I think this particular piece was also printed - and possibly expanded from what is here - as an appendix to the novel: the best place for it, of course.

The first fiction story is RAMMER, which starts with a memorable first line: "Once there was a dead man". The idea behind it is the possibility of returning dead people to life when there is a cure for the reason for their death - so far, so plausible, with real world cryogenics being available to store the deceased or nearly deceased in frozen form (dating back to at least the 1980s, as I actually knew someone who worked in this area at that time, waiting for the thaw for a "corpsicle" - and presumably the people who did this tool the term from Niven), waiting until there is both a reliable method of resuscitation and a cure for the cause of death. One of the big issues is the need to prevent ice crystals forming, which would cause significant damage on top of the reason for death itself. There was also a criminal, whose personality was wiped (and, in this story, the details of this more complex task is glossed over), leaving a body with no personality in it. And then there is what appears to be the start of a new story, that of Corbell, whose body does not appear to fit what the brain expects, when a body is resuscitated. In this case, the thawed body is given a new personality, in order to carry out a specific task: to become a starship pilot, a job which of course did not exist when Corbell died. To be honest, the rest of the story is less interesting than the setup - something I have felt before about Niven's writing.

The Alibi Machine, the second story, is shorter, and is about what could happen to alibis for the commission of a crime if instant teleportation technology became possible - a fairly obvious idea, but with an interesting twist.

The Last Days of the Permanent Riot Club is about the invention of a "spy cloak" to hide someone, in this case a criminal, plus teleportation as a way to escape - with the twist that the police know that this method exists. A fairly forgettable story.

A Kind of Murder is clearly meant to be humorous - not to my mind one of his strong points, and in parts showing its age in its depiction male/female relationships: a man always bumping into his ex-wife wherever he goes - the same restaurant, same clubs, every time he goes out: he becomes so frustrated that he hits her. Then the wife is killed - and, of course, he was nearby. This is, of course, another "how is the trick worked" story - in the age of teleportation: it is a companion piece to the previous story.

The third teleportation story here is All the Bridges Rusting takes teleportation (using neutrinos) for space flight. This is exceptional in Niven's writing at the time in that this story has a female protagonist, Karin Sagan. This trip was to be to visit Alpha Centauri - scouting ahead of a slower and larger ship carrying colonists; when the planets in the Centauri system turn out not to be suitable for habitation, a rescue mission is suggested. However, it appears that any rescue attempt would take decades...

In There is a Tide, Louis Wu is tired of his fellow humans, and sets out for the furthest reaches of the galaxy, or as far as he gets before he feels the need for company. This is a Kzinti story, with boosterspice, and probably makes little sense to anyone who hasn't already read other stories with this background.

The Multi-Generation Ship is not fiction, but a discussion of the physics of such a ship, relating to Ringworld, and going further, to the Dyson Sphere, which is also well known to science fiction, or a disc world, more like an LP with a sun in the centre than Terry Pratchett's Discworld (which also works by magic, not physics). I've definitely read this before, and I think I have discussed this in relation to another Niven collection: I just can't remember which.

With $16,949.00, Niven returns to Earth. This is a (perhaps slightly) humorous take on "the biter bit", and is very short indeed.

The Hole in Space starts with the discovery of an alien base on Mars - and then moves on to the idea of using gravitation waves to communicate like the electromagnetic spectrum is used in radio, and then turns to quantum black holes. Very much hard SF here.

The Fourth Profession is the last and longest of the stories in this collection, about taking pills to, for instance, give you the ability to become an acrobat, alongside strange and secretive aliens called Monks. It's in two parts, and it's fairly clear early on that this mystery will be the key point of the story. This turns out to be the most interesting story in the whole collection.