Rating: 2/5

To begin, I had heard about this book NUMEROUS times from BookTube and BookTok. From what I gathered, I expected this book to be a intense, profound story about immigrants in America. After reading close to three quarters of this book, I started getting slightly annoyed because of the lack of plot. 

The writing style in the book is very enjoyable and unique, but I found the actual story telling very reminiscent of listening to a toddler rambling. Kinda like they are telling a story but the story is leading
nowhere? 

The dynamic between Petra and Perfecto was unique and slightly confusing. It took me a while to realize what their relationship was and at that point I was extremely confused. I understand that age is just a number but that is an very, VERY large age-gap.

On a lighter note, the relationship between Estrella and Alejo is very young and naïve. It’s refreshing to read the more realistic parts of early-teen crushes. The awkwardness is visible but not cringy. 

The portion of the story involving Maxine kinda feels unnecessary. I can acknowledge how it hints to Estrella the relationship between Petra and Perfecto but doesn’t have a lasting impression. I feel that the story would have been just the same without that portion. 

The ending of the story really is what topped it off for me. It felt rushed and unfinished. There was no closure for Estrella and Alejo. She leaves him at the hospital and doesn’t know if she will see him alive ever again. And that’s that? 

Additionally, there is lots of symbolism suggesting that Perfecto is nearing the end of his life (i.e. dead bugs around him, homesickness, and memory loss). However, we never find out what his end is.

Finally, Estrella literally robbed the clinic nurse and we never find out if the nurse called the cops or anything!

In the end, this was a good book, but I probably won’t recommend it to many people. If I could have, I would have rated it a 2.5/5. This is because although it wasn’t my favorite, I did not dislike it. It’s captivating, but has an unsatisfactory ending.