Rating: 4/5

The Mabinogion, a collection of Welsh mythological tales compiled in the 12th century, has an uncanny beauty and fierceness. Evangeline Walton did a masterful job in capturing that beautiful strangeness in her Mabinogion tetralogy, four books that correspond to the four branches of that mythology. Her novels are faithful to The Mabinogion while fleshing out the tales, making them more accessible to modern readers without compromising any of their odd, otherworldly beauty. 

Prince of Annwn is chronologically first in the series, representing the First Branch of the Mabinogion. It’s composed of two separate tales, each about the young hero Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed. Both tales illustrate the strangeness of magical Otherworlds that lie close enough to the physical world that it is possible, sometimes to wander into them unawares. 

In the first tale, Pwyll is recruited (possibly entrapped) by Arawn, Lord of Annwn. Annwn is the Otherworld where go the dead to await rebirth, and as its lord, Arawn is a god of death. Yet, Arawn needs assistance from the mortal Pwyll as a champion to kill a foe that is beyond his own power to slay. Pwyll and Arawn swap places for a year and a day, each taking on the appearance of the other and ruling each other’s realms for the duration. This tale establishes the prowess and character of Pwyll, and his alliance and great friendship with the Lord of Annwn.

The second tale follows in the aftermath of the first. It begins with the hostility of Pwyll’s druids, who view him as a threat to their power. From this clash, Pwyll is forced to take a perilous traditional quest that has often proved fatal to those in his line. His quest leads him into another Otherworld, a sort of Welsh Fae realm. Here, dream, reality, and time itself are unpredictable. And here Pwyll attempts to win an extraordinary bride, and makes a deadly and lasting foe. 

Walton’s adaptation of The Mabinogion into fantasy literature deserves to be far better known. Her prose conveys all of its beauty and strangeness without being unduly convoluted. If you have any interest in fantasy as a genre or mythology, I urge you to read it.