Rating: 4/5

Hilary Hinton "Zig" Ziglar was an American author, salesman, and motivational speaker.
Born: November 6, 1926, Coffee County, AL
Died: November 28, 2012, Plano, TX

When I met Zig at a conference in Sacramento, he was the Key Note speaker of a stellar roster of notable speakers. He and his wife were living in Yazoo City, MS, and he was a biased ambassador for the city. His audience, including me was enchanted by his home-spun banter and whimsical delivery. Over the many years of my business career as a Financial Counselor, I read many of his books and listened to his recorded audio tapes, as well as attending his seminars and workshops.

From the Goodreads author description: Zig Ziglar was a motivational teacher and trainer who traveled the world over, delivering his messages of humor, hope, and encouragement. As a talented author and speaker, he had international appeal that transcended every color, culture, and career. Recognized by his peers as the quintessential motivational genius of our times, Zig Ziglar had a unique delivery style and powerful messages that earned him many honors. Today he is considered one of the most versatile authorities on the science of human potential. Ten of his twenty-eight books have been on bestseller lists, and his titles have been translated into more than thirty-eight languages and dialects. He was a committed family man, a dedicated patriot, and an active church member. Zig lived in Plano, Texas, with his wife, Jean.

QUOTES ATTRIBUTED TO ZIG ZIGLAR:

People often say that motivation doesn't last. Well, neither does bathing - that's why we recommend it daily.

You can get everything in life you want if you will just help enough other people get what they want.

You don't have to be great at something to start, but you have to start to be great at something.

Your attitude, not your aptitude, will determine your altitude.

Remember that failure is an event, not a person.

You were born to win, but to be a winner, you must plan to win, prepare to win, and expect to win.

What you get by achieving your goals is not as important as what you become by achieving your goals.

If you aim at nothing, you will hit it every time.

Expect the best. Prepare for the worst. Capitalize on what comes.

A goal properly set is halfway reached.