Rating: 5/5

Clare, her hands in the pockets of her school coat, her face stinging from the cold, moved slowly round the church, staring at one inscription after another, giving her attention to the whole chronicle of wood merchants, burghers and benefactors of the poor, of husbands and fathers, wives, mothers and children. She felt an obligation to listen. It would be nice, she thought, to be a person living in this place and sit every Sunday beside these names, especially if maybe they were the same as your own name, or people you knew. You would feel settled, if you were a person who did that.

Clare is fourteen. She dreams of the summer when the snow is blank. Her friend from school, Liz, wishes she could be nineteen already. They are lying back on Liz's bed, having done so all the Saturday. Clare had spent the week pining for this Saturday, despite that she doesn't do anything when it is there, or at least Liz accuses her of not doing anything. (I think there's something to be said for doing nothing on a Saturday.) Clare knows better, says that Liz would go crazy not knowing what happened between fourteen and nineteen. She needs all of that in-between rattling in her head. I loved that Clare knew this about Liz but inside it takes more than quiet acceptance to feel at home in her young skin. It is still winter, still indoors, time running away and time not doing anything at all. 

Clare has lived with her great-aunts Susan and Anne since she was nine. Her parents died when she was six and she hasn't let go of the memories of them she had, or of the early years of family who lived like strangers. Holidays with cousins who speak in code. The six year-olds smile at her in condescension. Not one of them. Clare wonders about how they cope in the outside world of unfamilial languages. Aunt Anne is eighty-one. Aunt Susan is seventy-eight. They are vague about today and yesterdays of decades past are closer to them. Their lease for their great house with the ecclesiastical windows and porches in Norham Gardens is up in fifteen years. Heads together trying to manage the money they don't have, housekeeper Mrs Hedges (she's more a friend to them. The heads in the clouds don't pay her much, if at all, so it can only be friendship that she takes care of them as she does) lets in reality too much considering the house not a problem. Clare can't admit to herself that the Aunts, who with greater frequency cannot do what they once could, will not be around in fifteen years. Another night that one of them stays in bed. Blame the cold. Clare is impatient for right now, yet estranged from any visions of a future self. Schools and other well meaning relatives want her to think of tomorrow. The youth magazines of the day haunt her with their promises of brand new transformations. Wear this shampoo, smile with these young men while you are still young enough to do so! I loved the quiet pacing in the fear of change. If you came out and admitted that you were afraid of how old the Aunts are..... Liz is always telling her to go some place with her. When she's cycling with the other kids she's free. The school days are euphoria and despair. Forget your today in the history on the chalkboard. I think my very favorite part is when their boarder Maureen says to Claire "It's never just you!" Clare is marveling that she had thought it was just her. That only she had to run home to make sure that home was still there as she left it. Maureen is thirty, works in an office, makes disparaging remarks about herself, usually her weight. She always lets the truth slip in offhand remarks. How she isn't so very jealous about her younger and prettier friend getting married and she is not. It's more a worrying always in the back of her mind. I don't know if she did it on purpose or not but I liked Maureen a lot. There's something comforting about people who are always themselves like the Aunts, but Maureen has this way of giving herself away that's just as good. She is right that nothing is ever just you. Someone has always felt that same way as you had. I liked everybody in this book a lot. Like during the school production of Macbeth when the audience extra Clare ruins the scene by talking about seeing Banquo's ghost. They've already forgotten it when she goes back to school. That was great. 'Norham Gardens' is so perfect for stuff like that. For being happy in today, real miseries, small ones, for being worried, and how Clare could have thought it was just her. 

Another set of thoughts, and experiences, and attitudes had joined all the others whose misty imprint surely still lingered somehow behind the yellow brick and gothic windows. Yearnings of late Victorian housemaids, boredom of the aunts, cloistered in the schoolroom, the despondency of governesses... Great-grandmother's busy pursuit of an appropriate and well-ordered life, the heady breeze of the aunts' resolution to determine their own futures... Friends, relations, students... And, faintest of all, the alien flavour of remote, half-understood things known only to great-grandmother. The shadows of another world and another time.
 
There's this chest in their attic (the Aunts keep everything) with something their father brought back from an expedition in New Guinea. It's a piece of wood. It has a picture on it. It's art, it's a anthropomorphized know-it-all. It's black, red and yellow. Stripes and war paint and forgotten ancient. They want it back in her dreams. Every night Clare visits the edges of forests. The edges of people circles and intent. She knows it is a dream and wakes up, only remembering that she dreamed. Clare is reading one of her great-grandfather's books on New Guinea. The book is quoted in the start of every chapter. I loved this. She's concerned that they can't remember why they needed things like the tamburans. Tamburans aren't really shields but they are, the belief that their fathers and grandfathers protect them from the mysteries of the world. They no longer make them because they can't remember why they needed them. I don't know if the tamburan, or the spirits of the New Guineans, is communicating with Clare in her dreams. It's the fear of forgetting herself like they did that gets to me. It could be an obvious connection, look at these guys. They were overtaken by the outside. But where would they be? Killing each other? People need people, people are just people. Yesterday is history, an hour ago is history. I loved that Clare could sit there and live all of how it could be beyond the making connections part. How can you forget it it isn't ever just you? Could be a slab of wood or it could be mystery that follows you with its eyes. I loved how she's thinking about them just like she's thinking about stories from her Aunts. They tell her stuff like why the butcher is such a creep. During the war and rations people would put up with any humiliation to get a choice piece. 

Visiting the New Guinea collection in the museum Clare meets a new friend John. John is from Uganda and in England to study. He becomes part of her life like Maureen. Maybe he won't always be there (I think he'll have to go back to the family he misses). Clare feels like he had always been there. This is what made 'Norham' so special, I think. It was a great idea to haunt Clare with the shield. I loved that the yellow, black and red are more vivid than the similar pieces in the museum. They are more vivid each time she dares to think about it. But the symbolism aside, the concentrating, it's the every day in spite that works so well. Clare goes touring London with John on one of those days she feels like she doesn't know what to do with time. (I forget which Aunt had the idea to get out of herself this way. I loved them for it, anyway.) They go to the zoo. Clare thinks it is awful and odd how the Orang seems to see in all directions at once. But the elephant she likes best. The people aren't laughing (John says that people aren't laughing because they think the monkeys are funny. John also laughs a lot. He laughs when he doesn't think things are funny. Sometimes Clare can tell which is which, sometimes she can't. He has his own way of giving himself away, just like Maureen. They have their own secrets, it's just a way of paying attention to people so you're not the jerk that calls other people fake for how they have to live inside and outside themselves. Anyway, Lively has a light touch this way that I appreciated a lot). She has a name, Samantha, and was born in captivity. I didn't like that Clare preferred the elephant for reaching out with her trunk. I think it's like the conversations John and Clare have about how some people are comfortable with the expected, and how you can forget how to not live that way. Things like people not coming right out and asking if Clare can remember her parents. I wanted to be in the book and talk to Clare about the orangs and the elephants, really. What if you met them in the wild, took away the people and their reactions that don't have anything to do with how they are their own animal alone. What if you saw them on different days? When a bad day felt like it would never end? Maybe their best friend in the neighboring exhibit was hibernating and maybe.... Sighs. I really loved The House in Norham Gardens. I didn't like that the pacing sped up in the end, when Clare finally knows what she already knew to tell Liz, that you need the rattling in your head. She really already knew she would have to memorize her Aunts for one day too. That she wouldn't forget why she needed them like the New Guineas forgot why they needed their magical ancestors. But really I think I just didn't want the book to end and that's all. The pacing was so perfect, scary faces in blank wallpaper and snow squares, it's exactly like a Saturday of doing nothing and a London trip of forgetting yourself, and dreams you can't remember and people giving themselves away. It's never just you. A self consciousness kind of time obsession behind the walls....

I bought this book not too long ago in one of my "I'm going to stockpile books for a day I feel bad and that book will take the place of the edges!" It really did do that. There's nothing that beats that. 

I wonder how her great-grandfather wrote in his paper on New Guinea that they were forced to walk in rivers with alligators in them. Really, alligators? Since when are there gators in New Guinea?