Rating: 3/5

Ladder Of Years was published in 1995 when Anne Tyler was 54. Its a book thats been thrust back into the limelight in the UK, in 2018, by Waterstones (whose local bookclub selected it as my monthly read). Tyler has written many books subsequently, and her fame has grown. In reality though, the parochial Baltimore setting has changed little and nor has Tyler's writing dated in the last twenty three years.
I feel a bit conflicted. There’s nothing wrong with writing about middle life, and small community America in the twentieth century. That’s the America of Norman Rockwell, barbecues, holiday cottages by the sea; children growing up and creating their own families as extensions of their own matriarch and patriarach.
In Ladder of Years, a familar Tyler theme is given free reign. Thats the examination of under-the-surface discontent, and furtive rebellion. "Moms” are all too frequently regarded as a piece of the household furniture. Uncomplaining, dutiful, sexless, predictable...?? Wrong. - Look more closely and there’s a more carefree individual, not so blankly compliant, fuelled by bodice ripping literature, wanting to express, and free herself.
 
 "Every woman ought to learn how to dine alone in a formal restaurant without a book (165)
 
In this story there’s something delicious about the human doormat striking a blow for emancipation, and pulling it off. How many of us relish the thought of starting over? What it is to re-invent yourself, and to break free from just doing what is expected.
 
In large part Ladder of Years captures this feeling and the reader is pulled along a path of carefree, impetuous abandon.
 
I cannot bring myself to describe this Tyler as great literature, nor great story telling, though. With the exception of our leading lady, Cor(Delia) Grinstead, the rest of the character ensemble don't convince. A lodger, Mr Lamb, morphes from social misfit to marriageable candidate without any discernible explanation for his change of circumstances. Couples on the brink of separation suddenly have second thoughts and get back together. The Mills &amp; Boon type romances sometimes favoured by Delia, are seemingly replicated in real life. Nat and Binky; Adrian and his on off wife; Belle and her paramours; Ellie and Joel. None of them are believable. A wild, chaotic scene involving Ellie and Delia is poorly inserted.
 
Then the end... a cop out. And unsatisfactory.
 
In summary it was a case of the curate's egg for me. Good in parts, but only in parts.