Rating: 3/5

I hated Fanny Price. 

I'm supposed to like her because she has a deep appreciation for nature, understands her place in society, is happy to be useful to her betters, is pained to the point of tears when anyone other than Edmund pays any attention to her, is gratingly proper, and can't walk more than 10 steps without having to sit down?
Yes, more of that kind of heroine, please!

And as much as I disliked Fanny, I loathed Edmund even more.
He is one of those people who will adhere to the rules of society that he believes are right, proper, and just, to the point of turning his back on family and friends who don't follow those rules.
But who doesn't find starchy and stifling to be the most incredibly sexy qualities in a man?!
I know he certainly melted my panties as the book wore on...

These two were the WORST. Was there ever a more obnoxiously deserving couple ever created for literature? I think not.
You know how everyone thinks that they are the hero of the story? Like, even smug assholes and annoying twats - they think they're justified to be smug assholes and annoying twats because of whatever douchy reasons they come up with. &lt;--Edmund &amp; Fanny!

You know who I liked?! 
Mary Crawford! 
Yes. The villainess of the story is the only tolerable character in this thing. In fact, I'm not even sure she's a bad guy. I found myself nodding along with almost everything she said.
Her worst offenses were that she spoke her mind and thought church was boring.
Ok, there was that bit where she was semi-excited that Edmund's brother might die and make Edmund a rich dude. &lt;--not cool, Mary.
BUT.
Considering Edmund went to see her that last time just to say goodbye because she was tainted by what her brother Henry did with his sister -so  of course he couldn't try to woo Mary anymore? What an ass! And then he was mortified that she thought they should forgive their siblings for their dalliance and welcome them back into society. &lt;--THE HORROR!
Get the fuck out of here and go marry your 1st cousin, douchebag.

 
Let sickly, boring, conscientious Fanny have that dork and count your ill-fated romance with Edmund a bullet dodged, Ms. Crawford. 
Ride off into the sunset, girl!

And as far as romance goes?
Nothing was less romantic than watching (listening, in my case) to Fanny simper and pine over her oblivious cousin, while he chased after Mary. There was nothing, nothing in his manner that led you to believe deep down he might love Fanny and just not realize it.
In the end, there isn't even an on-page ah-ha! moment! It just says (and I'm paraphrasing here), after a while, he realized Fanny might due quite well for a wife and there's an off-page marriage between the two.
Wow! The fireworks between those guys were unbelievable!
I can only imagine what kind of sparks they had in their marriage.

 

Was I supposed to be rooting for these boring, self-righteous, snobby a-holes to get a Happily Ever After? Was I really?
OhmyfuckinggodnoIcannotdoit.
My personal happy ending includes Mary marrying some awesome rich guy who thinks she's funny and hot, then riding past Edmund's gross little church on their way to whatever amazing honeymoon destination they pick out. Edmund gazes longingly at the dust her carriage creates as it speeds by, and stupid Fanny realizes she shouldn't have settled for being anyone's second choice.

Jane Austen is a fantastic writer so I can't give it less than 3 stars, but the characters in this sucker were awful.
I'd recommend this book only if you enjoy seeing the Bad Guys win.