Rating: 4/5

I read this in my usual way of reading anthologies: all the way through, without skipping. This method has benefits and drawbacks, and it ended here with a read I really liked overall. I wouldn’t say any of these stories were badly written; I wouldn’t say that I enjoyed them all to the same degree. Below are my impressions in order of appearance (ratings are numbers of stars out of 5).

Sex, Guns, &amp; Baptists (2 stars): I felt the characters to be clearly developed through behaviors &amp; word choices, which was good. I didn’t see the world-building handled as well, though it started strong with the subbing in of Catholicism for a pink triangle. If you like private investigator 

Half in Love With Easeful Rock and Roll (4 stars): I started out disliking it on the introduction, but changed my mind with the first paragraph. Solid and evocative language, characters, and setting made this one a keeper. The poem fragments threw me off my rhythm a little, but I still enjoyed myself.

Powertool (1 star): This felt to me like a story one either gets or doesn’t, and I’m in that latter group. I suggest those who like nontraditional form give it a look.

Time Gypsy (5 stars): Consistent characters and time travel ensured I had a great time. It managed the temporally displaced fish excellently, and in a way that highlighted the times and how they change.

Lonely Land (3 stars): I loved the ending, which I won’t spoil here. No such feelings for the protagonist; he skeezed me into nausea. Bile fascination was certainly at play for me here.

 The Rendez-Vous (3 stars): Weird, but in a good way. Describing it further might spoil, so I won’t.

Silent Passion (4 stars): From title to ending, it evokes a sense of beauty I usually associate with thunderstorms. I felt it bittersweet, so watch for that.

Sun-Drenched (2 stars): It was okay, but I wasn’t really feeling it.

The Flying Triangle (1 star): Full disclosure: I’m not generally a fan of westerns. This felt like one, which is the first and last reason I didn’t like it. Check it out if westerns don’t out you out.

Brooks Too Broad For Leaping (4 stars): Pitch dark and savory, an excellent story of being on the outside. There’s also a lot of walking.

Dance At The Edge (4 stars): The premise was strong enough to get me through the opening explanation, which is always good. I also liked seeing the protagonist grow, even if it felt abrupt a times.

Love’s Last Farewell (5 stars): I gave this 5 stars because that’s as high as the scale goes. It’s about loneliness and what happens when tolerance is no longer required. Reading it was listening to someone sing a coffin into the ground.

On Vacation (4 stars): The mood whiplash this story provided woke me right up. I liked that it was so cheerful, while still providing an interesting story.

The City in Morning (3 stars): I liked it even though I’m not sure I understood it. It’s very philosophical.

The State of Nature (5 stars): It uses a few words and one discussion to weave a world and its inhabitants. It doesn’t declare a specific moral stance, which was good here given the actual complexity of the issues it handles.

The Beautiful People (3 stars): I found the world disturbing but clearly envisioned. I didn’t really like the people in that world, though, which contributed to my impressions on it.

A Real Girl (5 stars): Poignant story of an organic A.I. that wants to be human. I think this story illustrated that she already is.

Who Plays With Sin (5 stars): Corporate espionage, lawless regions in place of jail, hackers in high rises – this story had a veritable mix-topia of things I like to read about. Thunder, the POV character was definitely rounded enough to carry this story.

Surfaces (3 stars): I’m fond of this story; speaking as it does of human complexity and expectations. It deals with families, and loyalty.

Stay They Flight (4 stars): I hated the go-slow-go cadence of the story at first, but as I understood more I tolerated it and the changing pace. It certainly provided some empathy, at least, and the changes are gradual enough to not be jarring. It has a nontraditional form that is fairly obvious.

Free in Asveroth (3 stars): I read it and found it haunting, but the more I thought about it the less I liked it. Explaining why would spoil it. Give it a look if you like journeys that illuminate.