Rating: 4/5

Shakespeare’s last play is a stroke of a genius. Defying categorization, The Tempest is the hybrid result of merging tragedy, comedy and fantasy that condenses The Bard's genius in the symbolical representation of the world through the demirugical elements of Greek mythology.
The setting takes place on an exotic island where Prospero and his astonishingly beautiful daughter Miranda have lived in exile for the last twelve years. Overthrown by his treacherous brother, Prospero has crowned himself ruler of the island making use of his supernatural powers and has usurped it from its native inhabitants, who are embodied in the slave Caliban. Aided by the spirit Ariel, who owes loyalty to Prospero; he invokes a turbulent storm that causes the vessel carrying his brother and his retinue to shipwreck on the reefs of his wild domains. A peculiar adventure ensues from destruction and loss and, almost as if by divine providence, the dead resurrect to be given a second chance in the realms of songs and imagination.

The moral process of the characters echoes the interconnectedness of the natural elements -earth, water, wind and fire- in the never-ending circle of life; pagan symbols coexist with Christian imagery, enhancing the procreative forces. With death comes rebirth, and also the generational replacement of the old being lost in the new. Prospero forgives and abandons his schemes for revenge, and as proof of his good will, he renounces to his magic, becoming the virtuous master that Montaigne celebrates in his essays and also a mere mortal who will be eroded by the inescapable passage of time. Thus, the emphasis is not in the promise of eternal life but in the transience of a fading world that continuously changes shape alternating reality and illusion. 

Prospero’s benign treatment of his lifelong enemies contrasts with his brutish manners with Caliban, a fact that has been interpreted as an allegory of colonialism or even racial bigotry, but that would simplify the complexity of a play that brings the game of scenes and characters to the supreme limit of what words can express. Musical alliterations, rhymes and riddles infuse the language of this dreamland where the reader is torn between reason and mysticism. Words are the true “rough magic”, the “art” that rule in Prospero’s kingdom and in dropping them, the inevitable question arises: is Prospero’s resignation a metaphor for the playwright’s definite retirement and therefore, is the The Tempest a valedictory play as many critics and scholars have presumed? 

An answer could be extracted from the Epilogue:

“Gentle breath of yours my sails
Must fill, or else my project fails,
Which was to please. Now I want
Spirits to enforce, art to enchant,
And my ending is despair,
Unless I be relieved by prayer,
Which pierces so that it assaults
Mercy itself and frees all faults.
As you from crimes would pardoned be,
Let your indulgence set me free.”

The author begs for applause and appeals to the audience’s forbearance, for his aim was to entertain, and mimicking a religious prayer, he bids farewell and hopes that his masters will follow Prospero’s selfless deed and grant him freedom. 

And we do, of course we do, but, as if by some magic spell, his presence is still hovering around, lurking in the corner of every page we turn, talking back at us and shaking his head, an indulgent smile on his lips, not very different from that of a father who has finally become resigned to the foibles of his children.