Rating: 3/5

2018 Romance Challenge 
Category: Civil War Romance
 

3.5 Frenchman's Kiss Stars 

ANOTHER Buddy-read with the Queens of Trash &amp; Awkwardness!

After the tragic death of her husband, Jeanette is left reeling. Theirs was a marriage of love and tenderness and she feels cheated by the young death that deprived them of a long life together. As was the practice at the time, Jeanette has spent a year in mourning before being re-introduced into society as a widow. With the few friends she has she values that of one of her oldest companions, newly returned, Cristobal above most others. Despite the fact that they can agree on nothing save that they love to banter with one and other, the young dandy and Jeanette have quite a charming rapport. 

At this first public outing, after a disastrous punch incident, Cristobal and Jeanette are discovered in a rather awkward situation - what with his hand unceremoniously shoved down the front of her dress and all – and her dotting aunt tries to convince the two to marry to save the widow’s reputation. 

 

Not such a bad husband to have, I would think… but Jeanette is still in grieving for Armand and cannot imagine marrying another. Whilst Cristobal reveals that his sensibilities and desires might not lend themselves to marrying a lady at all. 

It is during this social gathering that an idea begins to germinate in Jeanette’s head (I’m just going to start calling her “Jen” – like Cristobal does – to save typing her proper name this whole review, if you don’t mind. And if you do, you can as they say toddle off now.) You see, she seeks revenge on the army which caused her late husband’s demise. And with the rebels needing firepower, and her having all this access to unsold cotton, she begins plotting a way to obtain and provide those necessities using her cunning and skill. 

After some digging, and an awful lot of trouser wearing and pretending to be a young man, Jen finds herself on the ship of the infamous, or famous (depending on which side of the fence you sit), Frenchman, Kitt. Her masquerade as a young man is quickly torn to shreds by the Frenchman, who insults her by proposing that yes, he will help her offload the cotton in exchange for munitions but not for anything so monetary as goods or gold. No, he will do this thing only on his terms: her, in his bed. Jen is, quite naturally, extremely offended and slaps him in his elegant mouth. After which, he catches her up in his arms for a searing kiss unlike any she’s received before. 

At this point in the story, I was done for. Falling hopelessly in love with the feckless Cristobal of Jen’s days. And then, once Jen reconsiders and ultimately agrees to Kitt’s cost, sighing after the Frenchman’s passionate embraces and utterances in the dark night. There is a lot to recommend the first 70% of this novel. I honestly believed this would be my first 5 Star romance read since joining goodreads so many years ago. 

The sex scenes between Kitt and Jen were exquisite torture. Bondage and blindfolds paired with sweet French utterings and kisses to set a house on fire. 

Alas, it was not to be. 

The final 30% of this book brought about a character arc of disastrous proportions, for me. While there is an argument, and certainly Jen makes it, that the Frenchman is using her body in a most discourteous way. It is not, in my opinion, rape. She did agree to it, in a situation wherein she could easily refuse if only she would let her revenge plot go, after all. Is the Frenchman a scoundrel for asking this price? Oh absolutely, there isn’t a doubt in my mind and I (not-so-secretly) love him for it. Is it unseemly of him? Again, of course it is. Is it hot as hell? Also, yes. 

However, after an early on reveal of identity and an explanation of his reasons and intentions; I started to see him as so much more than a scoundrel. The Frenchman grew on me in leaps and bounds. A fact which, ultimately led me to heartbreak when his character changed so drastically for the worse. 

In Nenia’s review she goes into the problems and issues I had quite elegantly, so I will simply lead you there for explanation on the whys of the latter part of this book’s flaws.

Thank you, lovelies, for buddy-reading this with me! And know, that I will saving a few of the more “scientific scenes” of this book for future perusal.