Rating: 4/5

Truly a monumental achievement in historical fiction. This isn’t a perfect book, but as someone that’s been obsessed with this era of European history forever (and someone that can struggle with some of the more academic-oriented Napoleon reading material), this just scratched that itch for me. This is a quick, easy read, but good lord, it’s intense. Much of the story was informed by memoirs of soldiers who fought at the Battle of Asperger-Essling or in the campaigns mentioned throughout, so it’s pretty gory. Honestly, having read about some of the fighting of this era before, I was still shocked by the graphic nature of some of the violence in this book. That’s really the point, though. It feels to me like warfare of this era is thought of as these sweeping, dramatic displays of gallantry and glory, probably because of the art that came out of the decades following these wars (or the propaganda put together by both sides during them). But that’s not the reality. These were real men, who had to fight brutal battles across the entire European continent. 

That brings me to another point. Rambaud is very transparent about his sources and where he invented characters, scenes or dialogue, which I really appreciate. I can see why this was a work of historical fiction, even if it wasn’t originally supposed to be. To be able to tell a boots-on-the-ground story of a Napoleonic battle, you really need to perspective of the everyday soldier, and that would be extremely hard to find in a way that would fit the narrative Rambaud is trying to construct. Sure, there are plenty of memoirs out there from all sorts of low-ranking soldiers, and those are actually Rambaud’s main source of information for the combat sequences, but adding in characters like the voltiguer and the cuirassier allow Rambaud to present the battle from new perspectives, and address parts of the battle that the marshals and their staffs only saw from a distance, or not at all. Instead of penciling in dozens of side characters just to include some anecdotes, we follow along the regular grunts of the army as they fight for their lives. By no means should Rambaud’s depiction of the battle be treated as gospel, even he’ll tell you that. But in my opinion the liberties he took with fictional characters and scenes exist only to make a cohesive story, not to shoehorn his own agenda into the retelling of Napoleon’s first defeat as Emperor.

The only part that didn’t really work for me was the whole subplot with Anna Krauss and Henri Beyle. I get it, he needed a perspective from Vienna, someone that wasn’t actively involved in the fighting, but to me that feel a bit flat, and even felt as though Rambaud became as disinterested in it as I did reading through. But that’s really my only major complaint. This is a fantastic work of historical fiction that includes far more real historical details than most authors would even dream of stumbling across in their research. I highly recommend it to anyone with even a passing interest in this era of history who wants to dip their toe in the water of Napoleonic history. It’s a fantastic work that I believe is written in good faith with respect to the history it’s trying to depict. I’ll absolutely be revisiting this one.