Rating: 5/5

I've given the 4th book in the Poldark series a 5 star rating.

The Poldark's continue to struggle along as Ross sinks every last penny he owns into a last ditch effort to revive the played out mine Wheal Grace, with his cousin Francis as his partner. The treacherous George Warleggan attempts to destroy Ross's life at every opportunity but thanks to a kind deed from an anonymous Good Samaritan he manages to thwart Warleggan's schemes.

Sadly, Francis loses his life in the mine and he leaves his widow Elizabeth and their child destitute so Ross beggers himself by scraping up the 600 pounds to buy Elizabeth's worthless stock in the mine. Now that she is free the smitten George W. wants her to become his bride. But Elizabeth seems to want Ross and doesn't care what effect this might have on Ross's wife and child. When Ross learns that Elizabeth is to marry Warleggan he loses control and immediately confronts her. Needless to say, when Ross doesn't return that night Demelza realizes that Ross still loves Elizabeth after all these years.

Ross's betrayal of Demelza was heartbreaking for me to read leading me to despise Elizabeth more than ever. But once Ross has partaken of forbidden fruit he surprisingly realizes he no longer desires her and never returns to see her after that incident, leaving her with no other option than to marry George Warleggan. Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned though and Elizabeth is not taking her rejection well although I thoroughly enjoyed seeing Elizabeth brought down a peg or two.

Demelza emerges triumphant leaving her rival in the dust. Unfortunately Elizabeth is now pregnant with what is probably Ross's child. Mr. George Warleggan will be extremely disturbed to learn he has a cuckoo in his nest if this new arrival unnaturally resembles Ross. There couldn't be a better way for Ross to achieve revenge either.

FINALLY Wheal Grace's riches are discovered and the Poldarks are on their well deserved way to the top now.

Can't wait to start reading the next book in this series.