Rating: 5/5

Unlike John Donne I have no belief in an afterlife. If there is an afterlife (assuming it is not hell), and I have an eternity to spend how I like, then I would like to dedicate more time to appreciating poetry in the way that it should be appreciated.

In an ideal world, every poem in this collection should have half an hour, or perhaps a full hour dedicated to it, as a way of teasing out its many complex meanings. Perhaps the time could be partly spent reading what other analyses of the poem say, and the rest of the time could be devoted to reading the poem several times over.

As it is, with over 150 poems in this selection I do not have the time to justice to Donne’s work, especially since his style is dated (late 16th and early 17th century), and employs very complex poetical techniques. Poetry is not really meant to be read in huge blocks. By rights readers should be reading a poem at a time and contemplating it. Had I but world enough and time, that is what I would do.

John Donne has produced mixed reactions over the years. He is not as accessible as Wordsworth or Hardy or Keats. His work lies halfway between the courtly conceits of Elizabethan love poetry, and the emotionalism of the Romantic period.

This is partly intentional. Donne wanted to move away from the rigidities of earlier poetry, and create something more freeform and personal. Nonetheless his poetry is not as intimate as that of later writers. 

Donne uses complex conceits and clever wordplay. The poems all have an object to whom Donne addresses the poem. He does not directly write about himself, and we only learn about him from what he says about others. However it is unclear how many of the poems are about Donne himself, or whether they are merely witty poems that describe love situations remote from the life of Donne.

Still even in spite of the distancing effects of Donne’s stylistic gymnastics, there is a curious warmth about his poetry. Elizabethan poets usually do not sound like they are describing any real relationship, which is why they constantly talk about ‘sighs and tears’, rather than anything sincere. Sighs and tears are mentioned in Donne’s poetry too, but he seems to move far beyond such clichés to create something that is his own unique vision.

In some ways Donne reminds me of Cecil B DeMille. Half the time DeMille was making films in his Sunday best, churning out bloated Bible epics. The other half of the time, DeMille took a curious pleasure in prurient and salacious material that contrasted oddly with his religious movies.

Similarly Donne is a pious poet who often writes about religion, but he is also writing in a sexually frank manner that seems to anticipate the Restoration period. Donne is not that blunt or crude, and often does not even mention the female body. When he does we get descriptions of a woman’s private parts as a ‘hairy diadem’.

The poet does seem fascinated with sex though, and his love poems are as explicit as the age allowed him. Fleas and compasses stand in as metaphors for the erect penis. Epithalamiums (wedding poems) often take a weird turn with Donne making allusions to the bride being naked in bed that night. I am not sure if Donne wrote the poems for actual weddings, but I do wonder what the groom would have made of them.

There is mischievous humour here, with poems praising ugliness or body parts in the wrong proportionate places like an anagram. In another poem Donne imagines himself as a ghost haunting a former lover. However she cannot appeal to her present partner for help because he is feigning sleep for fear that she is waking him to have sex with him.

The love poems are the highlight of this selection. I am not too enthusiastic for religious poetry, or for poetry praising other people, living or dead. It is in the elegies, songs and sonnets that Donne really comes to life for me. 

Here Donne mixes humour and sadness. Death is a constant theme, as Donne lost many loved ones. The poems show us Donne’s complex attitude towards women, both highly sexist and greatly admiring, though it is hard to know how serious Donne is being in either. 

It hardly matters. Just as we do not expect that every song reflects the true state of mind of the singer, so we need not expect every poem here to be about the actual opinions or attitudes of the poet. Rather we should see them as momentary moods in the life of Donne, or perhaps moments of inspiration where Donne thought of a clever conceit.

John Donne is certainly a very challenging poet, but his best work is very rewarding. His poetry is difficult, but it can also be very exciting. More than anything he is a true original, a poet who created his own path to walk down. Even today not many poets have chosen to follow him down that path, but I doubt anyone could have improved on Donne’s unique style.