Rating: 3/5

Too bad I don't have the edition with the aging, balding reporter on the cover. Looks a bit like a chubbier Frasier. That might have added half a star to my rating. The one I have is just weird, nonsensical and forgettable.

Budrys borders on the prophetic in this book. Although it dates from 1977, it is pretty accurate in predicting the feel of the present, if not the technical details. He doesn't really predict the internet, but in this novel, almost every computer can be reached by every other computer. The story even depends on it.

I liked the idea of some guy using an AI to keep an eye on everything that's going on in the world and gently nudging it into a peaceful (if somewhat boring) direction. I also liked the protagonist and the AI's characters, as well as their verbal sparring. The ending seemed like a winner at first, but it ended up in a direction that was too vague and unbelievable for my tastes. The ending would have had more power if the aliens had been from Jupiter instead of... I want to say some other dimension, but it was so vague, I'm not sure. Did humans only exist because those aliens were looking for them? It was just unnecessarily weird.

This book's biggest problem was the writing. There was a good story in there, somewhere, but every character sounded the same. Most of them also spoke overly sophisticated. What comes to my mind is a few pages of pointless pontification by some Russian about his native region and the difference between city dwellers and the people with six legs. Those are people riding horses. Why doesn't he just say so? Probably for the same reason these useless pages are in the book. They make the book more literary. And that's my problem with this book, I'm not even sure whether it's literature or it just has a thin veneer of sophistication and tries to pose as literature, but since I hate literature it was a chore to read it. 

I constantly felt like I was missing some underlying meaning in the conversations. It didn't help that I had trouble remembering who was who. That leaves me unsure whether this was a good story idea with a bad execution or a good story, meant for people more intelligent than me. Oh well.