Rating: 1/5

Having read, "To Reign in Hell," a book based off of Star Trek, and finding that it was good, I read this book, thinking it would be another good, nerd-ish read. Oh, and spoiler alert.

Nerd-ish, yes; good read, a resounding no.

This book fell apart. I can deal with random myths that nobody has ever heard of, even though half the fun of Indiana Jones is how close to reality he manages to bring these myths. What I CAN'T deal with are stupid characters, awful plots, inconsistencies with the movies, and (practically) copying scenes from the movies into the books. And yes, all of those things happened.

For one, there was no girl for Indiana to like. There was a 15-year old girl that, obviously, couldn't be a love interest for him. There was the girl's mother, who was looking for her husband, so no love interest there. Half of the stuff he does is made funny because of a girl, and there was no chance for that in this book. LAME. Oh, and they were annoying characters. The woman was WAY too knowledgeable about what to do. Right. Like she'd been to a town in the desert where they worship Satan and just happened to be the one who could control the Staff of Aaron and heal folks.... Riiiiiiiiight. Her daughter was way too learned about those types of things, too. She was just plain annoying.

Another big no-no was how Indy was portrayed. Like I said above, he lacked a lot of his charm because of a lack of a girl in his life, but there was a lot more wrong with him in this book. He was never really Indy---He was either too knowledgeable about something or incredibly DUMB. That's not Indiana Jones. That's glorified fanfiction. This book was a large fanfiction. Pathetic! There was nothing commanding about him at all because the only thing the author could think to make him say were smart-aleck responses (or he put in a serious response when Indy would have made a joke).

I'm not even going to talk about the plot. It's bad. If you don't believe me, read the book yourself.

The author practically copied a scene from Raiders of the Lost Ark: Salah's children came to Indiana and rescued him (or, at the least, they brought him to Salah... Not sure if they legitimately rescued him). Whatever. There's no originality in having the same thing happen twice. It wasn't the movie copying the book---the book figured that if it worked in the movie, it would be nostalgic for Indiana Jones fans. NOPE. It came out corny.

While it was kind of entertaining to read, this book failed. At least it's getting me closer to my book-reading goal!