Rating: 3/5

Ross and Demelza are reeling from the tragedy of losing little Julia. Ross is brooding over his cousin's betrayal and the end of the Carnmore Copper Company. He's also about to face trial at the Assizes for his role in the shipwrecks of last winter. Should he play conciliatory like his lawyer wants him to? Then what? Debtors' prison? Should he borrow money from friends the way Demelza wants him to or should he stick to his principles? Being Ross, the answer is fairly obvious. George Warleggan's hatred of the Poldarks increases as Francis struggles with his own role in Ross's struggles. Demelza has a secret she can't share and Verity is looking forward to meeting her husband's children. Will they like her? Dwight Enys is a little older and wiser after his affair with Keren but when he meets the beautiful, headstrong Caroline Penvenen, he's smitten. He tries to remind himself she's engaged to Unwin Trevaunance but Caroline isn't so sure she wants to marry him. The villagers are ill and Dwight spends most of his time caring for them and not dancing attendance on Caroline-how dare he?! The French are in revolt and the British nobility are worried. By the time 1791 rolls around, Ross and Demelza face new challenges but with a bit more hope. 

The story is really picking up in this slim third volume (with a handsome interpretation of Ross on the cover). I'm impressed the screenwriter managed to take the plot exactly as written, condense the timeline and still manage to get it accurate. The one difference here is that the story doesn't enter into George's head until after the trial and he moves a little more slowly than he does in the series, probably because of the condensed timeframe for TV. It was an interesting leap into his head, finding out more about why he hates the Poldarks and what exactly he wants. His father seems like a fair man-tough- but fair. Uncle Cary is the ruthless one and influences George. I liked the little bits of humor interjected into the story-especially the affair of poor Jud! Jud and Prudie provide drama and comic relief at the same time. 

What really annoyed me about this book is being inside Ross's head. Sadly he is still conflicted in his feelings about Elizabeth. He is content with Demelza- even loves her and recognizes she makes him an excellent partner but he is unable to tell Demelza or even show her. He blocked off his feelings when his mother died and claims not to be used to women, but I was hoping Demelza would help him open up. He's lived with her for years so he should be used to her by now but he continually ignores her feelings which makes me mad. Is this the difference between a male writer and female screenwriter? It's more realistic in the book but I want some romance with my realism, especially knowing there are more dark days ahead. 

I love Demelza. She doesn't deserve Ross's brooding anger. She's intelligent in her own right and witty. She manages to figure out solutions to her problems practically and occasionally gets Ross to see reason. I felt so bad for her in this book. She worries so much and I wish Ross would just talk to her and tell her what's in his heart. I like how she always knows what he's feeling even if she doesn't know what he's thinking. I also really like Verity. She isn't in the story too much but she's as sweet and good as ever.Captain Blamey seems like a man given to nearly as much brooding as Ross and he isn't home too often. Verity deserves happiness and I hope the stepchildren are kind to her. The women shine in this book because I also like Caroline. When she first appears she is spoiled, young and seems to make a game of the serious situations she finds herself in. Then as the story progresses and the reader gets to know her better, she's lively, fun and probably more intelligent than she lets on. She's open-minded and of course she loves her Pug, Horace, so any dog lover becomes an automatic hit with me. The one woman who doesn't appear in good light here is Elizabeth. She is cold, selfish and just so seriously annoying. She is likened to Galatea, and she is a lot like a marble statue wanting to be admired. I found her seriously annoying.

The men do not fare as well as the women in this book. Francis is on a bad path but yet I have sympathy for him. He's growing and becoming more of a sympathetic character. I really liked Dwight. He's a little older, a little wiser and more cautious, but no less dedicated to helping the poor.Dwight is a little shy, sweet and very kind. I admire his principles more than Ross's. Ross's hot temper would wear me thin. 

I'm both looking forward to and dreading reading the next volume. I'm going to stop there! 

This edition of the book is full of typos. I hope they were fixed in the latest edition.