Rating: 5/5

A wealth of knowledge for any leader

The book Top Performance How to Develop Excellence in Yourself and Others is a relic that was originally published in 1986. This review is based on the latest version, released in 2019.

I regret not having read any of Zig Ziglar’s many books before now. Top Performance is a wealth of knowledge regarding successful leadership. It’s based on the foundation that success in life is about the choices we make. Top Performance touches on many attributes of a good leader. Each topic is covered concisely and many include interesting examples and stories that hammer the points home.

This book is about so much more than management. It covers communication, honesty, loyalty, expecting the best, happiness, picking the right people, and education, among so many more.

This book would be a great gift for anyone taking on more responsibility in their career or any budding, eager professional.

How this book affected me:
I regretted not reading this book twenty years ago when I was slogging it out in the corporate world. What Top Performance highlighted for me is how much it all boils down to how we’re treating people. It’s really pretty simple. Treating people well and fairly is the best way to get the best out of them.

Who would enjoy this book:
Theoretically, this is a business book for managers or small business owners, but it’s packed with tidbits that can help anyone. From team leaders to sports coaches, non-profit organizers, or religious leaders. It could also benefit professionals whose jobs require working well with people, such as engineers, technology professionals, administrators, or politicians. Young professionals who are looking to advance their careers would also benefit from the wisdom included in this book.

Our Christian Book Reviews:
The BOOK REVIEWS at Finding God Among Us focus on Christian books - adult and children, fiction and nonfiction. We're proud to be included in the Top 50 Christian Book Review Bloggers. I chose to read an ARC from Revell, a division of Baker Publishing Group. This review is my honest opinion.