Rating: 4/5

This was a charming story, reminding me once again that Louisa May Alcott knew how to write. I read Little Women many times in my youth, but never got interested in the others of that series. I was surprised years later to read some of her short stories dealing with hospital work during the Civil War, and it seems like I also read some Gothic type tales by Alcott, unless my memory is playing tricks again.

But I had never heard of Under The Lilacs until I went digging at Gutenberg for books that had the names of flowers in the titles. It was for a challenge and although I left the group I kept my list and FINALLY am starting to read my garden. Lilacs are one of my favorites, so it feels quite proper to start the list with this book. Besides, I needed the U for a spelling challenge!

We start off with two sisters that look like twins but are not. They and their family of dolls are having a tea party at the Big House next door to their own. Their mother airs and tidies the place every so often, but no one has lived there as long as the girls can remember. They have made the front walk and porch area their very own, playing there with their 'children'. 

But today something goes wrong. Their tea cakes get stolen, all the dolls have been knocked over: someone has made a big mess of things, but who and why? Eventually we discover the thief, a dog who looks just like the china poodle on the mantel at home. And along with the dog comes Ben, a boy who has run away from the circus and arrived at The Big House.

From there we have adventures both sweet and dramatic, and more than once everyone including the reader was moved to tears. Alcott blended the different aspects of life into this story, so it is never overly saccharine or overly melodramatic. Things happen just like they do in life, which I think gave this book a lot of its appeal, at least for me. It felt believable.

There were of course morals and lessons written into the story, but that was to be expected from the author and her era. None of them are too 'in your face', except that as a modern woman I was a little annoyed by some of her words about girls and their attitudes in life. Especially when she wrote about "the sweet generosity which makes so many sisters glad to see their brothers carry off the prizes of life, while they are content to know that they have earned them and can do without the praise." 

I could go either way with that statement: so girls can do anything boys can do and besides that they don't need to have their egos bolstered by public praise because for a girl just knowing she did something is enough? That would make girls more self-reliant creatures who know their own worth without needing awards, prizes, or kudos from anyone except themselves. An excellent goal but how many people have that type of character? We all like to be told once in awhile that we have done a good job at this or that, so why press home her point just to her female audience? The boys are the ones who need such advice, unless she was trying to get the girls to think of themselves as much more noble, able creatures than those tiresome boys (and men) who need their egos coddled. Ah, well. Different times, right? Or are they....

Anyway, one cute character was a little boy who showed up on his own one special day when there was a grand party. This was the second time he had visited, and when he told the girls what he had been doing since they saw him last someone ended up telling him that he was a naughty boy and would not go to Heaven like good boys would. But he said he didn't care, he didn't want to go to Heaven anyway. When they asked him why not, he replied:
"They don't have any dirt there. My mamma says so. I am fond of dirt. I shall stay here where there is plenty of it," and the candid youth began to grub in the mould with the satisfaction of a genuine boy.

This made me laugh, since I am rather fond of dirt myself, even though I am a genuine girl. And now I need to wind this up and get back out to the garden and its dirt. 

If you ever need a feel-good read, this is a great one to choose!