Rating: 3/5

Surprisingly funny and witty, full of hyperbole and inversion, like a literary carnival - 3.5 stars
The chief element of happiness is this: to want to be what you are.
Jan Steen - The World Upside Down:

A real renaissance work, full of allusions to ancient Greece and Rome, and a goddess who tells of her deeds for the world. Folly is definitely not modest and attest all of mankind’s achievements to herself. Hereby she puts herself squarely into everything that makes humans (sometimes infuriatingly so) human. Friendship, kindness, love; the characteristics Folly claims basically distinguish us from an AI.

To convince us she quotes a multitude of sayings (Erasmus his own Proverbs. from the Adagia of Erasums) and ancient literary works to strengthen her case and meanwhile takes on the philosophers, theologians, courtiers, sovereigns and cardinals of his age.
 
Section 59 shows the true focus of Folly and Erasmus: a scathing indictment of the pope and his greedy, warmongering corruption. Here the link to the world of Thomas More and Wolf Hall, embroiled in the Reformation is most clear.
To achieve this sometimes convoluted explanations of the Bible (which made me think of Foucault's Pendulum arkane explanation of Kabbalah phenomena) are used to support the case, maybe meant ironically by the author?

Section 66 has a very interesting standoff between materialists who search for success and material gains versus the true Christians, close to insanity in their efforts to put the soul and belief first.
It is very clear that Erasmus puts more emphasis and value at the substance of belief over the form of rituals, be it in grammar or in Christianity.

Also quite modernly the praise of (uncritical) self love to help us all deal with cruel rational reality feels kind of self help like.
Finally Erasmus foreshadows William Shakespeare:
And what is all this life but a kind of comedy, wherein men walk up and down in one another's disguises and act their respective parts, till the property-man brings them back to the attiring house.

All in all this makes In Praise of Folly a very interesting book of a famous Dutchman.