Rating: 5/5

The war the world ignored and then forgot. Peter Maass was a war correspondent for the Washington Post and he covered the war in Bosnia in the 1990s. This isn't about military campaigns though, it's stories of war, about ordinary people caught up in something horrific.

When Serbia invaded Bosnia, the Bosnians appealed for help from Europe and America and were fobbed off. The Serbian propaganda machine, meanwhile, spewed out tales of Bosnians bombing their own cities for sympathy, Bosnians shooting their own and blaming the Serbs -- even the mass executions were blamed on Bosnia.

The book is certainly biased (in favour of Bosnia) but I don't have a problem with that. From first-hand accounts, evidence, and war criminals since, it's pretty much accepted that the majority of the atrocities were committed by Serbs. This isn't an easy book to read; it made me profoundly sad, not in a superficial "oh puppy abandoned by the side of the road" sort of way, but in a deep way, one that can engender hatred. But I wanted to learn more about the war, and how it affected Bosnia, and this seemed a good book to achieve that.

I love Bosnia. I have a cap that says that, and it's true. It's a beautiful country, with friendly, open people who are rebuilding their lives. It's not a comfortable country to visit, even now (we spent a few weeks there in 2008), but it's a rewarding one. There are still many, many villages where the occupants cannot return because of the (mainly unmapped) landmines. You see the signs warning of them everywhere - along main roads, in villages, outside a ruined house, in a farmer's field, in the mountains, and right in the centre of major towns such as Banja Luka and Jayce. One of the things that struck me most when we were there in 2008 was how everyone was getting along. There was none of the animosity and open feuding that even now plagues the factions in Ireland. I asked our Bosnian friend about this. How do people sit down and drink coffee with their Serbian neighbour? That same Serbian may have raped, maimed, tortured, killed. How do they shove it under the rug and sit down without hatred? Was it all glossed over, I wondered. Did it still fester away underneath. No, said our Bosnian friend. The war ended, they just stopped, sat down and drank coffee together.

I was hoping for greater understanding from reading this book. In some ways, I did get that. I know more history, more about humans in war time, more about what drives ordinary people to do terrible things. I know more about beautiful, battered Bosnia than I did before, but I'm not much wiser about how to forgive.