Rating: 5/5

Throughout this highly detailed work by Koestler there is a pendulum swing that might be said to center on a balanced integration of the mystical with the rational. From a certain perspective, we could say that the force which causes the pendulum to swing is human free will and the ability we have to view the world from numerous perspectives. Yet the decisions coming out of free will can be heavily influenced by larger forces: "the cosmology of a given age is not the result of a unilinear, 'scientific' development, but rather the most striking, imaginative symbol of its mentality - the projection of its conflict, prejudices, and specific ways of double-think on to the graceful sky." (106)

This larger environmental pressure on thought is sometimes shaken off by individuals who tap into an element of universal truth and carry it along the path towards a "logical conclusion". Yet none of these individuals ever possess the entire truth, and this can be said of societies, cultures and periods of time as well. Koestler takes the history of cosmology - from the Pythagoreans, Plato and Aristotle through Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo and Newton to illustrate how the progression of human intelligence (at all levels both "rational" and "mystical") is not linear, nor is it rational in the disinterested scientific sense. There is not a necessary progression to human thought or development. From the heliocentric conceptions of the Pythagoreans we see a regression through the Middle Ages, when we lose the idea of what Koestler calls "pure science" as an "intellectual delight and a way to spiritual release" (37) as well as a more accurate picture of the center of the universe with the regression to the earth center. Extremism presents itself in the form of scriptural interpretation vs. the reading of the transcendent message available in observed facts, which results in a limitation of vision. The divine reality has become too small. Humanity has limited it by an extreme focus on one element of the equation - in this case the mystical over the scientific. The reactionary response to this limitation is shown by Koestler to be extremism in the other direction, to the benefit of technological development but at the risk of complete annihilation of the species in both the physical and the spiritual sense. 

In both cases (mystical, scientific) the nature of divinity is confined, reduced, defined. Koestler attacks science for eliminating an entire field of potential thought through failing to recognize "purpose", but his statement could equally apply to the mystical as well: "It betrays a great lack of imagination to believe that the concept of 'purpose' must necessarily be associated with some anthropomorphic deity." (548) Extremism on the mystical side of the pendulum has allowed its vision of divinity to be defined by the scientific in that it reacts to this definition rather than transcending it through incorporating it into a more accurate picture of the whole or reality. In turn, Koestler warns science of its own lack of transcendence "It is therefore a perverse mistake to identify the religious need solely with intuition and emotion, science solely with the logical and rational" (531). In all of this there is a primordial truth waiting to be found and Koestler describes the creative process as a return through un-learning or shaking off the accumulated dross of environment while holding on to the good in accumulated human wisdom. 

Throughout the book, this last thought could be expanded into a central theme. Koestler uses this detailed history of human accomplishment through human means to illustrate the necessity of return to primordial truth while holding onto the underlying wisdom that we gain through various advancements. His own words can sum up: "If there is a lesson in our story it is that the manipulation, according to strictly self-consistent rules, of a set of symbols representing one single aspect of the phenomena may produce correct, verifiable predictions, and yet completely ignore all other aspects whose ensemble constitutes reality..." (544).