Rating: 4/5

I've yet to read all of Connie Mason's books, but so far, with only one exception, I've found them so damned entertaining I hate to put them down, and then hate when I finish them. I'm not saying there aren't any flaws, but they can easily be overlooked.

This book is not the exception (note the 4 stars), and one of the reasons for that was the amount of history included, about a subject I didn't have much prior knowledge of: convict labor in early 19thc Australia (the book takes place between 1807 1nd 1810), the Exclusionists vs. the Emancipists, the social and political situation in Sydney and New South Wales, the definition of The rum Corps, and just how difficult the settlers had it, due to corruption and unjust laws. (Civil Rights was an issue in other countries, besides America.) There were historical figures making an appearance, such as John McArthur and Governor (nee Captain) Bligh (yes, the Bounty guy), which always gives an authenticity to a historic novel. This includes bushrangers, escaped convicts turned outlaws, who figure in the story too. (I also learned about wattle, damper and Billy tea.) I like getting a history lesson, while I read about the H and h.

In this case, they were Dare Penrod and Casey O'Cain. She was sent to Australia, convicted of murder. Though it was self-defense, no one took her seriously. (She tried to speak to a judge about preventing her political prisoner father from being hanged; he said he'd grant her request if she became his mistress, then tried to rape her; in the struggle, she pushed him and he fell, hit his head and died.) She becomes a 7 year indentured servant to the Penrod family: patriarch Roy and his sons, Dare and Ben. There's also another convict servant, Martha, as well as Tim O'Malley, a friend of Casey's from Ireland, (who would like to be more) who's sent to the coal mines.

(Another thing I learned: England sent convicts to Australia after America became off limits, when it was no longer their colonies.)

At first, there's a lot of animosity between Dare and Casey, as he believes she's a killer and a whore, and she resents his suspicions and arrogance. Soon, however, they can't fight their feelings, and Dare discovers the "whore" was a virgin! Casey discovers how much she loves him, but fears that for him it's only lust.

Soon, all manner of obstacles appear to keep these two apart, and not just Casey's seven year convict sentence. Casey discovers Tim wounded in the bush, after being shot when he escaped from the mines. She hides him and cares for him (afraid to get the Penrods involved), with the help of Dare's emancipist friend, Robin, not knowing that fellow servant Meg has been spying on her, and uses what she knows to cause trouble. (Meg wants Dare, her former bedmate, to come back to her, and is determined to get rid of Casey. A charge of aiding and abetting an escaped convict, plus a trumped up charge of theft ought to do it.)

From there, it's one event after another, as every time Dare and Casey overcome an obstacle, another's thrown in their way. There's also competition form their affections (though one-sided in both cases) and not just by one person. There's two other men interested in Casey, (not counting two lecherous officers) and four other women who want Dare! While the OM are decent guys who want Casey to be happy, three of the OW cause a lot of trouble, but two of them (a refreshing change from "once a bitch, always a bitch") repent their actions and try to make amends, though one is prevented from doing so.

I don't want to give away details, but there are a lot of twists and turns you might not expect, but I will gladly report that (aside from one incident with Dare, out of anger rather than passion) there's no cheating. The most that happened was Casey got a friendly kiss from one of her suitors, and Dare, at a time when he and Casey were long separated, shared some kisses and caresses with one of the OW, but it got no further than that. They only make love with each other, and if you like love scenes to be hot and steamy, you won't be disappointed.

I'm also happy to report that, despite about five close calls, there wasn't any rape. Poor Casey had quite a few degrading experiences, but something or someone always happened to prevent things from going too far.

I did say before that the book is not without its flaws. Casey and Dare have such a strong physical attraction that it tends to overpower everything else; they don't talk to each other the way they should, and admit their love. Casey holds back because she's not sure Dare really loves her the way she does him, and Dare just assumes she knows how he feels, without saying the words. She was insecure enough that even when he did try to prove it, she couldn't fully trust him. Even so, she had no reason not to trust his father and brother; Ben thought of her like a sister, and Rob was fond of her. Yet, when she was in trouble and needed them, she believed the wrong person and let herself be convinced they didn't care. No matter what doubts she may have had about Dare, she should have known better when it came to Roy and Ben.

There's also a time when Dare becomes jealous of Casey's attentions to Drew, an elderly man (a family friend of the Penrods), who was there for Casey when she needed help, and whom she wanted to care for, while he wasn't well. Dare acted as if she were choosing Drew over him. For a sophisticated man, he sure acted like a silly child!

Both of them were guilty of being too quick to suspect the other of infidelity, despite how strong their love was, and how great the sex was.

But flaws don't take away from the story, as it's got too much going for it. There's a HEA, but it sure took a while to get there! Just read the book and enjoy the adventure!