Rating: 4/5

Going to shamelessly use my review that I wrote for class because, honestly, it's a good one.

The Shaman’s Coat: A Native History of Siberia, by Anna Reid, 2002. Great Britain: Orion Publishing Group Ltd. ISBN: 0-297-64377-0 (hardcover). xiii + 225, 9 maps, 29 pictures, acknowledgments, introduction, afterward, notes, selected bibliography, index.
Reviewed by C. Andrews 

The Shaman’s Coat is an extensively written ethnography detailing the Siberian indigenes and their world. Despite what the title may suggest, this book has very little to do with shamanism, and more to do with the fact that many Westerners are not even aware that the Siberian indigenes exist. Anna Reid does an excellent job of bringing that fact to light by using all manner of sources in order to get all of the information possible. Reid also makes a point of making many subtle comparisons to other indigenous people, such as Australian aboriginals or the Native Americans, to emphasize the resilience of culture. It is through these examples that Reid attempts to provide a spectrum of how the Siberian indigenes have dealt with the modern age and their evolution through history to their embrace of their Russian citizenship. Overall, The Shaman’s Coat is an excellent example of ethnography, pulling various sources together to create a detailed exploration of the Siberian indigenes and where their future lies. 

The Shaman’s Coat details the lives of the Siberian indigenes to such an extent that it emphasizes just how various and numerous they were, emphasizing the fact that “few generalizations held true of all of them” (Reid 199; 2002). Reid emphasizes the fact that there are over thirty different Siberian nationalities, and that to gain a single interpretation of them as a whole would be folly, because it simply isn’t fair to classify the people as a whole. They are all so different that it would be presumptuous to reach any broad conclusions. Reid made detailed studies of nine of these indigenous communities, came to the conclusion that it would be impossible to classify them all under the same category other than that they all live in Siberia. 

Reid studied many of the Sibiryaki, Siberian subcultures such as the Khant, the Buryat, the Tuvans, the Sakha, the Chukchi, Ainu, Nivkh, and Uilta. This is only a small portion of the Siberian indigenes; not even half of the local Siberian people. Reid dedicated chapters to each of these subcultures, detailing their lifestyles, folklore and history, and the ways in which the Soviet Union attempted to crush their individualism and culture. Over the course of several months, Reid garnered enough information to write a very thorough ethnography of the Siberian indigenes. Reid sought out to enlighten readers of the true Siberia, not just the “vast white snowfield” (Reid 1; 2002). Despite what the title of the ethnography may suggest, there are very few discussions relating to shamanism throughout the novel. Through this, Reid subtly suggests that Shamanism did not fare so well under the Soviet regime. Overall, the crux of her studies revolved around how the Sibiryaki in general, not just the Siberian shamans, had fared during the Soviet control of Siberia. 

It is through Reid’s critique of the Soviet control over the Siberian Indigene that becomes apparent that she used a painstakingly amount of research in order to create an unbiased and informed approach, especially considering her lack of information regarding the subject in interviews. Reid had to use sources such as folklore, KGB reports, the work of other ethnographers, and a wide array of interviews in order to get the information she needed over the span of months. The goal of her ethnography was to prove that “native Siberians did still exist,” (Reid 199; 2002) in that the culture still lived on despite Soviet control. Reid’s research is valuable to the anthropological community because it emphasizes the perseverance of culture. While the fabric of the Siberian indigenes cultures has changes, it still retains the same basic shape. 

Reid also indulged in great detail the lack of information regarding how well the Siberian indigenes got along with the Russians following Soviet control. This was a topic of particular sensitivity as the soviet regime had undergone great efforts to suffocate the various Siberian indigene cultures. The “extent [to which] northern native Siberians resisted collectivization is unclear” (Reid 164; 2002) but the aftereffects were felt nonetheless. Most of Reid’s sources would “clam up or change the subject” (Reid 200; 2002) whenever the topic of Soviet colonization was brought up, making it hard to pull together sources for valid and valuable information. But, despite this, Reid persevered and managed to extract enough information from her tight lipped sources to provide a compelling and thorough depiction of the lives of the Siberian indigenes under Soviet control. “It was all … about how to give away your things” (Reid 163; 2002) for the Siberian’s under Soviet control and so they were “engulfed by Stalin’s terror” (Reid 165; 2002). Reid also details the destructive policies under Khrushchev, emphasizing that it was the Soviet regime in its entirety, not just Joseph Stalin, which had such a negative impact on the Siberian culture. Soviet control attempted to leave the Siberian indigenes “bereft of their cultural identity” (Reid 167; 2002), resulting in lower life expectancy and literacy throughout the many villages. This was through the Soviet Union’s desire to wipe out the Siberian cultural identity. Despite her lack of first hand sources, Reid does an excellent job of illustrating Siberian indigene collectivization and the effects it had in the years to come. 

The Shaman’s Coat is made all the more compelling by Reid’s audacity and perseverance for honest sources. The most interesting part of the novel is the perseverance of the Sibiryaki despite the Soviet Union’s efforts to squash out individualism and faith. Through reports and scattered interviews, Reid determined that the Soviet control of the Sibiryaki had “turned from tough, self-sufficient herders, hunters, and fishermen into bored, browbeaten manual laborers” (Reid 167; 2002). Reid explains this as because the Soviet Union left them “bereft of their cultural identity, self-respect and often of their children” (Reid 167; 2002). Reid compares this to the “passive, alcohol-soaked despair [of the] Australian [aborigines] and sadder parts of Alaska” (Reid 167; 2002), comparing the suffering of the Siberian indigenes to the culture crushing done to other indigene people around the world. Reid also utilizes various photographs, which are seen throughout the text, to emphasize this point. One haunting image in particular is of Stalin holding a little village girl, and in the photo caption, it reveals that he had her family killed within a year of taking that photo (Stalin with Gelya Markizova). This is but a small example of the devastation wrecked upon the Siberian indigenes. Although, Shamanism and the Sibiryaki had been “strengthened since Communism’s collapse” (Reid 199; 2002); the Siberian indigene culture had been “stripped down to its essentials by Russian rule and especially by Communism” (Reid 201; 2002), yet they still persevered. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, there was a strong surge of re-found faith and sense of community. Overall, Reid emphasizes the importance of culture and community through her narrations by describing the devastation inflicted upon the Siberian indigene and the results it had upon the culture in both the long and short term.

The crux of the Shaman’s Coat was to illuminate the hardships undergone by the Sibiryaki and the methods they used to move on from such devastation. Anna Reid also proved just how important culture is to the community as a whole, and how culture survives hardship. Reid also managed to prove that there is more to Siberia than a vast white wonderland. She managed to prove that Siberia is a land full of culture and vast misinterpretations and a still thriving culture. While Reid makes a point of the decay of the culture under Soviet control, she also emphasizes the growth of the Sibiryaki afterward. Utilizing interviews, transcripts, diary entries, photographs, paintings and various other sources, Reid brings together an excellent ethnography.