Rating: 4/5

⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ four stars -

This book, “Roses Have Thorns”, was such a fun, romantic read. It pleasantly reminded me why I’ve been on a Betty Neels (BN) read-fest lately. 

I would encourage anyone that loves easy-to-read Harley or M&amp;B romances to give this tale a chance. 

This story delivers all of the trademark BN romance staples:

. An independent heroine who is intelligent, capable, and hardworking. She gives our Hero delicious snark, which makes for wonderful banter between them. 

. A complete backstory for our heroine that spans from her later childhood to her present twenty-eight year old self. BN does a great job fleshing out her characters, and our heroine Sarah, has lots of interaction with our Hero and a wide secondary cast. 

. A satisfyingly romantic Cinderella story arc - my favorite trope ❤️. Even though we don’t get to see Sarah in all her new finery - because surely Radolf is going to gift her a new wardrobe as a wedding present 💝.

. BN’s signature Hero - a handsome and successful RDD - Rich Dutch Doctor - complete with a beautifully expensive car (this time a Rolls).

. A smitten Hero who comes to our heroine’s rescue to save her from peril, not once, but twice! 

. A heroine that meets several members of the Hero’s family - including his mother. Of course they all adore our wonderful heroine. Really, who wouldn’t? Sarah is the standard, wonderful BN heroine.

. Adorable pets that have their own action within the story - of course our heroine has the requisite BN feline. Radolf, our Hero, has a wonderfully fluffy Golden Retriever. 

I found this story to be one of the better Neels stories I’ve read, so far. I’ll be carrying on with my BN read-through. This one definitely ranks up there with my other two BN’s favorites:

1. “Dearest Mary Jane” - review here 👉 https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

2. “An Old-Fashioned Girl” - review here 👉 https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

Overall, a fun, thoroughly-told, romantic read that I would recommend to anyone else who enjoys BN.

Four romantic stars.