Rating: 2/5

I really tried to like this book. I think there's a lot here that is unique, interesting, and extremely creative. Ken Macleod is an author whose work I've struggled to connect with once before, and I wanted to give him another chance due to wide acclaim from critics and fans. I've also heard good things online about this book in particular and its series in general. As it stands now, I'm within minutes of closing the back page I'm annoyed. That's never a good sign when finishing a book you had high hopes for. At times The Star Fraction was brilliant. It had sprinkles of very deep insight into the human condition and the nature of authority and sovereignty, and I found quite a few quotable passages that I've taken note of to carry with me. That being said, there are some real flaws that just kept poking me in the eye while I was trying to read, spoiling some of the better moments. In the last 50 pages or so I was determined to give this book at least 3 stars because I believed the author had created something worthy and new-feeling, but the ending was extremely disappointing and managed to highlight some of the issues I had throughout the book, causing me to close the circle in a negative way on some things I was unsure of prior to the ending. I wanted so very badly to try to give this book a positive rating because, while this book really didn't resonate with me for reasons I'll explain, I felt that the author had created something that absolutely would resonate with others. At the very end of the book, it felt as though some promises he'd implicitly made throughout the story were not met, which is a primary reason for my frustration upon completion. Another issue is the organization of the book, which seemed at times to wander so much that I just wanted Macleod to move the plot along in a clearer direction.

This book's bright spots lie in Macleod's vision, creativity, and descriptive imagery. He's imagined a future Earth in which some callous human traits have managed to dominate society worldwide, resulting in a fracturing of states and countries across the globe. The book takes place in what used to be known as England, but due to some kind of never-fully-explained upheaval that takes place before this story begins England has become a fractious, divided patchwork of individual regimes. It's implied that a similar development has occurred in most other countries and regions in both hemispheres. The notable exception is the United States, who apparently have managed to either co-opt or coerce the United Nations to the point that they're referred to either interchangeably or as "U.S./U.N." Each of these small regimes varies in size from what appears to be city-state proportions down to areas as small as a single block of a town. Within each of these mini-governments, the authorities having jurisdiction each get to set laws, control customs, levy armed forces, and generally act as independently as possible from everybody else. It is implied that his results in a sort of divided culture where everybody tends to group up only with others almost exactly like themselves. However, this point is undercut by the wide variety and extensive diversity (both genetic and societal) of the characters who seem to be - loosely - aligned. If Macleod is trying to put a spotlight on the dangers of a fractured populace, having folks from all walks of life come together for poorly-defined reasons harmoniously and spontaneously isn't helping to push this narrative. Layered on top of this is a global "datasphere" (read: "internet"). The datasphere will feel familiar to those of us living 30 years after this book was published as we probably all use the internet every day in some capacity. Here is one aspect of Macleod's strength as a writer: his technological foresight and imagination is right up there with the best science fiction writers of his time. Unfortunately for the reader, the author either chose not to or was unable to convey his ideas in a way that is comprehensible to his audience. I will detail this more in latter paragraphs, don't worry. As the plot begins to form, we are introduced to several primary characters who come together in what felt like a tenuous way. Circumstances do push them together initially, but their decisions to realign their motivations and allegiances at the drop of a hat didn't feel like it had a realistic impetus behind it. These characters group together to foment a revolution that feels like it's unnecessary to me. As they either inadvertently or intentionally push the world closer to the brink of governmental rebirth, the story sort of fell apart for me, and towards the end it really felt as though the author had either given up or written himself into a corner and tried to cop out until he could gather all the threads together coherently in the sequels.

Now we come to the point where I must detail what didn't work for me in The Star Fraction in greater detail. I feel mean every time I write a negative review, but just saying "this book is bad" is both inaccurate and unfair to the author and all the folks behind the scenes who worked really hard on this novel and deserve to know why it didn't work for me. I hope he and they will take this criticism for what it is: detailed, incisive feedback intended to help people find books they may really connect with (even and especially if I didn't).

My first issue with this book began to sink in quite early on. I took copious notes on my thoughts about this book because it both made me swing wildly from liking it to disliking it multiple times and because at times it can be quite dense and I was trying to parse what I was reading into some semblance of a sensical tale. My first strong opinion about this book, and my premonition that I may be in for a rough ride, was when I realized it was feeling a lot like William Gibson's Count Zero. I really didn't like Count Zero because it felt like it was so vague and sparse in descriptive narration that at times I couldn't tell what was happening, who was talking, or even what setting and time period we were in from moment to moment. This happened to me so frequently in Count Zero that I got really upset at times with Gibson's choices to obfuscate and cloud things in a way that occasionally felt intentional. While there was less of the mystical, and a lot less of what felt like intentional confusion on Macleod's part, I would much prefer no intentional confusion in my books unless it serves a literary purpose. To be fair to Macleod, there were several times where I made myself question whether I was just misunderstanding an aspect of depth that Macleod was inserting into his book. At times I felt like this book was intended for people smarter than I am, and I'm not a dumb man (I promise!). Whenever I stopped to consider whether the issue was with me rather than the book, I came to the conclusion that it felt like the book was leading me around by the nose with no clear destination. And that, in itself, isn't a bad thing. This strategy can have real benefits in a mystery novel or something with suspense at its core, but it felt inappropriate here. This book is mostly about exploring a political landscape and scheme very different from that with which we are familiar in a setting that feels like the near-future. It was as though this book was intended to be read multiple times and that Macleod did not put much effort into being understood, which I didn't appreciate. The character development - or lack thereof - also hurt my comprehension (aside from being its own issue) because all the characters felt like the exact same personality in different bodies. If this was intentional, it wasn't fleshed out in a way that made sense to me. Regardless of intent, it sure did cause difficulty in ascertaining who was talking at many points in the book due to the fact that they all sound the same and have virtually identical opinions about the same topics. Added to this, they all seem to be wildly fixated on politics to the point of monomania, making them all feel as though they need a hobby. This sort of monomaniacal dialogue could've been intended to combat the confusion Macleod may have suspected he was inducing, but it feels more like he's beating me over the head with the same concepts until I tap out. Further evidence that he may have been concerned about his reader's comprehension only after the fact comes at the end of the book.

The ending of this book was extremely disappointing to me, and ended up hurting this book's overall rating by a full star.  There is a wrap-up summary in place of an epilogue that attempts to explain some of what we've just experienced. This felt like the end of the movie Animal House when the credits are rolling and the viewer is treated to a "where is he now?" of all the characters, giving us a separation from the wild events of the movie and a sense of conclusion to a story that otherwise wouldn't really have one (and, in my opinion didn't need one). In this case the summary felt clunky and awkward, and at my most cynical I wonder if it was grafted on after the book was written because an editor or publisher told Macleod that his book felt unfinished. It seems to attempt to paper over some of the missing pieces in the plot, and poorly. If it had been expanded, or if this information had been worked into the bulk of the book in a way that's more respectful of the reader's comprehension and intelligence, I think this would've been OK. Unfortunately, it felt too on-the-nose. This semi-epilogue seems to kill off or leave decades in the past the characters and settings from this book. There are two sequels. They must be about the AI who's being narrated in the first person in the final couple pages, despite the rest of the book being told in third person. This perspective change seemed jarring, but as it was intentional I will leave it alone. The AI is explaining some key plot points, including the fact that it is the perpetrator behind a major development that drives the climax of the book. The ending feels more like a stoppage than an ending. The book really feels as though it needed to either end about 50 pages earlier or 50 pages later, with more explanation. The denouement felt too long and drawn out, and it feels redundant when considered in addition to the almost-epilogue. My biggest issue with this sorta-epilogue is that it just feels lazy. It really struck me that this passage should've been unnecessary, and would've been if Macleod had taken the time and put in the work to integrate this information into the body of the novel. This leads me to believe that perhaps the utter paucity of explanatory information in this book is due to a similar reluctance to go back and make clearer many of the plot points that confused me. I guess what I'm left with is the sense of a book unfinished, in more ways than one. 

Another major issue with this book was the central premise of the plot: we absolutely must have a revolution to right all the wrongs in the world! But it's never clear who they're rebelling against, why they feel the need to rebel in the first place, or who they're aligned with from moment to moment. Part of this confusion about characters' allegiances was, I believe, intentionally included to give us the sense that the type of governmental structure Macleod is showing us would result naturally in chaos and overlapping interests. There is a structure where "terrorism" is legal within bounds as long as you're a registered combatant attacking legally-recognized legitimate targets. This structure results in many individual extrajudicial militias forming, both for hire and connected with the authority in each region. This mercenary structure and seemingly casual violence with a strange emphasis on "minimum force" seems both pointless and wasteful of human life. Again, this may be a point Macleod is attempting to hold up to the reader as an inevitability of the culture he's created and a result of some innate human trait. This setting is interesting and - to me - unique amongst the books I've read. The downfall here is that the narration can be so confusing that I could never tell who any of the characters were fighting for or against, and from start to finish I never figured this out to any degree of certainty. There were times when a character's motivations were stated explicitly, but their motivations were likely to change almost immediately after, sometimes multiple times. Related to this, I could not for the life of me figure out why these folks felt the need to rebel. All the main characters want to overthrow "the state," sometimes referred to as the Hanoverians. But we're never introduced to the Hanoverians; they have no identity and we never even feel the impact of their actions, which aren't described. There's no sense that these characters are oppressed, and since each faction has its own rules independent of its neighbors, how does "the state" impact them in any way that justifies revolution? Added to this, if they really felt oppressed in their micro-state, why not just move two blocks and be in a different one? There are communists working with capitalists who work with socialists who are affiliated with the green movements who are somehow sharing a common interest with the space movement. There's so much going on and such an interconnected and unexplained web of different groups that I couldn't put any of it together into a coherent whole. There is some lip service paid to Space Defense, a U.S./U.N. installation of satellites with weapons aimed at the Earth, ostensibly to preemptively destroy facilities involved in nuclear proliferation or AI development. These weapons  are threatened several times but never used,  and they feel like a wasted plot device that never realized its potential. As a motivator for overthrowing a government that had nothing to do with the Space Defense satellites, it feels very flimsy. On a related note,  when the revolution finally comes, it's unclear what sparks it. When the Americans join in in a revolt out of implied solidarity with their cousins across the pond, it's also unclear why they would do so as there doesn't seem to be any reason for them to care one way or another.  In the end, I never really understood why anyone was doing the things they were doing or for whom. At the conclusion, some of this is explained but insufficiently (and way too late). This strongly reinforces my opinion that The Star Fraction was meant to be read multiple times, which honestly isn't really my style unless the plot is much more engaging or the setting is so inviting that I want to return. This lack of apparent motivation for the plot was a glaring weakness in the pillar holding up the framework of the story. This was a problem for me throughout, and I simply couldn't ignore it once I noticed it.

This review is on par with my longest ever and it's exhausting me almost as much as the book itself did. However, I feel a responsibility to explain why this book was such a problem for me, and while I'll probably be reading the next one anyway. Part of the problem is serious spoiler territory:  the main character dies. He doesn't die in any way that really makes sense to me, or in any way that seems to have a major impact on the plot, but he's held up by his comrades as a messianic figure (literally in these terms at least once). Why? He doesn't seem to deserve this reverence, despite being a pretty stand-up guy. He was screwing around with dangerous things on the internet while trying to foment a revolution, and the internet slapped back through the influence of an AI he's somehow brought to full consciousness with a code he manages to remember subconsciously from his childhood. It just feels so unbelievable and is so poorly explained that I wasn't able to suspend my disbelief. There are many books in which the main character dies, and quite a few where he's not really dead but seems dead. In this case, he's dead. Fully dead, as is explained (shockingly, since almost nothing else is) by the AI residing in his gun's CPU to his grieving girlfriend. There are two more books after this one, though. And there are another 50+ pages of book after he dies. This seemed like a poor choice to me, as it's implied that decades and generations have passed from the end of this book to the start of the next one. The only connections I can see between the two books are the space aspect and the AI's existence, but this feels as tenuously held together as the internal plot devices and felt really unsatisfying. 

Thank you for hanging in there for this epic of a review. Lastly, there are several little irritants that built up like sand in an oyster into something that was unfortunately much less spectacular than a pearl. The first and foremost of the minor irritants to me was the stilted and 2-dimensional love interests that seemed shoehorned into this book. In my opinion, this book didn't need romance at all. None of the characters felt enough like people with emotions (much less distinct individuals) that they needed a love interest. The most cringeworthy example of this is the relationship between  Jordan and Cat. These two end up getting married with almost no sense of them ever getting to know each other. At one point, Jordan finds out something that Cat had withheld from him and which I'd consider manipulation, and his response is to say something along the lines of "You're so loyal to someone other than me that it warrants grudging respect. Wanna get married?" Excuse me? That's your proposal? Try a little bit harder, man. You seem like a cardboard cutout akin to Flat Stanley, who somehow has more personality than you do. The whole marriage and relationship seems to be based on nothing other than initial physical attraction, and it's never fleshed out or returned to in any significant way.  This felt like an editor told Macleod "you really have something here, but where's the sex?" and so the author went back and inserted some. It ended up coming off icky rather than romantic, and totally unnecessary either way. The other two irritants were just inconsistencies, like the time "24.03." I believe you mean 00.03, if we're using a 24-hr clock. If not, I'm baffled. Also, Britain is described as being demolished, yet everybody still seems to live there and there's no sign of destruction. That didn't fit together.

This book was a struggle for me most of the way through. I can't really recommend it, but the tech was so interesting I'm going to see what happens next anyway. Maybe it can be redeemed. One can only hope.