Rating: 4/5

It’s been quite a long time since I’ve read “The Gift of the Magi” and “The Ransom of Red Chief” by O.Henry. I’m pretty sure it was when I was in high school. My mother-in-law was my English teacher and she and her husband were visiting at Christmas. She and I were able to have a lovely conversation about his short stories and it was so much more fun now than when I sat at a desk in her classroom over 30 years ago. I have to say, that I really, really enjoyed O. Henry’s writing style in this 16 story collection. He writes with descriptive clarity and a vividness that draws you into his settings. A southerner born in North Carolina in 1862, he also spent years working and living in Texas. He spent several years in prison in Ohio for embezzlement and moved to New York when he was released. He became one of America’s most entertaining short story writers who drew upon his life spent in the city or on the Texas range. One of the most exciting techniques that he used was his surprise endings, one of the topics my mother-in-law and I talked about when she was visiting. His stories have humor, wit, irony and most of the time leave a smile on your face.

Some of my favorites in this collection:

“The Gift of the Magi” - how can you not enjoy a story about a couple’s generosity and love for each other who express it through sacrifice.

“The Cop and the Anthem” - a story of a homeless man who tries everything he can to get sent to prison for the three winter months explores themes of poverty, homelessness and societal differences. 

“The Furnished Room” - a tragic story that has elements of horror (which I don’t usually enjoy) and themes of obsession, desperation and greed. This story highlights how a city (New York) draws people to it and then destroys their dreams.

“The Last Leaf” - such a heartfelt story of a starving artist that sheds light on how life is precious and that faith and hope is alive. There are themes of sacrifice in friendship.

“Ransom of Red Chief” - a hilarious story about two petty criminals who decide to hatch a plot to kidnapp the 10 year old son of a wealthy community member and how that turns sour for them and they wind up with a punishment to fit their crime.