George Speaks is an excellent book portraying the life of a very special baby who could talk right when he was born. He kept it a secret to all the grownups and only told his eight year old sister Laura who was extremely happy and overjoyed at the fact that her younger baby brother George could talk. She was amazed at his ability to know the English language and also to know all his tables at such a tender age. Laura was scared though that her parents would find out how special George was so she asked George what they could do. He decided to use the parrot technique where George would repeat everything the grownups said. To their mother’s amazement at six weeks George could say “yes mummy”, they rang the doctor out of shock. George got very tired of life as a baby he began making improvements, changing his milk formula to proper baby food and he also began reading books and expanding his knowledge by reading books to Laura. As time moved on George spoke more and more to his parents demanding proper food and teaching them potty train him. Laura had been a great help to him in improving his speech but the book describes how George needed someone more intellectual to talk to so he decided that on his first birthday he would talk and have an adult conversation, from then on George spoke regularly to the shock and dismay of his parents grandparents and many relations. When Laura asked what he wanted to be when he grew up she suggested brain surgeon, judge, an explorer or even a King. George politely responded to her suggestions with no, he wanted to be a writer and so he did. This is an excellent charismatic and alluring book to read, any reader or child would be mesmerised by the plot and storyline of this special baby being able to talk at such an early age. The illustrations are quite charming, black and white and very detailed to help in the readers understanding of the plot. There is also humour in the book when Laura is fretting that her father overheard them talk, George wittily says “well that was a close shave”. This book by Dick King-Smith is an excellent read for any child as it allows them to use their imagination. Enthralling and exciting are only two words that I could use to describe this children’s book.