Rating: 3/5

Robert Pinsky once told an interviewer that the present is always overrated. This fact seems to be the greatest dilemma facing the editors of anthologies. Anthologists have the probably impossible task of selecting poems that are simultaneously of high quality, diverse, representative of a culture/language /subject, and important for the reader. The problem is that these criteria do not always overlap—in fact, they often contradict each other. I suspect that, in the midst of this confusing conflict, relevance is easily confused for importance. As a result, Shakespeare or Katherine Philips end up buried beneath an avalanche of contemporary writers. 

In a sense, this slant towards today is all well and good; I like plenty of contemporary or recent poets. (Truth be told, most of my favorite poets are 20th century.) But, as I read the Norton, I still constantly found myself thinking of Orwell’s Confessions of a Book Reviewer, in which he writes “if one says [...] that King Lear is a good play and The Four Just Men is a good thriller, what meaning is there in the word ‘good’.” In this spirit, what is a reader supposed to take away from this selection? 

All of this is to say that I was generally disappointed with the selection in The Norton. This was, perhaps, my own fault. I might have used the book incorrectly. I had hoped that I would, in reading the English poetry anthology, I would discover a large number of amazing poets. I did. However, I was especially hoping to fill in the gaps in my knowledge of poetry from earlier periods. For this, The Norton is not especially helpful. Using the anthology's own timeline and doing a quick page count, I find hat 25% of the anthology is devoted to just 4% (i.e.: the last 60 years) of English’s literary history, while the first 50% of English’s history (“Cædmon's Hymn” through the year 1400) is represented in just 4% of The Norton's pages.*

Also, on a pettier note, the copy editing in this anthology did not impress me. The footnote numbers, in many cases, don’t line up correctly with the poems and pages. The criteria for what gets explanatory notes is baffling. In many cases, the same word or reference will be explained in two or three poems, but not in others. I noticed that some of the French translations are sloppy, which gives me little confidence for the translations from other languages which I can't read or verify. In other cases, explanatory notes give definitions that are objectively incorrect. (My favorite example of this was a margin note explaining “the diet of Worms” as “'food for' worms”!) The upside to these bizarre errors is that they make me feel a lot better about the MLA formatting mistakes that I made in high school and college. 

At the end of the day, there is still a lot of good material in this book. I definitely understand why it is useful as a teaching tool; a good professor (such as the one for whom's class I bought this book) nullifies the most—if not all—of the text's problems. In the right context, The Norton is a useful one-stop-shop for many of English's great poems. 

*I invite anyone to check my math. These numbers are derived from a cursory review.