Rating: 4/5

Finished awhile ago. Here are the women that were discussed in this book: 

Chapter 1: Anna Maria Zwanziger: 

A female poisoner. This happened in the early 1800's

Chapter 2: Jeanne Weber.  

Another story from history. This happened a century ago. Interesting.

Chapter 3 :Myra Hindley.  

Who doesn't know her and her partner Ian Brady. I had already read about about her which was quite good so for further reading: One of Your Own: The Life and Death of Myra Hindley

Chapter 4: Martha Ann Johnson. 

 Horrible child killer who to get back at their father killed their children a thing we see a lot of lately. Mostly done by men though but women can be just as mean apparently.

Chapter 5: Charlene Gallego. 

Yes of course I did read a book about her and her partner. Very sadistic couple.
As a matter of fact I read 2 books about them: The first was The Sex Slave Murders: The Horrifying True Story of America's First Husband-and-Wife Serial Killers which sucked but later I discovered and bought A Venom In The Bloodand that book was much better and one I recommend. 

Chapter 6: Genene Jones. 

This creep was a nurse who murdered many babies while working in a hospital. They think she killed between 30 and 46 babies. I remember reading a book about her and that it was a struggle to read. Not because of bad writing but because she killed and killed. I am looking her up on wikipedia and it seems they only nailed her for one! She will be scheduled for mandatory release in 2018 due to a Texas law to prevent prison overcrowding according to them.

Chapter 7: Judith Ann Neelley. 

Bingo This is one woman I do not know much about so I skipped this story and going to buy Thomas Cook's book Early Grave Early Graves because I want to know all. 

 Chapter 8: Catherine Margaret Birnie. 

She together with her partner David Birnie became serial killer.
I did skip this story because I wanted to get a book about this case but so far I have not found one. If you know of a book about them please fill me in.

 Chapter 9: Gwen Graham and Cathy Woods. 

(Woods is the blond one)

Both bisexual although Woods was. Graham was lesbian.
They worked in care home for the elderly and killed them.
Woods blamed Graham and managed to get less punishment but it emerged it was Woods who was boss. For further reading I highly! recommend Forever And Five Days

 Chapter 10: Rose West. 

Rose and her hubby Freddy were sex obsessed and loved to inflict pain.
For further reading I suggest Fred And Rose by Howard Sounes Fred &amp; Rose which I was told is the best book about them. I read The Corpse Garden which was okay.

 Chapter 11: Carol Mary Bundy 

Together with her darling cutie Douglas (ha!) she went on a killing spree.
If you want to read more about this nasty couple read The Sunset Murders

 Chapter 12: Aileen Carol Wuornos 

She was a female serial killer who did not have a partner.
To be honest I have never read a book about her but I did watch a movie and a documentary.
She gave herself up to protect the woman she loved. I remember that.

 Chapter 13: Karla Leanna Homolka 

If there is one case where justice was not served besides Casey Anthony and then O J Simpson it was this case. This horrible piece of work managed to play being the victim and is now free even though she lured girls so her lover could have sex and then kill them.

There are some chapters after that but they are more of a summing up and talk about why they do it.

As always with this author a good book. 
(I am tired after writing this review)