Rating: 5/5

OBSERVATIONS ON MEN (AND WOMEN) BY A POPULAR AUTHOR OF THE 1970s

Merle Shain (1935-1989) was a Canadian author and journalist. She wrote in the first chapter of this 1973 book, “It is hard to write about men, because for a woman to write about men is to write about herself and the men who have been close to her, and that is hard on everybody. There is a thin line between being honest and being indiscreet… But when I thought some more about that ordinary man and his lost love and the man who envied him, I knew that what the first one had was emotional courage and the second was right to envy him.

“Really splendid men have this courage and know that without it is only housekeeping. You can tell them because they do as much feeling as they do thinking. It is not possible to think feeling any more than it is possible to hear blue, but many men clutch their hearts with their minds and stalemate their lives. Feelings take you into uncharted territory from time to time it’s true, but you almost always benefit from the journey one way or the other. We tend to think of the rational as a higher order, but it is the emotional that marks our lives.” (Pg. 4-5)

She notes, “Men are taught that women respect them for their strength and that may well be true, but they love them for their vulnerability and men with tragic flaws are often loved the most of all. Vulnerability is so seductive that some men learn to feign it, but that is not the same.” (Pg. 12) 

She says, “Mistresses are adjuncts to marriage invented to fill its holes, so when the marriage goes, the mistress’s job often goes too, because she really just existed to augment it. Sometimes a mistress keeps a bad marriage together by meeting its unmet needs, thus keeping the pressure off the wife, and there have been men who found the way to tenderness through other women and, having found it, took it to their wives.” (Pg. 37-38)

She states, “Men as well as women who’ve had some time to try out different styles of life after they leave home should do less fantasizing once married, having a better idea what they seek. And being clearer who they are themselves, they’ll be less searching for someone to fulfill and define them and less finding them wanting when they don’t.” (Pg. 68-69)

She points out, “A man who is considered a good catch is he who comes with a big ring, and a good husband if he is a good provider, isn’t missed much if he leaves a big will or big alimony payments. And a man who buys a bedmate often buys two or three. Sometimes it is out of our needs that we create each other, which is why a man crawling on his belly in the desert always wants water, but it is also why after he has it, he wants theater tickets, or in any case something more. The kind of wife who is perfect when one is forty and very often a man who chooses a functional wife when young, wishes he’d chosen a luxury model later on.” (Pg. 77)

She suggests, “There are women who want to stay home who are being urged to get out and get themselves jobs, and women who want to work who are being kept at home, and they are all in the same boat although they mistakenly think they’re not. The woman in the terrycloth robe who wonders if she’d still be loved if she didn’t do everything just so, and the woman who can’t do anything anymore because it’s been such a long time since she had a chance, are both victims of the needs of men.” (Pg. 80-81)

She asserts, “There is not much to be said for the business of the male having to be superior except that it’s a terrible strain. For men to be superior, women have to be inferior, which requires a lot of play-acting for both parties and never seems to work. And an awful lot of men would likely trade their male supremacy for a chance to be accepted as they actually are. Much of women’s resentment toward men at the moment is related to their notion that men, since they are supposed to be superior, should meet all their needs, and that is a pretty heavy trip to lay on anyone and generally leaves men feeling they’ve been charged with the national debt. Many a superior women spends her lifetime looking for a man who is more superior instead of for one she likes, not realizing that demanding that a man be superior isn’t much different from demanding that he be rich.” (Pg. 82-83)

She argues, “Really splendid men … find ways to manage their lives so they never give away anything that is their wife’s. And if there are times when they need more than one woman in their life, they give back what they get to both. Being faithful means not costing people you love more than they can afford to pay. The best men are committed to their partners as much as to themselves.” (Pg. 97)

She explains, “Many women who sacrificed their own growth for their families’ were both a cause and a casualty of their divorces. Nobody really wants to spend life with someone who has no other choice, and children who have been raised by a mother who gave up her life for them almost always spend years on an analyst’s couch learning to spit in her eye.” (Pg. 117)

She states, “Living alone is a life without mirrors… While single women may not have a man they can count on or call at four in the night, they do have the knowledge that when a man comes to see them he wants to be with them. And while he may come less often, he will really be there when he does.” (Pg. 119-120)

She contends, “The intellectual appeal of being liberated is strong but the old emotional conditioning is stronger still, so the time between men can be like the moments when you step down off the merry-go-round and the world is out of sync. It’s a time when you live in the shadows between what you thought you wanted and what you will ultimately get, and for those who can remember resenting waiting for a man to come home from work it doesn’t hurt to learn it’s even worse when you don’t have one for whom to wait.” (Pg. 123-124)

She points out, “Single women often envy married ones and dream of being married themselves, while married women fantasize about holding court for marvelous men if only they were free. But the dreams of the married about being single include being lonely, and while the single think about being married they think of being happily married only… I have been married and I have been single and I’d have to say it’s a half dozen of one thing and six of another and it really depends on what suits you best and when.” (Pg. 127)

Shane was a popular author in the 1970s and 1980s; but this book is not as pertinent as it would have been when first written.