Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars

Again, I thought I had never read this seemingly outdated diary written by a Noblewoman of Heian Japan in the span of 21 years, that is, from 954-974. However, having read "The Tale of Genji," I decided to have a go with this formidable diary because it "belongs to the same period as the celebrated Tale of Genji" and it "offers a timeless and intimate glimpse into the culture of ancient Japan." (back page)

Reading this fine translation by Edward Seidensticker is, I think, worth spending our time since we can enjoy reading various poems, travels, episodes, etc. narrated by the unknown authoress. The more we read, the more we'd love her and sympathize with her plight or trouble in her mind due to those unpredictable absences by the Prince, her husband, who seemed busy working or merely divided his time to stay with another lady somewhere. It had been rumored till the authoress knew this heartbreaking news so we can imagine how bitter she felt. As for the protest she made on the marriage system then might be categorized as feminism in the 10th century Japan.

Let me cite three excerpts I prefer for you:

1. ... I sought to see the child, and was turned away.
 Like the waves that break on Tago in Suraga,
 I was frowned upon by a mountain, a smoldering Fuji,
 Wreathed in clouds of smoke. ... (p. 46)

2. ... The fish traps stretched away into the distance, and small boats dotted the surface, now passing up and down, now crossing one another in and out, more of them than I had ever seen before. My men, tired from the long walk, had found some odd-looking limes and pears and were eating them happily. It was most touching. ... (p. 66)

3. ... I do not know what crimes they may have been guilty of, but a number of officials were demoted and banished, and finally, on the Twenty-fifth or Twenty-sixth, the Minister of the Left too was dismissed from office.... It was all extremely sad, I thought, and when someone as distant as I from the event was so deeply affected there can hardly have been a dry sleeve in the city. His children were separated and sent off to remote provinces, ... (pp. 72-73)

etc.

I like No. 1 because this poem informs its readers that Mt. Fuji did smolder with its clouds of smoke one thousand years ago, No. 2 for her detailed description of the view she saw and plenty of wild edible fruit there, and No. 3 for such a sad episode in one of Japan's unpredictable political crises then.

As for the Notes to Books One-Three (pp. 169-201), this section based on its related pages should be printed at the bottom of each page for the readers' convenience. It may be a new way of printing things but, compared to those with footnote-like Notes, I found reading them more convenient by just looking down for any Note I want to know more instead of turning to the Notes section somewhere near the end. 

One thing that needs improving, that is, from Notes (p. 178, passim) 144. ... (see map: Appendix, Plate 8). I am sorry I cannot find Plate 8! I wonder if it is torn away. When I verify the Appendix section, I can find only 7 illustrations there. Therefore, there should definitely be No. 8 Map, I hope, for its future edition. Thank you.

Moreover, I would like to say something about her high level of literacy as expressed by means of her diary, in other words, written in ancient Japanese for her posterity and the world to see, read and understand more on the custom, culture, nature, etc. in Japan where she lived. Her words are still powerful, crisp, tactful even in the 21st century, just imagine, while there was no school or education system in Japan or in the world itself she could nobly write her ideas, reflections, sufferings, etc. and thus she of course should deserve our respects and admiration as one of the famous early female diarists in the world.

I think I would find another book in the same genre written in the same age, that is, "The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon" translated by Dr Arthur Waley to read as soon as possible. In fact, I have had this paperback copy since some years ago, I recall I tried to read a few pages and gave up then because I thought it was not interesting and beyond me. This proves that reading any obscure books with insufficient background may take time, motive and inspiration indeed.