Rating: 4/5

Inner Compass by Margaret Silf

I just finished reading Silf's book this week, working through it with my LBC (ladies book club). (I am trying to write this without 'spoilers' but with enough information to help others decide if they want to read it or not.) I found it very rewarding, and a very workable introduction to Ignatian spirituality, but without enough of the history and direct drawing from St. Ignatius to make me feel I have really connected to his process. I now hope to go back to more original works of the great Jesuit father to gain more insight and to put what I have learned into action.

The entire work provides a guide to viewing life as a spiritual journey and gives tangible ways to reflect on and share that life and more importantly to see the "God-in-the-other" in all we encounter. I recognized elements I was familiar with like the concept of the paradigm shift from Stephen Covey, the realization that between stimulus and response there is a space or moment in which we can make a choice on how we respond from Victor Frankl, and the reality and survival of shipwrecks of faith from Sharon Daloz Parks. But the most beneficial of all was the real-life and sometimes 'risky' examples of how to use Ignatian Imagination to 'exercise' our spirituality. In that way, the book is a true success.

There is an early exercise that the reader is called to do, to write our "faith story", and this was my first real connection to the book (but also queue that there was something missing) - I struggled to see how our 'life story' is NOT our 'faith story'.

I found through my LBC that many of the visualizations did not work for everyone, but everyone was able to connect to at least one or two of the major imagery-segments that Silf provided. I think in that way this book is a great work, its ability to grab each one of us at our core was an amazing thing, whether it be the image of tilling the fields, the image of a river, or the image of stars, she guides her readers in 'imaginings' in such a way that when she delves into imagining and placing ourselves into the Word of God we slip right in and observe, interact and integrate right into the text.

For me, the most poignant moments were those in which Silf recognizes evil in our fallen world, that our failings and weaknesses are real but are part of what God is using to bring his goodness and kingdom into the world. I appreciated the ability to recognize that almost everything can be offered in some prayer-like way. And I especially loved the suggestions for further reflection at the end of each chapter calling us to explore the psalms, experience the walk to Emmaus, comparing bees and spiders (and seeing ourselves in both!) and to recognize the desolation of our lives as parallel to the trials and tribulations of the very real souls recounted in the Bible.

There is a very clear reality that we will not ever reach perfection, that life will continue to be a roller-coaster and that we will really find God in the ups &amp; downs of life as we live it and not suddenly at the end of our journey. Recognizing our own fallenness can really be very sad, but Silf does not let it immobilize us. She draws out the value of all we experience. As my father would say, "Suffering builds character", I imagine Silf would say "Suffering brings us closer to God" - or maybe "Suffering builds the Kingdom".

I love the idea of the light of God and our choice to either face it (and all it illuminates, both good and bad) or to keep our backs to it allowing our line of sight to be darkened by our own shadow, creating a shadow that might darken the world for others, or worse, that the darkness of our creation will actually worsen the world.

I truly appreciated the advice from Igantius, to not make a decision to change our course while we are in a period of desolation, this has been very needed advice for me in the past weeks, and advice I was even able to impart to others (without any religious overtones) to help others consider and contemplate decisions instead of making them rashly. (And even allowed me to recognize when others did make rash and regretful decisions.)

There is great value in the chapter on Tracking Our Moods. Silf provides real tools in recognizing the triggers for both our desolations and consolations and I find this to be of great value (lots of underlines and highlights!) and that life is a journey of ongoing conversion. And of even more value are the practices she introduces to recognize our deep desires, and how uncomfortable they might really be, but once glimpsed, how uncomfortable our current status or situation becomes. And then comes the realization, that whether we like it or not God really is answering our prayers, we just need to realize it.

At least once per chapter there would be a single line challenging us to shift our paradigm, to 'die to self', to overcome our self-centeredness, but these opportunities were not fully developed. And in the end, we can recognize the call to be more fully converted, no matter how close we think we are already.

In closing, I have to say that I think Ms. Silf stops short from really challenging us. We are certainly challenged to view ourselves differently, but she is very gentle in what we do next with that, there is not enough emphasis on how to then take these new realizations and exercises and push ourselves to a new level. Our discussion group's take on it at times almost appeared to me to be a 'cop-out'. But then I must circle myself back to remembering the book presents itself as a 'introduction' and in that capacity, perhaps it is ok and understandable to be simply that, but it left me wanting the real stuff, and will hopefully drive me to read more of Ignatius himself. (I did read his autobiography while at Fordham for grad school, maybe I should revisit it...). 

 Most certainly Silf relates, in an understandable and moving way, that God is with us in the dark and trying times, as much as he is with us in the times of consolation. That, if we stay close to him, we are consecrated in him, and then every time we are broken a little, every time we "die a little to self" we are able to move closer to him, to his suffering, and with each break and sacrifice we are giving to others in some measure. Deep stuff, hard to fathom and even harder to accept for those of us who are already hard on ourselves.

Lastly, if you do journey through this book, I would love to know how you would define "the gap" that Silf describes, in your own words. Our LBC struggled over this and in the end we decided to move on and not force the definition, but the fruit of that part of our conversation was very valuable. 

 Shall we share more conversations? Follow me @ seekingwisdomsharing.wordpress.com