Rating: 1/5

Buddy read with my tbr twin Laura

Actual rating is 1.5 stars 

Am so disappointed with this book. I really wanted to like it but Alas I ended up hating it. But on the bright side, this book broke my record of never giving a book one star.

How I felt while reading this book

It was so boring, am not even kidding. Am certain my chemistry textbook would be so much more fun than reading this book. 

The whole experience felt like I was stuck in the middle of an ocean, in a rowboat trying to paddle my way to the shore but seeing no sign of land, just the ocean spread out before me, no sign of life and since it's a rowboat, am pretty much stranded. I thought I was never going to finish reading this book.

Yeah. Jim Butcher literally Butchered 
 me with this book, get it? 

Am sure you're probably confused, I mean what could have gone wrong with this book? It held such promise.

First, I'd like to say I pretty much loved the concept of this book. The whole thing with the furies was pure genius. It was elemental magic in a way but way more unique. I freaking loved it and sadly that's all I liked about this book.

What did I hate about this book the most?

First, the fact that I felt in no way attached to the characters. I didn't even care if they were about to die or something. I just shrugged it off. There was no backstory whatsoever. The characters were only introduced and then boom were in danger throughout. Like seriously?

Secondly, I don't know what the fuck the plot was ok I do  the premise was not intriguing at all. It was all just to stop a kid from reporting an evil plan to a count so they'll have the advantage of surprise during an attack, that's all.

And.... the battle that seemed to go on for like 200 pages. I got so tired of it, very tired. It just wouldn't stop, to be honest, I've never felt reading to be so exhausting. I almost started relating with people that hate reading. It felt like punishment and the whole battle happened in one person’s POV, all she did was describe what other people were doing in the battle.

And no one important died, when I thought they were dead, they all seemed to be resurrected somehow*

Can we just talk about the ship/weird romance/insta-love/whatever it is. Don't get me wrong, am a sucker for ships and I actually shipped these two people but next thing I know, they were already making out and behaving like angst-filled teenagers in a YA book and they met like four days earlier *eye roll.* This is how their conversation goes I may be exaggerating

Male * Kisses her*
Female  Kisses him back then hits him, while thinking about how she can't resist him
Male what was that for 
Female  why'd you do that *still thinking about how much she wants him*
Male Cause I like you
Me Dude, you guys just met. You know what, I don't ship you guys anymore.

I wasn't a fan of a writing either. It wasn't bad, was just okay I guess. Some descriptions were just really weird like..

  ”The woman had skin of dark, golden brown”

Ok....? I still don't know what dark, golden brown looks like.

And this book had a huge case of telling and not really showing

  She looked up at Tavi, her eyes not focused, her face bedsheet-white.”

Okk......

Am not a Masochist so I clearly won't be reading the other books in the series. I guess it's just not for me........ Or not.