a friend lent me this three months ago and i thought i was gonna want to chuck it at the wall while reading, but instead of being tacky or overly prescriptive (except a bit in the final chapters) elliot presents herself as a thoughtful and deeply feeling woman with a lot of empathy and gained insight (from the pain of losing two husbands) and (whether i believe like her or not, spiritual) maturity that could slowly and unexpectedly comfort me at times, because at least a secure comfort can exist out there u know? she’s tapped into it. i came into this defensive but on the very first page elliot described a tide of loneliness at seeing a man help a woman on a dark plane light her cigarette, which made her miss certain details of her recently-deceased husband’s (lover’s) hand, and i was like oh she gets it. i can trust her humanity even while i question certain assumptions in her godly worldview. 

my mind (soul? heart?) is def gonna keep wrestling with some of her takeaways (on suffering, solitude, holiness, and mostly perhaps on trust/ obedience) but she presents her spiritual views with both clarity and humility. (and to be fair, won’t i wrestle with takeaways on these topics, and on sacrifice, regardless of who it’s coming from)? maybe bc she’s a woman in a man’s field that she’s better at not hopping on a soap box, at least imo. though the content is preachy, her tone is inviting. there’s room to ask questions and sit in feelings and think about grace. it’s clear how much this lady loves and cares for other ladies (in her life, and her daughter!) and i’m the one who’s still here reading anyways. the book was honestly easy to get through bc of the brevity of each chapter and her light, direct way of writing. if anything, she quoted others almost too often (a critique i RARELY find myself giving as i love quotes). she referenced not just scripture or hymns, but other writers, philosophers, and excerpts from letters or conversations with others who have once sought her guidance. okay maybe these quotes and citations actually WERE necessary bc the whole work of figuring out how to continue to live is a big big big team project, and we’re all in it together. at the end of the day i think i was shown some god-centered self-help narratives, felt inspired at times and indignant at others, and am still intrigued by the persistent human dilemma(?) of freedom as surrender.