Rating: 3/5

Set in 1910s Cape Breton, Each Man's Son is a story of fathers, religion, and purpose in a world and town overcome by the demands of the coal mine that is slowly leaching the life of the people forced to work there. Alan is the son of Mollie and Archie MacNeil, and lives with his mother, listening to her stories of the great work his father is doing in the states as a prize fighter. Daniel Ainslie is the town's doctor, without a son, craving for a purpose, an attainable goal in life, when he meets Alan. Their relationship, and the growing need in Ainslie to have something to dedicate his life to leads to tragedy as MacLennan's Homeric hero journeys back to his home, only to find out the imaginings he had of the life he left are now gone.

Each Man's Son was one of the books we had to read in my English Literature seminar class this year, as well as being the novel I had to do a presentation on. As a piece of literature (and I'm speaking in the academic sense here), Each Man's Son is a brilliant composition of thematic moments, and examples of the Puritanical legacy that survived (and possibly survives) in Highlander Cape Breton. As a novel, it is still enjoyable with a compelling plot, good, solidly-built characters and nice prose, but it is, however, absolutely depressing. 

Or as my friend, Victoria so eloquently put it: Depressing Cape Breton is depressing.

Take that as a warning should you decide to read this novel. There are no unicorns or happy things, so please pack your reading list with happy things after finishing this one. If you're forced to read this novel, like my class and I so horribly were :P, my sympathies. I suggest a funny shojo to bring you back to life. 

So the plot throughout this novel is both unexpectedly uneventful, and pretty dull. And what I mean by that is that most of the plot is just there for character development. Much like the town the novel centers in, the plot is slow-moving and focuses on those day-to-day aspects of real life, allowing the reader to fully immerse themselves in the relationships and inner working of Mollie, Alan, Ainslie, Archie and Margaret. Near the very end of the story is where these small steps we've seen throughout the novel finally come to a head, and (frankly make themselves useful) with the fun depressing ending I won't go into because hey, if you actually read this book, it'll be worthwhile for me NOT to spoil it for you :P

The characters are a nice bunch of angst while quite a bit of downtrodden. Ainslie, pretty much the main character, is perhaps the most interesting of the bunch because his character is so complex and full of all those fun little things this book is about. He's religiously guilt-ridden, has no purpose, and fully believes he's full of sin. At the same time, however, Ainslie, due to his profession as a doctor, is fully incapable of reconciling his scientific side with his fervent, (even though he denies it) belief in God. Ainslie's incapability to accept himself, and the duality of both his technology and spiritual sides, is what is at the heart of this novel, and is ultimately what causes (at least a portion anyway) the tragic events we see at the end of the book.

Alan is very much at contrast to Ainslie throughout the novel in that he remains not only an innocent character, but isn't tainted by either the place or the people of the town he lives in like Ainslie is. He fully believes the world to be the one his mother paints him, without the doubt Ainslie suffers through, and in a way represents the easy, innocent belief in the unknown that Ainslie, with his knowledge of the scientific, cannot overcome. 

Mollie and Margaret, the two women most important to Alan and Ainslie respectively, are equally as striking in their similarities as in their differences. Mollie, while an idealist, and a fervent one at that, is a scared woman, fearful of what the town thinks of her as she is fearful of what her son might think of her. Margaret, by contrast, is a bit more cool-headed, but still retains that fear, something we know leads her to confide in Ainslie's superior. Both women are, however, tossed aside to the male-dominating roles of Alan, Ainslie, and even to some extent Archie in this novel, who push the plot forward while the women almost take the sidelines. 

Even at the end of the novel, when Archie returns to Cape Breton and kills both Mollie and Camire, the fight isn't even about Mollie, but instead evolves into Archie's own problems and his hatred against Camire who represents the change Archie isn't willing to accept. Mollie gets pushed aside both physically and mentally by the men who forget about her until she accidently steps in again only to die.

Thematically, this book centers around religion, most obviously, the issue of fathers/sons/mothers, and the idea of place, especially in relation to Maritime culture, and Cape Breton's Highland Scot ancestry. This last one, (while religion takes the crown) is perhaps one of the most prominent themes throughout the novel, allowing the reader to immerse themselves in the culture that is Cape Breton, and the Maritimes in general that speaks deeply to the souls that have grown up here. Place, home, and the idea of leaving are something Each Man's Son deeply impresses upon us especially in relation to Archie and his journey as a failing prize fighter. 

There's something to be said about grand/great/prize-winning etc.. pieces of 'literature' (Snobby voice included) in that when you read them you understand why they are so greatly thought of. Their thematic quality, their insights into both a culture and place and/or time, their overall profound message, these are the things that are important to us as a people and as readers. It's important to think, deeply and meaningfully when you're reading, and Each Man's Son provides that incredibly in every word, character, and event. 

That doesn't, however, mean you have to like it. 3/5