Rating: 3/5

This review was originally posted on Addicted To Romance 
  
    
  
  
    Summary 
  
 
Flame met White Fire when she only ten years old and she knew that she wanted to marry him. She didn't see a "breed" as so many others did. She saw his kind eyes and his humor and didn't treat her as a child with little notice. Now Flame is a full grown woman, and has been stuck in doors taking care of her ailing mother. But when her mother passed she was to live with her father in the wilds of Minnesota. Flame has dreamed of adventure and was thrilled with the opportunity to spend time with her father and continue her search for White Fire. White Fire has been held captive for three years by the Sioux and has just been released. Learning that his wife died from disease and his six year old son is being raised by another family. When he is called upon to act as a negotiator for Flame's father, he knows he needs to do it even though her father has changed since he once knew him. White Fire and Flame meet again and soon share a love and passion. But there is one huge obstacle preventing them from sharing a life together. Flame's father refuses to allow her to marry White Fire. And there is a mystery that must be solved around a murder and the real intentions of Flame's father, will Flame and White Fire find a way to happiness after all or be serparated forever...
 
  
    Plot and Story Line 
  
 
I have been a fan of Cassie Edwards for many years. And I was so excited when I heard that she was working on getting some of her backlisted titles to be republished. So when I saw that White Fire was one of those, I knew I needed to grab it up. White Fire has been on my TBR for many years. Ever since I first discovered this author. This book is a single title, so you don't have to worry about getting in the middle of one of her huge never ending series. Now my only complaint about this one was the beginning of White Fire and Flame's romance, It is a bit of a rush with the whole instant love connection. And it is really the only downside to the story but didn't detract too much from my enjoyment of the story. It does have a old school feel to some of the "writing" at times but I didn't mind that aspect.  Normally I liked seeing more build up in a relationship however once I reached about half way I realized that with the other factors involved I knew that it fit. The development of the plot that Cassie Edwards writes here makes up for my lack of enjoyment of the "instant love" trope. We have a ghost or "spirit" that is a best friend to White Fire that comes to him showing him truths of the true intentions of Flame's father. Intentions that are racist and downright evil in some ways. Now at this time frame, their relationship is solid. They have declared their love for each other and dreams of sharing a life together. But it soon becomes apparent the battle that they will need to find to reach their dreams to be together. White Fire is stimulating, dramatic and enchanting.
 
  
    The Cover 
  
 
I honestly don't know how I feel about the new cover....I like it but I don't. I do like the fresh look of it though. With the light blues and the Canoe.
 
  Overall View 
 
White Fire is a breathtaking adventure of sensuality, intrigue and danger..... a romance that simultaneously delights and makes the reader eager for more....WONDERFUL!!