From the 1930s until the mid 1950s Bernard Bruyere of the French Archaeological Institute of Cairo and Jaroslav Cerny Czech born, professor of Egyptology at Oxford University from 1950 to 1965 worked on the village of Deir el Medina, several miles to the west of Thebes the occasional capital of ancient Egypt and a major cult centre.

Deir el Medina was no ordinary village. Built in the desert, about two miles from the Valley of the Kings and slightly closer to the Valley of Queens it was a community established to cater for the preparation for the afterlives of royal personages. A well to do community with their own establishment of servants, they carved out then decorated the tombs and made furniture for them, as well as for the great and the good in nearby Thebes.

Over the period of time as Bruyere and Cerny were working, France moved from the Third to the Fifth Republic, Czechoslovakia existed in several different forms and Egypt moved from colony to Monarchy to Republic. The excavation of the three hundred odd year working life of Deir el Medina was to reveal a story of prosperity, followed by hardship, famine, the breakdown of government, the establishment of local regimes and finally the end of royal burials in the region.

The community was literate to a high degree with its own scribes, but some of the other workmen were also able to write. And there was a lot of writing. Everything had to be delivered to the village - from water onwards. Everything had to be accounted for, hours worked, chisels used, materials required. Progress had to be reported on, work might be delayed by hitting a seam of flint, digging through into an older tomb, or that an oversized tomb lid wouldn't fit down a corridor and into the burial chamber. All of this had to be written down.

In addition the scribes had personal reading such as books of dream divination, they wrote letters and inscriptions where ever they ended up working. Disputes between workers could come to official attention. Tomb robbing was an important way of getting by in hard times all which also left its mark in written documents even though much of the elite of Thebes were in on the practise  and how else could wealth in gold, silver and copper be disposed of in a rural economy? . 

Still, though all the years that craftsmen worked on the tombs the basic problem remained the same - Pharaoh's life expectancy. Unfortunately there was a trend for each new tomb to be made about five percent larger than the previous tomb while each successive Pharaoh's reign could not be guaranteed to be five percent longer. In fact quite the contrary. While Ramesses II ruled for 67 years and Ramesses III for 32, other Pharaohs barely managed seven, or five or even one year in office. At which point word would come down to the village and work had to roughly finished off. The walls plastered as they were, painters set to work with no under drawing or outlined carving, a corridor adapted as best as possible to hold the royal sarcophagus. By contrast during a long reign there was time to make tombs for Pharaoh's favourite wife, or even for some of his grandchildren  they had the same problem as you have in any job - the people at the top. Left to their own devices they could have turned out a nicely finished tomb on a regular basis with a steady workforce, but Pharaoh wouldn't oblige. The whole process would have worked efficiently with a wooden Pharaoh which was replaced every twenty or twenty-five years  Dilbert makes a similar discovery 

On the upside these problems as with the over large coffin lid and digging into another tomb  the unfortunate occupant was judged by order of the then Pharaoh to have been a usurper so workmen were sent in to carefully deface it  were accepted as part of the vicissitudes of the tomb business by the authorities - unlike tomb robbery.

Occasionally the craftsmen of the village turned their skilful hands to re-purposing the investment made in the afterlife by departed rulers. As professional people they did this by gently tunnelling into the rear of the tomb, leaving the seals at the front intact, and removing the valuables. Sometimes this included setting fire to the mummified corpse, then removing any metal which melted and puddled on the floor during the process. Pharaoh took a dim view of this requiring that people be questioned 'with the stick' as part of any investigation and it emerges that on at least one occasion the village elders sparked off an investigation, sought to manipulate it and eventually offered up some of their own people as culprits to deflect attention from how far the whole community was involved in this creative recycling.
 
Sometimes the weather worked against the settled afterlife of departed Pharaohs.
Eventually after an assault on the delta region by an ambitious viceroy, Ramesses XI managed to re-establish his authority over Thebes. In the spirit of an age of renewal he had the Valley of the Kings investigated with bodies rescued from tombs that had been flooded over the centuries. These were re-wrapped, excess precious metals removed, although fortunately the names were left in place, and lodged in other tombs. Ramesses II was moved in with Seti I, while eight former rulers plus queens and princes were laid to renewed rest in a side chamber of Amenhotep II's tomb.

In modern times a similar process started from the 1820s. Papyri rolls, sealed in labelled jars from Thebes holding details of court cases, investigations and strikes involving the tomb workers where found, removed and relaid in museums throughout Europe. Eventually letters and documents written maybe on pottery sherds or even flat pieces of stone from the village itself where uncovered and collected. In time as they were sorted, examined and published their significance became clearer allowing a book like this to be written in which we can read about the diet and doings of ancient Egyptians as they worked with copper chisels  this was during the bronze age, the odd bronze cooking pot gets mentioned but there don't seem to have been any bronze tools, I imagine because of the rarity of tin which came from Spain or Cornwall while their copper came from nearer by Cyprus. Apparently the stone in the Valley of the Kings was fairly soft but even so the copper chisels needed regular sharpening and eventually would be so pounded out of shape that they had to be sent away to be recast  and paint brushes or when they put on their best wigs to celebrate their high days and holy days.