Rating: 2/5

When I was well into this book, I felt it was going to merit a solid 3-4 stars. It's full of interesting information and ideas, although I don't agree with all the information therein. Still, it was a solid read.

Then I got to the chapter on ethics. Why would a book purportedly for adults have a chapter on ethics, to begin with, let alone one who's tone changes dramatically from the rest of the book and comes off as rather condescending? I find it more than rude and presumptuous for the author to assume that folks reading the book wouldn't already have their own established code of ethics and therefore need to have her particular concepts forced upon them like a disapproving nanny.

To add to the annoyance, she then "whips out" the Wiccan Rede as some type of holy law. Not only that, but she then erroneously states that it's actually known as the Pagan Rede too. Now, before I continue, let's clarify what a "rede" actually is: 
Rede is an archaic word meaning, among other things, "counsel" and "advice". 
Ok, now that that is established and obviously NOT some incontrovertible law as this book claims, why does the author purposefully mislead folks by claiming it is something other than what it is? Sure, some Wiccans follow it like it's law and that is their choice to do so. However, many Wiccans consider it the advice it is meant to be and most non-Wiccans do NOT follow the rede, NOR consider it anything more than an interesting, although unrealistic, concept. Ms. McCoy, as everyone, is free to believe as she wills, but it's irresponsible for her to falsely claim her beliefs as FACT when it is nothing other than her own opinion. This glaring inaccuracy lends one to wonder just how much of the rest of the information is wrong or purposefully falsified to suit the author's opinions. Between the chapter itself, the tone of the writing within it, and the false information portrayed as fact (complete with dire warnings should you disagree), it tainted my enjoyment of the rest of the book and did Lady of the Night a great disservice.

If not for some of the interesting information throughout the rest of the book, it would have merited a one star rating. Intent is everything and being "talked down to" like an ignorant child is NOT something one expects from a professional writer.

There are plenty of other wonderful books out there about Moon Magick and rituals, so I recommend steering clear of Lady of the Night.