Rating: 4/5

Please note, this is not a romance novel. This is foremost a mystery with a supporting, established gay relationship. For myself, I quite enjoy this dichotomy - so many m/m romance books cover the dating or beginning stages of a romance, not so many delve into the nuances of a mature couple and I appreciate this aspect. While this could be read as a stand-alone, reading the series in order will help explain the relationships established in book one. 

This is an enjoyable cozy mystery. Nick, directed to organize an Edith Wharton conference for the university under a subtle threat of no tenure if he refuses, reaches out to two rival Wharton groups. While antagonism is expected, the murder of a well-known – but not well liked – celebrity author comes as a shock to everyone. Events surrounding the conference spiral out of control, the local detective is not pleased to see Nick involved in yet another mystery, and Nick is left wondering if he could find employment elsewhere after this debacle. 

This was also a rather convoluted mystery with a substantial cast of characters – the celebrity author and her French wife, the well-known author and her publisher, the president of the college and her husband (also Nick’s new office mate), the department head, Nick’s coworker and budding friend, Nick’s coworker and co-conference organizer, the two rival Edith Wharton presidents, a former student of Nick’s, and Nick and Stephan. The author didn’t need much in the way of ‘red herrings’ – he had so many people moving around it was a whole school of herring causing misdirection.

This was also an unusual mystery in that the first half of the book is about establishing the conference and the murder/mystery didn’t happen until nearly halfway through. Anyone having attended, or help run, a conference will fully empathize with the trials and tribulations Nick is going through. The fear of not having anyone show up, the concerns about the celebrity dramas, the conference space not working as planned, a job is on the line… this was all incredibly well conveyed and nearly overshadowed the primary purpose of the story. 

NOTE: This book was provided by ReQueered Tales for the purpose of a review on Rainbow Book Reviews.