Rating: 4/5

At first, I was determined not to like "Other Bells for Us to Ring" because this book was required reading for me (well, the author was required). However, I very much enjoyed Cormier's historical novel about a young girl named Darcy who must face the social and political facets of WWII society. Darcy is a shy eleven year-old girl who finds solace in making friends with Kathleen Mary O'Hara, a fiery redhead who challenges Darcy's religious beliefs. Kathleen is a devout Catholic obsessed with growing up, while Darcy is a Protestant unsure of how she feels about entering young adulthood. Both Darcy and Kathleen struggle with their family lives. Darcy's father eventually goes to fight in Europe and Kathleen has to deal with an abusive, alcoholic father. Kathleen tells Darcy all about the Catholic church and Darcy has to figure out what she really believes and how accurate Kathleen's information is. However, Kathleen disappears from Frenchtown, the neighborhood of Massachusetts in which Kathleen and Darcy live, and Darcy's father goes missing in the war, leaving Darcy to figure out her internal struggles alone (her mother lives with her but is helping in the war effort).

I felt like "Other Bells for Us to Ring" got off to a slow start, but the ending chapters were so touching that Cormier's message of true friendship and religious discovery cannot be ignored. I do like how Cormier developed the relationship between Darcy and Kathleen. They started out having typical preteen adventures and conversations, but began desiring and exploring the deeper facets of adulthood. I like how the discoveries that Darcy do not change her sweet, inquisitive personality, even though she sees much darkness in those around her. So many authors take heavy young adult themes and transfer that heaviness onto the reader. Cormier's writing is revealing without being depressing. Cormier created the perfect blend of joy and pain, a blend that is truer to real life.

Everyone should give "Other Bells for Us to Ring" a chance. Sometimes, reading an uplifting novel is just what the reader needs to move on with his or her own personal challenges. I felt like this book helped me to realize that I'm not alone in the world and other people, other authors like Cormier, understand the confusion and/or pain that I have felt in my life. I think that coming to this realization is very comforting and one of the triumphs of Cormier's writing.