Rating: 5/5

Alistair Horne's The Price of Glory brilliantly recreates the First World War's longest and most destructive battle, the Siege of Verdun (February-December 1916). Horne discusses how this long, sanguinary campaign began as an effort by Germany's General Erich von Falkenhayn to break the will of France with an overwhelming attack on their largest military position. A few early tactical victories (including the near-bloodless capture of Fort Douaumont by a small team of German scouts) convinced Falkenhayn that complete success required just one further push. As generally occurred in World War I, this hope degenerated into bloody attrition, as the French high command overcame their initial mistakes, poured more troops into Verdun and countered German stormtrooper tactics with advanced counteroffensives of their own. Horne effectively shows the squabbling of France's generals, with Philippe Petain and Robert Nivelle overcoming the poor command decisions of Joffre and Castelnau, mounting a stubborn defense that inspired France to keep fighting, even as their armies suffered horrifying costs. The effects of the campaign spread to other fronts, as Germany committed so many forces at Verdun that Russia launched its punishing Brusilov Offensive in the East, while France goaded the British into their suicidal attack on the Somme to relieve pressure on Verdun. Nor does Horne skimp on the gruesome details of trench warfare, the nightmare of gas attacks and the horrifying, soul-shattering ordeals of endless artillery barrages. Horne argues that neither side truly won the battle - the French held the position, but suffered such heavy losses that they were forced to lean on British, and later American troops to maintain the Front; across the trench, Falkenhayn was sacked and replaced by the more competent Hindenburg and Ludendorff, but Germany had themselves exhausted their military resources so much that victory on the Western Front was no longer possible. And France's embrace of Verdun as their ultimate triumph led them to adopt defensive strategies for the next war, and to make Marshal Petain an unassailable national hero - two developments with baleful consequences a quarter-century later. A strikingly written, engrossing work of military history.