Rating: 2/5

What a strange story this is: British ex-pat Lucy Fly has lived in Tokyo for ten years and works as a translator; she befriends Lily, another Brit newly arrived in Tokyo. Her lover – she hesitates to use the word “boyfriend” is Teiji, an amateur photographer, about whom Lucy is quite possessive. 

The book opens with Lucy being questioned, and not for the first time, about the murder of Lily; as Lucy was the last known person to see her alive she becomes the main suspect. Why, then, is she so reticent about helping herself out of the situation? Why doesn't she tell the police that she is fluent in Japanese? I actually found that the notion of the police not knowing this to be quite ridiculous given that they know where she works, and actually sought her out at her workplace. 

None of the characters is fully developed; Lucy herself is selfish and unsympathetic and does not endear herself to this reader. Described on the back cover as “ a young, vulnerable English girl” - hardly, considering she left her native Yorkshire some ten years previously, and has survived in Tokyo ever since. She is self-sufficient, self-serving and almost makes a point of being unfriendly and unsociable. Vulnerable? I don't think so. She decided on Tokyo because it was as far away from Yorkshire as she could possibly go without getting nearer to it again. She befriended Lily because another ex-pat asked her to, but she took an instant dislike to Lily because she was from Yorkshire. What is it about that county that Ms Jones dislikes so much? We learn little about Lucy even when she reveals something of her early family life, when she shows an incredible sense of survival. Having lived in Tokyo for ten years it's amazing, even given her strange personality, that she has only one friend, Natsuko a work colleague. Lucy also has the extraordinarily irritating habit of referring to herself in the third person. Why? I'm darned if I know. Why is the book called The Earthquake Bird? Again – I'm darned if I know as it seems a fanciful title which bears very little connection to the story. The descriptive writing of Japan is well done and enjoyable, and that is what kept me going with this short book, and I have to wonder, if this book was set in Yorkshire, say, would it have been even half the book it is? 

The ending is a bit of a flop as it fizzles slowly out of what little steam there was. All in all a disappointing book; I honestly wouldn't recommend it if you're looking for a thriller.