Rating: 5/5

Not difficult to understand how a small colonial possession rises up to throw off the occupier.

Reread:
Rereading a classic after many years, some things stand out that I don’t recall or probably didn’t note the first time. It seems like certain bloodlines or family trees show up in the middle of combat in various ages. Here is a connection to an earlier age and family: 

   As Mobile Groups 1 and 4 consolidated their hold on the city, a tank company of Mobile Group 1 pushed farther north, toward Phu Hien, to establish an outpost line against a possible enemy counterattack. In the lead tank Lieutenant Marion, seated on the edge of his turret, kept a careful watch over the countryside. With his fair complexion and crew cut, Marion looked more like a young West Pointer than a graduate from Saint-Cyr, and well he might have been, for he was a direct descendant of Lieutenant Colonel Francis (“the Swamp Fox”) Marion, the Revolutionary War hero from South Carolina whose guerrilla tactics had been so successful against the British in 1780. 

The author goes on an airdrop mission. As they pull off the drop zone, his airplane is hit and a couple of French fighters roll in to strike the enemy AAA. Except they really can’t see where the fire came from—the VietMinh were fantastic at camouflage. So the fighters roll in and bomb a “likely” target, a village. If it wasn’t sympathetic to the communists before, it is now:
 

   “Can’t see anything either, but let’s give it to them just for good measure.” 

Another swoop by the two little birds and all of a sudden, a big black billow behind them. It was napalm—jellied gasoline, one of the nicer horrors developed in World War II. It beats the conventional incendiaries by the fact that it sticks so much better to everything it touches. 

“Ah, see the bastards run now?” 

Now the village was burning furiously. The two fighters swooped down in turn and raked the area with machine guns. As we veered off, the black cloud just reached our height. Scratch one Lao village—and we don’t even know whether the village was proCommunist or not. 

Women on the front lines, courage in abundance:

   Like all modern armies, the French Army has its women soldiers, called PFAT (Personnel Féminin de Armée de Terre) With the standard problems and jokes this entails. By 1954, a total of more than 2,000 women served with the French ground forces in Indochina, with an additional 120 serving in the Air Force and 30 in the Navy. Another 470 women, wives of military or civilian personnel in Indochina, were recruited locally. 

Assigned on an individual basis, or in very small units to various headquarters even in the combat zone, they performed their duties extremely well, in spite of the murderous climate, often doing jobs that were as dangerous as that of any man. Close to one hundred of them were killed in action. 

Among the women as a group, one of the most respected was that of the ambulance drivers. Generally in their late twenties or early thirties, those girls would pick up their wounded in the worst of the fighting, in spite of the fact that the Viet-Minh would often make a special target of the vehicles marked with a red cross. Aline Lerouge was one of the best known, having in several cases raced her U.S.-made ambulance clear through friendly and enemy lines in order to pick up wounded left behind in an ambush. 

Another woman who had left a deep impression was Captain Valérie André, M.D., command paratrooper and helicopter pilot. Piloting her own little Hiller copter, she had rescued 67 men from behind the Communist lines. Being not only a pilot but 3 full-fledged M.D., she was able to save the lives of dozens of med by giving them emergency aid before flying them out to a hospital. 

One tough cookie, a reporter who jumps into combat with the guys: 

   Then there were women who were strictly one-of-a-kind, such as Brigitte Friang, one of the civilian reporters of the French Information Service. Brigitte, in her early thirties, had been through a lot. Having served in the French underground against the Nazis, a tattooed serial number on her forearm testified to her acquaintance with a concentration camp. In Indochina, her reporting of military operations equaled that of the best male reporters in matter-of-fact description of military situations without the gushiness and cuteness of her Anglo-Saxon sisters. 

She never made the headlines of the world press with photographs of her face covered with road dust, but Brigitte had earned her paratroop wings in Indochina and had made several combat jumps with French paratroops, including the desperate jump of the 6th Colonial Paratroop Battalion at Tu-Lé. And she followed the 6th in its harrowing retreat on foot across the hills of the T’ai country, back to the French lines, carrying her own pack and steel helmet, back from a mission which, in the United States (or in Korea) would have earned her a Pulitzer Prize for sheer physical stamina alone. But in Indochina, this was taken as a matter of course, coming from little Brigitte. 

Impeccably attired in black tulle evening gown, Brigitte Friang looked like any girl should look, except for her gray-blue eyes. No matter how gay the conversation, how relaxed the evening, Brigitte’s eyes never seemed quite reconciled to smiling. Perhaps they were still seeing the gas chambers of Zwodau or the paratroopers impaled on the barbed wire of Tu-Lé. 

https://coffeeordie.com/brigitte-friang

One tragic story (there were more):

   There were also those women whom Fate seemed to have singled out for tragedy. One of them was Marie-Rose M. She was a quiet, blonde woman in her early thirties and worked on the staff of the French Air Force Command, North Viet-Nam. Marie-Rose’s first husband had been killed in May 1940, during the 90-day Blitzkrieg when Hitler’s panzer divisions overran France. She remarried and her second husband was posted to Indochina. He was killed by the Japanese on March 9, 1945. Her third husband, Army doctor Didier Michel, died in an airplane crash near Gao, in French West Africa in 1948. Marie-Rose requested to be reassigned to Indochina again, and somewhat of a romance had blossomed out between her and Brig. Gen. Hartemann, the northern Air Force commander. But Marie-Rose was afraid, lest bad luck would again rob her of someone she loved. Hartemann, however, was hardly the type to be intimidated by fate. 

On April 27, 1951, after lunch, when Marie-Rose was particularly despondent, Hartemann said: “Come on, Marie-Rose, there is no such thing as Fate! It’s just bad luck, and your série noire has run its course.” And, to change her mood, Hartemann took Marie-Rose for a brief ride in his American B-26 bomber converted into a command aircraft. 

They were shot down by Viet-Minh antiaircraft artillery over Cao-Bang fifty minutes later and died on impact. I found the photograph of their destroyed plane eleven years later while going through the photographic files of the North Vietnamese Government, and told my escort officer the story of Marie-Rose. 

“You know,” said the Communist officer, “until now we had always wondered why General Hartemann had a female observer aboard on that mission.”
 

This remains a classic account of arrogance, courage, intelligence failures, tactical and strategic errors –all which will be repeated by the Americans. For the military and intelligence professional, this is a must have for the permanent shelf. It is dated and Fall had his biases/prejudices. Read Stefania’s excellent review for another perspective https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... She knows her stuff. I approach the book with a military mind. The use of airpower, special forces, multinational forces, generals fighting a war different from the one needed, lessons for the ages.