Rating: 5/5

I'm completely hooked on Horne's readable, clear approach to history. 
I've been wanting to understand Marechal Pétain for a long time, why it was that many French were so devoted to him as a leader during the Occupation, and Horne begins here to provide the answer. 

The history of the battle of Verdun is complicated and excruciating to read about, but Horne succeeds in describing it with the aid of some very good maps (I'd have loved to see them in color though). His descriptions of the personalities of the military hierarchy of the day are vivid and to the point - one could understand exactly how things went awry on both the German and the French sides. And sometimes, how they went right, and how some of the carnage could have been avoided or mitigated. This book was published in French in 1964 when these battlefields still bore the scars of the conflict; I am curious to know if birds have begun to sing there now, or if the silence of death still prevails, along with the pock-marked, bone-filled earth which hides the buried villages...

It seems that myths are always created to hide certain realities of history and the sentimental obsession of many with this war is no exception. One may disagree with Horne's generalized description of "national characters" - there are always exceptions to any rule - but it must be admitted that the French desire to optimistically plunge ahead in search of glory without proper preparation or taking into account probable cost had disastrous consequences in this war. In contrast, German over-planning and indecision were equally at fault, as was the English hesitation to commit to actual engagement. Horne gives no side preferential treatment, they all managed to create god-awful messes in their different ways. But the contrast between the quality of military leadership in the first war and that of the second world war is undeniable. 

I'm looking forward to reading more about the latter in the third book of this series, "To Lose a Battle: France 1940." Horne never taught history, he was a journalist during the 50s after fighting in the second world war, but his research is detailed and impressive. If he had taught - what a teacher he would have been.