Rating: 1/5

Man, this is the worst Summerville book I've read thus far. I thought that the rake would be the worst character since I greatly dislike them, but the heroine was the one who annoyed me the most.

The premise is that Valeria is a spinster who writes novels under a male pseudonym (this plot goes nowhere however). She's asked to go to London to deal with her niece's infatuation with a rake since Kitty only values her aunt's advice. Of course, Valeria falls in love with the Earl and he with her and not much happens until the very (ridiculous) ending.

For all my hatred of rakes, I have to say that the Earl of Travelhurst is actually quite charming, and he becomes besotted with Valeria very quickly. That said, he does a few things that irks me. He is looking for a wife and considers Kitty for a moment, but decides that she's too young and silly. However, it appears that he continues to bestow attention on her, and I don't blame her for thinking he's interested. For example, he visits her in her home and calls her by her given name. Even though he's looking for a wife, he's seen with his mistress at the opera and again later in his curricle. This is also after he meets Valeria. Also, at one point there's gossip about Valeria being his new mistress and, instead of denying it, he keeps mum and even seems to be a bit smug about it. When Valeria confronts him, he claims that they shouldn't care about what the ton says. She rightly mentions the fact that it's not the same for men and women, but eventually forgives him or forgets about it, can't remember which one, which leads me to the main problem with the story.

Initially, Valeria is portrayed as an intelligent and sensible woman but, as she falls in love with the Earl, she becomes stupid, reckless, and even spineless. She forgives or ignores a lot of his behavior. She dances with him and visits his house after the gossip about them starts, even though she knows it's adding fuel to the fire. She sees him unchaperoned, although that might be an author thing - Somerville writes a lot of unchaperoned scenes in her books. She's confronted and insulted by the Earl's former mistress twice and does nothing, even though she says to herself that she should have said something back. Worst of all, as this little plot about the Earl possibly being a spy develops at the end, she just becomes too stupid to live. The whole ending was absolutely ridiculous.

There are much better books out there and better Margaret Summerville books as well. Don't waste your valuable time with this one - I wish I hadn't.