Rating: 1/5

I took one look at this cover and I knew I had read this book as a young girl. It probably scarred me for life.

I actually enjoyed reading the beginning, a bit. I have friends from Maine and I have been there on vacation. I enjoyed the review of Maine-isms in the book.

The major flaw of the book is that the main female character is just beyond redemption. She has NO redeeming qualities as far as I am concerned. She does just the most horrible thing a young teenage girl can do to an adult man. Then she blames the male character for the whole situation. Of course it's just a plot device to justify the 26 year old man having sex with a 16 year old girl, which is totally illegal and frankly, kind of sick.

Now one could argue that she was a 16 year old girl and aren't we all full of hormones and hysterics at that age? Absolutely yes. But the main part of the book is supposedly when the main character is 26. Don't you think she should have grown up by then? Don't you think she should look back on her behavior and finally understand just how truly horrific her actions were? Don't you think she should feel some guilt, some remorse?

She does not, apparently. She blames him for her grandfather's death, and blames herself NOT AT ALL. She blackmails the guy numerous times, takes his money.. oh it is just awful.

And the premise is that she is "forced" to marry him because a bunch of people saw her running half naked home after he rejected her, even though it was night and pouring rain, and the book actually says -- no I am serious --

"She was ruined. No decent boy would look at her now."

Really, Janet Dailey? In 1978? She was RUINED??? Seriously? Have you heard of the sexual revolution at all? Is this Jane Austen?

Then she is married to him for one night, blackmails him for money, and goes back home, has the marriage annulled. Apparently THAT doesn't "ruin" her?

Not to mention she grows up to become a LAWYER, and yet when her "husband" announces to her 9 years later that the annullment is legally invalid and why, this is apparently the first time she's considered that? And she's a lawyer? The worst lawyer ever obviously.

But you know, it's all ok because she has silky dark hair and green eyes like the ocean. You know what, I have silky dark hair and light green eyes, and it doesn't give me a pass to act like that. But you know, the guy ends up loving her anyway, right? Even though she is a pathetic excuse for a human being.

The only reason I read these awful books is to see how very bad they can get. Usually the characters are both somewhat to blame and they both grow up a little, and they are slightly redeemed. 

Not in this book. It's just horrible.