Rating: 3/5

In a twist borrowed from the popular daytime soaps of the day, the wife in Strange Bedfellow gets the shock of her life when her husband, officially ruled as having died in a South American airplane crash two and a half years ago, returns home... to find her engaged to his best friend. *cue the dramatic organ music* LOL

If that wasn't shocking enough, it seems that her once courteous, civilized husband has had a personality transplant since the airplane crash, returning home with a savage "Me Tarzan, You Jane" attitude. He promptly and forcefully illustrates this new facet of his personality the very night of his return. The wimpy OM would-be fiance fades into the shadows and the rest of the book is a series of fights and arguments between the wife and the husband. They even fight about the hardness of their mattress lol, which forced the husband to sleep a few nights on the floor of the library. Then, when he replaces his wife's soft bed with a mattress that would rival a slab of granite, it is his wife's turn to have restless nights. 

In the absence of her dominant husband, the wife has grown to be independent and self-reliant. She has a career and is her own boss, which she greatly enjoys. So she is none too pleased by the return of her husband, especially not one who prefers to live by the edicts of the Stone Age. She was such a basic bitch, it was kinda funny. Incredibly, the husband, despite all his dubiously consensual seductions, eventually comes off as the more sensitive person. At least, he is trying to fight for his marriage, in his own way.

This was a strange one and I found myself skimming towards the end. The character of the wife was too wishy washy for me. She wasn't sure if she wanted to marry the OM at the beginning. Then she wasn't sure she wanted to stay married to the hero for the rest of the story. She clung to the wimpy OM then to her husband in turn. I think honestly she should have gotten divorced and married her career, it was the only thing that she had a real passion for.