Rating: 4/5

I started with EDS in 1985 during this time period so I thought it might be fun to finally get down to reading this after a 33 year IT career supporting General Motors. It hits the nail on the head about how EDS people were treated in the early days at GM. (Actually, IT people were never treated very well at GM in all the years I worked there. We were always red-headed stepchildren even after we were made full GM employees back in 2013.) It's a look at two egotistical CEOs (Roger Smith and Ross Perot) who had different views on how GM should be run. The merger between GM and EDS was supposed to be a good idea at the time but turned more into a hostile acquisition instead. Perot was to remain the leader of EDS while keeping it an independent company providing IT services to GM. He also was placed on the GM board of directors. Problems started when Roger Smith never really kept the terms of the merger agreement and bullied EDS much like another supplier. EDS was being integrated instead of being allowed to operate independently. Perot was angry about this and about how slowly it took to get something done in the GM world. He thought GM was losing ground in the automotive business because of bureaucracy and unimaginative design. What got him into trouble was his outspokenness at board meetings and in the press. This did not endear him to Roger Smith who felt directly challenged. 
This is a fascinating read about two egos clashing with Perot finally being bought out at General Motors and stripped of the company he founded, Electronic Data Systems. It ends with Perot starting a new company, Perot Systems and being sued by GM and EDS for violating a non-compete clause. 
Reflecting on things now it is ironic how none of this matters anymore. EDS as a company is long gone after being swallowed up by Hewlett Packard. General Motors no longer outsources their Information Technology. (In 2013 GM insourced all their IT people again.) Saturn doesn't exist as a platform at GM anymore. Both the outsourcing of IT and the Saturn concept were innovation ideas that were part of Roger Smith's legacy. Both men are now dead. Since then, General Motors has had its problems (surviving lost market share and bankruptcy) and still remains mired in bureaucracy. 
The money spent on the acquisition of EDS, the buyout of Perot, the lawsuits, etc... all seems irrelevant and silly now. All because of the egos of two men.