Rating: 5/5

Blue Moon by Lori Handeland
Jessie &amp; Will
FORGET WHAT YOU THINK YOU KNOW

I'm completely serious when I tell you to forget everything you know about a paranormal werewolf book. I went into this one thinking that it would be basically like every other paranormal werewolf book I've ever read. I expected a werewolf clan or pack with a fearless uber hot leader who was intrigued and couldn't stay away from a sexy human woman. Not happening here, not even close. This book is so much more! It's got suspense, dreadfulness, brilliant sex appeal, and above all wit.

Jessie McQuade is a fearless public servant. She can hunt down the bad guy, kill and skin a buck, and look sexy in a pair of grandma briefs and a t-shirt. Jessie is trying to figure out what is going on with the wolf population in northern Wisconsin. she has a full plate and to add insult to injury her captain constantly nags her about her whereabouts. Sheesh, give a girl a break would ya! She's a true hero and won my heart over tenfold.

Will is just plain old yummie! He's a hotter than hell Native American belonging to a local tribe. Oh and did I mention he's also a smokin' hot professor over at the college. Phew! His intentions with Jessie aren't quite clear at first, but, well, you'll get the picture when you pick this outstanding tale up. I'm fairly certain he melted my panties off me a few times!

The supporting character cast in this book is vast. There are so many people and places to bear in mind. Some are good, some are bad and at times you don't know which category someone may fall into. Clyde, Cherry, Zelda, and especially Edward made this book everything I needed it to be and more. Be careful who you trust because more than likely in the end they're going to eat you... or worse turn you! Bwahahaha!

To sum this up, this book was so compelling that I could not put it down. I was so powerfully drawn to the characters, that what happened to them became my primary concern. The dialogue flowed with ease and felt very natural, or as natural as it can in a paranormal book, lol! It was effortless to read, the pacing was just right, and the tension Lori created throughout was superb and lead to an excellent climax. I read the paperback which was 352 pages long. Just what the doctor ordered for this reader. I'm looking forward to the next installment of this awesome series, Hunter's Moon.

On a side note... I had the privilege of sitting at Lori's table at the Barbara Vey Reader Appreciation Luncheon this year in Milwaukee.. Can I just say that this woman is one of the nicest authors I've ever met! So down to earth, so laid back, and she's a Cheesehead for Godsakes... Thanks for all the gifts Lori!! YOU ROCK!!!

5 Freakin' stars!!!