Rating: 4/5

This installment of the book series was Maggie's (the mentor of the Daughters of the Mooon) flashback on her life in 431 B.C in Athens, Greece. She was a teenager reliving her destiny envolving the Atrox and how she became the gaurdian mother to the many of the Daughters of the Moon. It takes you through the incident envolving her romance with Hector that was mentioned in the book the Moon Demon number 8 in the series, and it showed you her struggles in fulfilling her destiny.

Likes: 

1. The problems the character (Penelope aka Maggie) had to face were not as small and little kidish in comparison to some of the other books in the series. 

2. I loved how this book was a flashback of an important character in the Daughters of the Moon series. (Maggie)

3. This book helped give you more insight on the romance of Hector and Maggie. 

4. It gave you more history on the Atrox and gave a more understanding of every aspect of the story.

5. I liked how Maggie was willing to sacrifice herself for those she loved and to set things back to the way they were ment to be.

6. I loved Maggie as a person in this story. She was loving and wasn't selfish at all. She thought before she acted and tried to fix her mistakes. She was never whining about how hard her life was and I admired how she never gave up even when it seemed the easier thing to do. She excepted her destiny and made the most of it.

7. The book throws a surprising twist at the end that makes you want to know more and continue on with the series to find out.

Dislikes:

1. I didn't like how there wasn't a lot of romance in this book as their could of been. I feel like there was a potential for it to have more.

2. This book was very fast paced and it didn't seem like there was any time to relax. It was action after action after action.

Overall this was a very enjoyable book and it didn't take long to get through becasuse the author did a pretty good job and sucking you in and keeping your reading. I hardly set the book down.