Rating: 4/5

Never has an author irritated me like this one has. In the biographical material included in the book it mentions that the author, now deceased by the way, was fluent in both French and German. I thought that an odd bit of information to include in an author's bio then I started to read the book. By the end of the first chapter I was a bit miffed; by the end of the second chapter I was irked; by the end of the book I was really aggravated. It started with author including in his text quotations and expressions all in French without translation or even a hint of meaning. This was annoying but these inclusions had no affect on the narrative so I dismissed them. The author, however, did not stop there. As the book progressed so did these French inclusions but the author was now adding the words of combatants describing conditions on the field and he was also including orders given by officers during the battle situations. All of these statements were in the native language of the speaker and no translations provided. This material definitely affected the reader's understanding of the events being portrayed. Why in the world would the author of an English language book offer significant details of the described event in a language other than that of his reading audience? Talk about a way not to sell books this is certainly one of them. I had hoped this practice would fade out by the end of the book but it didn't. I found this practice to be nothing short of elitist and insulting and it took effort for this not to affect my evaluation of this book. 

Regardless of my annoyance with the late author the book is quite compelling. While it is in no way is a reflection on the writing I found the book exhausting. The author has done an exceptional job of portraying the demoralizing nature of this 10 month long battle and how it drained the life force of the troops on both sides. The author's treatment of ordeals faced by all the combatants was so vivid that it can even affect the reader; it certainly affected me. Verdun exhausted the material resources and manpower like no battle in any war up to that point and, as the author points out, influenced the shape of the war to come as no other. While the book covers the lives and decisions of the major military personalities involved it hardly ignores the efforts of the common soldiers and frontline officers. The living conditions, the hardships, the cruelties, the dehumanizations, and the casualty numbers are all there in detail. One day's casualties exceeding the total casualties of an entire campaign in other wars. The ineptitude of military thinking at the time is certainly on display but so is the ineptitude of preparation and logistical support for men thrown into frontline situations. The lack of an efficient mechanism for supplying ammunition, water, food, and medical attention is an astounding failing that is difficult to accept regardless of the time of the conflict. And all of these things were lacking while the general in charge sat in luxurious splendor 150 miles away ordering attacks that were nothing short of suicidal missions for the soldiers so commanded. This was a brutal battle in a horrific war fought on an unimaginable scale even when compared to WWII. That we know so little about it is unfortunate because WWI shaped the history for the rest of the 20th century and is responsible for a great deal of the world's problems today. The book is more than worth reading but it will help if you are more conversant in the French language than I am.