Rating: 4/5

Since The Ogre is a book obsessed with taxonomy, heraldry, classification of all kinds, I'll start by saying that the author MIchel Tournier most reminds me of is Thomas Mann. Mann's playful, ironic fictions seem to have fallen out of use these days (I for one can't get over Guy Davenport's comparison of him to James Joyce: "Mann imposes meaning; Joyce finds it; Mann looks for weakness in strength; Joyce, for strength in weakness. Mann's novels illustrate ideas; Joyce's return ideas to their origins."); but reading The Ogre, I was reminded again of how incredibly fun it is to move around in a novel whose reserves are charged, rather than sapped, by a sense of ideal forms. At times, for all its storytelling and scene-setting and narrative capability, this book seems to be more of an ecology than even the most experimental nouveaux romans. Indeed, by the end of it, I got the sense that Tournier is not just system-obsessed, but system-haunted, and that the pages upon pages detailing the main character's private universe were put there as a way to make us see how a modern-day Crusoe (that is, a person who feels completely cut off from human connection) might go about surviving. Loneliness. This book is very lonely. It is also, I think, a testament and warning to anyone who ever spent a year and a half trying to learn Elvish (followed by Dark Elvish, Klingon, and - probably because it was the most strange and "made up sounding" of the languages that my high school offered - Russian). What happens when the world you make in your head takes over? Or, to put it more even handedly (I hope), How do we light the mental/emotional candelabra inside us without eclipsing the very real and consequential world outside us? How do we keep from destroying/being destroyed? In places, Tournier's book may be in a little too much of a hurry the answer these questions, to follow the arrow of its logic. I wanted more of the tide pools. But the last fifty pages or so are legitimately visionary and horrible, an inverted King Matt the First, and worth the momentum.