Rating: 2/5

An ambitious novel, but one that falls short in some places. The main character, Harriet, is paying a visit to Switzerland, partly because she is trying to protect her friend Anne, now living in Switzerland, who is having an affair with a work superior at an international oil firm; this much older man (Victor) is also a Holocaust survivor. The first part of the novel is written in epistolary form - letters that Harriet writes to her boyfriend Benedict, describing the living situation, but also referencing other characters and past lives. The second part is a summary of Harriet's childhood, which includes scenes of her witnessing child abuse of her neighbor's children at the hands of a nanny. We also learn about her mother's decline in mental health, and her dad having left the family when she was young. The final part is focused on the present day, the interactions between Anne, Victor, and the visiting Harriet. The story tumbles into a tragic denouement.

More time needs to be spent on the characters' development; it's a bit hard to identify how and why the readers are to empathize (or take a dislike to) the characters. Parts of the story didn't have a follow-up and needed one - for example, we needed to know why Harriet decides to scratch the neighbors' car and cut up the flowers in their flower garden. Also the love thread between Harriet and Benedict comes off as a tad superficial, perhaps too idealistic in its day-to-day ordinariness. There is a scene in which Anne gets psychiatric treatment from an elder famous psychiatrist in Freudian tradition, but that scene is also underdeveloped, and it's not so clear why Anne makes the decisions that she does.

I appreciate and applaud the author's ambition in writing the novel; I think she is attempting to make some key points with very limited textual resources; however I think because of this the motivations of the key characters suffer from lack of justification for those motives, and as a reader this comes off as a bit confusing.

I do look forward to some of the author's more recent work.