Rating: 3/5

Shortly after I started reading Jonathan Lethem's 2004 collection Men and Cartoons, I discovered that a previous owner of the particular second-hand copy I'd acquired had mutilated it, annotating page after page in bilious green highlighter and indelible black ink (rather than a more respectful pencil). They were uniformly obvious and banal marginalia to boot, where they were legible at all, and I did as well as I could to ignore them in favor of the stories themselves.

Fortunately, Jonathan Lethem has a superpower, perhaps acquired through the nibbling of a radioactive silverfish—the uncanny ability to weave a web of words that can enthrall to the exclusion of all else.

However, Lethem's power is not universally reliable. Even though its brevity is a recommendation—this volume clocks in at a mere 160 pages—I like Lethem more at novel length, and would not necessarily hand Men and Cartoons to someone as an introduction to his work. The short stories collected here are brief, often inconclusive, and frequently surreal. They certainly fit in with Lethem's overall oeuvre, but their tone is uniformly nostalgic—wistful and backward-looking—even when their trappings are futuristic:

"The Vision"
Adam Cressner was an oddball who wore a red cape, like his comic-book hero The Vision, to his fifth-grade gym class at P.S. 29. But "The Vision" isn't really about Adam. It's about Joel Porush, an altogether more typical child, who was in Adam's gym class. And it's about how and when—or even if—one should let go of childish things.

"Access Fantasy"
The most overtly science-fictional tale in Men and Cartoons, this one seems like a throwback to the "if this goes on—" mode of SF so common in the 1950s and 1960s. The freeway turned into a perpetual parking lot—that's an image we've seen before, more than once. But Lethem goes in a darker direction in "Access Fantasy," imagining a barrier that keeps cars and drivers alike entrapped, turned into squatters in their own vehicles, save for a lucky few...

"The Spray"
A vignette, sudden as a spritz from a spray can, whose science-fictional gimmick is hardly even the point—"The Spray" is another story about how people manage their pasts (or fail to do so), this time when they've been literally made visible.

"Vivian Relf"
Chance meetings are significant, the stuff of destiny... aren't they? "Vivian Relf" explores the difference between what matters and what we think matters—and how even the same encounters may not have identical impacts for everyone involved.

"Planet Big Zero"
People either grow and change, or they don't. What happens when one of the former encounters one of the latter, after years of separation?

"The Glasses"
Like "The Spray," this is another vignette with an unusual object as pretext for the scene. "The Glasses" would, it seems to me, be really good performed as a one-act play—with, unlike "The Spray," no special effects required.

"The Dystopianist, Thinking of His Rival, Is Interrupted by a Knock on the Door"
The Dystopianist and his rival turn out to be not that different after all. A sheep is involved.

"Super Goat Man"
"Super Goat Man" is in some ways very similar to "The Vision"—it also involves a mundane narrator who encounters an extraordinary individual from his youth again after years of separation. This one ends with much more of a bang, though.

"The National Anthem"
A letter from E. to M., almost entirely about A.—although E. didn't want it to be so much about her. Again, a story focused on the past, on regret and loss. "The National Anthem" was an anticlimactic way to end Men and Cartoons, too; I would have swapped this one with "Super Goat Man," had the choice been up to me.

That's it; that's all—nine stories, varying widely in detail but unified in tone. If you go looking for Men and Cartoons, may you find a copy that's pristine... Lethem's words deserve no less.