Rating: 5/5

I have been a big fan of Tim Winton for some time, but had not got round to reading The Riders - possibly because unlike his other fiction it isn't set in Australia. But this is another superb novel from an incredibly talented writer.

Instead the opening chapters are set in Ireland, as Fred Scully renovates an old farm cottage in advance of the arrival of his pregnant wife Jennifer, and daughter Billie.

But when only Billie shows up at the airport, Scully ends up purusing the mystery of his wife's absence across Greece, France and the Netherlands.

The book starts gently with Scully dedicating himself assiduously to creating a new home alongside the local postman Pete. But that makes the gradual descent into Scully's mad, obsessive and dangerous pursuit of Jennifer more nightmarish.

Winton brings the same skill he uses to describe Australian settings to the European locations. His descriptions of dank Ireland and scorching Greece are equally effective and atmospheric.

But he is also a master of characterisation. We root for Scully - at the same time as wishing he would see sense and end his pursuit. His appearance is against him - there are some references to the Hunchback of Notre Dame - and at times that hinders him.

I felt tense for so much of the novel - as all Scully's assumptions about his relationship are undermined. It can be painful at times, but is never less than compelling and is immensely readable.

There are two possible quibbles. I loved Scully's daughter Billie - but when we are in her head there are moments when she feels a little older and more sophisticated than a seven-year-old might, but then she is increasingly having to be the adult in her relationship with her father.

There are also a procession of unsympathetic female characters - and I do wonder how Tim Winton was feeling about women at the time! There was perhaps room for a sympathetic character to counter any charge of misogyny - although I am glad the author didn't try and turn one particular encounter into an easy and lazy romance. Instead it just accelerates Scully's descent. I do not though think this is a book or author who hates women.

And in the end neither of those apparent weaknesses detracted seriously from a terrific book.