Rating: 3/5

UNC-CH, NC State, Duke, and Wake Forest, the titular ‘four corners’ of ACC basketball, have won 50 of 58 (and 17 of the first 18) ACC tournament championships. North Carolina’s spot at the center of college basketball universe was driven by the rivalry between the four schools. Both storied venues, NC State’s Reynolds Coliseum was modeled on Duke’s Cameron Indoor Stadium. When legendary Indiana high school coach Everett Case arrived to coach the Wolfpack, he looked at the bare girders that had sat since WWII broke and declared, “It needs to be bigger.” Duke would respond to the Wolfpack’s dominance by hiring a Case disciple, Vic Bubas, to put them on the map. Billy Packer went to Wake Forest in retaliation for Duke waffling on a scholarship offer. Beating out UNC-CH for David Thompson cost NC State a year’s probation.

Basketball really hit the big-time in North Carolina with the wild, wild west days of Everett Case (NC State) and Frank McGuire (UNC-CH). They opened up pipelines from Indiana and New York City, respectively, to bring some of the best talent in the nation to North Carolina. Case also worked tirelessly to promote the sport within the state (it worked—NC produces some of the best home-grown talent in the nation today). They, along with a colorful whiskey drinking Baptist preacher named Bones McKinney at Wake Forest, built teams that could play with anyone in the country. UNC-CH toppled Kansas and Wilt Chamberlain in the 1957 national championship game. NC State toppled UCLA and Bill Walton in the 1974 Final Four before going on to win their first national championship. It was a rough-and-tumble time: NCAA rules were bent and differences on the court were sometimes settled by blows.

The section surveying the early years of the Big Four is by far the best. Menzer has a storyteller’s flair and plenty of stories to tell. But the later sections may give a hint why those stories were so good. Four Corners is by no means a work of journalism. Menzer is here to tell good stories, not get it right. He repeats a number of apocryphal anecdotes of NC State coach Jim Valvano, a legendary raconteur, as if true. He quotes Charles Shackelford as saying he was “amphibious” (Shackelford never said that; it was another one of Valvano’s apocryphal anecdotes and V didn’t even make up the joke). He says Peter Golenbock’s piece of yellow journalism, Personal Fouls, was “quickly” picked up another publisher after Simon &amp; Schuster dropped it under threat of lawsuit by NC State (it was actually only picked up by another publisher after the Raleigh News &amp; Observer printed Golenbock’s most salacious claims as if they were true). Menzer’s desire as a local sportswriter to keep in the good graces of the reigning powers in the state may have influenced him as well. Describing the infamous Final Four incident, he says Duke player Christian Laettner “tapped” a Kentucky player (unfortunately for Menzer, YouTube is now available to show just how ridiculous his use of that term is). He fully buys into UNC-CH coach Dean Smith’s “aw shucks, Old Well and education” routine (Menzer characterizes Smith disclosing information on the SAT scores of two Duke players, likely in violation of federal law, as Smith just “trying to do what he thought was right”). He describes the Cameron crazies as “creative” (they’ve brought us such creative cat-calls as “you suck”).

But all-in-all, Four Corners captures the heart of Big Four and ACC basketball: outsize personalities, high-flying athletes, terrible officiating, a center of gravity firmly in the state of North Carolina, and a view of history rooted as much in legend as fact.