Rating: 4/5

It took us way longer than it should have to finish this book. We got it from the Buckinghamshire Library as an ebook and were reading it to fulfill a challenge on Habitica. We didn't finish it by the end of April as we should have, but we just kept renewing it and plugging away. Then it was due and there was no more option to renew! Not because someone else wanted to read it, but because it had been removed from the catalogue! I couldn't believe it! So I requested it be purchased by the library (at least I assume I did), because it magically reappeared a couple of weeks ago and today we finished reading it!

ANYHOO, I really enjoyed the book. I'm not sure my son loved it, but I made him suffer through, because it was really well written (lots of new vocabulary!) and the MC, Maria was quirky and talked to animals and inanimate objects whenever she felt like it, but had trouble making friends usually. She and her family went off to Devon for their summer vacation/holidays and rented an old house and there was a large, noisy family living in the hotel next door. Maria met and hit it off with the 11 year old boy (her age) next door. They both enjoyed looking at and for fossils which are in abundance on the coast near Lyme Regis where they were. Maria's imagination would run off with her so much so that she would hear things that no one else would hear (like the cat saying snide things), but that and seeing a sampler (hence the title) made, but not finished, by a girl her age more than 100 years ago. And here there may be spoilers: Maria would find herself being transported to the 1860's experiencing life from the other little girl's perspective. 

But that is where the time travel ends and even though it's not always explained away as simply Maria's over-active imagination, that's basically what it was. The moments of time travel were so fleeting as to be more surreal than anything but the mysterious sounds she would hear were never really explained. There was a great tension and foreboding that to everyone's (mine and Maria's at least) relief never amounted to anything. I kept waiting for something more than magical realism and imagination, but oh well. It was a lovely book despite that.