Rating: 4/5

A Land of Little Rain is an enraptured resident's unsentimental and occasionally spiritual love letter to the vast, pitiless deserts of California and the surrounding High Sierras mountain range. 

Mary Austin wrote this book like someone utterly in tune with her chosen home who wants to describe it to you, but not have it explained; at least not with any science, but intuitively, not unlike how a Native American would comprehend and explain it.

More a series of essays than a concerted narrative, through the course of fourteen chapters Austin provides vignettes about the fauna and flora of a mostly uninhabited, inhospitable land; a place of both blazing heat and freezing cold, wind-whipped heights and breathless plains: 

'Weather does not happen. It is the visible manifestation of the Spirit moving itself in the void.' 

Austin often refers to the smaller animals in anthropological terms as 'furry folks' or 'little people' (e.g. 'Rabbits are a foolish people'), but it's her only concession to sentimentality, if you can it that. 

They are generally depicted very much as part of their environment, subject to its laws, to the harsh realities of hunger, drought and nature in tooth in claw.

She has a special love for the coyote, most despised of the local population: 

'The coyote is your true water-witch, one who snuffs and paws, snuffs and paws again at the smallest spot of moisture-scented earth until he has freed the blind water from the soil ... goes garrulously through the dark in twenty keys at once, gossip, warning, and abuse.'

On the few human inhabitants of the Land of Little Rain, Austin provides a few short but memorable case studies, starting with the prospecting 'Pocket Hunter': 

'a small, bowed man, with a face and manner and speech of no character at all, as if he had that faculty of small hunted things of taking on the protective color of his surroundings'. 

With his prehistoric panhandling he harbors hopes of a life of wealth and leisure elsewhere.

Not so Seyavi, the widowed and forsaken indian basket maker who brings up her child alone and against all the odds in such a culture and environment: 

'There used to be in the Little Antelope a she dog, stray or outcast, that had a litter in some forsaken lair, and ranged and foraged for them, slinking savage and afraid, remembering and mistrusting humankind, wistful, lean, and sufficient for her young.'

Other chapters provide an insight into a Paiute indian medicine men, Winnenap', who, like all his type, lived and workedin the knowledge that after failing to avert three deaths, he himself must be killed; an episode of frontier myth-making around the hardened residents of Jimville, 'A Bret Harte Town'; and a final glimpse at the Mexican ex-pats of El Pueblo de Las Uvas, celebrating in exile their national holiday on sixteenth of September. 

If this choice passage, about Crested Quail at drinking time, captures your ear, you will certainly enjoy the book as much as I did: 

'flocks pour down the trails with that peculiar melting motion of moving quail, twittering, shoving, and shouldering. They splatter into the shallows, drink daintily, shake out small showers over their perfect coats, and melt away again into the scrub, preening and pranking, with soft contented noises.'