Rating: 1/5

Watson’s passing mention of the unrecorded case of The Giant Rat of Sumatra has proven to be an irresistible draw for writers of pastiche, so much so that 2001 and saw not one, but two books released under that name. Daniel Gracely has taken the title and used the mysterious beast to good effect in his recently released paperback of the same name. The rat itself is only a clue in a line of reasoning that leads us to an encounter with the late Professor Moriarty’s unheralded successor as well as his most potent and destructive legacy. Gracely, in combining elements of Jules Verne within the framework of a Holmes story provides a short but mildly entertaining read that has a tone more in keeping with a Rathbone film than a Canonical tale. 

The story moves along at a fair pace and I found myself enjoying the plot far more than I expected after a less than compelling start. The dialogue is a bit stilted and somewhat basic in style, with Watson's narrative voice being relatively faint, but Holmes is given very Rathbone-like clipped lines that work in spite of their non-Canonical flavour. Mycroft Holmes makes an appearance, not only as the plot concerns the Diogenes Club but because the threat of Moriarty’s legacy is such that all of England is at risk. Basically, an aeronautic trophy has gone missing from the Diogenes Club. Hidden within it is the key to an explosive of such force that the world has seen its destructive capabilities but once…in the destruction of Krakatoa! What does the late Professor’s treatise on gigantism have to do with it? Just what had the mathematical criminal genius discovered? You’ll have to read the book to find out, but be warned that the format of the book leaves something to be desired. As an undersized paperback of 117 pages with some poorly doctored Paget illustrations, it is ridiculously over-priced at $13.95 USD (no doubt caused by a small print-run by an even smaller press – Grandma’s Attic Press).

Recommendation: For the must-have-everything-collector only and not at all recommended for the Canonical purist.