Rating: 3/5

This book was extremely disturbing. It's supposed to be a novel, but I assume that much or most of it is based on the author's experiences as a psychiatric resident. After the first hundred pages, I mostly skimmed, as the hospital and his life were both disasters. I mean, the protagonist, Roy, tried to do things right, but he was very closed off. When his partner (or anyone else) asked anything about his feelings, he couldn't answer, and wouldn't even acknowledge that he was upset about her questions or anything else.

The psychiatrists are totally crazy, and the patients are mistreated to the point of a number of avoidable suicides. At his first ward assignment, the head doctor is on vacation, and Roy's friend Malik is in charge. Malik gives him common-sense guidelines for working with the patients, and also tries to discharge as many as possible before the crazy head doctor (who diagnoses all patients as borderline) comes back. When he does come back, Roy falls under his spell and adopts his extreme, Freudian-oriented viewpoint, which causes him to treat patients inappropriately, doing harm. When his rotation takes him to the psychosis ward, he finds that the head doctor doesn't even consider the patients human and doesn't interact with them, just prescribes excessive amounts of harmful drugs. Some people there are misdiagnosed and shouldn't be there, but the head doctor doesn't care. When it's obvious that another prominent psychiatrist in the hospital is having sex with his patients and even a younger women doctor, Roy tries to help, but the doctor is charismatic and the hospital circles its wagons around him. Meanwhile, Roy starts an affair, which is the last straw for his wonderful partner. (Yes, the book is thoroughly sexist.)

It has a happy ending for Roy, but the book is an indictment of the psychiatric establishment and mental hospitals, this model of which I don't think still exists. Also those who work with the Freudian model are much rarer now. But the issues he raises about insurance and pharmaceutical companies continue. And care for the mentally ill is woefully inadequate.

All the blurbs say the book is witty, funny, hilarious. Yes, it's written irreverently, but overall, I found it more disturbing and tragic. If I were to re-read The House of God, I wonder it I'd like it as much as I did long ago when I read it.