Rating: 4/5

“In all my experience along the dirtiest ways of this dirty little world, I have never met with such a thing as a trifle yet.”

TS Eliot endorsed THE MOONSTONE in distinctly lofty terms. He characterized it as “… the first, longest and best of English detective novels.” Whether it was indeed the first is a matter for scholarly debate and its ranking is clearly a matter of subjective opinion. But, whether you think it is the best or not, Collins’ typically Victorian description of Sergeant Cuff’s investigation of the alleged theft of a spectacularly valuable gemstone by three Brahman Hindu priests is certainly an entertaining read.

Cuff’s sleuthing efforts are expertly interwoven with typical 19th century tales of social class behaviour, family clashes, bequests and heredity and a thoroughly aggravating tale of a sanctimonious, proselytizing bible-thumper who had a tract in hand to cover any conceivable moral failing on the part of those who presumed to transgress in her presence.

I’m not quite certain why THE MOONSTONE ranks with THE WOMAN IN WHITE as one of Collins’ best known works because, notwithstanding its thoroughgoing quality and entertainment value, it simply isn’t in the same league as some of his other novels such as NO NAME, MAN AND WIFE or THE LAW AND THE LADY.

Insofar as it being an early example of a Victorian detective novel is concerned, it certainly was easy to see later ideas and characters that might have sprouted from the germs of Wilkie Collins’ ideas – Sergeant Cuff as the precursor to Hercule Poirot or Sherlock Holmes, for example; Superintendent Seagrave as the template for Holmes’ colleague, the bumbling Inspector Lestrade or the obnoxious, outgoing Chief Inspector Japp in Hercule Poirot; the brilliant and clever youngster Gooseberry could easily serve as a model for the later members of Holmes’ Baker Street Irregulars.

As with all of Wilkie Collins’ novels, THE MOONSTONE is a cinch to recommend for lovers of the Victorian classic genre. And take special note … if you are a green newcomer to the entire field of 19th century English literature, this would be an excellent place to start. The language is considerably more current sounding and accessible to the 21st century ear, less verbose, less mellifluous, less complex and distinctly less lengthy and overwrought than what one typically encounters with Dickens, George Eliot or the Bronte sisters, for example.

Paul Weiss