Rating: 5/5

Like fine wine, there is literature that needs an acquired taste to be fully appreciated. This is one of those books. The story is as simple as a red table wine, but the intricacies of the writing set it in a class of its own. This is a story that has been done time and again – an aged and unreliable narrator recalling their life. 

90-year-old Hagar claims to never have been happy and dislikes most everyone she’s known in her life. She will not accede to leaving her own home, in which she is lives with her docile son Marvin and his wife Doris who bears the brunt of caring for Hagar, for a care facility and does not recognize how much less independent she has become. She has dementia and struggles with her short term memory but is able to recall and tell her past. She is far from likeable, yet after a short struggle acclimating myself to Laurence’s writing, I became fully engaged in the book.

So much is done well here. Laurence has a marvelous sense of word choice that makes all the scenes visual and all the characters knowable. Sentence structure is generally short and her language is usually common. 

I think in today’s world, Hagar would be what is known as goth. 

“It was spring that day, a different spring from this one. The poplar bluffs were budded with sticky leaves, and the frogs had come back to the sloughs and sang like choruses of angels with sore throats, and the marsh marigolds were opening like shavings of sun and the brown river where the tadpoles danced and the bloodsuckers lay slimy and low, waiting for the boys’ feet. And I rode in the black-topped buggy beside the man who was now my mare.” 

“Lottie was podgy as a puffball. She looked as though she’d either burst or bounce if you tapped her. The Dreisers always ran to fat. I didn’t remember her mother very well, who’d died so conveniently young with a bare left hand, but the dressmaker aunt who reared Lottie used to waddle like a goose force-fed for Christmas.”

Oh, she is cutting. And even when she feels gratitude or pleasure she is unable to express it to others. One must note that her mother died young and she had little in the way of affectionate role-modeling from her father. She marries one man to escape another, but accepts that as her choice. She bears two sons. She does go off in search of a life of her own, but returns during his final days at a loss to explain why she is really there. In that house of her marriage, she lives on to this final chapter in her life. This chapter in which dementia takes hold. 

This is a marvelous study of character, one of which may or may not be who she once was, but one who stubbornly hangs on to herself to the very, very end.