Rating: 3/5

Not your average Robert A. Heinlein book... Really, how often do you hear that?! 

Robert Heinlein was one of the most influential and controversial authors of his time. He wrote all kinds of books, from the Young Adult market to pseudo-sexual revolutionary stories. He even went so far as penning books where the characters knew they were in a story and end up cussing him out, as to the way events were unfolding. With all that it might be hard to believe that this story is a little different, yet it is.

Originally serialised in 
  If: Worlds of Science Fiction
 (1962) Podkayne comes early in the period after Heinlein had moved beyond the Young Adult market. Here he is more unabashedly writing the SF social commentary he judiciously sprinkled into his YA books, the Heinlein Juveniles. 

A commonly-held misconception of Podkayne of Mars is that it's part of the Heinlein Juveniles but 1959's Starship Troopers, which raised serious objections from the publisher, resulted in the end of HJ series. The last of Heinlein's juvenile novels was actually Have Space Suit - Will Travel published in 1958. 

It is evident why people mistake this story to be in the YA genre he was so prolific in, until then, after all it does follow many of the usual tropes of the YA market: It is about a young girl, Podkayne Fries, and her asocial genius brother, Clark, as they leave their home on Mars to take a trip on a spaceliner to visit Earth, accompanied by their uncle, Tom. 

But once you realize the heavily laden social commentary of the story mostly surrounds making time to raise children, implying that when parents' carers take precedence over raising the children society might atrophy (something I agree with whole-hardheartedly). You realize what the book is doing is questioning a woman's ideal place in society, you notice the absence of role models in Podkayne's life, you see this is what drives Pod through the tale and you begin to realize how subversive this story may actually be.

Podkayne of Mars is filled with the vibrant and imaginative landscapes Heinlein is know for, including a Venusberg that's almost some kind of cyber-punk Las Vegas. Inhabited by miners, gamblers, cute yet vicious 'fairies' and pinheaded-aliens to whom it seems humans tend to sell a highly addictive drug. Another of the things that makes this book a noticeable change from Heinlein's earlier works is that the entire story is composed of diary entries rather than his usual prose.

Though the book is Podkayne's diary it is debatable whether she is the main character of the story. Within the pages of the diary/book itself secret entries are made by Clark, in invisible ink, that expand the story. In fact his adventures/mischief tend to take much of the center stage. And there's a lot more here than what's on the stage, because Uncle Tom is a former member of the Mars government and a hero. This means that Pod and Clark are privileged to interact with all sorts of odd characters the average future space traveler would not. 

Like a good cook Heinlein thickens the plot to a satisfying consistency. As the trip continues Pod comes across the mystery of Clark's secret package, gambling dens and we see skullduggery afoot all around. This while the seemingly innocuous travel log teaches us quite a few things about how get along whenever you find yourself far from home. It should be noted in fact that much of the descriptions of Pod's voyage are based on Heinlein's own experiences traveling the world, during and after his stint in the Navy.

The original ending of Podkayne of Mars caused some controversy with the publishers which resulted in two endings to this story. The edition I read prints both the original ending as well as the changed ending that appeared in all editions from 1963 until 1993. It also has a section of fan essays discussing the endings. This is almost as fun to read as the book. Some differ wildly though most agree that the original ending gives the book more weight. 

Collected and published as a novel in 1963, on the cusp of sexual revolution, when many of those same questions asked here were being talked about. All while Heinlein is already communicating that women are capable of equaling, or out-classing, men at the same time he positions young Podkayne, and her brother, as palpably grasps for a role models. If, as in Pod's case, it were only as she struggles with her femininity it might seem impertinent but it reaches into what she wants out of her future... what can fulfill her.

It's not all that surprising that the trend of latch-key children, with working parents, was something Heinlein saw fit to include and comment on back in 1963 as programs like CBC radio's Discussion Club featured the topic "How War Affects Canadian Children" coining the term 'latchkey kid' back in 1942. What is impressive is that he would find this trend so troubling that Heinlein would build an entire novel about it.

That, in 1962, a male SF writer would bring up these particular questions in this rather original way, for him, is striking in itself. Most surprising of all, for Heinlein who has no problem providing examples of how best to live over-and-over again throughout his career, is that Podkayne of Mars doesn't answer any of the questions it brings up and indeed leaves much unknown.

In the end; as entertaining as I feel this story to be, much of this book could be misunderstood [see other reader reviews], so in this rare case I would dare say I might recommend this to gender studies majors or anyone prepared to talk about this book in a forum. 

Of course I would also recommend it to any Heinlein fan.