Rating: 5/5

The small town of Moonfall has a secret. In fact, it has a lot of secrets. The only problem is, nobody knows them. No-one apart from the witch who runs a local store; and, of course, the cult of Satanic nuns who occupy the convent on the far side of the woods, and are responsible for just about every secret in town.

Secrets like... why do so many people die violent deaths at the local beauty spot? What are those weird birds... the locals call them "night hawks"... that screech above the rooftops at night? And what exactly do the nuns put in the mincemeat pies that they sell to tourists at their own picturesque little store?

Moonfall is a story that spans generations of one family, without ever leaving the present day... 1972 in the early pages, and twenty-four years later elsewhere. And remember that number, because it will turn out to be significant. Unless, of course, you're the local sheriff, John Lawson, who... no, no spoilers. Suffice to say, there's not much real action in Moonfall, so you can excuse him being a little slow off the mark when things really start to happen.

And they do happen. Thorne is an incredibly engaging writer, surely one of the best in the entire modern horror genre. Eminently capable of creating believable communities, she also possesses the remarkable ability of blindsiding your expectations, time and time again. Imagine she's conducting you on a leisurely drive... taking the scenic route, if you like... while she points out the areas of local interest. 

Sure there are a few little potholes to jolt your reverie evero so often. But it's calm, it's relaxing, you're having a wonderful time.. Then you hit the hill. Then she announces the brakes have failed. Then she tells you that the engine's overheated. The steering's gone, as well. And just when you think things can't get any worse... they do.

Moonfall is a breathless spiral into darkness, and while I swore to myself long ago that I will never binge read an author again, this is my third Thorne book in under three weeks. And now I'm eyeing up a fourth.... Watch this space.