Rating: 4/5

I’m a Bipolar Soul whose Magic can forever Fester in my Heart, unless I sober up! For a sober mind dispels the magical mists and leaves simplicity in its wake.

Modern Madness arises by refusing to let emotional life Flow ordinarily - and in consequence, not being able to win for losing - and by continuing to search for meaning beyond the basic, and tried and true values our brain had been given at childhood.

That's impossible. For it is an impassable Double Bind. It is to construct a bronze idol of oneself, with clay feet as in Nebuchadnezzar's dream. And Nebuchadnezzar fell into madness.

Modern Madness begins when we reject all of society's ethical answers, as Nietzsche did to his certain doom. For only society gives our brains functionality. 

And that functionality is embedded in our original upbringing, and our education.

Reject that, or what it has now become, and you reject yourself.

That's what I did in 1970. Never having been told the truth about the past, I lashed out at my enemies blindly, using invalid reasons. 

The tangled wires of my brain short-circuited, and with medical inducement it shut down.

That's the personal madness of modernity.

My meds gave me peace - because madness is a Double Bind which in its pure futility must be stopped and transmuted into tranquility.

***

Where does that leave us patients?

In Limbo. Limbo is the traditional final home of the lost, unshriven ones among us - if our souls remain in continual unrest in this life. Souls in Limbo, Dante says, are the Proximate Damned.

My own trauma in the face of modernity twisted the world right outta shape... Now it had become downright bizarre:

Peace packed up and left.

Unrest was all that remained.

And it will stay, unless we have certain faith that we can positively mitigate this modern madness.

Faith puts bronze in our clay feet. We are no longer confused about the big picture. Our venial peccadilles we can leave alone, as vital components of our essential humanity. Don't sweat the small stuff.

***

You see, modern psychiatric veterans cannot always pretend to be fully functional, because they have rejected our society's functionality. 

They fondly think life is deeper than all that. But it is no deeper than its foundation.

Our books and friends with their pat answers only take us back to Limbo. Even the neurotypicals are now confused. Unless daybreak floods through their hearts.

Because we veterans of a simpler world have jettisoned our functionality by searching through mere doublethink for answers. Hence our current intolerant politics.

Rapid fluctuating change always upsets our common meaning anew. Without holistic emotional functionality, deep shared common meaning cannot exist. Our totems, Freud said, have been abandoned because they are now mocked.

To be honest, we Have to be thankful we still have the seed of meaning in our lives, having been reduced to a hopelessly inchoate machine language.

That very same original machine language must be allowed to run emotionally unhindered - yet, paradoxically morally curbed - again.

Only when it runs will we be happy, and we can mitigate this modern disaster.

To do that, we must keep our brains active - either in physical activity - or in the contentious inspiration of our reading. 

We must let our program run again in the free flow of unprejudiced love.

With faith.
***

Only by acceptance and not by rejection of the world are we saved.

This threatening new kinda personal unbalance is the bequest of a woke, unbalanced world. Thus it threatens to become universal.

Where once it was the domain of only the mentally unbalanced, it is now our worldwide lingua franca.

For by denying the positive functionality of this modern society it sends us off anew in a futile search -

Cruising for yet another bruising - 

In our classically Double-Bind Bruised Minds.

For it is only through an emotionally positive and loving acceptance of this world, our inheritance, that we are healed.