Rating: 5/5

Ruth Benedict’s Patterns of Culture introduces us to cultural studies. Through both the individualized and compared cultures of three societies (Zuni of southwestern United States, the Kwakiutl of western Canada, and the Dobuans of Melenesia) demonstrations of the diversity of behaviors among them served as a deeper dive into the nature of culture. Benedict’s interpretation of the said cultures as being continuously compared to ‘our’ (meaning the universal Western civilization) emphasizes the need to seek a perspective that is beyond the unchallenged lens of early social scientists – their own thinking. “Precisely in proportion as it was fundamental, it had its existence outside the field of conscious attention.” Benedict claimed that since there is an emphasis in the West on the frustrations and pressures of the modern world in attaining “success,” our freedom is then also as restricted (or even more) than earlier cultural communities. The last chapter of the book steered into her stance on cultural relativism, and the importance of seeing what is called ‘abnormalities’ or differences as as critical in not only tolerance, but its further inquiry into the nature of cultures. 

I laud her critical assessment on absolutist philosophies and morals that limits us into a cultural lag than we should we open to the transcendence of cultures. More so, she relates this to the constraints felt by society as manifested by the limitations this imposes on an individual who does not find the form presented to them as congenial. From that point on, Benedict solidifies and calls for the opportunity of Anthropology’s further contribution to advocating (suppose it be at present times) for Mental health, LGBTQ+ Rights, and empowerment of the self from one’s disavowal to limiting beliefs that are imposed by society. Benedict also deems that the dominant traits of our civilization need special scrutiny. And it would be of a great inference, to think of our arrogant and unbridled egoists family men, as officers of law and business as forms of ego-gratification culturally supported in a similar fashion to the Kwakiutl’s rivalry, to the traditional Zuni indifference? How different are we then from the same patterns of culture that are seen “primitive?” 

It is in the observances and keen perspective of Anthropology into different patterns of culture that make the world, as Benedict quotes it, safer for human differences. 

Quotes:

“Custom did not challenge the attention of social theorists because it was the very stuff of their own thinking: it was the lens without which they could not see at all. Precisely in proportion as it was fundamental, it had its existence outside the field of conscious attention.”

“But our civilization must deal with cultural standards that go down under our eyes and new ones that arise from a shadow upon the horizon. We must be willing to take account of changing normalities even when the question is of the morality in which we are bred.”