Rating: 5/5

Caveat: This book has a very limited audience. Those with little interest in the Christian religion will find it a difficult and unrewarding slog. Conversely those with strong religious beliefs may be challenged or offended and avoid the book for those reasons. Additionally, the writing is very dense and somewhat difficult and will deter casual readers who may be otherwise interested in the subject matter (while the book is only 340 pages, the font is small and tightly packed, and there are few paragraph breaks and no line breaks for dialogue, so this feels more like a 500+ page book). This leaves a very narrow band of likely readers, namely mildly or formerly religious people who enjoy reading difficult literature. People like myself, who are for reasons of upbringing or possibly masochistic tendencies, cursed with a deep fascination of the subject despite believing not a word of it. 

This is a masterpiece of historical and philosophical fiction. It is simply a beautifully written book, both in the style of prose and the content. Overall, it is very respectful to the source material. There is no overt mocking element; the writing does not look down on religion. The characters are very real and human, and are treated with seriousness and dignity. The subversive element is quite subtle (with the arguable exception of one chapter close to the end of the book), and on the whole arises naturally from the interactions between the characters and the situations in which they are placed. The characters are forced to work through difficult moral situations and in doing so bring to light the absurdity of the various doctrines of the religion. This is treated so lightly that I fear the moral questions raised are likely to be missed if one is not paying attention. 

One thing I really liked was the way the book handled depictions of ancient Jewish life. The role of women being completely subservient to men: first to their fathers, then husbands, and ultimately to their own children, and the effect this had on their relationship with their families. It also depicted honestly the ritual of quotidian animal sacrifice - the absolute savagery, cruelty and waste of this practice, which is often overlooked when we think about that culture and that time.

If I have one small criticism, it is that the final two chapters appear somewhat rushed, as if the author has said what he needed to say in the preceding chapter (which is in fact the crux of the book and seems to contain the culmination of the author's message) and was simply trying to conclude the book. It's a pity because those final chapters contain some key events that were worthy of closer scrutiny.