Rating: 2/5

Skimming through reviews, I realise that I am in the minority here - which is a tad shocking, but oh well, here we are. 

First of all, I really appreciated The Second Sex, I think every teenage girl being awakened from their performative internalised misogyny in late girlhood and early adolescence does - it's refreshing to realise you're a whole human, outside of the eyes of men, contained and important in your own right - especially after puberty makes all of your friends begin to act crazy. 

Now, onto the meat and taters: what the Hell with this book? I brought it with me for a long walk, so it was all I had to read throughout the day, and I was so assured in de Beauvoir's ability to write that I didn't even both bringing a back up book, as I usually would. 

I am shocked that someone so eminently quotable, so interesting, such a deep thinker, one of the most influential philosophers and feminists of the recent age and married to Sartre - another fave of mine - could write such a boring and dragging memoir. I must repeat: what the HELL? Also, where the Hell was the editor? You let ya gal down! 

Talking to my mate who has read Sartre's autobiography, apparently this is a trait they both shared in their memoirs - a very, very long introduction to their childhood, with lots of ruminations on their memories between the ages of birth and 10 - we're talking books worth of recollections. This simply isn't interesting; these memories, in my opinion, are not reliable, and are extremely tainted by reconstruction over decades. de Beauvoir also has a habit of really overindulging in useless description of things that must have sentimental value to her, but cannot possibly fascinate the reader to the same degree - there is no empathy with her audience, I think because she is not a very empathetic person (by her own presentation of self in the novel). 

Not only does she seem to have almost no understanding of what is or could be interesting to the reader, but she also comes across as thoroughly unlikable. I do not like her as a person at all - she's elitist, domineering, condescending, self-absorbed, mean-spirited and spiteful to those who offer her tenderness for seemingly no reason and her writing is not charming enough for her to get away with any of this bad behaviour. What you usually see in memoirs of anti-heroes is a sort of self-deprecation - they've been checked so they know they're a little horrible, and while owning it they apologise through their own (maybe shallow) distaste for their actions. You cannot expect that here. Sometimes, there's a social schism within the book between her and another person due to her behaviour, and de Beauvoir's understanding of it boils down to: ah, they just don't understand how clever I am! 

One of the funniest moments came early on in the book, I mean I genuinely belly laughed reading it for its lack of self-awareness. de Beauvoir is reminiscing on how she wasn't exactly Miss Popularity in the schoolyard (because all the other children were DUMB and BELOW her, you see), when she remembers how one child who didn't like playing with her due to her being an anal-retentive stickler for the rules cried, "Oh, I don't want to play with her, she gets on my nerves!" de Beauvoir, writing decades later, describes the child with several choice unflattering adjectives, including 'ugly' and 'bespectacled'. But ends the sentence with assuring the reader that she couldn't have cared less, of course, because she was so above this child in terms of intellectual capacity. Yep, you sure didn't care, Simone, and you sure didn't hold onto this memory for decades past when most people would've let it go. 

Summarily, love what de Beauvoir did for the cause of feminism, but do not really like her as a person - I also don't care for extremely long reveries that you seriously had to be there for - and thus this autobiography wasn't for me. I abandoned this book three quarters of the way through it - hey, if it sucks, why force myself? - but I do understand I'm in the minority here.