Rating: 3/5

Re An Engagement of Convenience - Catherine George brings us another segment of her never-ending Pennington series in this whacktastic masquerade.

The h in this one is 26 and looks almost identical to her Italian BFF. Which is kinda weird, cause the h is supposedly English and Welsh and the BFF is not. The h is having sad times when the story starts, her mum is ill, along with her mean granny and there is no money to pay for the lifesaving operation.

Enter the Italian BFF - she has lots and lots of money ever since her parents died and she inherited all the Pennington Hotels. So if the h will pretend to be her for the BFF's Italian Nona's 80th birthday party in Italy, the BFF will pay for the h's mum's operation AND pay to get the h's mum's huge house repaired,(and install central heating,) too.

The Italian BFF can't go herself because ten years earlier, the girl got forcibly evicted from the Nona's presence by her older cousin. 

 He found her in a scandalous situation and he and the Nona were outraged. Plus the BFF hasn't changed her wild ways, she is currently expecting a stork visit and doesn't know where the baby's dad is so he can marry her.

Anyhows, the upshot of all this drama is that the BFF can't go and reunion with her Nona, cause she is up the duff and has no baby daddy to present. The h is reluctant, deception isn't her strong point - but she is fluent in Italian and she is a shorter dead ringer for the BFF. 

The h's mother hears the plan and pushes the h to do it. Mum really needs that surgery and the only other option is to sell the family pile - but mean granny hates the h and she can't see them all squished up together in some grotty flat.

So it is off to Italy we go and the older cousin is there waiting. at first he is mean and tart shaming to the h who is in the guise of her BFF. But soon the older cousin H is feeling the pull of the HP Lurve Force Mojo and he is trying his best to ignite some Treacherous Body Syndrome in the h.

The h is feeling some tingles, but she is still unicorn grooming, so she doesn't realize what they are at first. Nona is delighted to see her again and the h feels a huge bond for the elderly lady. 

 The H gets more determined on seduction and the h learns that the BFF did quite a bit more with the brother of H's fiancee ten years earlier.

The BFF gave up her unicorn grooming license to the boy in a bid to make the engaged H jealous. The H found them, beat up his fiancee's brother and his fiancee broke up with him. 

(Which isn't as bad at it seems, only the H's ego took a hit. He was only marrying the fiancee because they both owned matching side by side vineyards.)

Then the H's ex fiancee sister threw herself at the H and he had to kick her back to the curb, cause he wasn't interested in her womanly wiles. Needless to say, the relations with the vineyard owners next door have been very strained for years and the H blamed the BFF.

But now the H thinks the h, still posing as the BFF, should be his lady buffet sampler for the duration of her stay. After the Nona's birthday party, where the h gets a bottle of wine dumped on her by the rejected ex fiancee's sister, the h makes her plans to leave. 

The Nona and the H make it clear that the Nona wants the h to marry the H, but the h has no intention of agreeing to any such thing.

The H drags the h to dinner on the eve of her departure. He takes the h to his house, gets her drunk and then forcibly seduces her. The h may or may not have had a good time, CG isn't really clear on the physical gratification moment for the h, but the H figures out that since she was a unicorn groomer - she definitely isn't the BFF.

There are some harsh words and the H now believes that since the h is not really family after all, she should just be happy to be his lady buffet sample - there were a few courses he didn't get to try out. The h is all about the NO and she goes home to England just in time to support her mother as her mean grandmother dies.

The H continues to stalk the h, even tho she made it clear she isn't preggers and she isn't interested in being his dirty weekend baggage. We also find out that the mean grandmother wasn't related to the h - it seems that mean grandmother was infertile and her husband, the h's grandfather, kept an Italian mistress.

The h's mother is actually the mistress's child, but the mistress died in childbirth and the mean grandmother raised her. But the h looks just like her Italian grandmother, so the mean grandmother hated her and did not leave her any money. (Tho the mean grandmother kindly left the h's mum enough money to repair her house.)

By this time the H and the Nona have shown up to meet the real BFF relation and fortunately the baby daddy came back, so now we can have a wedding. The H keeps stalking the h for an affair, the rest of the cast is doing their best to pimp the h out and the h is trying to move with her life. 

She has figured out that if she isn't blood related to the H, he has no intentions of offering marriage to her. The h's mother tells her to go have an affair with the H anyways, but the h isn't feeling the joy for that.

Then the Nona gets ill and the h rushes to Italy to be by her side, as the BFF is on honeymoon. While looking through the Nona's family photos, the h realizes that the Nona's younger sister who ran off is actually her biological grandmother. 

So the h is family after all and after some more hemming and hawing about, the H drags the h off again to lurve her up and tell they are marrying, since keepin' it all in the family is the only way CG seems to be able to pull off this whacktastically tacky HP Voyage with a dubious HEA.