Rating: 4/5

Although I know I've read Treasure Island through the same pirate sea twice, I wasn't sure about the almost-as-famous Kidnapped. If I did read it once, the memory of it is gone, so let's say this was a first go-round.

My biggest observation is that is gets off to a roaring start, adventure-wise (which is what you want, nay DEMAND, of a Robert Louis Stevenson), because at first there's the mystery of young David Balfour's dead father and living uncle (his brother) and estate, and then there's the derring-do of Uncle Ebeneezer (I can't help but picture Dickens' character) hiring a captain to get the kid out of his hair via kidnapping. Young DB's destination: Carolina (where the weather may be finer, but after that, all down hill).

Anyway, once David teams up with his sidekick Alan Breck, there's lots of good adventure on the boat, but the boat gets storm-tossed and with it David and with him all the really good adventure. After that, the poor lad re-teams with Alan as they cross this part of Scotland and that as fugitives. Not a lot of action. Just a lot of grunt marching and hiding, really. Enough to toy with 3 stars, even, but for all that, I never lost interest, so I'm sticking to the high 3.5.

If you're Scottish, you should definitely read this. Man, the old Scottish words are ubiquitous here, some defined by footnotes in this 1908 edition, some not. Speaking of, what a pleasure to read an old library edition still holding up thanks to the thick paper and solid binding (no glue, thank you). The many water stains and yellowing effect of time (not to mention the library smell of old paper and ink) made it worth the page-turning itself.

What confuses me is "David Balfour #1" in parentheses after the title. I guess RLS wrote sequels using this character, much the way Twain ruined Tom Sawyer by writing books like Tom Sawyer, Detective (God spare us).

In any event, I won't be going there. I know a thing or two about sequels--none of them very good things, either!