Rating: 1/5

One of Frank Miller’s great achievements. His ultimate samurai epic!! Everyone loves this graphic novel. I don’t quite understand that. I read every single letter in this book and I just can’t bring myself to like it. Too high with expectations? No. This story goes in a direction that if I’m being honest isn’t bad. That being said, a great story about strictly Japanese samurai. That is what I wanted and that’s not the book I get it. But the book, being called Ronin, BARLEY FOCUSES ON THE RONIN! No it focuses on this immeasurably boring-ass plot about some future Aquarius complex with about 50 characters I didn’t give a shit about. To be honest the Ronin is used so little I didn’t care about him! And whenever he is used it’s usually him mumbling the same word over and over and over. Whenever something cool happens it quickly cuts to the Aquarius biocircuitry bull shit where they ramble on and on and on and on and on and on and on and on and on and on and onnnnnnnnn about the future of the company, a subplot with an AI named Vergo, and a person named Billy who was born with no limbs. All the crap about the Aquarius company’s future plans and circuit science ultimately amounts to no part in the ending. So why Miller devoted so much time to that topic, I dunno. It was ssooo much less interesting than what happened in the beginning of the story. The beginning of the story does take place in Japan and focuses on Samurai’s and the Villain named Agat. A demon from hell. I will say I love the beginning of this story. But as soon as book 2 starts it becomes a boring wreck that I just wanted to get through. Let’s talk about the art. Again the beginning of the story. It’s some of Miller’s best art. I’m serious. The rest of the book? It’s pretty bad. Not Holy Terror bad but just lazy and messy as fuck. Especially the Aquarius complex, which is the most rushed-looking art in this book. I feel like I could have done a better job drawing the Aquarius complex. The book mostly takes place in a future New York that has gone to shit. The Ronin stumbling around and occasionally getting into bar fights was very annoying to see. I say occasionally because there is another subplot where some crazy psycho takes the Ronin in and plans to use him for show business. Showing the Ronin to his Nazi friends and talking about how the Ronin is going to be a star. This compared with my wants of this being an epic samurai tale just made me realize I was wasting my time. The title character was as relatable and developed a rock. Casey: the head of Aquarius security, while being an okay character makes a certain choice that made nooo sense to me. She betrays her morals and superiors with a single sex scene. For no reason. She claims she is in love. I say that’s bullshit. I didn’t buy anything about the romance although it being more entertaining than the Aquarius stuff. Not absolutely everything was disappointing not this book. There were two twists that I did appreciate. Unfortunately, they do not make up for the rest of the slog. The tagline for this book is “Honor never dies”. I understand why that is the tagline. But it just doesn’t fit. I wanted to love this story. After the horseshit that Miller has been writing lately, I wanted to like this so much. I couldn’t. It’s not for me. A Japanese samurai tale would have been tremendous and would not have left me disappointed and kind of broken. Letter Grade: (-D)