Rating: 2/5

“There was no yesterday, no tomorrow, only today, this room, this man, and love.”

After loving two of Candice Proctor’s Australian romance novels, Lauren’s and Anna’s reviews piqued my interest in this book by Connie Mason. It wasn’t available in Germany, but thanks to Gloria, who sent me a paperback copy from the U.S., I was finally able to read it. Thank you again for the generous gift, Gloria! I was so amazed when I held the book in my hands—the cover is absolutely stunning!

The story, alas, not so much. It reminded me once again that classic historical romance novels from the ‘80s and ‘90s aren’t really my cup of tea. The stories are just too absurd, the men are too dominant and the women are too naive and devoted. (That's probably realistic, but I still don't like reading it.)

Our FMC, Casey, is a 20-year-old Irish redhead, who was convicted of murdering a judge. Instead of being hanged, she was sentenced to transportation “because she was a beautiful woman.” Unfortunately, she has a knack for putting her foot in her mouth at every opportunity, and she can definitely be counted among the TSTL heroines. She regularly does exactly what she’ shouldn’t do in her situation, such as continuing to bathe naked in random ponds out in the wilderness with unwavering enthusiasm, only to be caught by nasty men. Repeatedly. She speaks when she should remain silent. She remains silent when she should speak. And when she does speak, she always talks to the wrong people and says the wrong things. 

However, her beauty and grace turn heads wherever she goes. All the men—old or young, land owner, soldier or bushranger—either want to rape her and/or marry her. The sole exception is Roy Penrod, a widowed farmer and sheep breeder. He rescues Casey from the claws of Lieutenant Potter (who—of course—also intends to rape her) and assigns her as a cook on his farm.

Roy’s son, MMC Dare, 29, does not follow in his father’s footsteps. A dashing guy and a ladies’ man, he “set more than one feminine heart aflutter, including Governor Bligh’s daughter, daughters of settlers, and female prisoners who avidly followed his passage”. Among his conquests are also his neighbor’s daughter, whom he is supposed to marry one day, and at least one convict house maid (who becomes a problem for Casey and them all due to envy and jealousy). After a brief period of hatred, he becomes consumed by a wild, uncontrollable passion for Casey. He makes a half-hearted attempt to fight it, but it doesn’t last long. Fortunately, his “sexual magnetism drew her deeper and deeper into the seductive web”, so there’s no need for rape.

Their first sexual encounter is still a bit awkward, because, despite being an alleged skilled lover and “no one can compare” with him and his lovemaking, he doesn’t even realize that she’s a virgin. “Mistaking her response for passion, Dare lunged strongly forward, burying his considerable length fully into her tight sheath.” Nevertheless, this attack marks the beginning of a great love.

Unfortunately, this love has to weather many adventures, including: various run-ins with bushrangers and near-rapes. Riots in Sydney. The rescue of an escaped convict, risking her own life and that of Robin (a friend of Dare’s, who also would like to marry Casey. Just like Dare’s brother, BTW.). Various jealous women who are keen on Dare and try to get him by any means necessary. Lies, betrayal, and blackmail. Corrupt judges. A forced marriage. A breakup out of pure selflessness. An escape to England. A baby. A benefactor. (I’m sure there was more, but it was so much that I forgot.)

Surprisingly, the writing isn’t bad. Despite being or bordering on purple prose, I liked it.

I absolutely didn’t like Mason’s tendency to retell the same events over and over again, which seems to be typical of her (as it was also the case with the only other book of hers I’ve read, To Love a Stranger). Everything we already know—because we were there when it happened!—is given thorough consideration later on and recounted to at least one person. It drove me crazy.

Overall, it was a tiresome experience and yet another example that romance novels from this era aren’t for me.

1.5