Rating: 4/5

Another interesting journey with Judge Dee and his entourage. This is the first book that Robert van Gulik wrote after he translated the original novel into English, and this one was actually published in Chinese and Japanese before it was released in the West.

In this book, Judge Dee has been assigned to a district on the western border of the empire. The new district has been usurped by a local wealthy landowner, who ran off the previous 2 magistrates. The town is cowed by him and his cronies, so Dee has an immediate crisis on his hands. The group is even ambushed outside the city walls! But, they make it inside and take possession of the tribunal, just in time to land a couple of puzzling cases - on top of dealing with the usurper.

There are really 2 main cases here (the third is a distant third in terms of importance to the plot): a disputed last will and testament of a former, well-known Governor, with clues seemingly hidden in a strange painted scroll, and the murder - forewarned by the murdered man's son - of a retired general, who was killed in a locked room. Several other cases come before the tribunal, including the search for the headman's missing daughter (case #3 according to the summary), showing an authentically messy, muddled state of affairs for the detective/prosecutor/judge and his team. And did I mention they are on the lawless western border, with an imminent barbarian threat?

As it turns out, the 3 main cases are all intertwined. The former Governor was obsessed with creating a hedge maze on his property (hence the title), and two of the cases are solved there. It's fairly gruesome, even before we get to the obligatory explicit descriptions of the executions of the criminals.

I think the author did a good job writing in the style of the old Chinese detective story. He has a postscript, where he gives original references to the plots that he used here. There is very little supernatural going on in this book, and I kinda missed that TBH. But this is just as readable as the first, and I definitely want to read more!