Rating: 4/5

The fourth and last of the Barnaby Ross/Drury Lane mysteries written by Manfred B. Lee and Frederic Dannay before they adopted a different joint pseudonym, Ellery Queen . . . the rest being, of course, history.

Not just fourth and last but, in my opinion, the best. The full flood of EQishness is here, from the gratuitous erudition to the overwriting-for-humorous-effect to the crime that's not just a mystery in terms of finding the perpetrator but in its very nature, its raison d'etre. Here that crime is the theft of a near unique Shakespearean volume from a swanky uptown museum/library, its disappearance being concealed through an even more valuable edition having been set in its place; not content with this philanthropy, the thief returns the stolen volume a few days later complete with a $100 bill to pay for the repairs to the minor damage the thief has done to the binding.

The unsubtle Inspector Thumm, his title an honorific because he left the NYPD years ago to become a PI, is drawn into the case when an old cop acquaintance, now working at the museum, is reported to have gone missing at the time of the theft. Really Thumm would prefer to be doing other, paying work, not to mention wrapping his head around the reason why a man in a manifestly false beard should have paid him handsomely just to stick a plain manilla envelope in his safe . . .

Also pulled into the case are Thumm's exceptionally intelligent daughter Patience -- a sort of prototype for Ellery -- and of course their old friend Drury Lane, the hugely acclaimed thespian forced to retire from the stage when a freak illness struck him deaf. There's ratiocination galore, there's adventure, there's romance as Patience discovers the merits of a youthful Shakespearan researcher she discovers at the museum, there's a delicious sort of pre-Code sensibility, there's finally a murder, and there's an extraordinarily twisty plot involving identical twins and Shakespearean memorabilia worth not just a small but a large fortune.

(The other mystery, of course, is why GoodReads has omitted the apostrophe from the book's title. It's Drury Lane's Last Case, of course.)

Thoroughly recommended.