Rating: 4/5

Kennedy becomes President. Ike talks JFK into keeping Felter as Couselor and promotes him to Lt Colonel. Felter gets involved with planning the Bay of Pigs. We get a new character in Lieutenant Ellis, a very young Spanish speaking half Puerto Rican who MacMillan picks up hitchhiking. MacMillan is in civilian clothes so Ellis finds out later who he is. MacMillan is promoted to Lt Col. They are both assigned to Special Forces at Ft Bragg. Ellis ends up leading an A Team into Cuba along with a Navy Lt Commander who is captured and killed. The Commander’s mission had been to find proof of Russian missile sites in Cuba. He succeeds and caches the evidence before he is captured, tortured and killed. Felter parachutes in to retrieve the evidence. He and the A Team are in dire shape as the Bay of Pigs invasion fails. Somehow Lowell gets wind of it, manages to find a sea plane and on his own flies to Cuba and rescues Felter, Ellis and the A Team. Lowell gets promoted to Lt Colonel. Parker finally gets promoted to Major after a black clerk in Pentagon personnel discovers that he is being blackballed and brings it to the attention of her boss. As the story progresses the Special Forces get heavily involved in inter Army politics and power struggles. Fortunately, JFK takes an interest in the Special Forces mission which Colonel Hanrahan is now in charge of. Parker volunteers for Special Forces so that puts most of our main characters in that milieu. We expect, at some point, that Craig Lowell will end up there as well. One of the affectations of this author is to print orders in detail with all the numbers, dates, headquarters details, etc. This gets a bit tedious at times and I expect were I reading the books instead of listening, that I would quickly skim over the headings and get to the meat. But our Audible reader, who does a great job, reads every word. As another reviewer on another book in this series points out, our reader makes a rookie mistake on one particular abbreviation by always pronouncing the letters—T, W, X. This is a pre-email form of military communication used to issues orders, etc. from higher headquarters. In the military it’s always used as a word—twix. As in, “Do you have that twix? Although I’ve noted before that I’m not at all “woke” I wonder why Griffen invariably refers to Felter as “the little Jew.” It gets a bit tiresome. If the reader has gotten to book 4 he knows that Felter is Jewish. Curiously, his Jewishness doesn’t seem to have any impact on his behavior or decisions. He is “little” in that he is small but not very Jewish. And, he is obviously one of the most important, impactful and courageous characters. That he is a “little Jew” seems his least important characteristic. On to Book 5 which will no doubt be more about Special Forces.