Rating: 5/5

It was the silence of the Gallipoli peninsula which most surprised and awed the survivors of the campaign who returned there after the war, the stillness of the cliffs and beaches where nothing much remained of the battle except the awful sight of the white bones of unburied soldiers and the rusting guns along the shore. Of the sunken battleships nothing was to be seen. 

Gallipoli, by Australian Alan Moorehead, is an engaging narrative history about the famous WW1 naval and land campaign. It took place on that sliver of geography between the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. The disastrous campaign was dreamt up by Churchill in the early months of the war — ostensibly to protect British interests in the Middle East by seizing the straights which would also free up Russia to wage war in the Balkans and on the Eastern front. Eleven months later the British led forces fled Gallipoli utterly humiliated. It was the last victory of any importance for the doomed Ottoman empire. 

Churchill, Lord Kitchener, the poet Rupert Brooke and the intriguing General Ian Hamilton are all found in the pages here. Enver Pasha, the enigmatic leader of the Young Turks, and Mustafa Kemal, who later became Kemal Atatürk the creator of modern Turkey, both figure prominently.

Supporting the British in Gallipoli were large Australian, French and New Zealand land forces. Of the 50,000 Australians who landed on the beaches at Anzac Cove and the other beachheads near Gallipoli nearly 10,000 soldiers and sailors died, a shockingly high casualty rate even by WW1 standards. Many infantry died right there in the trenches from sniper or artillery fire or from the occasionally ill-advised frontal assaults against the Turkish front lines. Many men also succumbed from dysentery and other related diseases.

Moorehead was just a young boy in Australia when the disaster in the Dardanelles unfolded. It is no surprise that the veterans who returned home from Gallipoli had a profound effect on him. Moorehead turned to writing and became a well known WW2 war correspondent and wrote this book some forty years later in 1956.

This book is written from a western perspective and while it makes note of the bravery of the Ottoman forces, the author’s sympathies clearly lie with the Allies. Secondly the maps in this book are inadequate so upon reading I regularly referenced Google maps to better understand the geography of western Turkey. It was a rewarding rabbit hole adventure in itself 

5 stars. So this was book #75 in my WW1 project, and is easily one of my favorites. Focused solely on the 11 month campaign the narrative is full of depth and insights. The chapters on the terror and warfare waged by both the British submarines and the German u-boats were riveting.