Rating: 5/5

This is the first popular maths book I ever read - and the one that persuaded me I wanted to be involved in the field of popular science. Just as the US publishers of Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone reckoned the US public couldn’t cope with the word ‘philosopher’ and changed the title, this was originally called Fermat’s Enigma in the US, but such is its longstanding acclaim it's ended up with the correct name there too. Crazy assumptions from publishers apart, it’s the superb story of a bizarre little problem that no one could solve until the ever-wily mathematician Fermat scribbled in a margin that he had a wonderful solution, only there wasn’t room to write it down.

Fermat may well have been boasting, but his marginal claim threw down a gauntlet to hundreds of mathematicians who were to follow in his footsteps and fail, until it was finally achieved in the 20th century. Don’t worry if the maths itself isn't of great interest to you – the story will, both in its historical context and in the insight into the work and nature of modern mathematicians - at least, relatively modern given the book is a good 25 years old now.

In some ways the star of the book is Andrew Wiles, the British mathematician who pretty well single-handedly cracked the problem with an unusual level of secrecy, rather than the typical sharing approach of the profession. But equally it’s Fermat himself.

Whether or not Fermat actually had a solution is a moot point – but he certainly didn’t have Wiles’ complex approach and it's entirely possible it was a boast that he could have fulfilled. It seems so difficult to come up with a straightforward solution to this problem that Fermat has to be more than a little doubted. The nature of Wiles' solution is such that many mathematicians struggled with it, and Singh can only really give us an impression of what was involved. Any attempt to give meaning to the 100 plus page proof requires mathematics that is beyond the casual reader, and it's probably fair to say that bringing any clarity to the nature of the proof is the weakest part of this book.

Like all the best popular science books – and this certainly is one of the best – it brings in a whole range of extras historically and mathematically to add to the fascinating cast. Singh's writing style is fluid and genial. He came from a TV background, and the book combines the accessibility of that genre with the ability to go into far more depth than a TV documentary can. It's a milestone in the development of the popular science genre.