Rating: 2/5

Re Let Fate Decide - Annabel Murray is coming to the end of her HP outings. AM's penultimate HP is about a 25 yr old antique dealer who falls into insta-lust with another antique dealer who is very reserved and emotionally unavailable. 

The h is fairly well off because her parents were big time scholars who died with lots of insurance and her grandparents left her a well to do antique shop. The H's big dark secret and his obvious resentment over her better financial status causes a lot of mistrust and confusion between them as the H continually leaps to the worst possible conclusion he can about every situation where there is a chance the h spoke to another person about him.

 As they continue to meet at various antiques auctions and sales, they start a big passionate affair with the h completely in thrall to the mighty lance of lust. Yet this H has no problems letting other people mock and trash the h when he talks about her with other people and he is remarkably insistent on not revealing ANYTHING about himself or his situation. 

For some reason the h keeps returning to the H even when continues to treat the h like a convenient pump and dump and the h's female family members are all ready to pimp her out no matter how badly he behaves. After many,many misunderstanding where the H rejects the h and she crawls back after her parasite family members encourage her to humiliate herself some more, the truth comes out.

The H was married to evil woman. His dying twin sister and his younger sister lived with them but the evil ex was horrible to them. H divorces the evil ex but there is tremendous wrangling over his money. The twin sister is desperately ill and H expended big buck in hopes of cure, but the situation is hopeless and essentially the H is waiting for the other half of himself to die. It was kinda creepy cause this H was seriously into his twin and yet never talked about her the whole book. But at no point was there any reason that all of this should be a big mystery.

 In fact the H never talks about anything significant the whole book. The one big revelation we get is that some paintings he outbid the h on at the start of the book are Constables and he will get a high price at auction. That is truly the only semi personal info the H EVER offers. Every bit of information the h finds out, including the big secret revelation at the end, is told to the h via other people and the h once again has to beg the H for another chance tho it was him who kicked her off. 

When all is revealed we achieve a nominal HEA which I have no faith in. The reason being is the h was okay, but the H lied, misdirected and jumped to conclusions with direct evidence to the contrary. He basically always assumed the worst of the h, even when it was clear she wasn't anything like his evil ex. 

He resents her for her wealth, even when she is more than willing to share everything and rely on his advice. He makes her crawl back to him numerous times, continually patronizes her and she laps this up like candy. When she has doubts about continuing the affair, her relatives bully her into it. There is absolutely no trust for the h in the H and I figure he will go off on a wild assumption and dump her in about 6 months or so after they marry and he will be getting a conveniently large divorce settlement in the process.

I just had no patience for this one. The H was a mess and nonredeemable, he was obviously into his twin way more than into the h except as a convenient cup to fill . Her continual chasing after him entirely due to enthralled lust was just too tacky and ewww for me to appreciate this HPlandia outing cause I just wasn't feelin any lurve.