Rating: 1/5

I want to begin by saying how I acquired this book. My 7th-grade son was approached by a strange child asking if he liked Harry Potter. My son answered yes, and was offered a “cool” Harry Potter book. This book. 

The very first page of the actual book opens with the quote “Any time the dark side of the supernatural world is presented as harmless or even imaginary, there is the danger that children will become curious and find too late that witchcraft is neither harmless nor imaginary.” Lindy Beam-Focus on the Family.

Because this book is supposed to represent the moral Christian community, it seems a bit silly that they actually believe that reading the Harry Potter series is going to turn our children into practicing, and somehow evil, witches and wizards. They can’t actually believe the world Rowling has created is real. Can they?

The book was written after the publication of Goblet of Fire. The first few chapters of the book address each installment of the series. Each is dissected and references to occult, Wicca, and paganism beliefs are brought to our attention. The distinction between magi”c” and magi”ck” are explored. “C” is merely sleight of hand used by stage performers and perfectly acceptable. “CK” is actually the manipulation of forces and energies and is definitely not acceptable. This manipulation can actually be attributed to Satan. WHAT?

After each of the first four volumes is deconstructed and analyzed, Abanese goes on to explain the differences between good Christian literature (Lewis, Tolkien, Carroll, etc.) and Rowling’s paganistic, and evil writings. Rowling’s wizards are human, whereas Tolkien’s wizards are not human at all. Tolkien’s represent good and evil “angels” or demons. Lewis’ good and evil are allegories for Christian beliefs, and their power is derived from the “One”, or God, and the “Other”, or Satan. THIS is the difference? Despite an entire chapter devoted to this idea, I can’t understand the distinction. They are both fantasy worlds conceived in the author’s imagination. The fact that two of the authors’ were practicing Christians, and one merely believes in God, makes no difference.

Abanese then goes on to lay the blame of 17-year-old Sean Sellers’ death sentence for three murders, on a love of Dungeons&amp;Dragons, which led to his Satan worshipping. Abanese admits Sellers was abandoned as a child, physically, mentally, and sexually abused, but still attributes his “fall from Grace” to occult influences and compares the dangers of Harry Potter to this situation. “Be warned, lest you be damned” or some such nonsense. This seems to me to be a blatant search for blame other than circumstances. Abanese states Sellers turned again, and again to Christian leaders for help and was turned away. I find it hard to believe a game led to his murderous actions, or that loving the world of Harry Potter will, if unchecked, lead our children down this same path of destruction.

I was compelled to read this, as I have never understood the arguments against Harry Potter. Now that I have, I have an even firmer belief in the advantages Rowlings worlds have given our children. The ability to differentiate between good and evil, right and wrong, fantasy and reality. She shows them loyalty, friendship, and love, and above all doing the right thing is not always the easy thing. It’s our job as parents to teach our children, but Rowling gives them examples on their terms, aimed at their interests and hearts. What a great starting place. We should thank her not only for getting them reading but for that.