Rating: 2/5

"Diane Smith's acclaimed novels feature strong heroines, memorable characters, surprising revelations from the natural sciences, and an original 0perspective on the American West. Set in 1876, right after the Battle of Little Big Horn, her new novel tells of Eleanor Peterson, a scientific illustrator in her late thirties, and her friend and mentor Augustus Starwood, an aging portrait painter with a passion for Shakespeare, who join a diverse band of adventurers heading west to Montana to work on a dinosaur fossil dig. Told through Eleanor's remembrances years later, the story recounts the experiences of this ambitious and at times contentious field crew, as they argue over prevailing theories of evolution, contend with rival scientists, and worry about Indians moving north after their defeat of Custer. A vivid portrait of both the natural environment and the issues and ideas of the time, Smith's novel is ultimately a story of personal discovery, revealing the redemptive power of the land and its rivers."
~~back cover

This is an odd little book, and doesn't much match the description given on the back cover. There wasn't any discussion of theories of evolution, only passing glances in conversation, and those were few and far between. The overall impression was that none of the field crew had much idea of what they were looking for, and indeed when they didn't recognize it when they found it. It was an assemblage of odd characters, mostly with unformulated notions of what they were doing. The crew seemed to be on its own, with little instruction from the Yale professor who organized the expedition.

The book is written in the form of letters from Eleanor to a curator at the Smithsonian, some 45 years after the expedition, giving her remembrances of the incidents portrayed in paintings done by Starwood while on the expedition. That literary form gives the book a disjointed feel, at least it did to me.

Perhaps I was disappointed in the book because I was expecting to read about a more organized, formal exploration into the period of time when dinosaur fossils were being discovered in America and changing the way people thought about the history of the earth.