Rating: 3/5

When I started reading these it was about the crew of ships, as seen through the eyes of a young officer. With time, he gets promoted, and promoted again and again, until there has to be more to it to reflect his new responsibilities. There is politics, there is romance. There is, in short, a bunch of stuff I didn't want to read in a Bolitho book... and that's okay. It's just not what I want. Based on this, I'm pretty sure that 1800s England basically required you to sleep with someone else's spouse, to destroy someone's career because you desire something of theirs, etc. And I'm just not here for that.

So, rather than continue to feel frustration every time I read one of these, I'm going to end here. Honestly, I should have stopped about 2/3 of the way through this one, when the title fit the book and Bolitho was either thought dead (an unexpected but still very appropriate way to go) or after his triumphant return. Looking ahead and at the wikipedia page, it seems like he's still got another 3 or 4 years from this book until he dies. Let me guess... he'll miss Kate and whine and moan about it, other men will be jealous of his relationship with her, society will continue to be scandalized by their relationship, Richard's wife will continue to be evil, Adam will keep raping Keen's wife until he's caught and there's a duel (and if you don't think it was rape, go back and re-read what happened after the first time), Miles will turn out to still be a crap human being after his experience being pressed, and there's no happily ever after for Allday with his inn-owner widow. That's my guess. And maybe everyone being miserable shits is period accurate, I don't know. I just miss the excitement and joy that a very decent human being Richard Bolitho had when he was younger.

There's like 4 more Richard books, and then another 4 or so Adam, and I just can't. So I'm going to stop now while I still feel fondly about the series, and maybe think about starting some other wooden sailing ship series in a year or so. Aubrey &amp; Maturin would probably still be the incredibly obvious one, but we'll see.