Rating: 5/5

Well that certainly took a turn. Not me crying over sentient robots in fiction AGAIN. She just wants to play music 🥺

Dreamships and Dreaming Metal Review

5/5 stars

This will be a spoiler free review. Onto the review!

I read this duology to fill one of the prompts on the r/fantasy bingo for 2024 (which went through the end of March, so you can see how behind I am on reviews oh no) and also because I had read and enjoyed The Master of Samar by the same author in 2023. If you’re curious to see what this author does with fantasy, I highly recommend giving The Master of Samar a try. It’s about this guy who inherits a mansion from his family in a Venetian inspired city, which may or may not be cursed. I loved that book.

So of course when I saw that I needed a book published in the 90s by an author who had something published in the last five years, I wanted to give her older sci-fi series a try. And I ended up loving these two books.

The first book follows Jian, a spaceship pilot. She and her two best friends get hired to help this woman navigate her brother’s ship to another planet to find her brother who went missing. At first, they’re skeptical about taking the job, because the ship was custom built, and they don’t know if it’s safe. They’re especially nervous about the AI system that would help them fly the ship, due to it being highly modified. Any mistakes in the code could cause them to crash into something.

They eventually do decide to take the job, mostly because the pay is really good. Once they’re on the ship, they realize just how much of this ship and its AI was custom made by this lady’s brother. The AI doesn’t just do its job. It follows everybody around, chatting as if it were a normal human. And there are a bunch of weird maze-like rooms on the ship that have been handcrafted by an artist. It unnerves Jian a little bit, because she’s used to ships just being machines for transport, not artistic statements.

There’s some talk about how back on their home planet, these people who belong to a political movement called Dreampeace are trying to get rights for AI, because they believe that someday a fully sentient AI will be created. But this group is at odds with the Coolie people who are a specific race of people that don’t have as many rights as everyone else. Coolie people are often deaf, and are often othered by non-Coolie people because of their differences. So it comes as a shock to them that the Dreampeace movement is trying to get AI rights when not even all humans have rights.

The super advanced AI on the custom ship almost feels like sentient AI to Jian, but she doesn’t want to get involved in all the drama and politics. The more she learns about the guy who made it and the ship, the more she thinks that their return home (potentially with him in tow) might cause huge issues on their home planet. Jian doesn’t know what this woman’s plans are once she finds her brother, nor does she know what the brother wants, since he was presumed dead for many years.

The first half of the first book is set on the ship, as they travel to retrieve the brother. The second half is back on their home planet, dealing with the fallout. Book two follows both Jian and two new characters as they navigate the political turmoil that started in the first book. The two new characters are a member of a new Coolie band that’s struggling to write their first full length album, and a woman who performs stage magic. I liked the perspectives that the new characters brought to the story, especially since Jian doesn’t want to have anything to do with politics. I especially liked having a Coolie perspective, because it really made that aspect of the story stand out as compared to the first book.

It was kind of weird seeing the old fashioned version of AI that people thought would be possible, where a computer would be able to gain sentience. Now that we have seen what AI actually looks like, what its limitations are, and what sorts of problems it can create, this almost felt like a fantasy we’ll never be able to achieve. Honestly, I would prefer sentient AI over the version of AI we’re getting in the real world right now, but there’s not much anyone can do about that.

One of my favorite things about this series is how much the author recognizes that we as readers really want to feel like we completely understand what the characters are experiencing on a sensory level. In the first book, we get to see Jian connect herself to the ship’s navigation system and experience what that’s like for her. And in the second book, we get to see the two creative characters working on their craft in real time.

I feel like that sort of sensory detail is something we’ve lost a little bit in fiction recently, likely because we aren’t experiencing things in that way as much as people were 30 years ago due to the rise of the internet. Rather than going outside and experiencing the world through our five senses, we’re instead going online and seeing the world that way. Writers today often talk about how easy it is to write pages and pages of dialogue, but the in-between details take far longer to figure out how to articulate on paper. Bring back writing sensory details into fiction! I’m so sick of reading books that feel like I’m reading a script for a play. If I want that, I’ll go watch a play at the theater, where they have elaborate costumes, sets, and music to make me feel engaged.

If you are looking for a great sci-fi series that will make you nostalgic for the big sci-fi and cyberpunk classics of the 80s and 90s, this is a great series to try. I honestly sort of feel like this is a better version of the kind of sci-fi tech integration with the human body than when I tried to read the original Ghost in the Shell manga a little while ago. Once I get around to reviewing that, you’ll immediately understand. Long story short, I may have potentially left an angry rant of a goodreads review because of one particular author’s note that made me dnf the entire thing. It was…bad. Extremely awful. So instead of reading that piece of garbage, read this duology instead! It’s so good! I loved these two books very much.

Have a nice day/night everyone!