Rating: 4/5

From what I can tell, during Japan's Heian Era (794-1185), there was hardly a dry sleeve, the many references to 'wet sleeves' being the known trope for tears. The same perpetual state of wetness seems to have held true for brushes; the constant writing and exchange of poems delivered by messengers must be one of the reasons Heian households needed so many retainers. 

The Gossamer Years is another nikki or diary of this age that begins with the seduction of the lady we will only know as 'the mother of Michitsuna' (referred to throughout her diary as 'the boy') she gives birth to after her marriage to 'the Prince' (Kaneie, 929-990 CE). He was a terrible philanderer and after the first sweet months or years, it is clear that she becomes bitter with the lonely life she is left to live awaiting his infrequent visits. Poems continue to be exchanged between the two but not any lingering love and very little affection. 

I have to confess that at the end of Book I, I was so impatient with the author, I wanted her to give up on the Prince and take a lover herself rather than spend a life of wet sleeves, but by Book II, I had become thoroughly engaged in the insights that both the lady's diary and its translater's helpful endnotes revealed about life during this period. "The most striking feature of aristocratic Heian life ... is its emphasis on good taste. Inaction, a word which seems to describe the tone of Heian life better than [any other], gave rise to a vast and minute cultivation of taste and form. Infinite care was devoted to the selection of an ensemble, to the composition of a letter, to the concocting of a new perfume." (p. 17) The most active events described are the required decorating of one's home for a multitude of holidays and Buddhist and secular celebrations (for example, laying irises on the roof of one's home on the Tango no Sekku, the fifth day of the fifth month), pilgrimages to temples, and the keeping of a long list of taboos and prohibitions regarding days when it was forbidden to do this or that, to travel in a given direction, to fast, to light ritual fires, to visit friends, or even to remain in one's own residence as it was the time when it would be occupied by an evil spirit. In fact, I highly recommend re-reading both Seidensticker's Introduction and his endnotes upon finishing the diary itself.

An interesting contrast are two other Heian tales. The first is usually referred to as the Ochikubo Monogatari, a novel where the suitor turned husband is a person of the most refined and honest qualities, faithful to the heroine alone. I read the translation by Whitehouse and Yanagisawa (The Tale of the Lady Ochikubo, but wish I had read the books in the reverse order with The Gossamer Years first as Seidensticker's endnotes provide very helpful information that would have made reading The Tale of the Lady Ochikubo more insightful. The other novel from the same period is the Sarashina Nikki, actually written by the niece of the author of the book translated as The Gossamer Years, which is also known as the Kagerō Nikki. Again, the translator's (Ivan Morris') Introduction and endnotes are critical and I would recommend reading this work as well before The Tale of the Lady Ochikubo. Having read all three, you must then read Ivan Morris' The World of the Shining Prince: Court Life in Ancient Japan. Only now (because you now understand that references to hollyhocks is code for 'meeting days' and references to autumn (aki) are pun allusions to aku with its meaning of 'to be weary of', etc.), should you reach for the ultimate Heian novel, the classic Tale of Genji by Lady Murasaki.