Rating: 4/5

We finally get Lord Delacourt's story. I was very excited to read this story since “A Woman Scorned” ended with Delacourt needing a parson. The story to this problem is a both amusing a horrifying. David Branthwaite, Viscount Delacourt, has just almost compromise a young lady and he is determined to make an honest woman of her. The whole prologue is amusing and sad. Sad because David’s salvation must wait until later in the book and funny because David is drunk, Cole is trying to calm things down and Jonet is right in the center of the whole mess. The prologue should snare any fan of historical romance and give new readers a fair idea of Ms. Carlyle’s writing style. David is that tortured hero we all know and love. He has a dark secret that he is afraid will get out and ruin his family, especially his mother. For all David’s reputation he is at his core an honorable, compassionate man that just needs to find someone that will love him for himself. Unfortunately, that person is Cecilia Lorimer and she won’t have anything to do with him.

Cecilia Lorimer is a little bit of a bitch in the first part of this book. Yes, she is young and inexperienced but she has little compassion or wisdom. I liked her much better after her and David are thrown together again at the mission. I was delighted to see Cole Amherst maneuver these two into the mission on a daily basis. Cole proves again that he has a clever mind and is acutely aware of those around him. Cecilia does give David a run for his money this second time around but she soon comes to realize that David isn't the man that she thought he was. As David takes charge at the mission and starts to investigate the murder of several of the woman living there Cecilia finds that he is a man that she could love. One of the problems with Cecilia is the she is just a tad impatient and she is impulsive. This is shown to full advantage when she confronts Bentham Rutledge.

When these two finally come together they burn up the pages. Ms. Carlyle doesn't put a lot of love scenes in her stories but the ones that come up well leave you looking for a fan. It was gratifying to see that Cecilia was just a wanton as David once they got together.

There are several returning characters from previous books in this story and one new character that will get his story in the very near future. I have already mentioned Bentham Rutledge, I can only hope that he will find someone to save him before it is too late. Both Jonet's sons are mentioned although Lord Robert is the one that is mentioned the most and he is the one in the most trouble. There is also mention of one of the Weyden boys, probably the oldest.

This is another finely crafted story but a very talented storyteller. Her characters are flawed, funny and courageous. This goes for the secondary characters as well as the main. The plot line is tight and move along without a lot of fluff and filler. Ms. Carlyle is a much buy author for me even after all these years.