Rating: 5/5

“We are only as strong as we are united, as weak as we are divided.”

The summer is dragging and Harry can't wait to join the Weasleys and Hermione at The Burrow and go with them to the International Quidditch Cup final. 

It's Harry's fourth year at Hogwarts school of Witchcraft and Wizardry. This year will be different to the previous ones, for Hogwarts will be hosting the Triwizard Tournament, a competition which hasn't been hosted for a century. A contest involving two other international magical schools and three dangerous tasks, only students of age are allowed to compete in. 

Harry is looking forward to watching the games and supporting whoever the Hogwarts champion is. What Harry doesn't expect is finding himself entangled in these dangerous events. 

For me this is where the story really picks up. The games, as well as the dark atmosphere make this book so compelling. You can't help but want to know what happens next and how Harry decides to face all the challenges that come at him. 

“If you want to know what a man's like, take a good look at how he treats his inferiors, not his equals.”

The introduction of foreign wizards/witches in this book sets this one apart from the others. I absolutely loved seeing how different they are to the usual British magical community. And the rivalry that is usually present at Hogwarts between the Houses is amped-up. 

I really felt for Harry. He faces hate from the other students for something he had no control over as well as being shunned by one of his best friends. I don't know how he deals with everything honestly. 

“It matters not what someone is born, but what they grow to be.”

Our trio are growing up. I loved those scenes with Harry and Ron struggling to communicate with girls 😂. Their sudden awareness of the female population was so sweet. 

I always associate this book with magical Christmas-sy vibes. It just felt a lot more enchanting than the previous books in this series. 

  “What’s comin’ will come, an’ we’ll meet it when it does.”

______
Buddy reading with Snape's brother 

 
______
My reviews for:

1:  Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone
2:  Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets
3: Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban