Rating: 4/5

This is the book that started my understanding of how PR works. I like Signorile better in retrospect. Here's what I wrote when I originally read it:

Understand this: if your children are straight they cannot be made gay, but they can be made into gay-bashers.

this was a fascinating read---not just because of signorile's sensationalist writing style that clearly shows why he's good at reaching the mass audience. it was published in 1993, when i was seven or eight and disconnected from any of the queer world. it's fascinating seeing the change from the more-radical-side-of-the-mainstream then to what i see in that more radical side of the mainstream now. it's particularly interesting to see talks of queer political and social change before the gay-marriage debate really got pulled to the forefront. it's also entertaining to see harry hay and the original mattachine so thoroughly snubbed---signorile names frank kameny the father of the gay rights movement and gives him huge props for starting the washington dc mattachine in response to the original in la, which kameny described as "very passive, very apologetic, very unassertive---they weren't doing anything." hay doesn't even get a mention, and the homophile movement is described in here by morris kight as "largely arch-conservative and…went under assumed names."

it's also interesting seeing this text as one from before everyone started tagging B and T to the end of every G and L acronym---the word 'bisexual' is printed in this book maybe 5 or 6 times (3 or 4 times because it's part of a group's name, twiceish as an identity someone came out as on the path to coming out as gay/lesbian, and once as an identity in signorile's own words---as an identity along with homosexuality owned by closeted people.) and the closest he comes to mentioning transfolk of any sort is in the form of a few notable transvestite icons---j edgar hoover, the killer in silence of the lambs, you get the idea.

i still think it's a worthwhile read, if only to get a feel for the manipulatability of the media and entertainment industry---although signorile says right from the start that to publicize ACT UP's FDA protest they publicized it as the biggest act of civil disobedience since the storming of the pentagon 20 years prior, knowing that that meant that was what the media would then give the public, which right away---along with the acknowledged high volume of unnamed sources due to the fact that this is about closets---makes it a difficult book to trust.