Rating: 3/5

Shaughnessy is a Hall of Fame baseball writer. He is also a curmudgeon with a pen. The coiner of the "Olde Towne Team" phrase has made a healthy living off of schadenfreude.

Since its initial publication in 1990, the Red Sox have broken "The Curse," and then some. A lot of people don't know about the big loan after the sale of The Babe to keep Fenway Park operating, however. If you believe in magic, David Ortiz has been Babe Ruth reincarnated. New England sports fans have been spoiled with bountiful championship parades.

Reflecting now, there is not nearly as much historical awe in professional baseball as there once was. Theo Epstein is a living God and breaker of two curses (plus we both had the same French teacher at BHS), but big money has taken over. Shaughnessy writes about the Red Sox failing to bounce back after winning a pennant. They almost pulled off the impossible in Saint Pete in 2008, but mark my words, "The Curse of David Price" will become the newest lore, unless I can do something to change it.

I am grateful to have lived and breathed an entire bearded 2013 World Series run (8 home playoff games) side by side with a die-hard who had his heart broken at Fenway in 1967. If that isn't enough to get me in the pearly gates, I surrender.

The two times I have crossed paths with Shaughnessy IRL have been at a bank in Newton (his hometown) and watching him trip on a crack in the curb at Gate D and eat shit sheer moments after I suggested the staff put a cone there so nobody gets hurt.

Both times I smiled.

Edit:

FINAL ADDENDUM:

From 2008-2017, David Price had a 2-8 record in the postseason with a 5.00+ ERA.

In 2018, "Astro's Dad" was being paid $30 MILLION ANNUALLY.

I purchased a custom Red Sox t-shirt (#24) with the words, "SNAKE OIL" on the back for under $30, including shipping and handling.

After losing his first postseason start of 2018 to the Yankees and giving up four earned runs to the Astros, I sent that shirt to David in the mail with a handwritten letter of encouragement. Besides members of the Red Sox organization, probably less than a dozen "normal" people actually know what I did because I mostly kept it to myself for a wicked long time.

David Price responded by pitching 3-0 with an ERA just under 1.43, playing arguably the most prolific and meaningful baseball of his entire career! The Red Sox won the 2018 World Series and we got the frigging Duck Boats!!

In 2019, David Price legitimately changed his uniform number from #24 to #10!!!