Rating: 4/5

Just as I remembered, the Molly Moon series is one big fever dream and this installment is no exception. In retrospect, I can see how these books shaped some of my humor and writing style preferences. Hear me out.. the immense detail and absolutely absurd (and at times problematic) scenarios remind of Anne Rice’s TVC. If you get it you get it.

I think my updates while reading outlined the craziest moments (though I failed to include  the time our villain (Cornelius) snuck into the house by swimming up through the pipes while holding a gun in his mouth.  I was crying laughing when he surfaced). The humor and high stakes were better than I remembered and a lot of nostalgic moments made me want to bump my rating up to a whopping 5 stars! However..

Some details and characterizations did rub me the wrong way:

1.  This book was published exactly two years after 9/11 and having Molly and Rocky disguise themselves as Muslim politicians to kidnap and potentially kill the U.S. president felt a little weird? I felt that the author was going for inclusivity more than anything but still.. I fear the orientalism will only be more intense in the next installment. I forget sometimes that the author is British.. 

2.  As in the first book, villains are made out to be fat and ugly. There are some good (side) characters who are fat and ugly but their appearances feel begrudgingly accepted. Maybe I’m out of touch with what’s excepted of children’s fiction but I’m tired of seeing character/morals tied up with someone’s appearance. Here especially, Cornelius is described as having a hooked nose and referred to as she-he because he dresses as a woman (while posing as his twin sister Lucy) to get close to children.. HELLO? Mrs. Byng I need to know your thoughts on bathroom laws right nowwwww!! 

Overall, I do love this book for all sorts of reasons (anti-consumerism, anti-Hollywood, found family) and the fact that parts of it don’t hold up doesn’t surprise me but does disappoint me a little. My crush on Rocky has waned, his vibes were just off 😭😭. Also, again, the dialogue is not believably spoken by 10 year olds. So, all things considered, 4 stars for now!