Rating: 4/5

In The World Split Open Ruth Rosen provides an overview of second wave feminism from the early sixties to the nineteen eighties, charting the rise of the Women’s Movement and its impact on American society. “Activists didn’t hurl tear gas canisters at the police, burn down buildings, or fight in the street,” Rosen notes, but it left a transformed world in which women had far more individual choices and collective prominence in government, law, business, medicine and culture. A veteran of the movement herself, Rosen’s narrative reflects the experiences and preoccupations of the middle and upper class women who were at its center. For these women, a key experience of the movement was one of awakening, as personal experiences and political views were recontextualized within a critique of the subordinate place of women in society. With The Feminine Mystique, Betty Friedan set the tone for an initial wave of activism when she asked middle class housewives to face “the problem that has no name,” a gnawing discontent arising from being confined to the claustrophobic dimensions a homemaker’s career and identity. Instead of accepting a life of endless housework and childrearing, Friedan urged women to embrace personal ambitions for self-fulfillment and equality in the workplace. Individual acts in defiance to women’s assigned social role, and collective political action to open up opportunities for women and enforce full social equality, would eventually be pithily summed up by Carol Hanisch in a saying that became synonymous with second wave feminism, “the personal is political.” 

Frustrated by the unresponsiveness toward women’s issues of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, created by the 1964 Civil Rights Act, Friedan and other women’s activists created the National Organization for Women in 1966 to advocate for greater equality. “By creating a feminist civil rights organization, NOW members did more than assert their independence from male-dominated liberal politics,” Rosen tells us, “they also freed themselves to consider the question of women’s rights from a more radical perspective.” As Friedan put it, “Everything was different . . .The problems looked different, the definition of the problems, the solutions sought, once we dared to judge our conditions as women by that simple standard, the hallmark of American democracy – equality, no more, no less.” Both an initial survey by Rosen of the position of women in society and a concluding tally of the achievements of the movement reveal the staying power of middle class preoccupations, focusing on college enrollment and education, and the number women working as doctors, lawyers, politicians and judges. 

Nevertheless, Rosen’s account is largely defined by the growing diversity of viewpoints and issues embraced by the expanding Women’s Movement. For many African American women “who had spent the last century holding together families, churches, and communities” learned helplessness was not a primary problem. For working class women who were already trying to pull along families financially, Friedan’s advice to find a meaningful career was obtuse.