Rating: 3/5

You know, if you've grown up around adults whose plainly virtuous lives have subconsciously bequeathed a living sense of morality into you, it can become for you a sense of the Japanese ideal of joriki - inner strength and independence.

So if you've been so positively infected, books like this can leave a sour taste in your gullet!

I read two famous novels in the Summer of 1971: this, and Thomas Wolfe’s Look Homeward Angel. 

Both were passionately written novels written by angst-driven, poor lost souls.

The first one I completed was Chatterley. 

A darkly impassioned, brooding work, one wishes repeatedly, during its endlessly extended panegyrics to the brute force of nature, for a breath of fresh air - a moment of unconsidered spontaneity, an escape to cooler and less feverish climes.

It’s as if Lawrence, and his dark antihero Mellors, are trying to punch their futile way out of a huge dark paper bag, but are so lost and weakened by their lonely self-centredness that the task has become Olympian and thus unattainable.

Lawrence, like so many we know, made his name - like Shakespeare - by playing to the Pit of the Fallen. A sure panacea for a Loner’s Angst. Shakespeare, though, later changed his ways with the restless questioning of his Middle Plays. 

And found Lasting Peace and Reconciliation with the Late Plays, like The Tempest.

And you know what else? 

I keep getting the feeling that Lawrence is trying to ground his Life in Passion. To find a foundation in it. You can’t do that.

For, as ancient Heraklitos said, “you can’t step into the same river twice.” In fact, you’ll be swept away by the wintry Void in old age - if you get there…

For “ash on an old man’s sleeve/ Is all the ash the burnt roses leave!”

It’s a losing game that leaves the bitter taste of burnt ash in one’s mouth. Give it up!

Open your windows!

Let in the fresh air and sunlight!

I had two maiden aunts where I first read Chatterley - at, of all places, their forever home in Victoria - Auntie Carmen (Aunt Crisp - as Dad wryly called her) and Aunt Wilhelmina.

Aunt Carmen, the dreamer, was aghast at my reading Chatterley, outré cause célèbre of her youth. Her more practical sister was not. She had quite possibly read it in her youth.

And I? Ever the Aspie Dreamer, I ended up loathing it, like Aunt Carmen. And I wonder if W.H. Auden was thinking of poor, depressive Lawrence when he wrote "never give a gun to a melancholic bore?"

Better days will always await the man that faces each new day with a smile on his face..

Quite unlike the perennial loner - grim, dour Mellors, Lawrence's doppelganger!

Maybe Mellors just needed a woman to clean up after him?

It’s just too bad Mellors and I hadn’t learned to stand up straight.

And you just have to wonder what good girls like the noble Lady Chatterley saw in his type!

Probably just common unbridled lust.