Rating: 5/5

Someone who I always picture smiling and perspiring, taking in a sequinned variety act of nimble gamines with squinting unease, the special talent of James was to approach mass entertainment in the spirit of acceptance - acknowledging genius where he found it, giving even the rubbish a fair go, but never allowing that sense of fairness to turn into blindness, always remembering to reconsider what he’d just seen; keeping his critical faculties intact, even when watching the weather forecast. Since there must be a scepticism even when reviewing light entertainment, a kind of critical method when when dealing with something as inconsequential as Pan’s People. 

It was a delicate balancing act, deceptively simple in the way only true deceit is. He saw that the only real way to interrogate something as apparently mindless as daytime television is by a kind of subterfuge, sneaking in a high brow reference under the cover of hapless larking. Anything else would have been too conspicuous. James had to smuggle in the big words by stealth, the grand allusions well between the margins, making sure not to attract attention to his considerable intellect, inadvertently making his readers feel dumb; and while it wasn’t perhaps as deserving as academia, there was arguably more skill in that subtle art of evasion than the heavy handedness that goes with extracting themes from Russian masterpieces, deep-rooted allusions from the works of Shakespeare, most of which have been brought to the surface many times before. In the end, it was far more challenging to write about David Bellamy than Fyodor Dostoevsky. Anyone can smash an idol to pieces. The art of gently taking a TV personality apart requires something else, something more like the light touch of a consummate light entertainer. 

But that James could be equally iconoclastic, tearing through themes, demolishing reputations, was evident too - at least for anyone who took the time to read his criticism in the Times Literary Supplement. Noticeably though, his more serious works (Cultural Amnesia; Cultural Cohesion) weren't quite so persuasive: the focused intensity and specialised inquiry that the literary review demanded rarely brought out his best. He was the consummate light entertainer, happiest when simplifying for novices, far better at setting the scene than decoding the scene already set on paper. Since for James, who we tend to forget was a poet by first calling, literature was too many steps removed from immediate experience to satisfy his essentially poetic instincts. He needed direct, instant, unadulterated input; even if it came from a boxy rectangle in the corner of the room, it was at least a view he could take in and interpret at his own leisure. 

To most of course, James known neither by his punditry or by the literary criticism. Nearly everyone knew him as a fixture of the small screen; a familiar tenant of the soft-furnished studio. Within the scope of his public persona, he was in many ways more lecturer than journalist, doing a good turn as a sort of brilliant but forgetful professor, equal parts ingenious and ginormous, expositing on images that may well have come from a compromised slide projector, given the things that flashed up on screen. Certainly, no one could accuse him of being a snob. There were Japanese crawling across beds of heaving cockroaches, sadhus doing theatrical things with snakes; traffic conductors singing in time to their semaphores on Roman piazzas, or James himself; wandering around dusty polyglot marketplaces, or otherwise being interrogated by towering, distressingly-dressed transvestites in Rio de Janeiro, all with that look of smiling unease that made him such an unmistakable presence, without ever detracting from the focus of the story.

Happily or not, the conventions of TV were what formed him, and the inbuilt prejudices and limitations of his second favourite medium carried him only as far as his audience would allow him, which was usually quite far enough. The rather dated content here suggests that he may have kept to the limits of that helpfully constrictive medium a little too doggedly. Most of the shows reviewed are long since forgotten, rendered obsolete by the drifting eye of taste; many, like the tantalising collaboration between Melvyn Bragg and Ken Russell, are now impossible to get hold of, lost to history, known only to their makers and those who manage the storeroom at the BFI. But James' brilliance was to conjure interest long after the fact, far past the point where the archivist would think to preserve. I don’t need to see Holocaust (BBC1) to appreciate the point about the aridity of the Nazi mind. I don’t need to watch an old episode of Panorama to get that producers too often steal their material from books when they could easily invent their own material, or that the Royals get far more attention than they really deserve. Some things never change; and even for the many things that do, James remains required reading.