Rating: 4/5

One of the things that I like about Goodreads is that it's more than just a bunch of book reviews. It's a location where book-lovers can exchange stories, discuss books, buy and sell books and simply go on and on about their favorite (and not so favorite) books. So please indulge me as I provide a longish backstory before actually getting into my review because that is part of the fun. To begin with please look at my bookshelves. You'll notice that one of them is labeled "seventies-classics". I was a child in the seventies (born in 1968) and both of my parents were (are for they are both still alive) readers. Mom liked classic dense novels, works about human behavior (Carl Jung et al) and the occasional "serious" work about the supernatural (Edgar Cayce,Dorothy Jane Roberts and so on). She encouraged my love of history and started my modest collection of historical works - many of which I still own. Thanks mom. 

Now dad provided the "men's action novel" section of my parent's library. My parents compliment each other. Mom is the intellectual with a couple different university diplomas. Dad is the Vietnam veteran and career police officer. He is an intelligent man, but a down-to earth man who enjoys reading espionage/action novels and Louis L'Amour westerns. As a boy I was drawn to dad's reading selections and one of my clearest memories are the hardback copies of Frederick Forsyth's first three novels on the shelves:  The Day of the Jackal, The Odessa File, The Dogs of War. Dad was a huge fan and even got mom to read the first two. My mother, the intellectual, found them to be "better than average genre novels" (mom sometimes slips). I read The Odessa File when I was ten years old. At the time it took some effort, but I finished it and enjoyed it tremendously. The Dogs of War followed a few years later. However I then followed with The Fourth Protocol and The Devil's Alternative ,a couple years afterwards, and I was disappointed. Forsyth's later novels are competent, but they lack the Cinema Verite  (no I don't care if I'm using that term loosely) of his first three novels which was the very thing that I liked. As a result I moved on to Tom Clancy's more muscular works and the twentieth century rolled into the twenty-first. 

A couple weeks ago my wife brought home a Franklin Library leather-bound edition of The Day of the Jackal which she found at the local Deseret Industries store (if you live where there are large numbers of Mormons you are familiar with "DI". Terrific secondhand store chain offering a great selection of used books among other things). It's such a pretty edition with leather cover, high quality paper, sewn-in bookmarker, silk moiré end pages and gilt edging. The best part is that my wife picked it up for only two dollars (United States)! On Ebay the leather bound editions sell for at least thirty dollars a piece so way to go honey. As I admired the high quality book I realized that I had never read Forsyth's debut novel. I had seen Fred Zinnemann's 1973 movie of course , but never read the novel. An oversight that I knew I would have to correct. I dare anyone who is a book lover to toss a high-end printing to the side without reading it - for the sheer sensual pleasure if nothing else. It's the equivalent of a classic car lover leaving a 1963 Jaguar XK-E Roadster in the garage and not driving it around the neighborhood on summer weekends......simply inconceivable!

So now that I have gone on and on without providing an actual review you're probably wondering what did I think about Mr. Forsyth's classic? Well I think it's a cracking good suspense novel. It is a forty-five year old novel so the technology and some of the techniques are dated. However that's all right because the novel is set in 1963 which moves it into the realm of historical fiction/secret history. The plot itself is not a complicated one. A professional assassin is hired by the OAS(OAS — or Organisation armée secrète, lit. "Organisation of the Secret Army" or "Secret Armed Organisation") to kill French President General Charles de Gaulle. The French learn of the plot and the race is on to stop the killer before he stops President de Gaulle . In 1963 the French government,and all of it's military and police branches, did not have computers, cell phones, satellite surveillance, DNA, thermal scanners, unmanned aerial drones or any of the other tools that are now used in the never-ending struggle against terrorists. The French authorities are also hampered by the President refusing to go into hiding as well as refusing to allow the news to be made public - which was so typical of that obstinate man. What they do have in their favor is manpower, organization and the French bureaucracy (yes you heard that right - red tape and endless paperwork makes a valuable contribution) on their side. The Jackal ,however, is a very smart man who is careful ,meticulous, motivated and lucky. The result is a race to the finish and I found it to be a very effective race even though we all know that de Gaulle died seven years later in 1970. This means that one starts the novel knowing that the plot is a failure, but it still pulls one into the story. That's an impressive piece of writing if you ask me. 

Day of the Jackal is an archetype of the modern "techno-thriller". Meticulously researched in which the characters function in our reality with all the drawbacks. Mistakes are made, people stumble and sometimes things move with an agonizing slowness. A former journalist Forsyth brought his skills to a novel, but he treated it like it was a research piece for a monthly news journal or a series in the  London Times . The result is that documentary "Cinema Verite " that I mentioned earlier. Other writers (Tom Clancy, Brad Thor, Jack Higgins etc.) have since pumped up the genre that Forsyth is one of the founders of and in many respects the genre has moved into James Bond territory only with lots of technical details. Younger readers will probably find Day of the Jackal to be dull with not enough action. The story is the action as it moves inexorably closer to the assassination attempt, but for the younger readers there is a definite lack of car chases, gunfights, thrilling escapes and an explosive climax. If one is curious as to how the story could be amped up see the 1997 movie version "The Jackal" with Bruce Willis and Sidney Poitier. Actually I like that version as well, but in terms of what it is and not what it isn't. I try not to get excited about movies straying from the source material.

There are weaknesses, but that is true of everything in this world. Forsyth is an excellent researcher and excels at establishing a very realistic and detailed setting in which his characters move through. However he isn't as strong when it comes the characters themselves. Forsyth will describe his characters with a few sentences and then moves on. Essentially his characters are cardboard cutouts with out the psychological depth that readers have come to expect in 2016. Actually ,in fairness to the older generation, many novelists were doing that back in 1971 as well, but remember that Forsyth was a journalist. Journalists don't spend much time writing about the psychology of a politician (usually). A few sentences about a president's background and then it's onto the meat of the story. Personally I didn't find the story hurt by the rather sparse character development. It's a suspense novel about a manhunt and not an in-depth character study. 

Well here I am with my concluding paragraph. What to write that hasn't already been written? I'm going to opt with the simple approach. It's a good novel. Give it a try.