Rating: 5/5

‘His life should not be like this. Other boys did not have to do as he did.’
  
 

of course a little backstory. everything described in the book is not just the fruit of the rich imagination of the author. Dreiser described a crime that actually happened in America in 1906. while working on the book, he carefully studied all the materials of the trial and visited the places involved in the case. he even visited a death row prison, where he interacted with convicts. this is probably why the novel seems so monstrously realistic, terrible in its truthfulness and frankness. Dreiser described in the book the circumstances of the tragedy on the lake and the subsequent process in such detail and carefully that you yourself seem to become a direct observer and simply cannot remain indifferent.

Clyde is like a 1900's spiderman. this is the kind of guy to whom things do not happen, but he happens to be in the middle of everything regardless. he is just there for the vibes. if Clyde had been a stronger person, how would the story have turned out? well, we also need to think about ethics, because it is ethical considerations that would determine where this hypothetical “strong” Clyde would put his efforts. would he plan a murder really carefully? would he find a willing doctor for an abortion? would he have broken up with Roberta? oh! or maybe he wouldn’t have paid attention to her at all, guided by the company’s rules?

  
    ‘Who were these people with money, and what had they done that they should enjoy so much luxury, where others as good seemingly as themselves had nothing? And wherein did these latter differ so greatly from the successful?’
  

in my frame of reference (which should not be trusted) the ideal option is an attempt to become a self-made man, a true realization of the american dream. carried away by the beautiful life, Clyde envies the rich heirs and somehow forgets that at the beginning of every dynasty of millionaires there is a simple dude from the folk who made a fortune from scratch. like cmon dude. this is America—the land of opportunity, where there is no hereditary aristocracy, but only people who didn't goof around and miss their chance. Clyde despises his parents cause they are poor af and couldn't give him an education. …okay, why not start learning yourself, it’s never too late erm what the flip? Clyde could even ask his rich ass uncle to enroll him in some courses in engineering or accounting. but his dream is not wealth through hard work, but a fortune that fell from the sky. he doesn't want to do anything for it and the thought doesn't even occur to him that he still needs to be worthy of an educated and rich girl from society. honestly, Jay Gatsby, whom i used to think was pathetic, is a thousand times more of a man than Clyde Griffiths.

  
    ‘Clyde had a soul that was not destined to grow up. He lacked decidedly that mental clarity and inner directing application that in so many permits them to sort out from the facts and avenues of life the particular thing or things that make for their direct advancement.’
  

and even more so, it doesn’t occur to him that there is such a thing as love. in relationships with women, he was guided at first by purely carnal attraction. Clyde is essentially a nonentity, just a handsome guy with good manners who knows how to keep himself in the world. 

well, to be fair, cowardice is not a crime. Clyde is an asshole who cannot even decide what exactly he needs and wants, like figure it out girl. but what he did to my girl Roberta…...

  
    'Please write me, Clyde, a long, cheery letter, even though you don't want to, and tell me all about how you have not thought of me once since I've been away or missed me at all— you used to, you know, and how you don't want me to come back and you can't possibly come up before two weeks from Saturday if then.'
  

 

according to the law back then, he is completely guilty; according to current laws, his act can be classified at least as leaving one in danger or as murder by negligence. Clyde has a direct path to the electric chair and i don't feel sorry for him one bit lol.

  
    ‘Clyde, if I could only die. That would solve all this. And I have prayed and prayed that I would lately, yes I have. For life does not mean as much to me now as when I first met you and you loved me. Oh, those happy days! If only things were different.’
  

the author’s attitude towards religion is also interesting. Dreiser never tires of referring to the inertia and dogmatism of religious people. one gets the feeling that poverty and religiosity go hand in hand and characterize limited, stupid people leading a completely bestial existence. the dilemma here is this: in terms of level of thinking and personality development, Clyde is undoubtedly superior to his parents and Roberta’s parents. on the other hand, a set of moral imperatives dictated by religion could protect him, or even give him strength, as happened with his mother. there is a strange thing with these tenets of faith: either narrow-mindedness entails increased religiosity, or vice versa. it turns out that intellectuality means a rejection of fundamentalism—Clyde hates religion with every fiber of his soul. independence of thinking does not guarantee that a person himself will be able to form a system of values ​​that will be ethically correct. 

at the end of the day, faith does not help Clyde cleanse himself and become a better person, it only gives him the opportunity to die without fear. he was a weak-willed rag and became a beast doomed to slaughter. in any case, religion guarantees its adherent everything in some posthumous reality and nothing now. everything comes down to some elusive sense of truth, which will allow a person to direct his efforts to a worthy goal. Clyde's dream turned into a tragedy not because he went against god in his heart, but because he himself had no idea what it was about—his dream. he imagined and even knew how to dream, but he could not understand that every dream needs to be achieved. Clyde confused a dream with a goal, and chose a goal that was not on par with his abilities. 

rip dreiser you would’ve loved therapy and reddit