this has always been my favorite of Robert Westall's books, but I didn't appreciate it in as much *wholeness*, reading on and off and knowing what was coming, as I did the first time I read it.

I have, happily, managed to put my hands on the review I wrote when I first read this book in 1992, and here 'tis. A bit long-winded and full of spoilers!

-------------------------

I'm on page 10 and I'm already in tears. That, I think, is a sign of great writing: because I don't yet know or understand this character, I don't know the people or things he's lost, but I've obviously sympathized/empathized with him so *instantly* that I can feel emotional about it all.

[Later] Very episodic. Harry is bombed out, loses his entire family, and rather than be taken in by smothering Cousin Elsie he strikes out on his own. Right in the beginning he meets a bombed-out dog who becomes his protector and closest companion. He begins by living under a boat on the beach at Newcastle for a few days, and eventually works his way up the coast to Lindisfarne--living hand to mouth, making it.

[After making a list of the book’s incidents] I discovered a very interesting thing. I was trying to remember a character’s name, and realized she doesn’t ever identify herself as anything but “the Mermaid”--her father’s old name for her. There is another character in the book who is actually named Merman. Both characters are after Harry’s affection, the touch of his youth, brightness, attention. The Mermaid’s “seduction” works in a different way from Merman’s (which is overtly sexual), but Harry does lift her up, eat her food, sleep in her bed wearing her son’s clothes. It’s like he’s always seduced by the sea--the sea creatures keep coming at him as he makes his way along the shore--and they’re always dangerous, and if he listens to the siren’s song he’s always on the verge of drowning, of getting in over his head.

Which happens *literally* on his way back from Lindisfarne (where he has a bad run-in with local kids and, in the absolute cold blood of necessity, deliberately and consciously breaks a kid’s ankle), when Harry’s caught by the tide, soaked to the skin, and ends up spending the night in a refuge tower in the middle of the flooded causeway.

And check this out--after his fight with the sea itself, which he wins (gets himself and his dog safe into the tower), it says: “The very air he breathed was full of salty spray, so that he breathed a mixture of air and water, half boy, half fish.”

He’s turned into a merman himself! And sure enough, the next character he ends up with--Mr. Murgatroyd--Harry asks directly, “Can I help?” Expecting seduction of some kind, but this time he’s prepared for it. And Mr. M. says, “Help? Help with what?” So Harry’s taken the offensive and offered his services--it turns out that what he’s needed for now is to be a substitute son--and Harry wins over the locals himself to work out the kinks in the plan. He ends up spending the rest of the summer there.

Mr. M wants to adopt him, so they go back to Newcastle to work things out--and discover that Harry’s family completely survived the bombing, but were tossed by the blast into the neighbor’s yard so the wardens thought they were a different family. You think this is a happy ending, the great reunion? There’s a twist.

Dad says, “A big lad like you, running away?”

Dulcie, the sister says, “And you weren’t even *scratched*…Cowardy cowardy custard.”

Harry thinks of “his whole kingdom, that he’d found himself, made for himself. And on the other side, these shabby angry bossy people… full of whining self-pity for what *they* had suffered. Narrow, narrow…”

So Mr. M. drives away with the dog and leaves Harry to his family, where he’ll have to “keep his own mouth shut, over all the years… before he got back to his kingdom by the sea.”

But you know he will, because he’s amphibious now--he can live in the water *or* on the land.

-------------------------------------

Reading this book again nearly 20 years later, I find the narrow-minded reception of his return to his family to be a little too forced. But it’s still a great book.

------------------------------------
Tori: Lindisfarne is Windy Isle--this book was my first encounter with the Northumbrian coast! And now I have climbed around in the WWII ruins where Harry hides out on the beach.