Rating: 4/5

A SUMMARY (AS OF 1967) OF RESEARCH INTO ESP AND PSI

Louisa Ella Rhine (1891-1983) was a doctor of botany and is best known for her work in parapsychology. In 1920, she married J.B. Rhine, a fellow graduate student, and they worked together in the Parapsychology Lab at Duke University (now succeeded by the Rhine Research Center).

She wrote in the first chapter of this 1967 book, “What is man? Is he a creature of ‘sense and mechanics’ only, or something more? The objective of this book is to call attention to the still almost unknown researches in the field of parapsychology because they bear on this ancient and important question… in the following chapters, the objective is to show as much as possible of the nature of ESP by tracing the process that produces it from its beginning to its end and … to indicate something of the kind of pioneer research that has been involved. To do so it is necessary to piece together the results of various experiments, each of which contributed its bit to understanding… The total effort is to show that the process by which ESP is produced does make sense; that it is part of the mind’s equipment, and therefore bears its testimony to the nature of man, just as much as his sense perception, his memory, reasoning ability, or any other of his mental characteristics do.” (Pg. 1, 6)

She states, “Once the occurrence of ESP was established, research in parapsychology can be said to have entered a new stage. Even though no sharp division can be traced, still it then became no longer necessary to perform experiments which would simply show that ESP occurred.” (Pg. 22)

She explains, “in parapsychology statisticians examine the results ... such that they are ‘mathematically significant.’ And because one can rely on the statisticians, it is possible in this presentation to minimize the statistical aspect. Interested mathematicians can always go to the original reports to find out what the exact values were.” (Pg. 49)

She cites the early Duke University tests of Linzmayer and Pearce, and comments, “However, these are only the results of two unusual early subjects at the Parapsychology Laboratory. Proof of clairvoyance only begins---not ends---with them.” (Pg. 79)

She explains, “[in the late 1930s] the problem of negative deviations was only beginning to be taken with seriousness… to an experimenter trying to get positive results, it was a frustrating outcome to get negative ones instead. However, if the negative trend was anticipated, it would be a different thing. Then it was a desired result and an experiment yielding it would be a successful one… [J.B.] Rhine had a fairly strong impression that negative scoring tended to occur when something in the situation bothered or upset the subject. He thought the reason the subjects had scored negatively in the precognition tests might be related to their attitudes toward those tests. Therefore, he planned the new test with them, expecting the negative scores.” (Pg. 88)

She recounts, “In order to avoid the monotony of card symbols [G.N.M. Tyrell] chose to go back to the old practice of using drawings for targets… he would have all of the target drawings different. Of course this was stepping backward into the use of ‘free material,’ but he thought he could overcome the drawback of not having any mathematical basis on which ‘chance’ could be reckoned. He decided to do it by an elaborate system of judging the results against a control set of drawings.” (Pg. 126)

She acknowledges, “Reports from individuals show personal variations ... over the complete range. The general suggestion is that each individual has his own range and that he probably remains true to type, but the difficulty is in knowing just what his type may be… This lack of unity in people’s reports of the forms of experiences they have had shows that in some cases at least the unconscious is not limited to using just one kind. This may be one reason experimental procedures can succeed; at the same time, the restriction of the form in experiments may be one reason they sometimes fail.” (Pg. 160)

She notes, “when PK seems to be related to human situations, the nature of the situation is not revealed by the occurrence. As message bearers, PK effects are the worst. Being so ineffective, they practically advertise the fact that they were not built for this job. The evidence suggests that, like hallucinations, these effects have a secondary origin, which quite possibly also is in connection with the origin of intuitions.” (Pg. 225)

She quotes an article by J.B. Rhine, in which he refers to ‘psi missing’ [e.g., guessing the card AFTER the ‘target’ card], and comments, “Over the years experimenters had been bothered by it, and often the successful repetition of many kinds of tests had been prevented when scoring would unexpectedly turn negative, for reasons too obscure to be identified. Now in this article the problem was dissected plainly even though its implications were not widely appreciated even then.” (Pg. 246)

She says, “Something of the stylized process of ESP in the laboratory is revealed by these effects; psi missing, differential selection of targets, reversals. They appear only in the laboratory, not in life experiences. No hint of them was given in the imperfect intuitive cases discussed in Chapter 11. Upon reflection, however, one can see it has to be this way, because actually a stage of the psi process is represented in the imperfections that show up in the laboratory, different from that which causes incompleteness in life experiences.” (Pg. 258-259)

She concludes, “This much the still incomplete discoveries of parapsychology show about man and his ‘destiny in the scheme of things.’ The fact that the psi process proves to be a real and lawful one guarantees the promise. It justifies the scientific method as applied to the age-old question, What is man with respect to the solid world of sense and mechanics? It enlivens the labor of discoveries still ahead, because the goal, to find out man’s full potential and his destiny, is the greatest man can have.” (Pg. 272)

This book will be of interest to those studying development of parapsychological research.