Rating: 2/5

I've been a devotée of John Updike's for a while now. Reading his Rabbit, Run was a "come to Jesus" experience for me. So profound was his impact, I became an Updike-ian fundamentalist, eager to spread his Good News.

So you'll understand when I tell you I was seated in the first pew, with much love for this author, and an open heart with which to receive his message.

Imagine my dismay though, reading this 1974 novel in which Reverend Tom Marshall is sent away to naughty-priest-camp for making the rounds in his parish with his er, holy sceptre, and finding that I... didn't like it. Whaaaaa???

It was so promising! It features a philandering man of the cloth. It examines the phallic game of golf (which is, I can confirm, as interesting to read about as it is to watch on television). It's written by one of last century's brilliant scribes. How could it go wrong? Well, I'll tell you.

As I mentioned earlier, Tom is sent away for being a bad, bad Reverend. Having sex with the ladies in his congregation isn't quite what the church deacons deem acceptable behaviour. So he's off on a month long sabbatical of sorts, in which he receives no real punishment or therapy. He plays golf, poker, and uses a typewriter to write his version of how he got into this predicament. 

Doesn't sound too bad to you? Well, Reverend Tom is a truly despicable ass, and we never get a break from him, not for one page. When he's at his best, he's describing his two-timing shenanigans. At his worst, he's delivering one sermon after the next, twisting Biblical passages to suit his belief that humanity's natural state is that of adultery. He does this using the most pretentious, decadent language possible, practically forcing my eyes to glaze over, to skim paragraphs. Making it impossible for me NOT to huff and shake my head.

I huff not because I take exception to his behaviour, or because I feel offended by his warped "religion". No, it's just because it's all so damn self indulgent. Self indulgent and... boring. We all know Updike was preoccupied with the extra-marital state. We know he couldn't reconcile his stubborn WASP-ish identity with a sexuality that could not be tamed, and this conflict rears its ugly head over and over in his books. It worked really well for me in Marry Me and the Rabbit tetralogy, only tepidly so in Couples. 

But here? Reading this was like being witness to John Updike orating in the pulpit, shoving his rhetoric down our throats, expecting us to shout "AMEN" and then afterwards tear off his robes and kneel before him in the vestry.

Not me, not this time. Sorry, Mr. Updike. I haven’t lost faith, but as it turns out, I really don’t like being preached at.