Rating: 4/5

3.75 stars overall

The Call of the Wild: 4 stars

White Fang: 3.75 stars

Short Stories: 3.5

The Sea Wolf: 5

Two Tales of the Klondike: 2.5

It took me forever to finish this, about 4 months, but I finally got through it. I was going to rate each short story collection individually, but at this point they've all flowed together for me, and I think the ratings would have been about the same anyway, so I've lumped them together.

I enjoyed this, or at least parts of it. I admit I have previously read The Call of the Wild and White Fang, but the rest of this was new to me. That being said, I don't think I would ever reread this collection again in its entirety, since the short stories make up the bulk of it, and I just found those to be okay. I already own the three novels as separate ebooks, so I would just read those if I wanted to reread them.

I did have some issues with the content, especially with many of the short stories and the way native peoples and women are described, as there were a lot of stereotypes involved. With descriptions of native peoples, there was a general attitude of white superiority, and it was outright stated at least once in one of the stories. I also felt that the depictions within the stories might be inaccurate, given this and the fact these stories were written by a white man who likely did no research prior to writing them. I also take issue with how women were generally portrayed. They are referred to as weakling women a few times, and Maud, a character in The Sea Wolf, is referred to as lily-frail. I understand that this was a product of the time in which this was written, but it was too pervasive throughout the stories to ignore. 

Spoilers

I had thought The Call of the Wild would remain my favorite of London's works, but I was proved wrong by The Sea Wolf. It was so captivating that I'm surprised London is known more for the other two novels than this one. Wolf Larsen was an interesting and contrary character. Well-read, but had little formal education. He could be philosophical, but also cynical. He was intelligent, calculating, and cruel, especially in the incident with Leach and Johnson. The story got a bit less interesting when Humphrey and Maud escaped from the Ghost, but the excitement renewed when the Ghost reappeared. In the end, I found myself actually feeling bad for Larsen and a little teary, because it was a pretty terrible way to go, to still be "in there" and alert, but unable to interact with the world. I think this is certainly one of the stories that will stick with me, and I definitely plan on rereading it at some point.