Rating: 4/5

Charlotte Lamb absolutely fascinates me as a writer because a not insignificant portion of the time she doesn't seem to really be writing romance novels. Case in point: this book. It's a love story of sorts but it's not a romance novel. The hero is overbearing verging on violent - not atypical for a Lamb hero - but the heroine gives as good as she gets, and genuinely dislikes him. When he first kisses her against her will it's a thoroughly unpleasant experience ("probably the single least enjoyable experience in her life") and definitely intended as punishment rather than romance; Niall is a man with serious anger and control issues. Lamb is certainly aware of this since she spends half the time psychoanalyzing her characters - Niall's younger sister has attempted to elope with Susanna's younger brother, and Susanna is really, and realistically, concerned about whether either of them is mature enough to actually be in love - and while we do eventually get a revelation as to where they come from (mommy issues, surprise surprise) it happens close enough to the end of the book that the reader isn't really sure whether it's a resolution or just an acknowledgment. 

And speaking of the end of the book, the vast majority of the book is Susanna noodling around living her life, worrying over her brother, occasionally intersecting with the hero in a variety of ways (sometimes coincidentally, then later at his instigation). At the end of the book, he's finally made his romantic and sexual interest clear, she's insisted that she's not interested in marriage because her work is important to her, he's acknowledged that - "I have a housekeeper, I'm not asking you to take her job, nor would I dream of suggesting you give up your work. I'll often have to go away on business myself, I'll be at my office all day when I'm in London - what on earth do you think I'm asking you to do, go into purdah? You have a weird idea of love; haven't you ever had a love affair before?" Setting aside the (fantastic) implication that they're not actually going to get married and settle into domesticity, Niall and Susanna clash - a lot. They're in love but they've only just acknowledged it. There's a lot of passion but do either of them have the maturity to make a serious relationship work? I don't know. And never will, because that's right where the book ends.