Rating: 5/5

The Manchurian Candidate is a novel about conditioning, control and manipulation - and brilliantly explores all these topics. It's concise, well written and one of those brilliant books that you have to read with a straight face because you can't decide whether to laugh or grimace.

Sergeant Raymond Shaw and his fellow G.I.'s have been captured in Korea, where they have been brainwashed by the mysterious chinese doctor Yen Lo. Chinese and Russian scientists select Raymond to be a "sleeper" agent, make him kill two other troops and brainwash them all to believe that Raymond is responsible for rescuing the rest from an ambush, for which he receives the utmost reward in American military - The Medal of Honor.
After the group returns to the States major Marco starts having nightmares where he stands in front of chinese and soviet officials, while Raymond picks up the telephone and listens to the voice which suggests passing time by playing a little solitaire...

Despite being written over half a century ago The Manchurian Candidate is as entertaining as it was in the fifties. Richard Condon's eccentric style is exquisite - his eccentric use of irony is perfect for the paranoid story he is telling. None of the characters can be described as likeable - each of them has some traits that wouldn't propably make you spend time with their company...especially with mr. Iselin, a commie-hating senator obviously modeled after Joseph McCarthy. But the real gem is his wife who also happens to be Raymond's mother - Mrs. Iselin. She's quite possibly one of the most loathsome villains in fiction - and at the same time one of the most desirable. Condon doesn't spend much space describing her looks - the reader gets to know Ms. Iselin as perfection embodied. The paragraph where he describes her legs is almost nauseatingly arousing - you loathe and despise that woman but you can't help yourself and want her at the same time, because of her allure and devilish mind, helpless like moths flying into the fire, blind to knowledge that the encounter will ultimately lead into your demise, willing to any sacrifice in exchange for only a brief taste of the flame. Brilliant, brilliant absolutely brilliant. The ultimate Femme Fatale.

Richard Condon doesn't try to hide his cynism, but he was that guy who knew that the everything was essentialy shit but the fact didn't stop him from making fun of it. The Manchurian Candidate is, to quote the introduction, "a banana overriped to the point of blackness". It was described as "pulp" if it's pulp, it's Great Pulp. The fact that it's considered as not literary allowed Condon to brilliantly balance between thriller and camp in weird, drunk prose. Practically unfilmable, The Manchurian Candidate is a great, satysfying read. Go get it.