Rating: 3/5

This book consists of two separate publications. The first, called To Ride Pegasus is from 1973 (with two sections of it dating to earlier publications in 1969). The second, called Pegasus in Flight is from 1990. The stories together show a founding history and then a later generation of a commune/community/union of people with psychic "Talents". In terms of overall story line, the later book was, in my mind, the better story as the conflict has multiple layers to it of both personal events and politics. The first book, although tied together, still has a feeling of separate stories conjoined and it seems to focus more heavily on the political side of things.

Enjoyable reads. But...

1. I don't find the use of Pegasus in the titles and as referenced in the stories apt at all.
2. This has an awful lot of the Heinlein style of granting the central characters superhuman abilities--they have a huge amount of money, they are brilliant, and they have powers. The good intentions of the key characters seem to overcome many of the problems of how people behave badly in ways that are lacking any depth.
3. It is interesting to juxtapose this story line with the X-Men comics. Although both the comics and these novels just indicate that these powers appear (no real explanation or science behind their rise) the Pegasus books stick with the Superman style of a socially embedded morality of doing good in the world, whereas the X-Men deal constantly with the flaws of their characters. The Pegasus books propose that the Talents themselves are used to resolve psychological problems and seem to have an underlying thesis that humans are "good" especially if all the bad psychology has been fixed. Both X-Men and the Pegasus stories work extensively with the "outsider" and "frightenly strange" aspects of people with powers/talents. On a larger scale, one always wonders whether these societies would become dominating powers of their cultures with extreme dictatorships and fascist tendencies, wiping out the normals/untalented and those considered bad-seeds.