Rating: 4/5

Packed full of thrills, Robert Louis Stevenson’s Kidnapped is everything an action adventure should be. From its opening when we first meet the protagonist, newly orphaned 17 year old David Balfour, the action comes at us thick and fast. A nefarious uncle attempts to trick him to his death to rob him of his inheritance. He is kidnapped by an unscrupulous ship’s captain to be transported to the Carolinas and sold into slavery. A swashbuckling castaway, the only survivor from a vessel run down by the ship, is menaced by the captain and crew, and young David allies with him in a pitched battle with the whole lot of them. He is lost overboard as the ship cracks up and sinks along the coast. He is stranded on a rocky, coastal island. And that’s all just the opening act before the book’s primary adventure begins. 

The bulk of the story in Kidnapped is a buddy road adventure, as our clever protagonist David teams up with a fugitive Jacobite swashbuckler and the two furtively trek across much of the Scottish highlands in the chaotic wake of the failed 1745 Jacobite Uprising. The two make an odd pair. David, is a lowland Scott raised as a Whig. He’s clever, but an untried youth. His companion, Alan Breck Steward is a proud Highlander soldier who fought in the Jacobite uprising. Exiled to France after that doomed conflict, he is now a secret agent in service to the King of France and the exiled clan chief there. The chemistry between this mismatched pair is the heart of the story, as they attempt to navigate through the dangerous highlands back to the relative safety of Edinburgh where David can attempt to gain his inheritance. 

But Kidnapped is more than just an excellent boy’s adventure. It’s also a fascinating historical fiction. Set in 1751 Scotland, the book accurately portrays the chaos and despair of the Scottish highlands after the failed 1745 uprising, during a time when the English Crown was attempting to break the spirit of the highland clans. Alan Breck Stewart, David’s companion, was an actual historical personage, as was James of the Glen and other characters the pair encounter during their highland trek. The assassination that the pair witness (and are accused of committing) was an actual event of some note, known as the Appin Murder. A statue of the real Allen Breck side by side with the fictional David Balfour now stands in Edinburgh, a testament to what powerful historical fiction Stevenson’s book is.