Rating: 4/5

With this review, I'm officially stepping away from Anne McCaffrey's Pern series. Though there are still a few more books in the series, they are all co-written and completely written by McCaffrey's children, and I haven't seen enough to make me want to keep going past this point. SKIES OF PERN was the last novel McCaffrey wrote herself, but this collection of stories was the last book she published herself. 

A GIFT OF DRAGONS is actually republishing old material for the most part; three of the four stories were published throughout McCaffrey's career, with the last one being a new original story to help drive interest. I'll mention each one here:

THE SMALLEST DRAGONBOY: First published in 1973. A young dragon candidate of very short stature is routinely teased for his height, and some wonder if he will be able to fly a dragon successfully. His determination, however, drives him to Impression despite multiple obstacles. Very short but sweet, stories of people getting their dragons are always joyful and happy, and this one is no exception.

THE GIRL WHO HEARD DRAGONS: First published in 1986, and featured in a general collection of Anne McCaffrey's work. Taking place during RENEGADES OF PERN, it follows Aramina, a girl with the rare ability to "hear" the telepathic voices of dragons, usually only reserved for their riders. Her ability makes her a desireable asset for the bandit queen Thella, and Aramina must flee with her family to avoid being pressed into the cruel criminal's service. A bit of an odd story, since it really seems to imply that Aramina will become a rider; in RENEGADES, she is abducted from the Weyr's custody, saved by the trader Jaxom, and ends up fleeing to the Southern Continent so she can avoid both Thella and the hearing of dragons in the sky. I'm not sure why McCaffrey changed up the outcome for this character so much, but it is interesting to see how things can change in just a few years.

RUNNER OF PERN: A lovely story that expounds upon the foot-runner system of the Northern Continent. The runner system is a postal service for all the Holds, and is constantly staffed by athletic runners who have travelling down to a science. RUNNER follows Tenna, a born-and-bred runner who is making her first Cross of the continent.This story has it all: romance, excitement, dancing, logistical info on a fictional public service. I enjoyed it immensely, and found it to be reminiscent of the Harper Hall books (the best books in the Dragonriders series, btw).

EVER THE TWAIN: A sweet but largely inessential story about twins, one who wants to be a dragonrider and the other who wants her twin to be a dragonrider. It's a nice story, but very little happens that feels important or interesting. McCaffrey seems pretty done by this point.

All in all, a very enjoyable collection, and a solid way to wrap up my dive into the Dragonriders of Pern!