Rating: 4/5

I picked up this book because I had been interested in learning more about the progression and variety of cultural attitudes toward sex. It took a little while to find a book that seemed to be at least somewhat scholarly and not written provocatively. I was pleasantly surprised that this book delivered so much more than that. 

First, I have never read anything that made me so thankful for my current historical context. As a woman, and as someone raised in a fundamental Christian context, it is easy to dwell on current injustices and inequalities and feel frustrated. It is easy to look backward and be angry at the failures and abuses of those who have gone before. But there is also so much to be thankful for in the imperfect and tangled thread of history, and much good in the current moment that was hard-won and long fought for, however entangled those victories are with further imperfections. Life, and history, is a mess. There's no sidestepping that, and this book does not try to. 

This book is about sex is the very broadest terms. The predominant scope of the book concerns the social and political dynamics as concerns gender and gender roles. It is not simply about sex in history, but about how sex has impacted and influenced history. Most surprising to me in this aspect of the book was how much I -- remember, raised in fundamentalist purity culture -- came to understand and deeply appreciate the American women's lib movement. Whether or not I agree with everything or everyone in it, I am a grateful recipient of the outcomes. The exploration in the book of the women's suffrage movement as well helped me to understand that the impacts of that reach far beyond me simply being able to cast a vote, but impacts the way women in general are perceived in a much broader context. The reverberations extend from there as well. 

Though the author reports on and comments on many world religions, she equally disrespects them all. Not in a crass or up-front way; she merely does not give any of them any credit beyond human constructions. Ironically, I found that this treatment specifically of certain biblical passages worked against her bias. Her detailed and uncensored explanation of the sexual culture of the first century Greek culture, for example, puts Paul's words in a different context than I had heard before, and I could finally see how those passages actually were radically liberating for women and evident of God's love and design. There were many other instances where I was able to appreciate other portions of Scripture more through the context provided in the book. Even the sections about the early Church fathers and their "sex is sinful" teachings, within the historical context provided in the book, were more understandable -- still wrong, but I could see how they were overreacting to a deeply lewd culture that they had previously reveled in. They were probably poorly dealing with a great deal of shame and guilt in the midst of it as well. They didn't have the option of going to therapy to deal with their startling life changes and learn to express their feelings. They blundered through imperfectly. And it started to make more sense, as she worked through the centuries, how the purity culture I was raised in came to be. And that, even, is messy. It's not as simple as people wanting to control other people. We all are born into established and evolving systems of thought and behavior, and each age leaves its mark. The fundamental church of the nineties was imperfectly working within an inherited system, just like every iteration of every culture has been. Very few, if any, have been all bad or all good. I was encouraged to read about Martin Luther and John Calvin and their intellectual courage to speak against not just faulty doctrines of salvation but also faulty perspectives of marriage and sex. I had never known that before! Again, the book does not sidestep the fact that history is messy. Some of the terrible atrocities of secular and religious systems happened because people were evil, and others because they were well-intentioned but deeply wrong or flawed. And some people were different things at different times. And this is what the Bible teaches -- we are all sinners. None of us escape error. This book highlights that for sure. Yet at the same time, there is an overarching sense of betterment, though certainly not in linear way, and sadly not equally throughout the world. As I said -- this book made me deeply appreciate my current cultural context.

At times the chronology was a little difficult to track with as the book is divided into different cultural areas throughout a segmented chronology, but overall I thought it was well-written. The different errors I could notice in some of the scholarship about biblical issues did make me wonder if other similar misrepresentations existed elsewhere. But, in sum, it was a good read that was more than I bargained for in good ways.