Rating: 5/5

This was a part of my sophomore son’s literature homeschooling.   We read _What Hearts_ , also written by Bruce Brooks, last year for homeschool, and I had given that book a lukewarm review. But I am not giving this book a lukewarm review.  

I thought this book was great. Truly. Very well written, with an excellent and realistic protagonist. The prose was delightful. Told in first person point of view, with a strong voice and a mix of humor and wit that works well in the face of very tough content such as racism and serious family dysfunction and issues. 

Jerome Foxworthy is the protagonist and he is likable and funny, smart and cool. A Black boy growing up in a single parent home, he is well adjusted and happy. Basketball is his passion, and he spends much of days and time working on his game, his “moves,” which become a huge theme in the book.

He is the smartest kid in his school, well liked but has no best friend, which doesn’t bother him much. But then he learns that for the next school year, the city has rezoned the area in his neighborhood and now he would be attending the local white school, making him the only Black student there. 

Through a series of events, he becomes friends with Bix, who, he learns has numerous issues of his own. That is probably the most I really think I can say without getting into too many spoilers.

There is so much to like in this book. The writing is so realistic—readers really feel like they are in Jerome’s head and we get to know him pretty well. He has a sarcastic streak to him, but it is a funny sort of sarcasm and not a mean one. He handles himself pretty well, especially the discrimination that he encounters—and he encounters not just racism but classism. We experience his emotions, and he is very eloquent, in his junior high, teenage way, in describing how he feels. I found myself really liking this kid—he comes alive within the pages of this book and you really want to be his friend. 

Some of the events are a bit strange and odd, which is what makes me drop half a star. Even knowing that the setting is in the 1960s or maybe 1970s, some things just are weird. I do sometimes have issues when plot details are inconsistent, but this is not the case here. It is just that there are some events that happened that I just didn’t understand exactly what they were. 

But all in all, a really enjoyable book. I’m going to give it 5 stars because I can’t do half stars, and I enjoyed it so much I can’t give it only 4 stars. Recommended for anyone who wants to read a good book.  

I have both the print copy and the audiobook version of this book and listened while I read along. The reader for the audiobook added to the appeal of the book for me, but I had to move it to 1.5x speed because he was a touch too slow in his reading. But the audiobook is really fun, and helped make the character come alive. Loved all the nuances and tones.

Warning: this book is set in the 60s or 70s and there is widespread use of the N word.