Rating: 4/5

According to one of the other books I've read on Gallipoli, Moorehead's is supposed to the the best at that time. I've heard since that he missed some things, got a few just a little off but that this is still the "go to" book for an overview of the battle(s).

The invasion of Gallipoli was based on the success that the British Navy had in advancing to Constantinople. Although they lost several ships and discovered mines that made them turn back, the Government, especially Winston Churchill, thought that an assault on the pennisula would allow the navy to advance and capture the city. However, no one really looked at what they were getting into. 

First of all, the pennisula is mostly mountains or rocky cliffs, especially close to the beaches. Therefore, any landing sites would be small stretches of sand that stood a good chance of being bombarded by the Turks as they landed. (The experience here, however, gave enough information about such assaults that the Normandy invasion, using it, was successful.) Second, one assault team was made up entirely of volunteer Australians who had never fought before so were an unknown quantity. Third, no one could determine the true status of the Turkish army. And lastly, most of the commanders were dunces - some were pulled out of retirement and never visited their troops to see the conditions they were fighting under.

Moorehead gives a lot of detail which I wasn't interested in - such as the type, size and number of sailors on specific ships - but the book kept me interested. I had to read it in stages, however, to be able to digest all the implications and information.

Two parts especially stand out. A British submariner managed to get through the nets, mines and strange water conditions (hard to explain) and actually cruise around the waters near Constantinople and sink many ships. He put the fear of the British into the Turks. His success enabled the British to send more subs into that area.

Also it's obvious that Moorehead loved the Australians. Volunteers who had never seen the violence of war turned out to be the best soldiers. When fighting was sparse or at a standstill, they calmly remained in camp and waited for orders. As Moorehead says

"No stranger visiting the Anzac bridgehead ever failed to be moved and stimulated by it. It was a thing so wildly out of life, so dangerous, so high-spirited, such a grotesque and theatrical setting and yet reduced to such a calm and almost matter-of-fact routine. The heart missed a beat when one approached the ramshackle jetty on the beach for the Turkish shells were constantly falling there, and it hardly seemed that anyone could survive. Yet once ashore a curious sense of heightened living supervened. No matter how hideous the noise, the men moved about apparently oblivious of it all, and with a trained and steady air as though they had lived there all their lives...."

The Aussie, more so that their British counterparts, came to know the Turks on a personal basis. A bit like the Christmas armistice in the West, the Aussies and the Turks frequently stopped fighting and during the quiet would throw food items or coffe or other "necessities" to each other since their trenches were just a few yards apart. Once a note came over from the Turks: "Bully beef no coffe yes." During times of truce for burial of the dead, they worked together with no animosity or thought of breaking the truce.

Moorehead includes maps to help the reader locate the pennisula and the landing sites and battles. All in all, it is a good introduction, and a great reference, for anyone interested in the battle.