Rating: 4/5

Nightmare Town by Dashiell Hammett

We have one surprise after another
- And men fall down, if not like flies, at least in an unusual number
- But hey, this is the Nightmare Town, remember?

Dashiell Hammett is best known for The Maltese Falcon that has been included on the TIME list of best novels.
And adapted for the big screen, with Humphrey Bogart in the title role, a super star that liked to whine- I have learned recently.

At the beginning of this story, a Ford car nearly kills a woman…and not just once, but twice, even if only unintentionally.
The driver is so drunk that he cannot stand on his feet and tries to challenge the Marshall, when he arrives to take him.
This will be our hero, albeit he does not look the part, with all this behavior there would be no Sam Spade.

Nevertheless, once sober, the man is the best we can find in this Nightmare Town and the rest appear to be connected…all.

When Steve Threefall- our Superman- appears in court, he is charged on a few counts, including drunk driving.

- You are sentenced to pay $ 165 and 80 cents or jail
- Do I have the money, he asks the Marshall
- Exactly the amount

This raises questions as to the honesty of the officials of this place called Izzard, for how could you judge on exactly the sum in the man’s wallet?

We then meet Nova and a good number of the other personages who populate this town, a surprising collection for a short story.
There is the rich owner of property, apparently most of the town, and his son, the girl who nearly got killed and who works at the post office, a banker, the doctor, a new friend called Kamp, only the latter dies almost instantly.
After they spend a few hours together, playing poker and exchanging pleasantries, as they walk on the road, Steve and Kamp are attacked by a few men who have weapons and after a serious fight, Kamp is stabbed to death.
Steve has to see a doctor and as it happens in a small town, you meet the few that you know again and again.
Nova leaves in the house of the local doctor and she is just being burgled when the knight on shining armor arrives.

- From here on there is one surprise after another
- And men fall down, if not like flies, at least in an unusual number
- But hey, this is the Nightmare Town, remember?

Since there is no spoiler alert, I would need to stop without revealing what happens.
Which should be hard, for the knack, what is important in this story are the plot and the unexpected revelations that we have.
The characters are also interesting, with Steve playing the good guy, Nova the damsel in distress and the rest are most of the time villains.
But there are unexpected turns, as aforementioned, with the one that seemed the most despicable making a 180 degrees turn.
Because of his passion, he abandons the camp of the Goodfellas and saves the person he cares for, at great risk to himself.

Reading such stories can be exhilarating, as we have a Hyperhuman fighting the evil and giving us a role model.
If such a character can be so valiant, tough, determined, resilient, dedicated, ready to overcome his hangover and blows, why can’t I?

Enjoyable, good story.