Rating: 4/5

Michael Drosnin brings to life a time in Hughes' life in which he seemed to have a second nervous breakdown and withdrew to a closed-off room. What seems to make this period different to his previous breakdown is that Hughes continued to exert a huge influence on the United States (arguably his influence greatly increased during this time).

Drosnin presents the story of how Hughes' desire to have the United States match his wishes led him to bribe politicians across the country as well as fund major candidates in both parties of the United States. It shows how Hughes, who never voted, was perfectly willing to transcend party loyalty in order to ensure he was always backing the winning horse.

I think what is interesting is that the requests that Hughes ended up making were not all in relation to his business empire; however, this should not be understated. The influence that Hughes had managed to accrue in the government meant that he received preferential tax treatment. His medical research institute (which provided very little money to actual medical research) was granted an exemption from the 1969 tax reform act. Some of the requests from Hughes seemed to be far more bizarre and confusing. Hughes became one of the most important anti-bomb testing proponents. What is unique is that Hughes was not against bomb testing in general, but he was opposed to testing in Nevada so close to him. 

The book provides an excellent overview of Watergate, which I am beginning to think really did revolve around Hughes and his connections with both Nixon and O'Brien. One does wonder if the world of politics is truly immune to this sort of corruption or if, possibly, we are yet to hear similar stories emerge in the future. 

The reason that this story is not five stars is that I can't help but wonder if the author could have delved a bit deeper into who arranged the robbery of Romaine Street, the haul of which the author was able to use in order to write the book. I appreciate that, without naming a name, they were able to indicate what really happened during the robbery.