Rating: 3/5

Like so many fictional Victorian daughters, Maud Ruthyn adores her father and trusts him completely. (Mother is dead.) Obeying his wishes is her heart's desire. In this she is a complete idiot, because her father is actually a terrible parent. Not only does Austin Ruthyn neglect her, but his will provides that on his death she will go live with his brother Silas, whom Maud has never met, until her majority. Putting the interests of one's child first would dictate that Maud go to live with her middle-aged cousin Monica, who has a lovely house, plenty of money, is fond of Maud, and actually does have her best interests at heart. But Austin is determined to have Maud live with Silas in order to rehabilitate Silas's reputation in the community: Silas was once accused of murdering a guest in his house, wrongly, Austin feels. If everyone sees that Austin has trusted Silas with the well-being of his child, they will stop believing Silas had anything to do with the man's death (which was, in fact, ruled a suicide). If Maud dies before Silas, he inherits the entire Ruthyn estate. What could possibly go wrong?

This novel had one of my now favorite new plot devices, the carriage ride that seemingly goes somewhere but actually goes nowhere. (It goes in an enormous circle, arriving back at its departure point, carriage inhabitants ignorant.) Supposedly Le Fanu got this plot device from something his great uncle Richard Brinsley Sheridan, the playwright, did once.

Someone should do a study of classic novels by male authors with first person female narrators in which the narrators opine about the characteristics of their gender. You get gems like this (Le Fanu via Maud): "So Lady Knollys argued, with feminine energy, and I must confess, with a good deal of the repetition which I have sometimes observed in logicians of my own sex, and she puzzled without satisfying me." Translation: "We ladies need to STFU, can I get an amen?"

Then there was this 8-comma sentence, probably surpassed only by The New Yorker at some point....

"I remember how, when, after we had got, late at night, into bed, I sat up, shivering with horror, in mine, while honest Mary's tranquil breathing told how soundly she slept." I know! If you really tried, you could get a 9th comma in there after "breathing," right?