Rating: 4/5

I loved Blanche Among the Talented Tenth even more than the first book in the series, Blanche on the Lam. I wasn't quite expecting that, because the setting of the first book (rural North Carolina) is much more familiar to me than the setting of the second (an expensive black resort on the coast of Maine). But in this book we get deeper into Blanche's life and personality. The setting allows her to make more friends, spend time with the niece and nephew she's raising, and contemplate romance.

As with the first book, this one didn't appeal to me as a mystery novel nearly as much as it did as a story about an awesome woman having an adventure. However, this time I was in suspense nearly the whole time about the solution.

Blanche's greatest strength as a sleuth is her interpersonal relationship skills. She's excellent at making friends with people, getting them to trust her and talk to her, and figuring out what's going on among a group of people she's just met. I love reading about this because I don't have those skills, and Neely describes them in such a way that I feel like I'm learning something.

Besides, at the same time Blanche is gathering clues, she's building genuine relationships with the people she finds worthy, and that's where this book is loveliest.

My favorite passage comes when she's having a tête-à-tête with Tina, a young woman she's just met who wants Blanche's advice about her fiancé.Blanche could almost smell Tina's longing to talk, and she was pretty sure who Tina wanted to talk about. But Blanche wanted to know who she was talking to first.

"Where you from, Tina?"

...

She nudged Tina with gentle questions until they were casting pieces of their past into the night like lights strung together to illuminate them for each other...

Heart talk, Blanche thought. Her term for the way women gave each other bits of lives and history as a way of declaring their good intentions toward each other.Later comes a scene in which Blanche and Tina are preparing dinner in Blanche's kitchen, and they shift their conversation to talk about how they decided to wear their hair naturally. This is something they want to talk about with each other, but they also know that Blanche's preteen niece, Taifa, is troubled because she's been around people who privilege straightened hair and light skin; and they know that Taifa can overhear their conversation. I'm not describing it well but this episode was exactly the sort of thing I (not a parent) like to read about parenting.

I loved this book. I would have given it five stars, not four, except for one short exchange that I wish weren't there. Blanche and her friend Ardell are talking about how it's best to pay attention when Blanche senses that there's a "catch" to a man who's apparently perfect for someone -- Blanche had had this feeling about someone Ardell had once dated, who turned out to be a cross-dresser. "Ardell had told Blanche that while she wished to be big enough to handle it, she wasn't." Sure, it's okay for Ardell not to be attracted to someone, but I really wish Neely had thought of a different example of a "catch."