Rating: 4/5

Another from my Spinners' Wheel list of titles written by California authors from years ago, this is a collection of lovely essays describing the desert country so dear to the author.
The country where you may have sight and touch of that which is written lies between the high Sierras south from Yosemite—east and south over a very great assemblage of broken ranges beyond Death Valley, and on illimitably into the Mojave Desert. 

Published in 1903, this book captures the magic of the area, back before modern man had left too much of a dirty footprint there. Austin was observant, respectful of both the country and everything that lived there, and able to bring it all to life. Although I did get lost more than once in the sections that talked mostly about plants. I admire all writers who can identify flowers, shrubs and trees, but it can be confusing if the reader does not recognize all the vegetation by name themselves. I confess I skimmed in a couple of places!

The edition I read at Gutenberg had delicate little sketches throughout the book; they were the perfect complement to Austin's words. The essays were on topics ranging from the plants, animals, and birds of the country to the waterways and people. And one about Jimville, which the author calls a 'Bret Harte' mining town and tells here how it earned its name:
Hear now how Jimville came by its name. Jim Calkins discovered the Bully Boy, Jim Baker located the Theresa. When Jim Jenkins opened an eating-house in his tent he chalked up on the flap, “Best meals in Jimville, $1.00,” and the name stuck.

Here she is talking about the human impact on Nature:
Man is a great blunderer going about in the woods, and there is no other except the bear makes so much noise. Being so well warned beforehand, it is a very stupid animal, or a very bold one, that cannot keep safely hid. The cunningest hunter is hunted in turn, and what he leaves of his kill is meat for some other. That is the economy of nature, but with it all there is not sufficient account taken of the works of man. There is no scavenger that eats tin cans, and no wild thing leaves a like disfigurement on the forest floor.

This is my second title by this author. I first read a short story of hers in The Spinners Book Of Fiction, which led to the creation of the reading list I have been working on lately. She has more titles at Gutenberg, and I will be sure to put them on my Someday Lists!