Rating: 1/5

Did Not Finish

Sometimes after reading a book this is you, "OMG, what were they talking about? The book was freaking AWESOME!!!" And other times you're like, "Wow, I really wish I had listened to those hate comments." &lt;--- That's me. Bad writing, fake wolf behavior, confusing, just to name a few problems.

Let me get two things straight first, I LOVE wolves, and I LOVE fantasy. So why wouldn't I LOVE this book? Let me tell you why I didn't with many examples.

Fake Wolf Behavior:

As Bran padded inside, he pushed accidentally against Huttser, who turned and snarled at him. Bran jumped sideways, creeping back to the edge of the wall in submission and showing his throat to the Dragga.

Showing his throat? Seriously? Shouldn't it say he rolled onto his back, which is the highest position of submission? No? Okay, how about he pushed his ears back, another sign of submission? No? Alright then... wolves do not show their throat in submission. Another example below.

Wolves rarely look at each other directly in the eye for fear they might raise the other's anger.

First off, wolves are all about eye contact! That is one of the main ways they communicate. Yes, sometimes eye contact can be used to give a warning glare, but it's not usual among pack mates. The author did not do his research at all.

The Confusing Parts:

Throughout the book the wolves use words from their own language, such as Dragga and Drappa. At first I'm thinking this is pretty cool, then we get introduced to Sikla, Varg, Putnar, and Herla. That's a lot of words to remember what they all mean. But no problem, right? Surely the author will explain them a lot so we can catch on. Yeah, no. We get a single explanation for each word, and then we're expected to remember it forever. Awesome.

The Cringe Parts:

"They're so very little, Huttser."
"I know, Palla."
The parents fell silent for both knew the harsh laws of survival and how much danger faces young cubs in the world.
"Well, we shall have to feed you up, Palla," said Huttser tenderly at last, "so your milk is as rich as sunlight."
"We'll bury the others outside the den, Huttser, beneath the birch tree."

Am I the only one who was annoyed by the constant use of names within the speech? At first it was cheesy, now it's just annoying.

Did I Mention That The Sight Is A Freaking History Book?

Huttser was right, for this was the time before the coming of Stephen the Great, the Hungarian king and fabled defender of Christendom, when a new threat had arisen like a specter in the East. Even now Ottoman Turks, who came from the southern lands and adhered to nothing of the Christians' beliefs, pressed hard at the haunches of eastern Europe and belief fought belief, as power wrestled power.

Someone please tell me how this is relevant to the storyline. PLEASE.

The Writing:

Let's be fair, the author obviously did a good amount of world building. It shows quite plainly from the wolf language to the wolf belief system. The editing was good too, as far as punctuation and grammar goes. As for the actual writing, you might be able to see how bad it is from my examples.

I don't think I made it far enough into the book to get a really good idea of the storyline, but I think it's mainly about this wolf that is hunting the pack. She is called Morgra and is suppose to have a power called the Sight, although some wolves don't believe in the power. The plot I found very interesting, and I was often wondering about Morgra. The author did a great job at creating suspense, only for the reasons above was the book ruined for me.

End Notes:

I really can't understand how this book ever got to an average of 4 stars. Nonetheless, I will probably come back to this book to see if my opinion of it changed. I doubt it will, but I am willing to give it another shot.