Rating: 2/5

On re-reading for the first time since probably the 1980s, I've realized this is a pretty awful book. If you are reading the series, I'd advise you consider skipping it and moving straight into the next volume.

Partly it suffers from middle volume syndrome. While the first volume zipped along, this one drags. We hear every bit of prep as Tregare tries to gather a small fleet of spaceships to invade Earth. Much of this is prep only of interest to engineers, as Rissa spends days marking with chalk where struts need to be welded to space ships to support new gun turrets.... It's a dull job to anyone not doing it, and I didn't need 50 pages of this sort of activity leavened only by the characters breaking for lunch and dinner, etc.

And partly, it suffers from mid-century male writer syndrome. Although F M Busby was trying to be a feminist like crazy, with various female ship captains, etc, some of his missteps are wince worthy. These include fat shaming, glib incest, and even aliens intent on sticking penis-like extrusions into human women. 

Also, the heroine is just too lovey dovey with and committed to her new husband (a man who insisted she be his "doxie" for nine months in the recent past when she was not in a position to easily refuse him.) Given their characters, I can see how they would ultimately fall for each other, but it's just way too fast. Several other new relationships also occur way too quickly, as in the romantic partners only knowing each other for a few hours before making a commitment. It's insta-love at its worst and in one case very uncomfortable for the reader because one man says a young woman looks like she could be his daughter by his former long term lover who looked just like her. And then he proposes. ICK!

Lastly, sex, while not detailed at all, is so clearly written though a 20th century male viewpoint. When the heroine has a problem coming, it's 100% her problem and her responsibility. Her partner doesn't have to do anything but show up and keep on doing his usual thing to help her out of it. You definitely get the feeling that her partner, who we have already have been told has far less sexual expertise than she does, may not be that great in bed. The funny thing is, although this is obvious to the female reader, I'll bet anything the male author didn't know or intend it.

All of these things aside - the dull parts, the missteps, etc - I still very much like all the characters and and excited to read on to the conclusion in the next volume.

So, yeah, this book has problems. But it's strengths are enough to keep me going.