Rating: 2/5

I can describe this book in one word. Strange. In fact it was so strange I could hardly relate to any characters as they and their situations were so unbelievable.

but let me start the things I did like. The dystopian fantasy world where long ago the manth people, who were settlers found salt mines and made their wealth. Travellers from the desert plains built the wind singer a contraption that when the wind blows a tune is played that keeps the manth people happy. But the morah an all powerful spirit lord (which appeared to consist of a legion of consciousness') threatened the city long ago so they were forced to give a part of the wind singer away leaving it non functioning. So its up to our 3 heroes to retrieve it!

I liked the city of Aramanth descriptions where exams are everything and everyone must sit the same exam in order to get a rating which will determine theirs and their family's status in society and where they live. The leaders of this society believe the exams are fair, giving equal opportunity to all. For me this reminded me of my school days and how our education system is today and it may also raise questions on whether this type of testing today really is fair on everyone..
In fact at one point some characters did point out that if they were tested on things they knew then their whole rating would be different.

But that's basically it when it comes to good development. I do appreciate that this book is aimed for much younger audiences but strongly do feel it could have been made more believable. Nearly all the situations the characters were in were extremely far fetched which had me eye rolling and cringing most of the time. The characters themselves were seriously 2D cutouts that lacked all kinds of depth. I mean they did dramatic things without even a thought for the rest of their family nor did they seem to care about themselves and their own wellbeing. Talk about self destruct! I also felt this book was sugarcoated too much for my liking too with violent scenes bogged down and heartwarming moments that made me want to throw the book across the room. I should also mention that the last quarter is so fast paced its like the author wanted to rush and get the book finished. Huh, he probably realised what a crappy job he'd done and decided he wanted out lol.

I would not recommend this book to anyone over the age of 12 as the young and unbelievable characters are more likely to appeal to children and young children at that.