Rating: 3/5

I came to this work with great enthusiasm; I once went on a Civil War kick, a few years ago, while living in Tokyo, and spent countless hours wandering around Tokyo while listening to Professor David W. Blight's essential and superb course at Yale, The Civil War and Reconstruction Era, 1845-1877. Once you start taking an interest in the Civil War, it’s hard to ignore the reputation for Ulysses Grant’s memoirs. Thus, I had wanted to read it for years, and now and again I would encounter a superb quotation from the work, which would increase my interest, to wit: 
“The framers were wise in their generation and wanted to do the very best possible to secure their own liberty and independence, and that also of their descendants to the latest days. It is preposterous to suppose that the people of one generation can lay down the best and only rules of government for all who are to come after them, and under unforeseen contingencies. At the time of the framing of our constitution the only physical forces that had been subdued and made to serve man and do his labor, were the currents in the streams and in the air we breathe. Rude machinery, propelled by water power, had been invented; sails to propel ships upon the waters had been set to catch the passing breeze—but the application of steam to propel vessels against both wind and current, and machinery to do all manner of work had not been thought of. The instantaneous transmission of messages around the world by means of electricity would probably at that day have been attributed to witchcraft or a league with the Devil. Immaterial circumstances had changed as greatly as material ones. We could not and ought not to be rigidly bound by the rules laid down under circumstances so different for emergencies so utterly unanticipated. The fathers themselves would have been the first to declare that their prerogatives were not irrevocable.”
So perhaps my enthusiasm for this work set me up for being underwhelmed by it. What I wanted was more reflections like the quotation above; what I got was details about battles, and many, many anecdotes about rainy roads and bad conditions for traveling by horse*. For someone who is looking for first hand accounts of the Civil War, it’s probably a perfect work; same too if want insights into the thinking of the military leadership of the North; but if you’re seeking more reflection, you may be dissatisfied. My review seems to go against all received wisdom about the brilliance of this work, and thus my review may well be worth ignoring. (3.5/5)

*
Chapter XXIV.
“The night was one of impenetrable darkness, with rain pouring down in torrents; nothing was visible to the eye except as revealed by the frequent flashes of lightning. Under these circumstances I had to trust to the horse, without guidance, to keep the road.”

Chapter XXV.
“After the rain of the night before and the frequent and heavy rains for some days previous, the roads were almost impassable.”

Chapter XXXII.
“This long, dreary and, for heavy and continuous rains and high water, unprecedented winter was one of great hardship to all engaged about Vicksburg.”

Chapter XL.
“From here we took horses and made our way by Jasper and over Waldron’s Ridge to Chattanooga. There had been much rain, and the roads were almost impassable from mud, knee-deep in places, and from wash-outs on the mountain sides.”

Chapter XLVII.
“The country back to the James River is cut up with many streams, generally narrow, deep, and difficult to cross except where bridged. The region is heavily timbered, and the roads narrow, and very bad after the least rain.”

Chapter LIII.
“The night was dark, it rained heavily, and the road was difficult, so that it was midnight when he reached the point where he was to halt.”