Rating: 4/5

This is one of those category romances which is much better than the (wildly inaccurate) title and back cover copy would imply. As the synopsis tells us, Harriet and Rosa have a strong resemblance and when Rosa is asked to go back and visit her estranged grandmother she asks Harriet to go in her place for Reasons. Rosa, however, is sympathetically drawn - yes, even with the backstory about how she was a sexed-up obnoxious teenager who is estranged from her Italian family - and has at least understandable reasons for making her request; she and Harriet are believably close, and Harriet's decision to accept on Rosa's behalf seems, if not reasonable, at least understandable. The actual pretense goes remarkably smoothly, and takes up less than half of the book, leaving room in the second half for a resolution to Rosa's reasons for the pretense in the first place, a family mystery to be solved, and generally speaking a chance for the hero to run around in besotted pursuit of the heroine while intermittently apologizing and occasionally putting his foot in his mouth in an effort to give the heroine what she wants while not actually asking her what that is because, of course, he is An Italian Alpha Hero in a Harlequin Presents novel. The fake engagement literally does not happen until the last twenty or so pages and I refuse to spoiler-tag that because if you're reading this expecting a fake engagement book you're going to be hopping mad. 

Anyway, the biggest problem in this book is the first sex scene, which verges on rape. The book doesn't really want to go there and the heroine isn't traumatized at all, but basically the hero is overcome with lust for her and she sensibly tries to dissuade him only to be carried away and stop trying to dissuade him. However, there's a lot of language later about how he wouldn't have been able to stop even if he tried and him beating himself up for not listening to her and she says she "should have fought harder" and they both acknowledge that she didn't have an orgasm. What I'm trying to say is it's basically the definition of dubious consent. The heroine is okay with it, but like, am I as a reader okay with it? Not sure. It's a 90s Harlequin Presents novel so I basically fall down on the side of "whatever," but it's frankly more dubcon than I usually expect from HP. On the other hand, I feel like part of the reason I have that response is that both hero and heroine basically acknowledge that the hero was super into it and the heroine did not start out super into it and they both regret it after it happens, whereas usually in HP novels with this kind of dubious consent sex scene they twist it around to be the heroine's fault and the hero just yells a lot, like how can you expect him to avoid the sexy sex with a sexy sex lady like the heroine? Anyway I'm unquestionably overthinking this, but if you're not going to be able to read past that, then absolutely this is not for you.