Rating: 5/5

This excellent book of essays was written in 1989 in the furnace of the AIDS crisis. Edited by John Preston, it brings to life the voices of people who experienced the crisis, some of whom are now dead. Each essay is different. Some are reflective, Others are written in the form of a journal, others are memories of events. All of them speak of the crisis and the challenges of compassion, care, community and activism.

Most of all, these essays speak of life and how difficult it is to live when faced with the death of so many. Not just that there were many dying but that these were untimely deaths, deaths of the young, and deaths that would have remained unacknowledged if not for the activism and voices of the courageous. This volume of essays is part of that activism and reading it now brings the past to life and this is vital because the voices from the crisis should still be listened to and those years should not be forgotten. The voices from the past have much to tell us about the lives of people today.

Many years ago I had a discussion with a dear friend. She corrected some of the terminology I had been using. I had talked about 'the struggle/battles against HIV'. My friend told me that HIV sector organisations (in the UK) didn't like using terminology that depicted the virus as a battle (or something like that). I understood her reasoning because it is so easy to go from a battle against HIV to a battle against people who have HIV, but I then found that I lacked the language to describe the immensity of the devastation of this virus. I wasn't sure I was allowed to speak about it because after all people were no longer dying in great numbers, at least not in the global North. I was frustrated with this need for political correctness because I felt the scale of the pandemic and the swathe of death that cut down so many milions of people should be spoken about with passion and with anger, and with action and vision, and I felt as if I was being told to be 'polite'. 

I could see her point but really what is politeness in the face of so much suffering and death. 33 million in 30 years - approx 

And suffering was also a word I was told I couldn't use.

So it is a relief for me to read this book written during the AIDs crisis and to see the way in which the authors use war time terminology. This book faces death and suffering head on. It is immediate, it is raw in its observations and emotions and it give voice to people instead of politeness.

Don't get me wrong I love my friend but I need a terminology that gives voice to the horror and helplessness and I need the space to remember and reflect.

Even now some 30 years later from the onset of the virus, when deaths from AIDS have fallen in the global North we should still remember those who fell during the crisis, during the war because quite simply it was a war.

And the war isn't over yet. It is just being fought on different fronts. It is being fought in low income countries where access to treatment is still limited. It is being fought in countries where people are imprisoned, persecuted and killed because of their sexuality. The war is being fought against the everyday homophobia and lies that emerge in the media and other public spaces. Most of all this war is still being fought because AIDS related stigma and discrimination is alive and well in our world today. And it is being fought in our religious institutions. 

So I appreciate and value this book because this book uses the language I desired to use (back then) to express the struggle for life and the way so many died. This book doesn't allow the world to forget and this book takes me back to the crisis so that I can listen to these voices from long ago and learn lessons and gather strength to fight the wars that I am now involved in.

The different essays in this book are beautiful, powerful, heart rending, passionate and intellectually engaging and they are not in anyway depressing. Yes they deal with death and loss but they also reveal the depth of courage and love that can be found. 

One of my favourites is the San Francisco Diary by Laurence Tate and the way it shows the many human, weird and some times amusing responses to AIDS. Apart from the sadness some of the descriptions of the callers to the AIDS helpline are amusing. Sad but still amusing and human. I think about the person who dialled to warn about vampire bats and I smile. But then I feel sad also because I too have come across so many myths and weird stories about AIDS. Harmless in many ways fatal in others.

This is a very real book. It obliterates political correctness, it removes the need to be polite. It focuses on the lived experience of the crisis and no kid gloves are allowed. It has transported me back to the days of the crisis and through these essays showed me the darkness of those days, the fear, the courage, the life, the love and the determination and for that I am grateful. Grateful to the writers, many of whom are no longer with us and grateful to John Preston who despite his own illness managed to edit and produce these essays so that these voices are not forgotten.