Rating: 4/5

David Weiser is the only Jewish boy in an otherwise all-Catholic school in Gdansk Poland. It’s the summer of 1957. When all the other kids march as a unit in an annual religious procession he doesn't participate. The boys see him watching the procession from a hillside and they chant “David Weiser is a Jew.” 

So David is forced to be a loner. He never plays with or participates in activities with the other boys. There is one girl, Elka, who hangs out with him and she becomes a major part of the story told by one of the boys, Heller. 

The boys start interacting with David one summer day while playing war games. David gives them a rusty gun he found. That’s the start of his winning them over. At first he mostly talks to them through Elka. He stands in front of them and says to Elka ‘tell them such and such.’ 

That's really the start of the story because it turns out that David is kind of a wizard and we get a bit of almost magical realism. 

The GR book blurb gives a good outline of the story so I will use that and not worry about revealing spoilers: ‘David Weiser can hypnotize panthers, shoot a bullet through a Hitler stamp at a hundred meters, and even levitate. After staging a spectacular explosion with a hidden cache of old German munitions, Weiser and Elka vanish without a trace, leaving the three other boys, including Pawel Heller - the novel's narrator - to explain his disappearance to the authorities.’

I say ‘almost’ magical realism above because the author leaves the reader a bit of explanation that we can choose to believe is the cause of David’s wizardry. For example,  when a group of boys spy on David and Elka through the cracks of an abandoned factory building, they watch him do a dervish dance while Elka plays a pan flute. They see him levitate a foot off the ground. Was it a mass hallucination? 

As the story opens, three boys are being interrogated by the school director, the public prosecutor, a military office and a sadistic teacher. David and Elka are missing, so the authorities believe they died in the explosion. But where are their bodies? The boys are covering up something.

The story alternates in passages between the interrogation and Heller’s reflections on the events with David that summer. All three boys give varying versions of what happened, trying to protect David and Elka. So the authorities send them out of the room, not allowed to talk to each other, and repeatedly call them back in one by one to go over their stories until midnight.

Thirty years later, the narrator, Heller, is writing this book still attempting to solve the mystery that he has puzzled over since these events. He warns us that the story is one of an unsolved mystery. “That sentence is illogical, but let it stand, because everything in this story is illogical. So let it stand.” What really happened in all these incidents? And what really happened to David and Elka? 

This lifelong obsession with a mystery, as I think about it, is a theme in several other books that I have read and reviewed. A man is obsessed with things that happened years ago and is still searching for answers. I think of Dom Casmurro by Machado de Assis where Dom obsesses over his deceased wife’s fidelity and Embers by Sandor Marai with a related theme. In The Vanishing by Tim Krabbé, a man obsesses over how his wife disappeared and there is an almost identical theme in one of the stories built into the novel Flights by Olga Tokarczuk. In Paul Modiano’s novel, So You Don't Get Lost in the Neighborhood, the elderly narrator is still preoccupied with figuring out mysterious events of his bizarre childhood. 

There is good straightforward writing and local color of Gdansk. These are all poor kids living in a deteriorated neighborhood where their fathers work in the shipyard. There are bits and pieces of information about growing up in communist Poland. For example, the kids still get a heavy dose of religion at school and church and yet they have to sing patriotic communist songs that denigrate religious authorities. 

The Polish author (b. 1957) has written 10 novels and collections of short stories, about half translated into English. David Weiser was his first novel and remains his most read. 

Top photo of the Monument to the Fallen Shipyard Workers in Gdansk, mentioned in the story. From Wikipedia 
The author from polskieradio.pl