Rating: 5/5

Flower Fire

In 1969, Angela Carter left her first husband and moved to Japan for three years. Her move triggered an amazingly fertile period of writing, which resulted in the novel 
  "The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman"
 (to date, my favourite of her novels) and this collection of short stories. The combined impression is one of the sudden release of an explosive talent, much like "fireworks".

The significance of the title is suggested in the first story, "A Souvenir of Japan". Some children pestered their father until he bought them fireworks, the Japanese word for which means "flower fire". 

Later, a fireworks display occurs in an area "like a fairground - but such an ordered fair!...Everything was altogether quietly festive."

Watching the fireworks sparkle, "the smiling children cooed softly; their pleasure was very pure because it was so restrained...These children were all on their best behaviour because they were staying up late and held their parents' hands with a charming propriety." 

There is a sense of excitement about some kind of behaviour that is normally forbidden. Yet the excitement is restrained, respectful or considerate, even if the subject matter is profane. 

Carter's stories are neither didactic nor prurient, yet they investigate the nature of behaviour that is either tolerated or taboo in a considered or studious manner, in a manner of restrained propriety.

In the Afterword, Carter describes her stories as tales rather than short stories:

  "Formally the tale differs from the short story in that it makes few pretences to the imitation of life. The tale does not log everyday experience, as the short story does; it interprets everyday experience through a system of imagery derived from subterranean areas behind everyday experience, and therefore the tale cannot betray its readers into a false knowledge of everyday experience."

In this review, I'll discuss aspects of Carter's system of imagery by highlighting significant parts of her text. Hopefully, this will lead to some understanding of her goals and achievements as a feminist writer.

The Double-Somersault of Love

Ironically, the female narrator and her partner grow bored and become restive, leading them to question their happiness and the pleasure they get from their relationship:

  "We fought a battle of self-abnegation and I won it, for I had the stronger character."

She recalls going to a love hotel early in their relationship, and reading a children's book about a boy who who was born inside a peach ("there was the baby, where the stone should have been"). The boy, Tomotaro, and the narrator's partner, "had the inhuman sweetness of a child born from something other than a mother, a passive, cruel sweetness I did not immediately understand, for it was that of the repressed masochism, which, in my country, is usually confined to women."

The narrator describes her partner's "curious, androgynous grace with its svelte, elongated spine, wide shoulders and unusually well-developed pectorals, almost like the breasts of a girl approaching puberty."

  

  "Sometimes, it was possible for me to believe he had practised an enchantment upon me, as foxes in this country may, for, here, a fox can masquerade as human and at the best of times the high cheekbones gave to his face the aspect of a mask."

Just like a fox, the object of love can disguise their true feelings and the subject can be deceived (or deceive themselves). Love can affect us like an enchantment or a spell.

The narrator's experience is particularly poignant, because she recognises that "as they say, Japan is a man's country...In a society where men dominate, they value women only as the object of men's passions."

Away from home, the narrator is an alien in a foreign country, which forces her to probe "the death-defying double-somersault of love", as it exists in both England and Japan:

  

  "I had never been so absolutely the mysterious other. I had become a kind of phoenix, a fabulous beast; I was an outlandish jewel. He found me, I think, inexpressibly exotic. But I often felt like a female impersonator."

Woman as a Fabulous Beast

Ironically, the narrator becomes a vehicle of and for fantasy, while she learns to comprehend the real or normal world outside, even if it is Japan.

In a department store, she encounters a rack of dresses labelled "For Young and Cute Girls Only", which alienate her even more, making her feel like Glumdalclitch. Her partner tells her that "when he was in bed with me, he felt like a small boat upon a wide, stormy sea." He is tossed around by the tempestuous nature of a womanhood he doesn't completely understand. He affects the "radiant aimlessness of the pure existential hero."

Women can't be understood solely in terms of beauty versus man's beast. Women might be part beast as well.

Mirror Images of the Self

In return, the narrator realises that "I was suffering from love and I knew him as intimately as I knew my own image in a mirror. In other words, I knew him only in relation to myself. Yet, on those terms, I knew him perfectly."

Love is complicated by the dual/rival perspectives of the subject and the object.

Carter discusses the knowledge of the lovers in terms that seem to apply to the creative writing process she has embarked on:

  

  "At times, I thought I was inventing him as I went along, however, so you will have to take my word for it that we existed. But I do not want to paint our circumstantial portraits so that we both emerge with enough well-rounded, spuriously detailed actuality that you are forced to believe in us. I do not want to practise such sleight of hand. You must be content only with glimpses of our outlines, as if you had caught sight of our reflections in the looking-glass of somebody else's house as you passed by the window."

She asks herself: "How far does a pretence of feeling, maintained with absolute conviction, become authentic?"

Relationships must be understood in terms of both pretence and authenticity, even if it's fleeting.

The narrator recounts the moving images of evanescence, fireworks, morning glories, the old, children, from which she has composed her story.

She concludes that "the most moving of these images were the intangible reflections of ourselves we saw in one another's eyes, reflections of nothing but appearances, in a city dedicated to seeming, and, try as we might to possess the essence of each other's otherness, we would inevitably fail."

Brief Imitations of Women and Men

In "The Loves of Lady Purple", we see life through the prism of love again. A character called the Asiatic Professor is a puppet master. His reality is different from those around him: "The puppeteer speculates in a no-man's limbo between the real and that which, although we know very well it is not, nevertheless seems to be real." 

His pretence has succeeded in becoming authentic, at least in the eyes of his audience: "The master of marionettes vitalises inert stuff with the dynamics of his self...the dolls project those signals of signification we instantly recognise as language...they once again offer their brief imitations of men and women with an exquisite precision which is all the more disturbing because we know it to be false..."

Like the narrator of the first story, the puppeteer has the air of a "visitant from another world where the mode of being was conducted in nuances rather than affirmatives." He is like a foreigner, whereas his assistants are all "natives of the fairground and, after all, all fairs are the same...perhaps, dissociated fragments of one single, great, original fair which was inexplicably scattered long ago in a diaspora of the amazing...here, the grotesque is the order of the day."

Reality and Otherness

The puppeteer reveals his passions through the medium of his heroine, the puppet, Lady Purple ("the Shameless Oriental Venus") who "did not seem so much a cunningly simulated woman as a monstrous goddess, at once preposterous and magnificent, who transcended the notion she was dependent on his hands and appeared wholly real and yet entirely other."

  

  "Her actions were not so much an imitation as a distillation and intensification of those of a born woman and so she could become the quintessence of eroticism, for no woman born would have dared to be so blatantly seductive."

The Magic Alternative

In performance, "the incantatory ritual of the drama instantly annihilated the rational and imposed upon the audience a magic alternative in which nothing was in the least familiar." 

Soon after, Carter refers to "the rapt intensity of ritual". Carter also describes Lady Purple as a "corrupt phoenix who rose again as a 'mannequin of desire' who expressed the nameless essence of the idea of woman, a metaphysical abstraction of the female",..."the sole perpetrator of desire...who proliferated malign fantasies all around her and used her lovers as the canvas on which she executed bourdoir masterpieces of destruction."

  

  "Her kiss emanated from the dark country where desire is objectified and lives. She gained entry into the world by a mysterious loophole in its metaphysics and, during her kiss, she sucked his breath from his lungs so that her own bosom heaved with it."

Interestingly, Lady Purple's career ended "as if it had been indeed a firework display, in ashes, desolation and silence."

The Desolate Smile

In "The Smile of Winter", Carter again lists the ingredients she used for her composition:

  

  "Do not think I do not realise what I am doing. I am making a composition using the following elements: the winter beach; the winter moon; the ocean; the women; the pine trees; the riders; the driftwood; the shells; the shapes of darkness and the shapes of water; and the refuse. These are all inimical to my loneliness because of their indifference to it. Out of these pieces of inimical indifference, I intend to represent the desolate smile of winter which, as you might have gathered, is the smile I wear."

The narrator is afraid of being both alone and lonely.

Inexpressible Vistas of Love

In "Penetrating to the Heart of the Forest", two twins "could not help but feel a faint contempt, for their world, though beautiful, seemed to them, in a sense, incomplete - as though it lacked the knowledge of some mystery they might find, might they not? in the forest, on their own." The heart of the forest, like Eden, contains secrets which are and must be concealed. Confronted with ripe fruit, Madeline "extended a long, crimson, newly sensual tongue to lick her lips, laughing [like Eve]. 'It tastes so good!' she said. 'Here! Eat!' " After Emile took the apple and ate, they kissed, in "the hitherto unguessed at, unknowable, inexpressible vistas of love."

The Real Conditions of Living

In "Flesh and the Mirror", the narrator moves through "these expressionist perspectives in my black dress as though I was creator of all and of myself, too, in a black dress, in love, crying, walking through the city [of Tokyo] in the third person singular, my own heroine, as though the world stretched out from my eye like spokes from a sensitised hub that galvanised all to life when I looked at it...I think I know, now, what I was trying to do. I was trying to subdue the city by turning it into a projection of my own growing pains. What solipsistic arrogance!...The stranger, the foreigner, thinks he is in control; but he has been precipitated into somebody else's dream. You never know what will happen in Tokyo. Anything can happen."

"So I attempted to rebuild the city according to the blueprint in my imagination as a backdrop to the plays in my puppet theatre, but it sternly refused to be so rebuilt; I was only imagining it had been so rebuilt...None of the lyrical eroticism of this sweet, sad, moon night of summer rain had been within my expectations...My sensibility foundered under the assault on my senses...My imagination had been pre-empted."

"The mirror distilled the essence of all the encounters of strangers whose perceptions of one another existed only in the medium of the chance embrace, the accidental...The magic mirror presented me with a hitherto unconsidered notion of myself as I...I had been precipitated into knowledge of the real conditions of living..."&lt;
Breaking Out of the Mirror

Just as the mirror informs the self, it deludes the self, and must be escaped:

  

  "Women and mirrors are in complicity with one another to evade the action I/she performs that she/I cannot watch, the action with which I break out of the mirror, with which I assume my appearance...

"The most difficult performance in the world is acting naturally, isn't it? Everything else is artful."

Outside and Inside

The mirror theme is continued in "Reflections": "Embrace yourself in the mirror. You must go, now. Now!...Kiss yourself in the mirror, the symbolic matrix of this and that, hither and thither, outside and inside."

  

  "When my eyes opened, I had become my own reflection. I had passed through the mirror...I gave birth to my mirror self through the mediation of the looking-glass, yet my sensibility remained as it had been...The world was the same; yet absolutely altered...The effect was as of the reflection of a reflection, like an example of perpetual regression, the perfect, self-sufficient nirvana of the hermaphrodite...

"Proud as a man, I once again advanced to meet my image in the mirror. Full of self-confidence, I held out my hands to embrace my self, my antiself, my self not-self, my assassin, my death, the world's death."

Living and Dying in Parentheses

"Elegy for a Freelance" describes life in a revolutionary cell in a futuristic London. The narrator and X have been in love, until X murders their landlord as practice for the planned assassination of a senior politician:

  

  "You made assassination sound as enticing as pornography...

"We had purposely exiled ourselves from the course of everyday events and were proud to live in parentheses."

From Pussycat to Tiger Lady

They live like exiles or aliens "amongst the architecture of desolation" and decay. "This abyss was that of my own emptiness."

Still, they share some kind of love: 

  

  "I was always a little afraid of you because you clung to me far too tightly and made me come with the barbarous dexterity of a huntsman eviscerating a stag...

"Your kisses along my arms were like tracer bullets. I am lost. I flow. Your flesh defines me. I become your creation. I am your fleshly reflection."

While the relationship ends with X's revolutionary trial and hanging, one of the narrator's fellow cell members observes that "you are turning into a tiger lady when I always thought you were such a pussycat."

The assertiveness and strength of the tiger lady might be what is needed to overcome the loneliness of the female pussycat.

I wonder whether Carter is a feminist, precisely because she examines the nature of relationships, love, desire and longing, as well as questioning what role one, a woman might play inside or outside such relationships. Her solution isn't necessarily separatist (it's relationships that must be repaired and bettered - both subject and object perform a somersault in the double-somersault of love), although she seems to acknowledge the attraction of multiple forms of gender and sexuality, including androgyny. It seems that her (and her narrators') ultimate erotic quest was for someone who appreciated that she was a tiger lady. She was no mere passive object of men's desire or passions, something she learned in Japan, both as person and writer.

SOUNDTRACK:

Siouxsie &amp; The Banshees - "Fireworks"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xtGkw...

Siouxsie &amp; The Banshees - Spellbound

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVTtF...

Following the footsteps
Of a rag doll dance
We are entranced
Spellbound.