Rating: 4/5

I read this book back when it was published - indeed I used to own a copy (now lost) - and enjoyed it immensely. But a lot of time has passed since then so I offer, instead of my probably faulty memories, the words of the New York Times from 1982:

THE friends of the great have a hard posthumous life. Their names appear profusely in the indexes of biographies but as individuals they have little independent existence. They tend to be dismissed as types: loyal and steadfast, unkind and unfaithful, rich and helpful. Every chef and valet may write his backstairs recollections; true friends often hold back. Perhaps Osric published his account of The Hamlet Years, but Horatio left no memoirs.

In the annals of literary friendships, few chums can have been as irrepressibly convivial as Scrope Berdmore Davies, the wit and dandy who was a favorite of Lord Byron. Byron's own most vivid picture of him shows us a figure of Regency insouciance, last seen the night before at a gambling hell where he was losing heavily, now at midday sleeping peacefully at home; beside him is a chamber pot stuffed with lately recovered bank notes. Peter Quennell's description in ''Byron in Italy'' sums him up: to Byron enthusiasts he is immutably that ''boon companion, the easy-going, irresponsible, perpetually effervescent Scrope Davies.''

Davies, overwhelmed by debt, fled England in 1820. He left behind him a hastily packed chest full of papers which he had deposited for safekeeping with his bankers. In 1976, in the course of alterations to the building at 1 Pall Mall East, Scrope Davies's trunk was discovered in a vault of what is now Barclays Bank. The trove included letters from the usual bankers and moneylenders, bills from shirtmakers and bootmakers, invitations, school memorabilia, betting books - and an original Byron manuscript, several poems of Shelley, letters of Byron's circle and many previously unknown letters from Byron himself. This rich discovery became the occasion for T.A.J. Burnett's full biography of Scrope Berdmore Davies.

Dandies are made, not born. Scrope (it rhymes with soup, not with soap) was the second son of a Gloucestershire vicar. There were 10 children and Scrope's prospects were hardly lavish, but he was educated at Eton and Cambridge. Mr. Burnett points out that ''Eton turned the simple clergyman's son into a wit, a dandy and a scholar with the entree to the grandest drawing-rooms of London. At the same time it made him a gambler, a drunkard and a spendthrift who ended his days in ruin.''

Eton was in some respects hellish, and it is sharply etched by Mr. Burnett. In the dreaded Long Chamber, the one enormous room where Collegers were housed, there was no adult supervision between 8 P.M. and 7 A.M. To the lack of privacy, and presumably of sleep, were added interruptions both prankish and depraved. Rats infested Long Chamber; the boys hunted them and nailed up their skins over the fireplace, in between fighting, drinking and gambling. The wonder is that at Eton Scrope formed habits of personal and intellectual elegance; these he further developed at Cambridge, where he probably met Byron through their mutual friend John Cam Hobhouse. The excellent Hobhouse tended to stuffiness, but Scrope's great attractions were his gaiety and his easy tolerance: Byron described him as ''the life and soul of me and everybody else,'' and hoped that he would ''marry and beget some Scrooples - it is a pity the dynasty should not be prolonged - I do not know anyone who will leave such 'a gap in Nature.' '')

Life in Byron's circle was energetically feckless. In 1808 Byron wrote to Hobhouse, ''I am buried in an abyss of Sensuality, I have renounced hazard (the ancestor of the modern game of craps), but I am given to Harlots, and live in a state of Concubinage.'' He describes Scrope at the same period, ''infinitely intoxicated with Gaming, Sea-bathing at two in the morning, and Supplementary Champaigne (sic).'' The rhythm of their year corresponded to the London season and the racing calendar; gaming, racing, shooting, tennis and sparring were both business and pleasure for Scrope, who had to make a living from the proceeds of his gambling. In fact, he made a small fortune, lived well and remained solvent for 15 years, but his cheerful irresponsibility was never without financial anxiety.

Mr. Burnett suggests that in his raffishness, Scrope was ''the invisible Muse of 'Don Juan,' '' but also praises his calm, his judgment and his exemplary loyalty when these qualities were much needed. Byron's scandalous separation from his wife was attended by terrible rumors of the poet's madness and sexual malpractices. That Scrope's devotion was rare and Bryon treasured it is clear from a letter of 1818 discovered in the trunk at Barclays Bank. It begins: ''You can hardly have forgotten the circumstances under which I quitted England, nor the rumours of which I was the Subject - if they were true I was unfit for England, if false England is unfit for me.''

AS long as Byron is present in this biography, either in person or as a correspondent, Scrope Davies can be seen in full and vivid form: lively, witty and affectionate. After Bryon left England, Scrope dabbled in Reform politics with his friends Hobhouse, Douglas Kinnaird, and Sir Francis Burdett, but Scrope's role was pale and secondary. In any case, financial disaster loomed. In one year Scrope seems to have lost 17,000, and by 1820 the most prudent choice was flight. Byron died in 1824. Scrope lived abroad for the rest of his life, no longer gambling but existing in Ostend on a small income, dining out on his anecdotes of the Byron circle and exercising his wit on visitors and expatriates. He died in Paris in 1852.

This cheerful biography is necessarily somewhat lopsided. It is dominated by the most fully documented period of Scrope's life, the years of his friendship with Byron; the sections on his brief political career and his long exile are understandably much less vigorous. Unlike Hobhouse, who ended his days glossy and prosperous, Scrope Davies left no memoirs to bend the judgment of posterity or even to fill in the narrative gaps. Mr. Burnett's account of Scrope is uneven in density, but it provides a sympathetic and entertaining portrait of the man and his milieu. A sprightly foreword by Bevis Hillier epitomizes the urbane, irrepressible Scrope: ''a carrier, but not a victim, of the epidemic disease of the early 19th century, the Romantic Agony.''