Rating: 4/5

Sartre corresponded exactly to the dream-companion I had longed for since I was fifteen: he was the double in whom I found all my burning aspiration raised to the pitch of incandescence. I should always be able to share everything with him. When I left him at the beginning of August, I knew that he would never go out of my life again.

This comes on p.345 out of 360 and, in one sense, it ends the quest that de Beauvoir has been on since childhood: to escape the shackles of her bourgeois family and the values in which she has been brought up; to break out of her insularity and to set herself on a path towards knowledge as an end in itself; to find a singular companion with whom she can be utterly herself but who will also push her to extend her thinking and ways of being. It's quite something to have met someone who will turn out to be a life-time companion at just twenty-one. 

This is the first of de Beauvoir's 4-volume autobiography and it's a set that I read at about 17-18 and which was a seminal, inspirational read for me. It was with some trepidation that I have come back to it knowing all that we now know about both de Beauvoir and Sartre, the unsavory relationships, and the questions that have been asked about her complicity and/or compliance. We cannot read this 'innocently' anymore - but this is still a superb account of a young woman's coming-of-age in the first decades of twentieth century France (de Beauvoir was born in 1908 and this ends when she is about 20-21 in 1928/9). 

The restrictions and constrictions of de Beauvoir's family, her stifling childhood and adolescence and her adoration for her father, before she grew out of it, gave her her initial political views of the world: 'property, it seemed to me, was a sacred right... I readily agreed with [my father] when he said his objection to universal suffrage was based upon the fact that the majority of the electorate were stupid and ignorant... If workers hated the bourgeoisie, it was because they were conscious of our superiority. Communism and socialism were the results of envy.' It's astonishing to see how far de Beauvoir is to move from this position though we have to wait for the next volume before her political growth really comes into focus. 

Alongside de Beauvoir's own growth into adulthood is the story of her best friend, Zaza. Oh, Zaza! I don't want to give away spoilers to anyone who doesn't know but this is an impactful and emotive tale that almost reads like a novel. Indeed, de Beauvoir later wrote a novelised fiction which has recently been released based on this friendship: The Inseperables/Les inseparables. 

Rereading this, it's impossible not to think about the lacunae and gaps, of what gets left out: that's particularly the case around Sartre in this volume where we're not sure how - and whether - they move from study companions and friends to lovers, and what de Beauvoir feels about this. Given her agonising about Jacques earlier, this remains a puzzle - though there's no obligation, of course, for de Beauvoir to open up her private life to publication, especially in the 1950s. I can't help wondering all the same. There is little about sexuality at all: some female friends are described in sensuous terms but even the relationship with Jacques appears overwhelmingly cerebral. Scenes where de Beauvoir is groped in a cinema and flashed on the streets leave her bemused and confused rather than feeling violated or frightened. Maybe she really was that sheltered by her respectable family. 

In any case, this is a gripping read and it's rare to have a book that builds on the exhilaration of reading and learning as this one does. De Beauvoir has a strong and individual voice and her self-analysis is cool and seemingly objective - almost inviting us to ponder, again, what this sleight of hand might be not sharing.