Rating: 5/5

Charles Portis, born in 1933 in the state of Arkansas, one-time Marine sergeant, is an American author best known for his classic Western novel True Grit. Such a darn good writer who created eccentric characters and comic plots. 

Part of the American Vintage Contemporaries series published back in the 1980s, this road novel by Charles Portis features 23-year old guitar pluckin’ ex-marine Norwood Pratt who lives (if you call this living) way down in the grit of rural East Texas. For me, when it comes to road novels the spice is in what prompts hitting the road in the first place and all the encounters on the trip. This one penned by Sir Charles is a real doozy. Since so much of the color and texture of reading Charles Portis is in his homespun, down-to-Texas-earth language, by way sampling Daddy’s literary cookin’, here are a few direct quotes from the beginning of the book along with my comments:

On The Visitors Norwood Invites To Stay At His House For A Couple Of Days
“Sometime during the night the Remleys decampted, taking with them a television set and a 16-gauge Ithaca Featherweight and two towels.”

You have to love those Remleys, dirt poor husband and wife with a baby, steeling the Red River Texas version of the basic human necessities of food, clothing and shelter: a TV, shotgun and towels.
 
On One Of The Houses Where Norwood Grew Up
“Once near Stamps, they lived in a house between a Tasee-Freez stand and a cinder-block holiness church. There had been a colorful poster on the side of the house that said ROYAL AMERICAN SHOWS OCT. 6-12 ARKANSAS LIVESTOCK EXPOSITION LITTLE ROCK. On the other side of the house somebody with a big brush and a can of Sherwin-Williams flat white had painted ACTS 2:38."

Great combination – go see all the horses, cattle, sheep and pigs and an in-your-face reminder of what you need to believe to get your ass into heaven.
 
On A Feature Attraction At The Gas Station Where Norwood Works
“On top of the station there was a giant billboard showing a great moon face with eyeglasses. A little cartoon body had been painted on beneath the face, with one hand holding a gas hose and the other extending to the public in a stage gesture, palm outward, something like Porky Pig when he is saying, 'That’s all folks.'"

Such a billboard is a clear, bold expression of American freedom. No wonder communism or socialism could never take hold – imagine living in a land where you can’t display your very own version of Porky Pig to sell gas. Impossible! 

On Norwood Making Home Improvements
“He ripped off the imitation brick siding on the house – Norwood’s father had called it nigger brick- and slapped two coats of white paint on the walls in three days."

But one example of racism in the book. Racism is so much taken for granted by Norwood and others that, in a way, it isn’t even seen as racism; rather, it is viewed as simply the way things are. 

On Norwood’s Sister’s New Husband Coming To Live In Norwood’s House
“Then with absolutely no warning Vernell married a disabled veteran named Bill Bird and brought him home to live in the little house on the highway.”

Vintage poor people: Vernell does what she damn well pleases and now that she’s married, she has her new husband move in, Norwood be damned. 

On What Drives Norwood To Hit The Road
“Norwood did not like the sound of Bill Bird’s voice. Bill Bird was originally from some place in Michigan and Norwood found his brisk Yankee vowels offensive. They argued about the bathroom. Bill Bird had made himself a little home in that bathroom. He used all the hot water. He filled up the cabinet with dozens of little bottles with typing on them, crowding Norwood’s shaving gear out and onto the windowsill. He used Norwood’s blades. He left hairs stuck around in the soap – short, gray, unmistakable Bill Bird hairs. Norwood had built the bathroom, it was his, and the thought of Bill Bird’s buttocks sliding around on the bottom of the modern Sears tub was disagreeable."

Turns out, not only disagreeable but completely and totally unlivable. Just think of having a Bill Bird plop his Bill Bird buttocks in your house, speaking with an annoying accent, using all your hot water and taking over your bathroom. 
 
Again, all these quotes are from the first pages. The story only gets better, including the part where a shyster businessman talks Norwood into driving a car to New York City. When Norwood shows up, the car smells of fresh paint, is towing a second freshly painted car and there is a young lady Norwood is obliged to take with him on his drive. But Norwood is no fool. Although he agrees, once on the road, the whole shyster plan is turned on its head when Norwood senses serious danger. Very entertaining read.