Rating: 5/5

A Gorgeous Book: But Be SURE to ask for This lavishly illustrated 1991 edition. A collector's item if I ever saw one - Very, Very Short - but Very, Very Sweet! Your kids will love it. 

The owl and the pussycat went to sea
In a beautiful pea-green boat
They took some money 
And plenty of honey
Wrapped up in a Five-pound Note.

Of such books are Lifetime Memories Made! 

For when Junior discovers the world of adulthood in his or her teen years, she or he will Know already the Modern definition of Absurdity as evinced in postmodern writing.

What is the Absurd, then? I'll give you an example. Remember the comic strip Non Sequitur? The name gives a hint: it is the gateway from an Aristotelian to a Quantum Universe. 

Suddenly the meaning of a world depends entirely on the point of view from which one experiences it.

Edward Lear, to go back to Owl/Pussycat, lived in a World of Hurt and Pain. So he created nonsense rhymes - the Poetry of the Absurd!

But Lear's myopic Victorian world invented the ungainly modern Box. Suddenly people were Boxed in.

Because viewpoints are different, we had to now SELECT a Box at the onset of adulthood In which to bury our pain.

Edward Lear's POV was Escape from Any Box at Any Cost.

Like at what cost, then? 

The Pascalian Wager.

The Wager - or bet - in Pascal's Pensees, introduces us to the Absurdity of the whole Process: leaving our comfort zones...

In order to arrive at what you do not know
You must go the way in which you are not.

So T.S. Eliot; and Lear, in the intense pain of rejection, epilepsy and illness, and being lost in a time warp between the box of polite indifference in all around him and his personal freedom in the free absurdity of nonsense, knew the feeling!

No wonder Eliot loved Lear. 

If you don't know Anguish you won't.

Kids know anguish well. Freud said the biggest obstacle to psychic growth is clinging to one's mother, all the time.

Edward Lear knew that feeling of anguish because he couldn't let go of love!

But he made the leap, the wager of simple Faith:

Through his childlike, playful Absurdity in zany poems like this...

And that took bravery, as he published them all!

And invented the Modern Limerick in the process.

And now, for your listening pleasure, is Edward Lear's nonsense poem about the brave men who sailed to sea in a sieve, to visit The Jumblies:

https://youtu.be/3_7jHCEMxZY?si=EHsSq...

AND - here's that super actress - Judy Dench - reciting The Owl!

https://youtu.be/1MtIJsxHMzw?si=LWdqg...