Rating: 3/5

A combination of two mysteries in one volume, "A Study in Scarlet and The Sign of the Four" are the first two Sherlock Holmes mystery novels. I think Doyle wrote "Scarlet" when he was only 27 years old, so while reading and perhaps having in mind a stodgy, old, pipe-smoking knightly author, please keep in mind, Doyle was just a young fellow goofing around the novel medium when he created his classic Sherlock Holmes character, which obviously influenced every mystery tale that followed. Kudos to Mr. Doyle on that score, for sure. As to the two stories here, here are my thoughts:

A Study in Scarlet:
A British veteran returns from war in Afghanistan, wounded and melancholy, lamenting his loss of military status and stature, and is now looking for a cheaper place to live. A barroom buddy tells him that there's another fellow looking for a roommate so he can afford a specific home. In London. On Baker Street.

The veteran is Dr. Watson, and the prospective roommate is an odd scientist named Sherlock Holmes. 

"A Study in Scarlet" (1887) is Watson's first introduction to the quirky private investigator who determines all manner of clues unnoticed by the police with his hyper-observant manner and deductive reasoning. He works as a scientist most of his days and kind of treats these criminal matters as a fun lark when called in by the cops to help him.

This first case has Holmes and Watson investigating the odd death of a man who suffered no visible wounds but has a lot of blood found around the body. Clues hinting at foreign and subversive political influences in Germany and America complicate things a bit. 

Then we take a big jump across to the Utah territory of the American West for the second half. A weary traveler named Ferrier and a little girl are the only members of their wagon train still alive, and, on the cusp of perishing themselves, come across a band of Mormons who provide them water and accept them into their group.

I listened to the audiobook version of this novel via the Hoopla app and narrated by Paul Spera.

Verdict: Not really an enjoyable read/listen. The mystery has a few moments of surprise and clever deductions but some of the sequencing and discussions among the investigators had me scratching my head and listening to sections twice to understand what was happening. Doyle improves with later Holmes mysteries.

Jeff's Rating: 2 / 5 (Okay)
movie rating if made into a movie: PG

The Sign of Four:
Sherlock Holmes is testing out different mixes of intravenously administered cocaine three times a day to keep his brain stimulated, and Dr. Watson is a little worried. Then the beautiful Mary Morstan visits and asks for their help.

Ten years ago Mary's father went missing following his return from duty in India, and then some period of time later she started receiving a pearl in the mail annually. Now she's received a suspicious letter from a man who wishes to meet her, claiming to have information about the pearls; she asks Holmes and Watson to accompany her on her visit.

The path leads to murder, treasure, double-crossing and some suspicious clues leading to a criminal crew that signs its warning letters and revenge notes "the Sign of Four." Holmes' hyper-observant manner and deductive reasoning will no doubt help the beautiful Mary solve the crime and mystery, while Watson gets an attaboy from us readers for his chivalrous and riz-heavy dealings with the young lass, to Holmes' irritation.

I listened to an audiobook version of "The Sign of Four" (1890) narrated by Clive Hayward via the Hoopla app.

Verdict: A fun mystery and a clear step up from the first Holmes tale "A Study in Scarlet;" if you are interested in the original Sherlock Holmes mysteries and came away from that first one disappointed, "Sign of Four" is a better read.

Jeff's Rating: 3 / 5 (Good)
movie rating if made into a movie: PG

Dual-story verdict: A pretty important volume for anyone interested in the whodunit mystery genre, because Doyle's Sherlock Holmes mysteries were so monumental in establishing it. The prose and pacing aren't dated enough to render the mysteries unreadable, by any means, but if we look at the two specific stories here, I'd say they are good and interesting but inessential. It makes sense that most school curriculums stick to "The Hound of the Baskervilles."

Jeff's Rating: 3 / 5 (Good)
movie rating if made into a movie: PG