Rating: 5/5

Hanging on to Max is a book in which Sam has to take care of Max and go to school at the same time. When Britanny(Max's Mom) and Sam were dating, they always had a good time. But then one day they went to far and had sex. That Tuesday, she tells Sam she's pregnant. Sam doesnt know what to do! He used to be this teenage boy who hung out with Andy (his friend) and focused is school. But now all of that will be over.

On the day Max is born, nobody sees him come in. When he goes in, he sees Britanny in the bed and feeding the baby. When shes done, he decides to carry Max. He looked so cute. Green eyes and curly blonde hair.Days after Max is born Sam goes to Brittany;s house too check on the baby and her. As soon as he walks in, she tells Sam he is going to give up Max for adoption.Since he was against her all the time, he decides to keep the baby and raise him himself. He wouldnt want Maz to grow up without knowing who his father was.

Soon he raises Max and higfhschool all by himself. He take Max to the daycare and goes off to class. He meets Claire, a pretty girl that got pregnant and kept her little girl. They decide to go on study dates and study for their SAT exams. They studied everyday at school in the library, or at each others house. On the day of the SAT, Sam drops off Max at his aunts house and drives to school.Later that day Claire,the kids, and Sam go see duks at a near by lake. Sam thinks he has found the perfect girl for him. They make out and go on dates. They gwt al,ong just perfect. A month later Sam gets his grades and scores high on everything. Sam's dad puts him down andsays that he wont be able to go to college because he is going to have to take care of Max and work to raise his son well. As time passes by, Sams dreams of going to college are all over. One night Andy and his girlfriend invite Claier and Sam o dinner. Everybody was having a good time until Max gets cut with a piece of glass. Andy and Sam ruch to the hospital and Max is able to get some stiches. Days later Sam decides to give up Max for adoption. Claire bursts out into tears and tries to convince him not to. 
The last chapter in the book says that years later Max shows up in the driveway and says "Hi, my name is Max."

In conclusion, Hanging on to Max was a book that teached me that if your planning on doing something think before you act. Because then you end up with a little boy and having to go to school at the same time. I recomend this book to girls so that they know how it looks the leave a guy in charge of a baby and know how he is able to dea with school and a baby at the same time.