Rating: 5/5

Henry V by William Shakespeare is the fourth instalment of the Plantagenet tetralogy. This play follows on nicely from the rise of Prince Hal/Harry to the throne to become King Henry V. We remember Henry V as the young beer swilling drinking mate of Sir John Falstaff – a regular at the Boar’s Head in Eastcheap. However, upon his ascension to the throne, he discarded his wild ways to become a more sober King, exhibiting the gravitas one would expect. This play is essentially about Henry V’s desire and calling to invade France. 

This Warrior King certainly had a penchant for war methinks. 

This play reads so easily. However, I’m not sure if this is due to my learning curve – or because of the writing - but I found it easy to read and understand. Shakespeare distinguishes between the language of the elite to the working class as you’d expect. He even introduces some passages in French (entirely) – such as when the beautiful Princess Katherine was trying to learn English when she realised, she might be bethroned to the English King to avert, what seemed to be, an inevitable war.

There are many memorable scenes in this play, such as the gift of tennis balls from the French Prince, the Dauphin, to King Henry V. Henry’s reaction is superb. I also loved the time Henry went undercover to see how his troops were thinking, feeling, and what they were saying (sometimes it’s best not to know) on the eve of the Battle of Agincourt. But I was sad that Falstaff only occupied a minor scene, and this when he was dying – MASSIVELY disappointed. 

On Agincourt, it was a battle where the English were totally outnumbered by the French, but they prevailed and suffered far less casualties than the French – it’s one of England’s greatest victories. But it was brutal. Henry was brutal too – this really struck home when he ordered his men to slaughter French Prisoners of War, even his officers shirked at that.

One theme that struck me in this play was the incredible power and responsibility a King (such as Henry V) possessed, he had the power to initiate a war that caused the loss of life and limb of many thousands. I believe this responsibility had a major impact on the King. I always find it interesting that opposing Kingsnand others, believe God is on their side.

Needless to say I followed my usual formula (see I am like a Hamster on a wheel, I have an aversion to change) of reading the play, reading study notes and then watching the BBC’s Hollow Crown series with the Gorgeous (let’s not deny it) Tom Hiddleston as Henry V – he is brilliant. I even watched a play on YouTube by what must be a US Theatre Company, from California – it is watchable too – the link is here:

(139) Shakespeare's Henry V | 2019 - YouTube

Now I can’t wait for Richard III, and I reckon I might be ready for a live play – they are scarce though here in Far North Queensland. Maybe I should start my own Puppet Shakespeare Company – coming to a pub near you!!!

5 stars