Rating: 5/5

There are several things I look for in a travel book experience: adventure, a smooth narrative, excitement and for the writer to get down to observing and understanding the people and place he/she is in without the eyes of a westerner. Strangely enough, I found it in Wilfred Thesiger’s Arabian Sands. Much has been said about Thesiger the man, the explorer, the throwback to the Victorian era, and before I opened the book, I cast everything I had heard about the man aside and read it with an open mind. What I found was truly delightful.

 He was truly one of the last explorers of his ilk and though there were some instances of condescension, he was very much observing the desert Bedouins and taking them entirely as they were. He wrote about the Bedouins with whom he traveled with, with what I sensed was respect and admiration; and after reading about them through his eyes, I've gained a whole new appreciation for them and the way they manage to thrive in such a harsh environment. He writes about tribal life and kinship, a concept foreign to him and to most westerners but which made up the life blood of relationships in Arabia. He starts off his journey by seeking out the Rashid, a tribe which was small but spread out throughout Southern Arabia and he calls them the smallest of tribes numbering only about three hundred men and yet they are the most authentic of the Bedouin, those least affected by the outside world. Through his journey, documents a way of life which no longer exists, at a time when the Bedouins were fast disappearing with the discovery of oil in the Middle East, bringing with it the modern conveniences which arrive with this discovery of black gold.
 
Upon finishing the book, I concluded that Thesiger was a true explorer; exploring for exploration’s sake. My favourite line from this book: “For me, exploration was a personal venture. I did not go to the Arabian Desert to collect plants nor to make a map; such things were incidental. At heart I knew that to write or even to talk of my travels was to tarnish the achievement. I went there to find peace in the hardship of desert travel and the company of desert peoples. I set myself a goal on these journeys, and, although the goal itself was unimportant, its attainment had to be worth every effort and sacrifice... No, it is not the goal but the way there that matters, and the harder the way the more worth while the journey.”

I feel somehow richer for having read this book which has a well deserved classic status. Thesiger himself concluded his journey: “I knew that I had made my last journey in the Empty Quarter and that a phase in my life was ended. Here in the desert I found all that I asked; I knew that I should never find it again. But it was not only this personal sorrow that distressed me. I realized that the Bedu with whom I had lived and traveled, and in whose company I had found contentment, were doomed. Some people maintain that they will be better off when they have exchanged the hardship and poverty of the desert for the security of a materialistic world. This I do not believe. I shall always remember how often I was humbled by those illiterate herdsmen who possessed, in so much greater measure than I, generosity and courage, endurance, patience and lighthearted gallantry. Among no other people have I ever felt the same sense of personal inferiority”