Rating: 5/5

A non-reading friend refers to Carlos Castaneda. When he mentions images from Don Juan, I wonder if Eiseley might share the some of the shaman's frequency for him.
Journey to Ixtlan
*** 
All the Strange Hours captured me, resonates on some level. 
***
To start, he quotes The Odyssey
"There is nothing worse for mortal men than wandering."

One. DAYS OF A DRIFTER
1. The Rat That Danced
2. The Life Machine
3. The Running Man
4. The Desert
5. The Trap
6. Toads and Men
7. The Most Perfect Day in the World

Two. DAYS OF A THINKER
8. The Laughing Puppet
9. The Badlands and the School
...

Three. DAYS OF A DOUBTER
21. The Blue Worm
22. The Talking Cat
23. The Coming of the Giant Wasps
24. The Time Traders
25. The Other Players.

Chapter 1 The Rat That Danced

"When my aunt died I found among her effects a beautiful silver-backed Victorian hand mirror. It had been one of a twin pair my maternal grandfather had given to his girls. The last time I had seen my mother's mirror it had been scarred by petulant violence and the handle had been snapped off. It had marked the difference between the two girls--their care of things, perhaps their lives. I had looked into the mirror as a child, admiring the scrollwork on the silver. Mostly things like that did not exist in our house. Finally it disappeared. The face of a child vanished with it, my own face. Without the mirror I was unaware when it departed.

"Make no mistake. Everything in the mind is in rat's country. It doesn't die. They are merely carried, these disparate memories, back and forth in the desert of a billion neurons, set down, picked up, and dropped again by mental pack rats ...

" ... I had flown two thousand miles to make a speech, not my kind of speech, but the kind they had insisted they wanted ... looking into the mouthpiece with the qualms of experience, but I needed the money ...

"The stage was vast and made for greater things than myself. It was an enormous cavern with only the small yellow glow of a light on the podium ... I was talking about time--time as it had existed in five great civilizations ...

"At this moment the press chose to make its appearance. From out of the dark cavern a stealthy figure crept along the edge of my vision. Suddenly from his hands emerged a light so blinding I almost staggered. Under its impact I was falling backward across decades. I clung to the podium as to a door being ruthlessly forced open against my will. Where was I? Into that ...

"The light on the stage faded though the afterimage stayed. The audience seemed insubstantial, vaporous. I tried again ...

"I broke off. The light had come again, this time a red glow at the stage edge. I was back by a switchlight in Sacramento opening a letter ... the summons that had come ...

"A spatter of applause was sweeping my audience. I was still clutching podium as I had clung to the flying train. Looking around I tried to determine what I had said. I felt as battered as on that night of fifty years ago.

"'Did you see him, did you see him?' exclaimed someone from the audience, rushing forward.

"'No, what?' I said, still returning from the glow of a long-vanished fire and drawing a fist down my face. 
 
"'The rat,' explained the man, whose features now registered in my mind as a former and distinguished student.

"'Nice to see you, Dick,' I said weakly. 'A rat, you say?' Others were grinning.

"'The spotlight,' It caught him right out of the dark. He tumbled, he ran, he played, he danced. It was fantastic, you should have seen it. Imagine, in a big municipal auditorium.'

" ... So that was the reason for the ironic applause. My speech ... had become increasingly incoherent in the white glare that blinded me. The applause was not for me. It was for the rat, the rat that danced."

" ... Wasn't it I who had once written that there was a trickster in every culture who humbles what are supposed to be our greatest moments? The trickster who reduces pride, Old Father Coyote who makes and unmakes the world in a long cycle of stories and, incidentally, gets his penis caught in a cleft pine for his pains. 

"I had summoned a rat who danced ... The rat cycle ... Something for Texas ... Only one of my own students would have caught the irony. Good old Dick who knew the ways of the Havasupai ..."

***

"'No,' I began, 'it was the same year as the Titanic sinking. He blew the gates with nitroglycerin. I was 5 years old, like you.' Then I paused, considering the time. 'You are right,' I admitted hesitantly. 'I was already old enough to know one should flee from the universe but I did not know where to run.'"

“ … the brain has become a kind of unseen artist's loft. There are pictures that hang askew, pictures with outlines barely chalked in, pictures torn, pictures the artist has striven unsuccessfully to erase, pictures that only emerge and glow in a certain light ... They can be pulled about on easels, examined within the mind itself ... The writer ... cannot obliterate them. He can only drag them about, magnify or reduce them as his artistic sense dictates, or juxtapose them in order to enhance a pattern ..."
***
page 32 -
"Even today, as though in a far-off crystal, I can see my running, gesticulating mother and her distorted features cursing us. And they laughed, you see, my companions. Perhaps I, in anxiety to belong, did also. That is what I could not tell Auden. Only an unutterable savagery, my savagery at myself, scrawls it once and once only on this page."
***
page 73 -
"Like a wolf on an invisible chain I padded endlessly around and around the shut doors of knowledge. I learned, but not enough. I ran restlessly from one scent to another. Sometimes I gave up and disappeared into the dark underworld of wandering men. Or I worked at menial tasks and convinced myself I would have been content if one of them had lasted."
***
page 152 -
"I have never chanced to meet another adult who has a childhood woodpecker almost audibly rapping in his skull. ... why should my dance with a crane supersede in vividness years of graduate study?"
***
page 155 -
" we, mankind, arose amidst the wandering of the ice and marched with it. We are in some sense shaped by it, as it has shaped the stones. Perhaps our very fondness for the building of stone alignments, dolmens, and pyramids reveals unconsciously an ancient heritage from the ice itself, the earth shaper. Like the ice, we have been cruel to the face of the planet and the life upon it. A chill wind lingers about us." 
***
page 262 -
"'There is only one,' said the remorseless gamester.
"'You have not learned its meaning. It is mentioned in your Bible. It is called the count of days toward wisdom.'
"'And this is where it ends?' We were whispering now.
"'Yes, this is where it ends.'
...
"'But I won,' I cried after him. 'Remember, remember, that I played.' It dawned suddenly morning in the harsh sunlight of Mexico, three decades back.
"'That, too, is part of the wisdom,' the voice came back to me.
"'You played. That is part of the counting. And this is where the kind of time that bewitched you began. Remember? Behind nothing, before nothing. This is the country of vertical time. I will leave you to add the zeros. The gods always carried them here."
...
" ... I was tired and I slept on the steps of a ruined temple. I cared no longer in what age I might awake."
... The wisdom could take care of itself. It was beyond me. It was beyond every man. But for all that the counting mattered."

"Make no mistake, I will dream again, but further, further back. The rifles will be silenced, the dice at last unshaken. I feel my hour coming. I am anxious to press on. They wait for me, the dog Wolf and the Indian, muffled in snow upon the altiplano."
***