This is the edition I have, and like all well-loved books, it's chipped, cracked, and worn. Halfway through I had to mount a search for the back cover and reattach it. But it's still legible, and you can turn the pages without them flaking off in your hands, so it's in good enough condition.

This one book in the series is in the Ballantine 'Bal-Hi' series. This means, I gather, that it's intended to be a cheap edition, aimed at people who are not very literate. Well, it's cheap all right. It's very poorly proofread (so that, at one point, a reference to o'Mara as being inexhaustible, short only of 'metal fatigue' is significantly reduced in poignance by the addition of an extraneous 'n': we're all of us subject to mental fatigue, after all). As for being aimed at people with limited literacy, I have my doubts. The very first patient is, after all, suffering from 'epithelioma'.

The Introduction (titled 'a note to teachers and parents', as if those were the only people involved in a child's learning) can be safely skipped. It's clear from context that the person who wrote the introduction had never encountered the series before, and really didn't understand it.

As with most of White's books, this one is episodic. In a sense, there are only two episodes in this one: but since one acts as a prequel, and the other is many chapters long, it's worth treating them as if this were multiple short stories, stitched together into sequential and parallel continuity by a common narrative thread.

SECTION I (CHAPTERS 1-5)

A new patient, mysteriously unconscious from a minor skin cancer, is described by the newly arrived Ian doctors as a god, although the more cynical and world-weary of the two dragonflies qualifies this. Then it's just a matter of resolving the patient's quarrel with its personal physician...

SECTION II (CHAPTERS 5-8)

After Lonvellin leaves the hospital to continue its mission (still carrying its personal physician--and don't lose track of that physician, by the way), things return to bizarre normal, until Lonvellin realizes that the medical problem is beyond its solo resolution. It's a mistake to impress VIPs, if you want a quiet life. Lonvellin demands the aid of Conway and the Monitors. This is the episode, btw, in which a frustrated Conway, escorting newbies around the hospital, directs them to several places other than the exit).

SECTION III (CHAPTERS 8-12) 

On Etla The Sick, Conway and his Monitor colleagues try to convince themselves that they just have nasty, suspicious minds. Even for the Monitors, this isn't particularly likely. The Etlan Empire is pretty seriously (and obviously) implicated in the problem from the start. This is the point where Conway is informed that if you genuinely mean well, it's easy to act as a spy, because you won't act suspiciously.

SECTION IV (CHAPTERS 12-18)

Realizing that though the Etlan Empire can't find the Federation (too diffuse) without coordinates, but they CAN find Sector General, the Monitor Corps prepare to evacuate and fortify the hospital for a siege. This involves removing the patients and the doctors who know the coordinates of Federation worlds. This chapter includes a discussion of why people will do the most suicidal things rather than disappoint their friends. Prilicla, as usual, hits the nail on the head by arguing that, if its friends would not think it was cowardly, it would be on the second transport out. Asked why the second, Prilicla explains "I am not completely without valor".

SECTION V (CHAPTERS 18-24)

In general, communications problems at Sector General are evaded by the rather nebulously defined 'Translator computer'. It's anything but a universal translator, but even with its flaws and failures, it's essential for communications: and it takes up a large part of the computing power of the hospital. So when it fails...Conway eventually has to abandon medicine, using seven Educator Tapes for translation. Because the other Senior Physicians and all the Diagnosticians are out of action for one reason or another (many of the Diagnosticians had to leave because they knew the coordinates for Federation planets, installations, etc. Others, like Thornnastor, are injured), Conway effectively becomes the only Diagnostician in the hospital. 

The defenders and the field medics wonder, at first, why the Etlan Empire don't just try to destroy the hospital, rather than try to capture it. But they figure out, eventually, that the corrupt Imperial officials have to have a Triumph/Show Trial, to justify the war. This means that the Federation forces have a better chance of mounting a defense, but it also means that there are many more casualties: and the wards and medical staff are significantly overwhelmed. I should point out, by the way, that I hope nobody ever DOES develop a weapon as fearsome as the 'rattler' described herein.

EPILOGUE (CHAPTERS 24-25)

It's been obvious from the beginning how this has to end. The problem has always been how to bring the necessary ending about. The Monitors insist that if the late Lonvellin (whom they describe as a 'talented amateur') hadn't meddled, they'd have achieved the same end by more subtle, longer-term measures. In fact, they argue, the Etlans would eventually have resolved the matter themselves. But in the event, if Conway hadn't ignored Commander Dermod's unacceptable advice, the matter would likely not have been resolved before the Etlans succeeded in capturing the hospital. I never have thought much of Dermod. 

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

I should include two points which most readers seem to miss. One is the never really explained argument that the Monitor Corps recruits almost solely from Earth-human DBDGs. This isn't comprehensible in any way. The Federation was founded by DBDGs, from Earth and Orligia. But other species (most NOT DBDGs), joined with their colony worlds very early on. If the ships are almost always Tralthan designed and built, why wouldn't Tralthans, for one, be included in their crews?

Second, there's the question of sex roles. Most people, reading fairly casually, (it's easy to decide to skip the expository bits, which are identical from story to story: but they should be read carefully at least once, because they're critical to the plots), tend to assume that there are no females on staff--or if there are, that they're confined to subordinate roles. In fact, among species which are bisexual in their reproductive patterns (meaning, in this case, not the Hudlars, who change sex with every child, so that the mother of the first child is the father of the second...), the evidence is that female staff members are about equal the number of males. This isn't obvious, because ets are deliberately not referred to with sexed pronouns. The stated rationale for this is to avoid embarrassing misattributions. This doesn't really hold water, because the term 'it' isn't much better. One would think that in developing the 'Universal' languages that are used for communication in the absence of Translators, a personal, nonsexed pronoun would have been included. A major oversight, especially since doctors must awkwardly balance empathy and objectivity when dealing with patients...

There is one exception. In this book as in several others, it is stated without evidence or attribution that females of any species cannot use the Educator Tape system, because they cannot adapt to sharing their minds with the donor minds. This is never justified, it is simply stated axiomatically. 

I put this on more or less the same level as the assertion that Monitors are all (or almost all) Earth-human DBDGs, because of some supposed mental traits that make only them able to do the work. I'd like to see some more research, if you please, and parse it thoroughly before I accept any such assertions.

One other quirk, which White eventually more or less phased out: the members of the various species are often casually referred to as 'races'. To the extent that the term 'race' EVER had any biological validity, it wouldn't apply here. The Kelgians, for example, are not a 'race': they're a SPECIES, and no other term should be used.