Rating: 5/5

Handsome, wealthy and extremely eligible Sir Gareth Ludlow gave up on love after his lovely and headstrong fiancée died in an accident. He has never loved since – but now, 7 years later, 35 years old and with his elder brother killed in the Peninsular War, Gareth realises he must marry. So, ignoring the many pretty young women his sister has been trying to push his way, Gareth decides to propose to the shy old maid, Hester Theale, whom nobody – not even her own family – even notices. Little does Gareth know that Hester has been in love with him many years now, and that she realises that this proposed match does not bring with it his love. 

On his way to formally offer for Hester, however, Gareth comes across the stunningly lovely young Amanda ‘Smith’ (as she introduces herself). When he discovers that Amanda – who is only 17 years old – has run away from home in an attempt to emotionally blackmail her grandfather into letting her marry the army officer she loves, Gareth decides to step in. By abducting (as she puts it) Amanda. What follows, as Gareth tries to keep a check on this madcap schoolgirl who insists on trying to escape, is what Sprig Muslin is all about. For Amanda resembles Gareth’s long-dead love, Clarissa; and Hester, seeing Amanda, wonders what is going through the mind of the man she loves… and Amanda has only one goal: to somehow bully Grandfather into agreeing to her marriage. 

Romance? Yes, certainly; Georgette Heyer, after all, is known as a writer of Regency romances. But what a lot of people unfamiliar with her work don’t realise is that Heyer also has a brilliantly witty style, and Sprig Muslin is one of the stellar examples of her humorous romance novels. The plotting is intricate and the situations hilarious. Heyer’s language is delightful, and her characters wonderfully etched: the hero who, while looking the traditional Regency romance hero), is far too nice, too amiable to be predictable, the heroine (if Hester can be called that) is not a raving beauty, and reveals unexpected spine and resourcefulness – and Amanda is a scream. 

If you’re looking for a light, witty (and yet satisfying) Regency romance not in the oh-so-predictable Cartland style, this is one I’d recommend. Highly.