Rating: 2/5

I have no idea why this book even exists. The writing is decent and the author certainly seems well versed in 19th- and 20th- century music, literature, philosophy, science, and history...but for all of its intellect, the novel doesn't have much of a point. 

Gregor Samsa is a man-sized cockroach who used to be an insurance salesman—yes, an actual person—in Prague. Through a series of coincidences, he becomes a fly on the wall (pun intended) to some of the most momentous events in U.S. history. The synopsis made me think that he would provide a profound insight to these events; after all, the entire point of this Kafkaesque hero is that he's not human, and therefore supposedly immune to the follies of our species. However, his profound insights can basically be summed up as "Hitler bad. But building an atomic bomb to win the war is also bad."

Most of Insect Dreams was hideously boring, but some parts were so stupid and tone-deaf that I can't believe the author included them in the book. There's a scene where Gregor takes Alice Paul's virginity. Imagine being a women's rights activist and then a century later, some pseudo-intellectual writes about you fucking a giant bug. There's another part where a receptionist at Gregor's job writes him a love letter about how she wanted to marry him but her parents wouldn't approve because...he's a Jew. She could convince them to accept a giant cockroach as a son-in-law, but nothing is worse than a Jew! Could Marc Estrin be any more subtle? Another disappointment was a historical inconsistency about a Japanese-American who self-immolated at the White House in protest of the WWII-era policies towards his race. This was one of the more interesting parts of the novel and I wanted to learn more about it, but I can't find any mention of it anywhere. It was strange that the author fabricated events when there's already so many true parts of history he could've included.

I wish I had given up after 20 pages when I realized I was never looking forward to reading. It didn't got more enjoyable.