Rating: 3/5

In a recent speech I attended by Walter Mosley, author of, for example, “Devil in a Blue Dress,” “The Man in my Basement,” and “Bad Boy Brawley Brown” (see my review), he cited Rex Stout as one of his “mystery genre” influences. Mr. Stout was a prolific writer of mystery novels and stories. His most famous character is a private detective, Nero Wolfe, a rotund, well-read, opinionated, man with a penchant for orchids and for gourmet cooking (indeed, Mr. Stout published a cookbook with recipes from Nero Wolfe’s kitchen). These books are always narrated by Archie Goodwin, Nero’s assistant. In recent months I have also read ‘The Doorbell Rang” (see my review), which I found entertaining, so this one seemed just waitin’ to be read, so here we go!

This short book (154 pages) involves the murder-by-a-bomb-in-a-desk-drawer of Peter Odell, a vice president of an oil company who is one of two potential candidates for president, as the president, Cass Abbati, is retiring. Problem is, the aforementioned desk belongs to Amory Browning, one of the other candidates for president. The two main questions, then, are: Why was Mr. Odell in Mr. Browning’s office opening his desk drawer? And: Who planted the bomb? Well, OK, Question #3: Who was the intended victim, really? Per usual, the suspects are several in number and include Mr. Browning; Odell’s wife Madeline (who retains Mr. Wolfe to investigate the murder of her husband); Helen Lugos, Browning’s secretary; Dennis Capes, a researcher in the firm; Sylvia Vemeer, an actress; and Kenneth Meer, Odell’s assistant. 

This one goes quickly, as do most of the Wolfe novels, with plenty of red herrings, research by both Archie and a trio of part-time investigators (think of ‘em as New York’s version of the Baker Street Irregulars), suspects and police captains alike summoned to Wolfe’s digs (he never goes out), and the revelation of corporate chicanery and infighting gleefully reminiscent of “Mad Men” and “Game of Thrones.” This book was published in 1973, but set in 1969, the year the Mets battled for the Pennant (Archie is a die-hard Mets fan) and feminism was becoming a more prominent political force. Of course, both Archie and Nero are more traditional men, so dealing with these issues is a confusing issue for both of them. Nero somehow sees Archie as able to relate better to women, but Archie is dating a woman who is challenging many of the gender stereotypes that had gone unquestioned for a long time; makes for a more entertaining book.

Fun, quick read (I guess one might call it a “beach read” these days).