What this book is about?
Although , the title itself is clear the author’s quote explains the book’s objective clearest:
Every body I talk to says ‘no’ . This is the number one reason people give for quitting the business. When they put emphasis on getting ‘yes’ answer, it doesn’t always happen, most people simply aren’t prepared. They don’t know how to handle it. They weren’t ready for people to reject them. Perhaps they had been conditioned to believe that everyone would react just like they did and get ‘in’. May be nobody prepared them for the possibility that some people won’t get ‘in’.
 
This book is written in the context of the business of “network marketing’. Basically it is about selling a membership to a kind of club whose business is to make new members whom they call distributors. 
So it is a tough business, but who’s business is not tough?
 
This book contains 24 tips to train our minds into the skills of taking rejection for a living. The book is a bit messy because there lacks a concrete framework that all the tips can be hung on and thus the tips are more like tangents going out of a theme. 
 
Anyways. 
Some good tips are:
· The beloved oyster metaphor is used here. Pearls come out from oysters but they suffer a lot in the process. Similarly to succeed one must be able to accept many rejections. 
· Get sick and tired of being sick and tired
· Easy yes’s produce little successes. It is like stretching a rubber band backwards. More it gets pulled back the further it will go. Similarly the more no you can take without snapping, the further you will go.
· You’re not their boss. No body needs to agree with you, certainly not potential clients
· Success takes time. There is nothing such as overnight success.
· Don’t be afraid to approach prospects out of fear they will reject

How is it useful to you in your : 
Life
This book is so important because in life we have to face so many “no’s”. We just need to learn to face rejection be in love, in business, in family. The idea is not to stop proposing until someone says yes. Especially true in love, otherwise half the world would be unmarried if they had given up at the first love rejection.

Business
Any business is so full of rejection. This book gives you the psychological tools to stand up to the thousands of rejections you get.

Career
Ask for a raise and most likely you will get a “no”, the first time. Keep trying, as the writer says, “no is the beginning” not the end.