Rating: 5/5

Utterly brilliant, groundbreaking, necessary book, which overturns many flawed and biased assumptions about the "primitive" past. The mere 450 pages are so densely packed that it took me almost three stinkin' weeks to read, but it was worth every frustrating minute. 

The fundamental narrative structures of popular stories are clearly derivative and based not on a convergence of psychological archetypes but rather on older forms which have been widely diffused throughout seemingly-unrelated ancient cultures. The later accretions and interpolations and subtractions can deform a story almost beyond recognition, yet by tracing subtle influences to earlier versions, one can reconstruct migratory pathways that lead past the traditional classical Greco-Roman derivations, blending the Indo-Europeans with outside traditions hitherto unrecognized by some philologists. 

The opening demonstration of this principle shows how the "Hamlet scheme" in which a whirlpool is made by women working a grinding mill - a great wheel in the sky - has been found in various forms through the north and west of Europe, from Iceland down to Rome. Ancient stories in the Nordic Eddas continue on back through Ireland, the mainland, and down to the Near East; the tales recorded much later in the Shahnama are as ancient as the hymns of the Rig-Veda, and the whole mass circles throughout the Shamanism of the steppes and the Indus river valley religions and finally to a nearly global treasury of universal myth. 

The heroes proclaim that they rule over recurring sections of the Zodiac - over heaven and time - in an essentially cosmological conception of the place of humanity, recurring in cycles of myth and ritual, eternal rounds, circles within cycles within wheels of a vast interconnected whole. 

The problem is that prehistory is by definition unwritten, and only scraps and fragments of myth have survived from that time. Yet "an enormous intellectual achievement" is presupposed in the ancient view of the world, which even the earliest documents introduce in medias res. Archaic verbal imagery was in some cases a scientific language, preserved now only in fleeting implication discernible solely through painstaking correlation of hundreds of sources. As Giorgio de Santillana was professor of the history and philosophy of science at MIT, and Hertha von Dechend was professor of science at the University of Frankfurt (and a research associate at MIT), they are uniquely equipped for the task. 

For instance, the "four corners" of the "earth" which moderns laughingly assume to be a primitive reference to a flat earth was actually the ideal plane made by the ecliptic spread between the four points of the vernal and autumnal equinoxes and the summer and winter solstices (it wasn't until around 1400 that "earth" was though to represent the actual planet). The conceptual spinning poles marking the wobble of the axial tilt turned the planet into the middle connecting point of a sort of cosmic hourglass figure. The precession of the equinoxes marked each world-age - Christ opened that of Pisces, Ichthys, the Fish, and is known as the sacrificed lamb of the constellation of the Ram, which follows next. 

The book is a rambling treatise on a bewildering bunch of obscure myths and creation stories. I loved the parenthetical story of Il-mater, the daughter of the air, descending to the surface of the waters (much like the Holy Ghost - long understood to be a feminine mother-figure - hovered and brooded over the waters in Genesis), floating above the world until Ukko/Zeus sent his bird to her to create the world out of seven eggs with her.

We range over the Golden Age ending in the Twilight of the Gods; the world wars between Aesir and Vanir; the Celestial Wars of the Indians; the cosmic context of the otherwise-ludicrous Biblical story of Samson. We are treated to discussions on the rivers of forgetfulness, and speculations on how they are related to Native American myths. We wander through Plato's Pythagorean "world above" and the rivers and oceans of space between heaven and earth; the whirlpool with the tree overhanging it common from Greece to Polynesia, with "the way of the dead" being through the Milky Way. Ancient star maps are discussed, showcasing the constellations common from Egypt to China such as the Arrow. The extraction of the navel of the earth in stories from Turkestan to King Arthur and his sword are tied together. 

The cosmological conceptions spreading from the Ancient Near East to India in the great Temple-building complexes which grew out into the Indonesian islands culminating in such monuments as Barabudur are shown to have commonalities with a great surplus of art, such as the African calabashes with cosmic scenes inscribed on their surfaces. There is an amazing discussion on all the different types of cosmic trees, such as the Yggdrasil. We search for eternal life with Gilgamesh (and other fire-bringers like Prometheus and Maui) and the goddesses in the great river of the sky and watch Plato's Timaean Demiurge creating a planetarium of sorts, creating souls in equal number with the stars and distributing them throughout the cosmos where, if they live well, they might one day journey back to their first star.

The Cosmic Tree of the Northwest Africans turning in a spiral marking the rotation of the stars; in the Kalevala, Ilmarinen climbs the great Tree to grasp the stars, and Vainamoinen sweeps him away in the whirlwind out to Pohjola. The Sampo - the Sanskrit skambha, "pillar, pole" - is part of the mill, with the tree which grows from it being the world axis, leading back to the Indo-European complex and beyond. The Shaman climbing the notches like stairs on his post or tree is mimicking an ascension to Heaven just as did the Mesopotamian Priest on his seven-planetary-spheres-tiered Ziggurat; the Chinese myths are even more explicitly calendrical and sky-conscious, and the Siberian cosmological drums contain a wealth of performance-based records of stellar events. 

What is ultimately shown through the wild untamed mass of material Santillana and von Dechend have collected is how the typical view of cultural history as a steady rise from primitive man to our modern enlightened age is simply not based on evidence. As Marija Gimbutas and Riane Eisler have shown, high cultures existed far earlier than we have been taught to imagine. 

One bit of advice: read all the appendices as you go along! (Yes, all 39 of 'em.) Don't save them for later; I found them absolutely vital to understanding the arguments presented. Those of us who are not multilingual would also do well to keep Google Translate open, as there are multiple quotes in different languages which add interesting details. 

With a thesis this revolutionary, there are bound to be minor flaws as the details are worked out. The underlying problem with this book (among so many other books) - my major disagreement - is that it attempts to allegorize the myths more than always seems to be necessary; I deeply disagree that a cosmological interpretation inherently implies fictitiousness. A more literal and a more figurative reading are not mutually exclusive; that is, even if the myths are used to record and name astrological principles, the personages they take their names from don't always have to be imaginary as well. Both stories can often be true. If anything, the causation seems to me more likely to be reversed in this book; that is, the figures predated their use as labeling devices for the astronomical concepts. In the ancient cosmology, Nut can be the Mother of the Sky both symbolically when related to the zodiac, and literally as a Queen of Heaven giving birth to the Stars, the souls of humanity. 

Then again, I'm just a stodgy euhemerist, so what do I know.