Rating: 4/5

This is a very slim book. I was surprised that this book isn't more well known than it is. I'd never heard of it until I did a search for holocaust books and happened to see it near the one I was searching for.
The story is a very quick one, I finished it in less than an hour last night. It's one of that you start and can't stop until the end.
Leitner's book starts with her leaving the ghetto and being transported to her first camp- Auschwitz. She leaves as a member of a 7 person family. She ends up a person in a 4 person family. (This is not including family out of the country, which her Father and several other extended family members were.) Some would say she's lucky she survived and that some of her sisters and one brother did as well and I suppose that's true. But there is no word for how unlucky it is to see your Mother being carted off to an oven. How does one survive that? Leitner mentions numerous times that were it not for her sisters she'd have given up early on- her sisters kept her alive. 
The story takes us through the few camps Isabella went through, some of what she went through there, some of her feelings at what happened to humanity during this time. 
There is also a touching remembrance of a family vacation years later where a group of Germans sat down next to her and her family in a restuarant. The flashbacks were so utterly horrible for her that she was forced to leave while freaking out. 
This type of book is especially hard for me to read because I'm half German. My Mother is from Germany and my Grandfathers fought against each other in the war. They fought against each other. And then became friends years later when their children married. I'm aware that what those people did is not a reflection on me but at the same time it's hard to hear certain things being said about "Germans". My Mother is a "German". I'm a German. Leitner didn't use the term 'Nazi's' in the book, but 'Germans'. It's one of those situations where I fully understand yet I don't understand at all. 
I will keep reading the memoirs of Holocaust survivors- they wrote them for reasons and they deserve to be heard and their ordeals known around the world.