Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars. 

“I have a great deal to lose, Jack. If I become a ruined woman, my entire life will change. I will no longer be invited to social gatherings, and many of my friends will no longer speak to me. Most likely I will have to move to a remote place in the country, or go to live abroad.”“I am taking the same risk,” he pointed out. “No,” she replied with a wry smile, “you know quite well that men are never judged the same as women in these matters. I would become a pariah, whereas you would receive a mere slap on the wrist.” Amanda’s 30th birthday is nearing and yet she has never been touched by a man. Resigned to her fate of spinsterhood, she wants to at least experience a night of passion. On her birthday, a man appeared at her doorway, and believing that he might be the man she hired – she pulls him inside. Jack Devlin only wanted to call on Amanda to discuss a possible business with her but when she mistakes him for the man she hired for her 30th birthday, Jack decided to play along with it. Although not completely giving Amanda what she desires, he lets her have a taste. And soon, they meet again. Amanda was surprised and embarrassed when she discovers that the very same Jack who gave her pleasure is the notorious businessman and most successful publisher John Devlin whom she despises. 

Suddenly You is a historical romance stand-alone written by Lisa Kleypas. I love her. She writes good novels. She has written some of my favorites: Secrets of a Summer night and Devil in Winter, so naturally, I had high expectations for this one. 

Meet Amanda Briars: She is a fairly known novelist. She is sensible, independent, and intelligent. A country-bred girl, she moved to London when both of her parents finally passed away. Her work as an author is what gives her the money needed to support her lifestyle. She is happy with her situation: spinsterhood although she does admit that having a companion would be nice enough. But of course, she harbors no illusions that she has any chance to get married for she is 30 years old and that must mean that her child-bearing days are gone. 

Meet John Devlin: As a nobleman’s bastard, he a had rough past. With a loan from his father, he started his publishing business. His reputation is not the best, for it is known that he was not fair when it comes to his business dealings. Now, he is London’s most successful businessman, and yet nothing seems to satisfy his soul. 

The main characters first meet during Amanda’s 30th birthday when she believed that Jack was the man she hired for that night. Jack went to Amanda’s townhouse intending to make her write for his publishing company and he was surprised to find out that she had been expecting someone else instead. Although confused, he decided to play the part and let Amanda take her pleasure, but of course, he did not let Amanda give her virtue to him. And then, they meet again during Mr. Talbot’s party. But it was obvious that no introduction is needed when they seem to already know each other: at least he knows her. Amanda does not like John Devlin as a businessman and thinks he’s a scoundrel while Jack had taken a liking to her. When they decided to work with each other, their desire for each other is apparent. And what comes with passion and desire is a scandalous affair…a few conflicts here and there and finally a HEA after countless banging. 

I loved the heroine. Especially during the beginning of the book. She is someone with who I identified. She was independent and liked her life as it was: for she has no need of a husband and thinks it would be intolerable to have one. She was straightforward and had a no-nonsense attitude. And when she had this internal dialogue, “No one had ever said such things to her before. People were intimidated by her self-possession and no-nonsense demeanor. No man would ever dream of calling her adorable, sweet, darling….” I feel like Lisa Kleypas wrote her character especially for me because Amanda is quite literally me. If I was a character in a book, I would probably be her. Although towards the end, Amanda’s character seemed to take a 360 turn. The sensible Amanda suddenly was gone. And I was so annoyed! Because she was written so well then suddenly…blah. 

I loved the hero. It is no surprise, though. I love me some self-made men in historical romance land. He was responsible, caring, and a better man than what people give him credit for. And of course, what’s a hero in an HR without some traumatizing past and the decision to never marry unless circumstances call for it. He was honestly a good hero. What a man! And he certainly was naughty and very H word all the time. 

I liked this story, alright. It was entertaining. Amanda and Jack had some nice chemistry. I was honestly expecting a completely different story, I thought it would be the usual “her reputation is at stake I have to marry her” type of marriage but it was the “oh no she has my baby in her belly I have to marry her”. I was surprised but I liked it. This book is just as well-written as other Lisa Kleypas books. But the problem I had was that it had so many sensual scenes. I have no problem with passion when it comes to romance books, for god’s sake it is a romance book, but this one had sex overload. It felt like rather than emotional connection, it focused too much on their physical desire for each other which of course I did not like so much because I prefer emotional connection over bed scene any time. I just have to see that the characters are truly connected with each other for me to believe their love for each other. 

And although I loved Amanda, she was so judgemental towards Jack at the beginning. What particularly annoyed me about her is when she decided not to tell Jack about her situation, it was so dumb! And so out of character, she was written as someone who is sensible and frankly, what she did what dumbness overload. I am just glad they got that over with. Jack had faults too, of course, it was obvious that he adored her and yet he was too blind to realize and was almost too late! Also, their first separation was so frustrating. If a happy ending was not required in romance, I would think that they won’t end up with each other because neither of them does anything to fix things and talk to each other and my patience was wearing thin!

The last 3 chapters felt rushed. I think Kleypas could’ve added one or two more chapters so it does not feel like the conflict they had toward the end was just glossed over. What I liked, however, and I admit had me giggling was when Amanda discovered the truth about Jack’s age. I understand her, I too would break down if I married a man younger than me. But Jack’s response was so cute and the whole time I’m just smiling and jealous because I need him in my life. Oh, he was so sweet to her! I must admit, I was shocked too when his real age was revealed. It was such a funny scene but the way he comforts her just made my heart go *sigh*. They annoyed me but I love how they comfort one another and eventually realized that they were perfectly meant for each other. 

Overall, it was an enjoyable book and was on the spicier side so if one likes reading that, I think they’ll enjoy this. However, one or two scenes about that are just enough for me so when there was more I was not particularly happy. And as usual, it is a well-written book by Lisa Kleypas which is just what I expected. Amanda and Jack were characters that I genuinely liked although both were annoying at times. My favorite part is Jack’s age reveal. I can’t get over how funny it was. It definitely fits his character to lie about something like that. 

Some quotes: 

“And yet…how nice it would be to attend parties and lectures with a beloved companion. Someone to talk and argue and share with. Someone to share her meals, and cuddle in bed to keep the winter chill away. Yes, independence was the best path, but it wasn’t always the most comfortable one.”

“I was thinking of that first night we met…that you were willing to pay me for doing this. And I was trying to calculate how much you owe me after all the times we’ve slept together.” As weary as she was, Amanda couldn’t prevent a sudden laugh. “Jack Devlin…how can you think of money at a time like this?” “I want you to be so deeply in my debt that you’ll never be free of me.

“I’ve spent the past few years going out nearly every evening and feeling alone in the midst of a crowd. Now I finally have a home and a wife and I want to enjoy them.”

“I didn’t want you to think of me as a younger man.” “You are a younger man!” She glared at him vehemently. “Five years…oh, God, I can scarcely believe I’ve married someone who is practically a…a boy!”

“Yes. I’m mad over you. I adore you. I lust after you constantly. I love your sharp tongue and your big gray eyes and your voluptuous body. Now come to bed and let me demonstrate what a younger man can do for you.”