Rating: 5/5

2023 Review of 3rd complete read
I am reading a new-to-me Norton Anthology, The Norton Anthology of English Literature: Romantic Period edited by M.H. Abrams and others. There will be selections that I will read and will want to read more of. Vindication of the Rights of Woman is one such example.

Here I find how daring were these thoughts of Wollstonecraft. Here a few ideas that caught my attention.

 * Wollstonecraft called on men of value to find inherent and practical value in educating women.

 * They would be have resources to be better mothers, able to help children with supporting early education and with having improved ability to be mother with some wisdom and with less interest in spoiling children.

 *Wollstonecraft pointed out that when women's education was limited that the women were up limited in numerous ways and that women were not able not participate in companionate marriage, being the long-time friends she wishes wives to become to husbands. 

Wollstonecraft did not argue for equal education throughout educational process, just for the few years would boys and girls be educated together in all educational endeavors. After that, girls might receive similar education but not to the same degree. 

As a result of Wollstonecraft's arguments being taken up, I can retrace the historical trajectory of women's academies where sewing and cooking were emphasized and of Home Economics degrees at university level. The MRS degrees which were a great improvement and allowed for better companionate marriages.

Wollstonecraft was early philosopher of men and women's rights. Think of A Vindication of the Rights of Men. We are right to consider Wollstonecraft when we think of the philosophers of the Enlightment. 

2017 Review of 2nd complete read
I read this as a buddy read with members of Catching up on the Classics. I have read this essay before as a undergraduate/graduate student or maybe both. Also discussed Western Civilization as undergrad. 

I think of this essay from time to time, thinking about the most educated women before the opening of female seminaries. So in August 2016 I read -Governess: The Life and Times of the Real Jane Eyres- and -Courtesans: Money, Sex, and Fame in the NineteenThe Century-. While we commonly think of Wollstonecraft, her relationships with men, and her daughters along with her writing, we commonly forget that she was educated enough to live in prestigious households as a governess  While I can be sad at the thought, I can also be grateful so that this essay had Genesis in a woman who knew from personal experience, living among and not among the wealthy.

I have written extensive notes on the buddy reads page, and cannot possibly summarize here. Know that I am grateful wherever you are today Mary Wollstonecraft.