Rating: 2/5

I've gotten pickier with the books I let myself acquire without my usual thorough perusal, and for good reason. Good intentions pave the road to hell, and I find that attaching to one publisher or another that proclaims itself a touchstone for the necessarily unorthodox in a particular demographic ends up dishing out the same old, same old, and ends up looking very much the status quo, albeit with a more specific focus than most. My last VMC bought for the sake of the publication edition went as well as this one went poorly and barring the Precious Bane that I recently picked up, the settings and the flap jacket introductions blur together so much that I shall have to be more hesitant before I dive into more 19th-20th c. white woman novelizations, as this combo of novels here was boring in the beginning and virulently nasty at the end. Comparisons to Jane Austen are rather misleading, as one of the strengths of Austen was to deal with character flaw, not stereotype, and to conflate the two is a laziness symptomatic of bigotry, plain and simple.

The most enjoyable part of the first work was when the two nastiest characters face off against one another, while the nicest part of the second was whenever Rachel was afforded some interiority. In contrast, the worst part about the first one was how droning it got at times in combination with an almost complete lack of character development, while that of the second was rampant antisemitism that makes me wonder what the praisers of this second novel in comparison to this first were smoking. I've read all six novels and a chunk of stories of Austen's as part of a university course, so I can assure you, as poor as Austen's writing is at times, especially in her earlier pieces, she always made sure to never drown the small machinations of regular jerks with the lazy caricatures of a largely brutally oppressed people, so one is free to look at everything else in a more forgiving light without a harsh and brutal lie blaring in one's years of, this is good! This is bad! This is the good way to be obscenely rich! This is the bad (Jewish) way! Again, very little good character development, if there indeed was any, as the incorporation of Rachel into a happy non-Jewish home smacks too much of enforced conversion/eradication to hold up as an example of quality. As such, I was either bored, infuriated, or somewhat entertained, but the last came in instances that were few and far between. The times they are a' changing', but considering how Austen preceded Eden, time wasn't these novels' problem.

I've had issues with having the correct edition on the digital landscape as I do on the physical, and so what I expected to be a 200-300 page tome turned out to be the longest book left on my cumulative challenge list, which played a small part in my overall annoyance with this/these work/works. However, even if I had sufficiently mentally prepared myself for a near 600 page stroll, it still wouldn't have made up for drudging through a satire that punched down far more than it punched up, and did nothing else but reaffirm what a lifesaver it is to be rich. Really not the narrative I need in this age of normalized Neo-Nazis and salting the earth for the sake of the 1%. Austen may have merely been more subtle about these implications, but at least she had a wicked sense of humor.