Rating: 5/5

As usual, the editor provides an amazing state-of-the-science-fiction industry introduction and forewords to each story.

The ratings given are based on personal enjoyment and may or may not reflect the quality of writing of each story.

R &amp; R by Lucius Shepard: 4.5	
An improvement over the story that opened the previous anthology The Jaguar Hunter by the same author. This story also involves jaguar hunter, but it is more than that. A story of a soldier torn between deserting or continuing his time in the army after he becomes superstitious after breaking his R&amp;R traditions.

Hatrack River	by Orson Scott Card: 4	
A psychic girl ensures that the 7th son of a 7th son is born.

Strangers On Paradise by Damon Knight: 4.5	
A classic story about a seemingly apparent utopia hides a dark secret. In this case is what happened to the prior inhabitants of the utopia.

Pretty Boy Crossover by Pat Cadigan: 4	
An idol grapples with the decision of signing up to become SAD (self ware data). A story ahead of its time predicting the rise of influencers and idols becoming popular based on created personas.

Against Babylon by Robert Silverberg: 5	
1st best story of the anthology: A story about a relationship strained by the arrival of aliens in California. The ultimate test of If you love something, set it free. If it comes back, it's yours. If not, it was never meant to be

Fiddling For Waterbuffaloes by S. P. Somtow: 4.5	
A story about wild events ocurring after aliens begin posessing people in Thailand

Into Gold by Tanith Lee: 3	
A story about a prince in love with an sorcerer and the skepticism of her intentions his closest friend holds

Sea Change by Scott Baker: 5	
A story about a boy feeling alienated from his parents decides to leave his old life behind and play with his newly found friends

Covenant Of Souls by Michael Swanwick: 3.5	
I do not know what was going on in this story, but once it got its pants on and was ready to go, it ended. Something about nuclear war, a not so metaphorical cancer in a church and a ghost. 

The Pure Product by John Kessel: 2	
Grand Theft Auto with time travel, the story.

Grave Angels by Richard Kearns: 5	
2nd best story of the anthology: A story about accepting death, the adverse consequences of fighting it and its inevitability

Tangents by Greg Bear: 5	
A boy and a gay mathematician rejected by society make contact with beings in the 4th dimension through music and finally find a place where they belong.

The Beautiful And The Sublime by Bruce Sterling: 5	
A story about two love traingles and their resolution.

Tattoos by Jack Dann: 5	
Does the plot hold under scrutiny? Maybe. A story about regret and being able to make up for prior faults

Night Moves by Tim Powers: 3	
An entity that has haunted a man sporadically through his life tries to kidnap him and his family by creating a world of illusions

The Prisoner of Chillon by James Patrick Kelly: 3	
The story of a thief being shadowed by a reporter and how the reporter falls for the being that hired the thief

Chance by Connie Willis: 4	
The story of an unhappy marriage and how it leads a woman to literally live in the past

And So To Bed by Harry Turtledove: 3.5	
Interesting story of the what ifs of America being inhabited before the arrival of Europeans 

Fair Game by Howard Waldrop: 2	
1st worst story of the anthology: Just the story of a succesful hunt by a hunter past his prime

Video Star by Walter Jon Williams: 4.5	
A cyberpunk story about a man hiring a group of teens obsessed with editing videos of their crimes

Sallie C by Neal Barrett, Jr.: 2	
2nd worst story of the anthology: The only selling point of this story is seeing a group of mismatched historical figures interacting with each other

Jeff Beck by Lewis Shiner: 2	
3rd worst story of the anthology: A be careful with what you wish for story. A man wishes he could play guitar like his idol and his wish is granted

Surviving by Judith Moffett: 5	
3rd best story of the anthology: A story of a feral child and how she never fully reincorporated to society and the events that ensue after meeting the researcher that had been studying her life

Down And Out In The Year 2000 by Kim Stanley Robinson: 4.5	
A story about poverty and the struggle of a man to make ends meet after his marijuana plants are stolen

Snake-Eyes by Tom Maddox	: 4	
After not being required by the air force after a war is cancelled, a pilot struggles with animalistic urges caused by neural implants that were supposed to help him pilot.

The Gate Of Ghosts by Karen Joy Fowler: 4	
A story about how a girl almost gets lost in another dimension

The Winter Market by William Gibson: 4
A story about a producer of dreams and how one of his clients releases a dream that becomes such a hit that she is able to pay to upload herself to a virtual reality