Rating: 3/5

I read this after having read The Liar's Wife. The four novellas in that collection completely blew me away. These three novellas here had less of an impact on me. These three are all in some way about a woman's relationship with a man who is in the process of leaving, or who has already abandoned her, and whom she cannot for one reason or another relinquish.

The stories chart the progress of each protagonist's questions: why am I having an affair with a priest? How long will it last? It is so tenuous, yet it gives me something, but what? He will leave me for something or something else and I don't know when that will happen, only that it will, so how is he even with me at all right now? Or in the second novella, I am married to a journalist who covers dangerous, threatening events and he is always leaving, and may at any time leave in the most complete way which is to say that he could be killed, so why do I stay? How do I make peace with his departures? How was it that he was so much better with my mother when she was dying than I was? 

Or in the third novella, when an older woman is being taken by her son back to the town in Italy where she grew up, she is forced to confront the place and time when her teen-aged boyfriend and she made a pact to commit suicide, and he did, but she did not. She was shamed and sent away to America. Now she is asking, why did I live and he died? Was I really alive this entire time? What does it mean to be alive, and what do I owe the dead, if anything?

What pulls you through these stories is the questions the narrators keep asking, how the pursuit of one question's answer, maybe arriving at some kind of an answer, only opens up the next question, and the next. While these novellas are, most simply, the stories of three women's lives, it might be more accurate to say they are the record of the questions each woman asks herself about her life. As none of us are 100% certain about our own lives or why we do what we do or how things have turned out the way we have, I think the central aspect of these stories, -- the continual pursuit questions -- is very true to life.