Rating: 4/5

I've been binge-watching FX's series Justified, and decided it might be fun to extend my binge by reading the Elmore Leonard books that inspired the series. I figured I'd start out with Pronto, the first novel to feature stetson-wearing Federal Marshal Raylan Givens, native of Harlan County and veteran of the Kentucky mines. 

The novel ends where the series begins, with the “justified” shooting of a mobster at an outdoor cafe in Miami. The book begins in Miami too, but it has to travel to Italy and back again in order to return to the place where it started.

At first, when the novel begins, it doesn't seem to be about Raylan Givens at all. It is the story of Harry Arno, a bookie on the run from both the Feds and the mob, but mostly on the run from the mob, which of course is trying to kill him. Marshal Givens soon takes Harry into custody, but Harry tricks Raylan and gets away. Where has Harry gone? Raylan has a hunch, for he remembers something Harry once said to him years ago.

I haven't read Leonard in awhile, and I almost forgot what a pro he is. He is so good that he habitually makes his writing do at least two things at once. For example, when he describes a person, he makes that description part of a dialogue in which one character is describing this particular person to another. (For example, Joyce, Harry's ex-stripper girlfriend, describes Raylan, who she has seen in the hotel lobby, to Harry.) The reader gets a description, but he also benefits from the further development of two additional characters, all at the same time.

You Justified fans want to know, though: is this Raylan really the same Raylan? Well, he's got two little boys, Wynona and he are definitely  not getting back together, and the brim if his stetson is narrower in the books (a “businessman's stetson” they call it). Otherwise, he is pretty much the same, and you ladies can always imagine he looks just like Timothy Olyphant if you want to.

Pronto is an exciting thriller, full of interesting people, wisecracks, subterfuge and gun play. If I were you, I'd give it a try, whether you are a Justified fan or not.