Rating: 4/5

In this entry in the Lord Peter Wimsey series of detective novels, we find the woman he loves, Harriet Vane, back on the scene. In fact, the story opens with her on a solitary walking tour in Cornwall, discovering a body on the shore. Lord Peter, guessing that this may mean trouble for her (since she has previously been mixed up in murder), flies heroically to her rescue.

Not that his heroism—or their romance—is portrayed in the sort of terms that are recognizable to most present-day readers. He lounges about, mingling with locals and constabulary, and treats the whole mystery like a game, all the while tossing “How about a spot of matrimony, what?”-style lines Harriet’s way. She treats these offhand inquiries with all the respect they deserve, so the reader has to read both the tension and the romance between the lines. One must be attentive to realize that the police are regarding Harriet as a suspect, and to see how much she relies on Lord Peter’s devotion and esteem while appearing to reject them.

About the mystery: a young man of possibly noble Russian lineage, who works as a paid dancer at a resort, has either committed suicide or been murdered by razor across the throat. Upon discovering the corpse, Harriet has the presence of mind to realize that the rising tide will soon wash the body away, so she gathers what evidence she can before leaving the scene to try to contact the police. A good thing, too, because the body is indeed gone by the time the police arrive.

The police and our amateur detectives delve into the young man’s life and associates, and a fairly typical investigation ensues for most of the book. Toward the end, though, Sayers’s mania for complexity is unleashed, and she lost this reader’s interest a bit with her endless detail about coded clues and descriptions of all the highly improbable planning that went into the commission of the crime. Only one person had a serious motive for murder, which made it not very mysterious for me; all the other suspects seemed to have little reason to be involved.

Still, I very much enjoyed the characters and especially the subtle dance between Harriet and Lord Peter.