Rating: 4/5

My ninth Tyler novel, and my second favorite (after Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant). I recently joined my neighborhood book club and suggested this as the September read after I saw that Waterstones had made it one of their summer recommendations – even though it’s from 1995. Delia Grinstead is a 40-year-old mother of three from Baltimore. On a beach vacation to Delaware, she gets fed up with her family and walks back to their rental cottage, then on a whim gets in the van with the repairman and has him drive her somewhere, anywhere. With little more than the swimsuit and bathrobe she’s wearing, she arrives in Bay Borough and starts to make herself a new life from scratch. A few of the book club members thought this setup was far-fetched, and objected to Delia’s selfishness. But we’re certainly invited to feel sympathy for this woman who married at 19 and never got a chance to go to college or see the world. She grew up helping out in her father’s medical practice and then her husband Sam took it over – perhaps he even married her for that reason? This house has been her whole world, but also her prison.

So we get some familiar Tyler elements that have also recently recurred in Clock Dance: taking a break from your real life, creating alternative families, testing out ‘what if?’ and asking if it’s ever truly too late to overcome inertia and change. There are many wonderful secondary characters: Delia’s first employer, Ezekiel Pomfret, an attorney who’s constantly tinkering with his new computer; Belle, her landlady, who has a penchant for married men; Eleanor, her penny-pinching mother-in-law, who turns out to be her most faithful and thoughtful correspondent in her new life; and the Miller family, for whom she becomes a housekeeper – language stickler and high school principal Joel, 12-year-old son Noah, estranged wife Ellie, who left the family to become a weather presenter, and her father Nat, who in his sixties is starting a whole new life with a young woman he met at the gift shop of his retirement home.

Sam is less weedy than your average Tyler man, though Nat is by far the book’s strongest male character, and also gets two of the key lines: the title phrase and “time trip” are his descriptions for what life is like. The nature of time is a major topic: is it a ladder you have to keep climbing, or is it more of a circle? The way that characters and incidents echo each other (Delia and Ellie the runaway wives; the wacky schemes that open and close the book) suggests more of a cyclical pattern, and, indeed, Delia’s trip brings her right back to where she started but allows her to ‘know the place for the first time,’ as Eliot puts it. I love how the theme of time travel develops, starting from the newsletter Adrian from the supermarket produces. There are also various terrific dinner party scenes. A real stand-out from Tyler, and one I’d recommend to fans and newbies alike.