Rating: 3/5

Waldo: 2.5 stars

In terms of plot, I thought Waldo was really interesting, and quite similar to The Lathe of Heaven by Ursala K Le Quin. Also, I often enjoy the technical jargon, which this book had a lot of, so that was a pro rather than a con for me.

However, it has some issues with how it portrays disabled people. It was written in the 1940s, granted, but the story constantly degrades and insults the main character, who is disabled. Also, the characters also declare how much they hated him when his disability affected him, but as soon as it stopped, suddenly everyone is great friends with him and all his previous character flaws have disappeared. This story also plays far too heavily into the savant character trope (think the Sherlock show, if that helps) in which the character is beyond genius and yet completely inept to a ridiculous level in every other field. Beyond that, the pacing was very confusing, as the book had no chapters at all, so it felt as if all the events occurred within a matter of weeks, although it was supposed to happen over several months.

In summary I liked the plot, even if it was pretty predictable, but the characters and the way they act have major issues.

Magic, Inc: 4 stars

Magic Inc was a really fun blend of magic use and the business world (though it was written in the 1940s, so businesses were a bit different then what we might automatically think of today). The storyline was interesting as well, and was far less predictable than Waldo. This story was also surprisingly critical to corporations to a degree I did not expect, as well as some social commentary on how corporations inevitably tie into politics, general criticism on the US law-making system, and it specifically made a point to have a character realize his own racism and come to terms with it, focusing on the fact that African culture and history exists and should be respected. 

However, as it was written in the 40s, the author did play into some racist stereotypes when creating the magic and history of his only black character. Similarly, there is a mild amount of sexism as well, although it seems as if the author was trying to make a point against sexism.

Overall, I really liked this book, as the blend of magic and everyday professional life was very entertaining and the plot was enjoyable as well, even if there were (quite) a few issues with representation. (Also the main character had an extreme case of 'just some guy' syndrome.)