Rating: 3/5

Thumbing through the shelves of a secondhand bookstore (Unicorn Books outside Cambridge, MD), I found a battered copy of Alan Moorehead's Gallipoli in the stacks and bought it for a dollar. I'd say that's about right for it. 
Gallipoli is a narrative account of the ill-fated Gallipoli campaign, one that resulted in over 250,000 casualties for the Entente and the Ottoman Empire in a brutal deadlock that lasted for nine months in 1915. Like a lot of WWI's conflicts, the standout moments of the campaign were its start and its end, with a lot of the middle reiterating on a central theme of push/counterpush from one trenchline to another. The start marked a dramatic naval attempt to force passage of the Dardanelles straits in order to, essentially, bombard the Ottoman Capital into submission. And in the end, the Entente safely evacuated the peninsula and committed to other pushes through Greece (deposing the Greek monarch to make space for this) and the Arabian peninsula. The campaign made the reputation of Mustafa Kemal, and submerged that of Winston Churchill and half a dozen other proponents of the campaign. That's the cliffs notes version anyways, and Moorehead mostly picks up each element in turn with an eye for writerly flourish in his accounts.
Yet published in 1956, it's very difficult to separate Moorehead's work from the time of writing. To give one example there, Winston Churchill was not only still alive but actively praised the book and awarded Moorehead a cash prize for the book. Second, this was Moorehead writing within a decade of WWII, where he himself served as a war correspondent throughout the campaign. Third, as an Aussie himself, Moorehead's sourcing and primary interest for the Gallipoli campaign is in portraying the battles there as a nation building trial by fire for the Australia New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC). 
Take all three together, and an otherwise very good summing up of the campaign with a solid writerly foundation becomes much more annoying to read. While at turns Moorehead acknowledges the campaign to be an utter waste of lives, he can't help but think what might have been accomplished if the Navy had forced their way through in those early days. If the army's first landing had been more aggressive. If the generals in charge were less conservative or better coordinated. If a later landing on Suvla Bay hadn't been done with raw recruits but instead with experienced ones. If If If. 
In those ifs, Moorehead carries water for Winston Churchill especially, a proponent not just of the naval landing but especially of the subsequent land campaign past any reason or hope of success. Neither man can quit the view that "just one more" push would've done, even as Moorehead describes the ANZAC troops suffering to a man from dysentery and plagued by a whole civilization's worth of flies and Churchill burned every professional bridge in his political life. The result is a weird glorification of profound suffering, one that Moorehead breezes through almost entirely without quoting primary sources (something he does liberally when the generals are engaged in their umpteenth bout of infighting). Soldiers are described in Homeric terms, above such petty desires as sex or alcohol (but again, no quoting, and only really in reference to the ANZAC troops). Two journalist's attempts to expose the horrific conditions on the peninsula are also treated as a near scandal, with Moorehead calling one journalist "gloomy" and suggesting the other should have simply conveyed his concerns in a private letter...which is exactly what was attempted and foiled by the British Army itself. 
Even at the end of the book, with soldiers dying of exposure and frostbite in their thousands, Moorehead devotes most of a chapter to one final twist where the British "almost" sent yet another full six divisions to turn the tide with a kind of palpable longing.
Perhaps that's understandable. As he notes in his conclusion, the alternative was the Western Front, a place of almost nihilistic carnage and grim attrition. Moorehead paints a rosy portrait of a world redeemed by a successful Gallipoli, one where the Russian Revolution never happened (what?) and half a dozen other sweeping events of the war are undone at the stroke of a pen. Perhaps. 
But the difference between dreaming and living are vast, as Moorehead himself inadvertently illustrates in the book. The poet Rupert Brooke is given a loving shoutout, described in (again) almost Homerically attractive terms as he gleefully writes in his diary about looting Constantinople and raping the Sultan's wives, a kind of orientalist fever dream from the colonial era that explains so much of the British Museum's contents. Instead of the glorious campaign promised, Brooke died of sepsis on the island of Lemnos before the landings even started. In the end all his dreams of conquest were undone but a total unfamiliarity with what the task itself entailed. The same could be said of Moorehead's whole whistful view in my opinion. One can always dream that a battle could've turned out differently, but forty years later it might at last be time to wake up.