Rating: 3/5

This Mike Hammer adventure is quite different from other I've read. First, this one is set in more modern times and sadly, Hammer feels out of place. Hammer is still tough, but is showing signs of recognizing his own mortality-- which may have been Spillane writing more about himself than Hammer, as it obviously was one of the last Hammer novels by Spillane himself. 

The novel opens with Hammer recovering from a shootout with gangsters. The shootout has left him near death, so much so, that emergency responders ignored his prone body in hopes of saving some of the other shooting victims. If it hadn't been for a retired doctor coming on the scene, who took Hammer to his house (and saved Hammer answering a lot of police questions about his presence) and nursing him back to health. 

The doctor is an interesting character. He left medicine behind and became an alcoholic. He sees Hammer as a challenge to his lifestyle and a sign that it is time he stops drinking and returns to practicing medicine. 

Throughout the novel, because of the serious injuries he experienced, Hammer experiences weakness that would normally be out of character for him. He is forced to return to bed constantly in order to continue his recovery. His grievous injuries plague him throughout the novel, which hampers his ability to be the traditional tough guy his fans admire. This weakness, to me, seems likely to be Spillane speaking metaphorically on his own personal experience of aging. I could be completely off the mark in this thinking, but it helped me to continue through the novel. 

The plot is pretty basic-- Mike hears a deathbed confession of a friend that indicates a huge trove of money hidden away by gangsters and soon everybody wants it. Of course, the clue to the location of the cache is cryptic and Mike must use his detective skills in order to find it. Threats and confrontations with gangsters abound in this story, and despite his injuries, Hammer manages to hold his own. His reputation is enough to intimidate most of the gunmen and it is in these verbal sparring matches that Spillane excels. 

Hammer also agrees to marry Velma, though their relationship is kept chaste throughout the novel in anticipation of a marriage and honeymoon. This agreement seems to signal that Spillane was recognizing that his writing career was coming to a conclusion and he felt the need to wind up the details of this long running relationship. 

Black Alley as a title works well. Hammer contemplates his mortality and sees death as a Black Alley one stumbles into and then cannot find his way out. The metaphor is offered several times throughout the novel, keeping the reader tied to the title in a manner better than most. 

It is a decent enough novel, but I like the earlier Hammer stuff better. Hammer is just a better detective in the age of old cars, pay phones, and less technology. In this modern world, he seems to be an antiquated dinosaur who is almost always out of step with the world around him.