Rating: 5/5

4.5 rounded up to 5

You can always find some good deals in the clearance section of a Half Price Books.

Now they aren't originals but the omnibus collections of all the books in Elizabeth Chandler's Dark Secrets series. Having enjoyed the Kissed By An Angel trilogy when I saw but honestly can't remember if it was the first or second volume on the shelf at HPB...I had to have it.

I soon ordered the other one off of Amazon because I just can't have a series incomplete unless it just isn't meant to be.

These books were originally written and published in the early 2000s from 2000 to 2003 but again...I seem to have missed a lot of good books back in the day when I was still in school.

The stories all seem to be connected to a small town in Maryland called Wisteria on the shore of the Chesapeake Bay but since I have only read this first one I do not know if there will be any recurring characters or even references to each book.

This one focuses on Megan Tilby. 

Both of her parents are from Maryland but her mother Carolyn was sort of disowned by Megan's grandmother when she decided to marry an African American man that she met at college.

They moved to the other side of the country to reside in Tucson, Arizona and had to adopt children which is how Megan and her two little brothers Dave and Pete became part of the family.

For sixteen years, Megan didn't know anything about her maternal family until a letter arrived from her grandmother Helen asking Megan to come to the family home in Maryland. Despite being ignored, Megan's dad convinced her to go.

Megan arrives at the airport and is picked up by a woman named Ginny who was her mother's best friend instead of her grandmother. Ginny is a very nice lady who runs a thrift store in Wisteria and from what Megan gathers, her grandmother is not one of the most loved citizens.

Once in the town limits, a red Jeep almost runs into the car with Ginny and Megan. It is full of teenagers and Megan is shocked to learn from Ginny that the boy driving...is her cousin.

It is going to be brought up a lot so I guess I should say adopted cousin.

Matt's father Paul is the brother of Megan's mother Carolyn and he is staying with his grandmother after a messy divorce between his parents. 

Ginny drops Megan off at Scarborough House where Matt and her grandmother live and it looks like pictures that Megan has seen but also just like the house...in her dreams. It belonged to Helen's family and was passed on to her and her husband Thomas Barnes as an inheritance.

Megan first meets Nancy, the woman who comes to cook and clean three days a week for her grandmother, and she is not the nicest of people. This is going to be quite a trend for awhile as Ginny is the only person who has made a good impression on Megan so far.

It's sad but true that sometimes strangers are easier to get along with than family...

Helen Barnes is a strict woman and very old-fashioned in hers ways. No pictures on the walls of family and the Ten Commandments hanging by the mirror in Megan's room...charming woman.

When Megan can hear Matt's Jeep pulling in, she heads downstairs and hears a conversation between her grandmother and cousin. Helen is quiet but Matt is clearly not happy that Megan is here and she finds his back to her when she enters the library, pretending not to notice Megan.

Megan plays the game too and pretends that she didn't see Matt and asks Helen about her cousin.

When it is clear that her grandmother is amused by their acrimony towards each other, Megan stops and crosses over to Matt and out right asks him if he is a snob.

I love Megan and wish I could have had that much spunk to talk to someone and speak exactly what was on my mind at sixteen...

When Matt turns around, however, Megan can't help but notice that he isn't just cute but handsome with deep eyes like a river.

I mean Megan is adopted so they aren't blood relations...so it isn't as if we have a Flowers In The Attic thing going on despite a grim grandmother.

Megan goes for a walk along the property and finds herself at the family cemetery where she finds the grave of her grandfather, Thomas Barnes. Beside it is a beautiful grave marker showing the name of Avril Scarborough and the dates indicate she died when she was only sixteen years old.

It gives Megan eerie chills and she leaves to back to the house for dinner at six sharp.

Matt continues to ignore Megan and she finds that the food prepared for dinner is just as dismal as the prayer before hand. Very salty ham, biscuits hard as rocks and cream of oyster soup that sounds as if they were served raw even though Matt assures her they aren't.

Megan only finds the green beans acceptable to eat and it has Helen presuming that her parents have raised her as a vegetarian in comments to Matt as if Megan were not there. 

Dinner is awkward and Matt leaves to go to a movie with some friends and doesn't bother to invite Megan though she tries her best to get him to be a little bit nicer. After cleaning the dishes up, Megan goes to read in her room because joining her grandmother in the library would yield no conversation.

Not to mention that Megan brought a Gothic romance book with her that her grandmother might assume it is a smutty bodice ripper with the heroine on the cover...

Around midnight, Megan wakes up from a dream about the house and playing with a look-alike miniature dollhouse in every detail of Scarborough House and decides to explore just as Matt returns home. They avoid each other but Megan finds Matt in her grandmother's library going through drawers of her personal things.

Grandmother told her to respect her privacy so why is Matt breaking one of the rules Megan has to follow? 

That next morning, Matt goes for a Saturday morning run and blows off Megan joining him. She also strikes out on going shopping in town with her grandmother as Helen states she only deals with the "riffraff" there if necessary.

Megan stops at Ginny's store and finds her short-handed so she offers to help out since she knows how to run a register and Ginny is grateful. One of the ladies in the store doesn't know Megan is related to Helen Barnes and thinking she is a newcomer mentions that Scarborough House is haunted by a ghost...the ghost of Avril Scarborough.

Murdered but the family claims it was an accident.

While working, Megan notices the three girls that were with Matt and another boy in his Jeep yesterday afternoon and learns that they were also the girls he went to the movie with last night.

Matt is flirty and charming with the girls and it is the first time that Megan has seen Matt smile or be charming to anyone.

Matt does all of this with the guy from yesterday and two other boys and not noticing that Megan is working at the shop where the girls are shopping.

 It clearly annoys Megan but must also hurt like pouring salt on an open wound since she can't help but be attracted to him yet Megan has also tried her hardest to be as nice to Matt as possible.

So can't blame her...when Matt does notice Megan and they trade acidic barbs back and forth at each other in front of the group. One of the boys, Matt's friend named Alex Rodowsky, is clearly infatuated with Megan giving lip to Matt while he is clearly not amused at all.

Once they all leave, Megan makes friends with a girl that was looking at a necklace in the shop and tried it on at Megan's urging but can't afford it. Her name is Sophie Quinn and she seems to have a crush on Matt but is more amazed that Matt is Megan's cousin.

Not in a get close to the cute boy let's be friends kind of way either so I like Sophie too...

The man who runs the bakery next door where Megan grabs some lunch, a man named Jamie Riley, is also amazed that Megan is Carolyn's daughter as he grew up with her and Megan's father, Kent Tilby. His mother use to work for the Scarborough family and live in their house and wants to introduce her to Megan.

Mrs. Riley also happens to be a fortune teller but the minute she comes downstairs and sets eyes on Megan...she refuses to read her to both Megan and Jamie's confusion.

The next morning, Helen's antagonistic comments about the difference between Megan's grades in school being superior to Matt's are interrupted when her Bible in the kitchen goes missing. She goes into serious anger mode and accuses Megan of taking it while only subtly thinking Matt may have taken it as well.

Megan quips that it might have been the ghost of Avril Scarborough she has heard about in town and Helen goes even farther up the scale of anger at the name before heading to her bedroom and locking the door.

Matt doesn't appreciate Megan upsetting his grandmother because Avril was her sister and Megan can't help but be confused as to why Matt would defend her after all of her negative comments about him.

As if she were trying to form a wedge between them but why would Helen be trying so hard when it is clear that Matt absolutely loathes her...wishing she never came to Wisteria?

What follows is an amazing tale and to tell anymore would rob you of the privilege of finding out the truth in a Legacy of Lies for yourself...