Rating: 4/5

Du snakker Oslo-måten, jeg forstår Bergens-måten. 😵

Unlike other books of the "Teach Yourself" collection, this one presents a long historical introduction on the Norwegian language. So, to start with, Norwegian is a "Teutonic language" closely related to the other Nordic languages, namely, Swedish and Danish. Among these scandinavian languages, Norwegian is the closest to Dutch and English. 

In Viking times, Norsemen and Englishmen learned to understand each other, and Norse and Danish words were incorporated into English. There was another important movement in the Viking era, that of Latin literature and alphabet being brought to Norway, from England. Thus the difference between spoken and written Norwegian widened, as old Norse and Icelandic were the languages used in the administration, and some efforts were made to maintain that scribal tradition. 

By 1319 a Swedish king took over the reign, but by the end of the century Denmark and Norway united under one king until 1814. In the time of the Black Death, the German Hansa took over, therefore bringing some German words into the Scandinavia languages. 

After the Luther's Reform, Norwegian authors wrote Danish but also some grammatical Norwegian forms and words. Only in the 18th century can we find a common script/speech, issuing from the southeast, and called Riksmål. 

Ivar Aasen's work is relevant by creating a literary language called Landsmål, drawing heavily on Western dialects; it got official recognition in the 1880's. 

Another development came from the work of Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson as he adopted an "orthography closer to the pronounciation". That's the reform of 1907, based on the language usage by educated people in the southeast. It's the Riksmål, an expression advanced by Bjørnson in 1890, meaning state-language. 

Other changes followed, and foreign words got assimilated. But since 1967 (this edition) both forms Riksmål (or book-language) and Nynorsk (Landsmål) have equal status. Both are learnt in school. The spoken language in the south has a lot of influence in the rest of the nation. And yet there are differences in the grammar in several locations (say, Bergen and Oslo).