Rating: 3/5

“Even the wise man must play the fool if he wishes to beget a child.”

A little background, if you please. This was written in the same century as Shakespeare and Cervantes, check. He lived in the Netherlands, check. His father was a Catholic Priest, check. He was an ordained Roman Catholic priest, check. He is considered the point man for the early ‘humanist movement,’ check. He wrote this in a week while hanging with his friend Thomas More, the ‘Utopia’ guy, check. He never visited the Czech Republic, check. Waiter, check?
 
This encomium, a word that he uses frequently, will take you a couple of hours to read. It is probably a hundred or so dense pages, although it is a skip in the park when compared to More’s “Utopia,” which has been read.

There are references to everything and everyone. These include the ancient Greeks, the Philosophers, the mythological Gods, Homer, Virgil, and a whole lot of ranting about Christ and the Church.

It is absolutely a satirical examination of society in general, at times it is wickedly funny, but he was not an Apologist. And no one can hide under his words; from Euripides to Seneca and the Stoics to the Pope.

His story is told through a doppelganger, Folly, a female who has little patience for pretense or hypocrisy, as her name would suggest. And since all is folly, nothing serious can stand in its way. This has significant merit. He is pugnacious and he vilifies all professions; lawyers, kings, artists, priests, scientists, soldiers, scholars, writers, all who would claim that their work has importance and weight.

He makes the plausible argument that all is folly, and that the serious folk waste away their health and their lives stuck in the miasma of their over inflated occupation's value and its worth.

He shows no mercy. It is quite impressive to ponder the quiddities and the zeitgeist of the time through one set of eyes.

If you have a few hours and want to hear another side of the story of life, this is inexpensive and short. It has been translated into many languages, so if that lends credence to this philippic, well, there you are.

To this reader, it holds no more weight than any other treatise. It is one man’s opinion.

You may, permission unnecessary, become a disciple of the god of Folly, without shame. And, in fact, with Praise.