Rating: 2/5

I almost DNFed this one. Several times. But I can’t give up on books even when they’re bad. 

Is this the author’s first book? It feels amateurishly written - like something a high schooler would write for an English class. Got a bit better as it went on... but not by much. 

Very simple, cliched characters that you’ve seen a million times. 

Rushed scenes where food ordered at a restaurant takes the time of only two lines of dialogue to be delivered to the table (with no other shorthand or indication time has passed by) or where clothes are suddenly dissolved from a body without warning. How is this guy sucking on her nipples? When did she lose her shirt? 

It’s as if it were written by someone who has never actually experienced anything they were writing about. Like a sheltered teenager pretending this is how the world works because that’s how they’ve read it in other novels. 

Why is this book touted as a sweet girl-powered adventure to France, and not the cheap movie-of-the-week ‘romance’ it really is? I was very misled. But I was already too committed. 

It’s like it couldn’t figure out what kind of book it wanted to be, so it just tried haphazardly mashing several genres together. 

I would have liked it more if it didn’t have this romantic side story with the clichédly named Jake Bronson: man’s man who shuns fancy drinks for a Bud, wears boots, and has a cabin in the mountains (and *happens* to be super-rich, not that that’s important of course, so he’s perfect). *eyeroll* My problem with this overdone character trope is that some people tout it as someone who is more “down-to-earth” and “real” than a man who wears suits, drinks scotch, and wants to drive a nice car. But it’s just as much a cultivated image as those others. It’s no better (and no worse). It’s just overdone to hell. My opinion of the book immediately dropped a whole star when I saw this guy’s name and realized he’d be the romantic hero in the story. 

To be honest if I just went off the descriptions of France, this would have been a four or five star review. But the two-dimensional characters and disconnected plots truly ruined it.