Rating: 4/5

The subtle third-person narrative of Tolm Coibin (born 1955) masterfully portrays Henry James (1843-1916) as person in this 2004 Booker-shortlisted novel, The Master. Covering a period of 5 years, 1895 to 1899, this includes his defeat at London Theatre when Guy Domville (1895) flopped, his self-seclusion in Rye East Sussex, flashback to his former life in America, before going back and ending the story in Rye. 

I picked up this book because this is both a 501 and a 1001 and I have been postponing this book for almost two years now. My brand-new copy then is now starting to yellow so I decided that before the pages become brittle, I have to give it a try. I did not have any prior idea of what the novel is all about except that it was shortlisted in Booker.

After 5 pages, I thought of dropping the book and then return it to my bookshelf. The reason: I have not read any James' books (shame on me) except with some sketchy ideas on Daisy Miller which is one of the books included in Azar Nafisi’s Reading Lolita in Tehran. The blurbs on the first few pages of the The Master say that Colm Toibin adapted the Henry James’ style of writing: calm literary realism. And this being a biographical fiction of Henry James life is also my first since I have not also read Michael Cunningham’s The Hours which I heard also uses exactly same the approach: a splice of Virginia Woolf’s life told in Woolf’s stream-of-consciousness style of writing.

But I persisted by reasoning to myself that I have to start somewhere. I am glad I did. This is an unforgettable read.

There is nothing like it yet: the calm prose of Henry James. His silence as this novel’s main character.

Supposing that it is true that Coibin’s style here is exactly the same as James’, I particularly enjoyed his taut, luminescent and deep narration. Normally, a novel with characters not talking is boring for me but this one is different. I never knew that paragraphs and paragraphs of descriptions about what’s going on in a character’s mind can be interesting. Now I know better. If the character is as interesting as Henry James, who wrote the classic excellent novels like The Portrait of a Lady (1881), What Maisie Knew (1897), The Wings of the Dove (1902), and The Ambassadors (1903), among many others, coupled with the masterful prose by someone like Toibin, then definitely it should be a must-read.

My favorite parts are those that describe the house in Rye in relation to James’ reminiscences and thoughts. That is the house where James “hibernated” after his flopped play in London. The house provides the main backdrop of this novel and it feels like it has a life of its own (just like the clock tower in Virginia Woolf’s Mrs. Dalloway) by the way Toibin described it in the James-like prose that is akin to an impressionist painting: vivid and detailed, depicting the right lighting and the right angle yet achieved with very minimal brushstrokes. For example, the first time Henry entered the house (descriptions: blah blah), while looking around, he saw his room (descriptions: blah blah). It dawned on him that it will be the place where he would die. What with the 21 years of mortgage and he was already 52. I cannot even paraphrase the blah-blah’s because obviously I am neither Colm Toibin nor Henry James.

For me, the main message of The Master is at some point in the second half of our lives, we need to look back and reflect on the first half to know where we are going or how we want to spend the rest of it. We get setbacks, yes, but those points should not stop us from what we want to do. Rather, those should inspire us to do more. While in seclusion, James reflected on the series of deaths (mother, father, sister Alice, cousin Milly, a friend) in the family and felt almost alone in his house by the bay in Rye except towards the end of the story when his elder brother William, his wife and daughter visited him. I mentioned those deaths because each of them brought out who James was (at least in the eyes or imagination of Toibin): calm yet profound, loving yet detached, artistic yet devoid of dramatic nuances. 

After his 5-year stay in Rye, he was 57, he bounced back and wrote most of his more “complete” (his word; with The Ambassadors as what he called to be his favorite work) novels. Just to drive home the point that sometimes we have to slowdown or even stop, reflect, wind up, then continue what we were doing and possibly achieve greater success in life. 

Definitely, I will be reading some of the works of Heny James soon and probably pick up another book or two by Toibin.
 
P.S. Colm Toibin is an all-out gay. Henry James was said to be gay too. His contemporary was Oscar Wilde who was an outlandish and scandalous (according to this book) gay. There are implied homosexual acts in the book but not as descriptive as in Augusten Burrough’s Running With Scissors. Well, I should not have compared this masterpiece to that trashy memoir in the first place but I just want to give you a strong contrast just to point out that this, The Master is a must-read book for those who love the works of Henry James and of course Colm Toibin. But still if you are squeamish about gay love, this book is not for you.