Rating: 5/5

4.5 stars
I came across an article which claimed that this is one of the best books about motherhood you have never read. In my case, I had not even heard of this book! With Mother’s Day coming up, I decided to remedy that quickly. I started it the evening before last and would have finished it had sleep not overtaken me. It is a quick easy read and I found it hard to put down. 

Based loosely on the author's mother's life plus an amalgam of other pioneer women’s stories, the main character, Abbie Mackenzie, is a young woman who has hopes and dreams of becoming a singer and an artist. She falls in love with Will Deal and marries him at the end of the Civil War. 

A few years later, Abbie follows Will west into Nebraska which was unsettled land at the time and together they eke out a living on the unforgiving land, having, raising, and loving children who little understood them. Abbie’s was the hand that held her husband’s, rocked the cradle, fed the animals, cooked, scrubbed, made hand-made everything, and held the lantern—as the title says. She never realized her dreams but saw them fulfilled in her children’s lives. 

Her long life was to see many changes, losses, and blessings. She reminded me of several elderly ladies I have had the pleasure of knowing—and saying “goodbye” to. I once heard a saying that when an elderly person dies it is like a library burning down and while that is at least true, I am not sure if it might be said that such a death equates to a city full of libraries burned down. We greatly undervalue our seniors. They have seen and know so much, and we neglect them at our own risk. 

Bess Streeter Aldrich’s A Lantern in Her Hand is one of the best books about motherhood, but it is also an excellent book about marriage, relationships, love, life, and our country’s heritage as well. It is perhaps not great literature as it could stand some editorial work, but then I know many other classics which that could be said about as well. Still, it is good reading and contains much wisdom.