Rating: 3/5

'Women Who Kill' was author Carol Anne Davis's first true crime book, in which she profiles thirteen women, often depicted as the 'gentler sex,' who committed murder, either alone or, more often, as a team, usually with their male partner.

There are two historical cases featured here, those of Anna Zwanziger and Jeannie Weber, alongside far more contemporary examples. Many of these women didn't live or commit their crimes in Britain; most took place in other countries, and a good number were new to me. 

I appreciated how the case studies were structured in chronological order, starting with each woman's childhood, progressing through the dark paths they chose, and concluding with the latest developments as of the book's publication in 2002. Davis does not shy away from the graphic details of the murders, and some of these cases genuinely shocked me. She writes well, and I never found it a chore to turn the pages.

While I cannot speak to the accuracy of all of Davis's research, I have some concerns regarding her chapter on Myra Hindley and Ian Brady, as I am well-versed in that case. Although Davis did a better job than many authors on this subject, she appears to accept Hindley’s later claims - that she experienced physical abuse by her father and sometimes by her mother - as fact. She should have clarified that this was solely Hindley's version of her childhood, first mentioned while she was still campaigning for parole in the 1990s, and should be taken with caution. It’s possible that this did happen, but we only have Myra's word for it. While seeking explanations for someone's behaviour is essential, we must not entirely excuse their actions. Many people had far worse childhoods than Hindley did, but without resorting to the terrible crimes she committed. (Hindley herself later wrote that her father was ''not all bad.'')

I was shocked to read: "She seems to have blocked out the picture of the deaths," highlighting that when a relative died, Myra claimed it was her first experience seeing a dead body, and therefore must have forgot that she had seen the body of Pauline Reade. I thought, "Carol, that relative was her sister, who died in 1980. Hindley didn't even confess to knowing about Pauline, the aforementioned victim's death until 1986, so of course she wasn't going to admit it!" Davis claims that Myra later reverted to her former good self, but fails to mention her foiled escape attempt from jail in the 1970s, when she was away from Brady's influence yet still not above breaking the law. We also know now that Hindley wrote some very unkind things about her victims' families while publicly professing shame and remorse. I could go on, but Davis's profile of Hindley is superior to some of the others I've read, and she does hold her accountable for some of her behaviour. Davis also interviewed the minister (Myra's friend), who heard her confessions.

Davis is (rightly, in my opinion) harder on some of the other women in the book. In the UK, aside from Hindley, the ones that most will have heard of are Rose West, America's Aileen Wuornos and Karla Homolka. The less documented cases (in this country at least) were the ones I found the most interesting.

I would likely have rated this book four stars instead of three if it weren't for Davis' tendency to frequently use phrases like "It is more likely..." or "Perhaps this happened, or so-and-so thought this..." At times, it seemed as though Davis was trying to shape events into what she thinks really occurred. However, I prefer to stick to the facts and what is known, rather than trying to fill in the gaps. That said, some of her comments did provide me with food for thought at times. Her frequent use of generalisations, which I didn't agree with, also went against an otherwise good, though naturally disturbing, read.

The last three chapters are not case studies but rather a classification of female serial killers, an exploration of 'Fabrications of Femininity,' and an examination of theories on why women kill. It's all fairly basic, simplistic information, and I don't believe Carol Anne Davis is an expert in this area. What she is good at, though, is writing in an engaging way. 'Women Who Kill' isn't perfect or groundbreaking by any means, but it is still worth a read nonetheless. I have also purchased her second true crime book, 'Children Who Kill.' Like this one, no pictures are included.