Rating: 5/5

“Some say that we shall never know, and that to the gods we are like the flies that the boys kill on a summer day, and some say, on the contrary, that the very sparrows do not lose a feather that has not been brushed away by the finger of God.” (p.12)

Without the batting of an eye, Thorntorn Wilder’s presents his short story with the dilemma of the nature of the divine will and the resultant conflict between fate and randomness, faith and reason, meaning and absurdity.
Set in the eighteenth century in Perú,  “The Bridge of San Luis Rey” focuses on the collapse of the mentioned ancestral bridge built during the Inka hegemony that unites the capital of Lima with the merchant town of Cuzco, taking away the lives of five people who happened to be crossing the bridge at the precise moment of the fatal accident. 

 “Either we live by accident and die by accident, or we live by plan and die by plan.” (p.9)
The latent question throbbing behind the scene being whether the hand of God had some doing in the tragedy leads Brother Juniper to doubt and to investigate the five deceased searching for some logical pattern in their deaths while forgetting that the act of believing involves the acceptance of the senseless, which eventually proves catastrophic for the inquiring Brother.

The  Marquesa de Montemayor pours her heart writing emotional letters overflowing with lyricism to her daughter Clara, who is married in Spain and who can’t abide her mother, proclaiming her almost obsessive motherly love and her need to feel accepted instead of scorned by her only daughter.  Pepita , the Marquesa’s assistant, who was raised by the Abbess in the Convent of Santa María Rosa de las Rosas, selflessly offers her mistress faithful devotion but Pepita’s continuous efforts pass unnoticed by the miserable Marquesa.

Manuel and Esteban are telepathic twins who were left at the same Convent of Santa María Rosa de la Rosas as infants who become scribes. Esteban worships his brother and finds himself in agony when he discovers the secret love Manuel nurtures for Camila Perochile, a famous actress, which threatens the brother’s uncommonly close relationship, making him aware that Manuel’s fraternal love is less profound than his. Esteban’s remorse increases when his beloved brother cuts his knee with a piece of metal and dies from a massive infection, leaving Esteban devastated and without an aim in life.

Uncle Pío is a self-made man; confidant, manager and protector of the aforesaid actress who launches her stellar popularity in the theaters of Lima. After having a romantic relationship with the Viceroy of Perú, which produces three children, Camila decides to stop acting in order to become a true lady. After Uncle Pío’s failed attempt to convince her to return to the stage, he persuades her to allow her only son to accompany him in order to be trained for a year.

When these apparently unrelated people cross the bridge on the fateful Friday on July the twentieth, they are dragged down and irremediably engulfed like insignificant ants by the waters of the river alongside the bridge of San Luís Rey, taking their lives, their dreams and their new resolutions with it. What force propelled them to be walking across the bridge at the particular instant of the misfortune? Were they selected by some Divine Providence for some inscrutable purpose? 
Beware though. Because those who survive might obtain less wisdom, might live less intensely than those predestined or fortuitously condemned to death, as Brother Juniper reflects after tragedy strikes:  “Everybody knows that in the world we do nothing but feed our wills. Why perpetuate this legend of selflessness? Why keep this thing alive, this rumour of disinterestedness?”

The five deceased characters in Wilder’s story have the commonality of sharing loneliness, heartbreak and despair. Maybe the key to all the unanswerable questions lays there. Maybe the rejected are in need to cross an allegorical bridge to find love and solace, either in the world of the living or in the world of the dead. Maybe insignificant humans are part of an indecipherable greater scheme of the universe. Maybe nothing is scripted and capricious randomness rules the world. But even in the most absurd of scenarios, erring humans will need to cross the bridge of fear and find the courage to love some time or another. And Love, my friend, might be the one and only answer.

 “Even memory is not necessary for love. There is a land of the living and a land of the dead, and the bridge is love, the only survival, the only meaning.” (p.124)