Rating: 5/5

Legacy of Lies by Elizabeth Chandler is an amazing book. The book has a mixture of genres. Young Adult, Fantasy, and Paranormal are the genres that make up this wonderful book. The main character is named Megan. Megan is a girl who is adopted. Her grandmother who practically disowned Megan’s mother and wanted nothing to do with her or her brothers, or so she thought, invites her to stay with her for a few weeks. When a letter arrives from her grandmother saying that she want Megan to visit her for two weeks out of the summer, her dad makes her go. There she has weird dreams and things are in a whole other place when they wake up. Megan is trying to figure out what is going down in this house she is living at for a few weeks. Her sorta-cousin doesn’t make her visit much better. When she visits an old woman for help with this situation, the woman tells her she might be her grandmother’s sister reincarnated. And so much more goes on in this book. If you want to know more I suggest you read the book.

I really like Megan because she is very adventurous and isn’t afraid to put herself in danger to solve a mystery. Another one of the characters I like is Matt. Matt is Megan’s sorta-cousin. He is very shady. At one point he is nice, sweet, and cares for Megan. Other times he is nasty and rude to Megan. Sometimes he even tells her to leave, and that she shouldn’t have come. The Scarborough house is my favorite setting. I like it because it is creepy and has a history that only certain people knew the whole truth. “Have you ever felt like that, Matt, like you’ve been in this house some time long before now?” This is a part where Megan keeps having deja vou. I feel this every time that I am in a new place. I see one room and it’s like “I’ve been here before!” 

Overall this book was very well put together. I disliked that at the beginning you got confused at night between her dreams and her real life but the rest I liked. One of my favorite parts is at the end of the book where they are in the hospital and finally reveal everything. I enjoyed this book because I felt that Megan was a type of girl who was like the rest of us because in books/movies the characters tend to be mighty and not show their emotions. I think that by showing your emotions it shows you are stronger mentally.