Rating: 3/5

Harriet Tubman was born a slave on a plantation in Maryland. Historians think she was born in 1820, or possibly 1821, but birth records weren't kept by most slave owners. Her birth name was Araminta Ross, but she took the name of her mother, Harriet, when she was thirteen. She live a hard life as a slave. Harriet first lived in a one-room cabin with her family that included eleven children. Later Harriet worked a number of jobs on the plantation such as plowing fields and loading produce into wagons. She became strong doing manual labor that included hauling logs and driving oxen. At the age of thirteen Harriet received a horrible head injury. It happened when she was visiting the town. A slave owner tried to throw an iron weight at one of his slaves, but hit Harriet instead. The injury nearly killed her and caused her to have dizzy spells and blackouts for the rest of her life. Slaves would try to escape to the north using the Underground Railroad. This wasn't a real railroad. It was a number of safe homes that hide slaves as they traveled north. The people that helped the slaves were called conductors. Slaves would move from station to station at night, hiding in the woods or sneaking onto trains until they finally reached the north and freedom. In 1849 Harriet decided to escape. She would use the Underground Railroad. After a long and scary trip she made it to Pennsylvania and was finally free. In 1850 the Fugitive Slave Act was passed. This meant that slaves could be taken from free states and returned to their owners. In order to be free, slaves now had to escape to Canada. Harriet wanted to help others, including her family, to safety in Canada. She joined the Underground Railroad as a conductor. Harriet became famous as an Underground Railroad conductor. 

Three questions were able to be answered in the book. I know that this is a biography because it talks about an African American slave’s life. Five important facts about Harriet Tubman are that her nickname as a child was “Minty”, she was a very religious woman having learned about the Bible from her mother. Harriet bought a house in Auburn, New York for her parents after helping them to escape from the south. She married John Tubman in 1844. He was a free black man. She married again in 1869 to Nelson Davis, She was so successful in helping slaves to escape that, at one point, slave owners offered a reward of $40,000 for her capture, and She was the famous woman in the Underground Railroad. Harriet Tubman escaped slavery to become a leading abolitionist. She led hundreds of enslaved people to freedom along the route of the Underground Railroad. Thus, Harriet Tubman had many important events in her life such as the Underground Railroad.

This book would be recommended for me to the middle school students to both boys and girls. Also people who like reading about famous peoples’ lives, usually who like reading about the slaves of America. I would recommend this book to people who are strong in reading and who love reading. Also to those who like to read about slaves’ lives and how they can be sometimes heros. Like Harriet Tubman, she served as one of the best guides, or conducters in the Underground Railroad. She also cared for slaves and did her best to protect them. So, I think people who like reading about heros who make sacrifices.