Rating: 4/5

I am back to this one for a third reading, teaching it for a second time after several years.

I still enjoy it, but its flaws are more apparent to me than before.

To start, though, I still love the central notion of our protagonist, Carmen la Coja – which translates as Carmen the Cripple – who nevertheless has a brilliant career as a flamenco dancer. There’s a sense in it that she refuses to be limited by what others say about her, refuses to be limited by what has come before.

As I taught it this time, I stressed the way she is always looking to reconfigure her “antecedents,” a metaphor I take from the opening sentences where she uses pronouns before she gives their antecedents. I think that rhythm pervades the novel, intriguingly. We see it in the nature of the dance where, Carmen tells us, a dancer’s steps can tell the musician to play differently – even, I think, when the music is already recorded. We see it as well in the way she, a Mexican-American, can perform a famously Spanish dance as part of a company of mostly Roma.

And we see it in the structure of the narrative itself where, in a mostly slow-motion account of her unhappy present, we gradually get the ‘louder’ story of her younger years.

So, all of that still works well and memorably. This is a strong novel, or I wouldn’t be teaching it in multi-ethnic, and I think it raises a lot of compelling matters.

That said, I found myself more distracted this go-round by the narrative quirks. I felt a bit manipulated in the way the time of “now” would pass without clear markings. At the start, Manolo has been gone for what seems little more than a year. By the end, it’s been five, and Carmen has begun a recovery. It’s confusing to figure out where the time went. And, I guess, it leaves me wanting to know more of what’s happening in her life as she reimagines her “antecedent” time.

I also admit to a frustration I recall from earlier readings. I am rooting for Carmen – Castillo is too good a writer for me to be indifferent to her – but [SPOILER:] I find it a bit pat to have things turn out so well for her at the end. It’s nice that she becomes a singer (all at once and with no training) but does she have to become a mid-level recording star as well? It’s also good to see Manolo and Agustin come crawling back to her but, again, must it be both? Why not let her find happiness with someone like Max?

None of that mars this generally fine book, but it does take some of the shine off it. There’s something magnificent still in the way Carmen channels flamenco on her one good leg and through the passion she embodies. Those highlights remain good reason for reading a strong novel, even if the shine of it may be wearing off for me.