Rating: 4/5

Theme:

_Sex before marriage
_having faith
_friendship

  Characters:

Payton Skky→ Payton Skky has her own thing going on. She is one of the most popular girls in school, her family is doing well financially, she is dating the cutest and most popular guy in school—Dakari Graham—and she’s a cheerleader. Payton is a bit self-observed. I think Stephanie Perry Moore made Payton that way so that readers could see the well-rounded change in her personality and decisions throughout this book series. I like Payton and found her character realistic.

Dakari Graham→ Gosh, Dakari Graham is such a guy (haha). All he cares about is a physical relationship. He wants to get into Payton pants and if she won’t let that happen, then he will find someone else that will. He’s a jerk and only cares about himself. I actually like his character though because he seems like a normal teenager who is struggling to be himself, but getting caught up in what his peers think.

Tad Taylor→ Tad Taylor is such a gentlemen. He is a strong believer in Christ who has been reborn and is ready to live his life for the Lord. He’s a football and basketball player. His competitor is Dakari. Both of them are one of the best football players at their high schools. Tad is a good guy who wants to help everyone out.

Dymond→ Haha. I love Dymond. She definitely has strong attitude. Some might even say she has an attitude problem. She emphasizes everything and isn’t afraid to speak her mind.

These characters all have a real, authentic personality. Although, in the end, I did find some things too good to be true. Like, when an enemy is just plain ol’ cruel to you in real life, most of them don’t come up to you and apologize for their rude behavior. So I found that in this book to be sort of exaggerated and unbelievable.

  Style/Setting:

Moore didn’t give enough description of the characters and scenery. I had to picture the characters myself. The story takes place in North Carolina. You can definitely tell this story was written in the early 2000s. The music Moore named and when the characters had to wait to call people when they got home because they only had a cell phone for emergencies was pretty cool to read. Life really isn’t like that anymore because of all the fast technology we have at our fingertips. I didn’t think I was going to like this because the book was so old but I did. It was different and a fresh compared to all modern reading that is up-to-date with the latest technology and pop culture. I enjoyed this book and I am loving the series. :)

Lesson Learned? Be yourself. You don’t have to change for a guy or anyone else.

**Recommended: I recommend this book series to any teen,especially teen Christians who are in high school and young adults who are in college.

  Rating:

Book Cover: .1
Character Development/Plot: 2.8 out of 3
Interest: 1 out of 1
Imagery: .5 out of 1
Total: 4.4 stars

For more of my reviews, go to: https://checkmybooks.wordpress.com/