Rating: 4/5

While idly reading sections of the book, "Four British Fantasists: Place and Culture in the Children's Fantasies of Penelope Lively, Alan Garner, Diana Wynne Jones, and Susan Cooper" by Charles Butler, I became intrigued with his account of Penelope Lively's interest in how layers of peoples and ages appear in the landscape, and of interpreting the past through examination of these layers. Butler calls this "applied archeology". Here is Butler's comment on Lively's "The House in Norham Gardens":

"The sense of the past's irrecoverability permeates Penelope Lively's work, although the solutions she offers are partial, and often more concerned with acquiring the wisdom to cope with the inexorability of time than with successfully opposing its march. Clare in 'The House in Norham Gardens', for example, is well aware that her frail and aged aunts will die quite soon...Clare can do no more than pay them the fragile tribute of a faithful remembrance, and this is the resolution with which the book concludes: "I'm learning them by heart, she thought, that's what I'm doing, that's all I can do, only that." Through such acts the human mind itself becomes a museum, or a time capsule...This is applied archeology indeed, an offering to time both defiant and propitiatory." (p. 60-61)

So, that is the statement that interested me in reading this older novel, which is ostensibly for children. It was published in 1974 and although I was not a young child then, I was only just past childhood, so the feel of the time period was rather nostalgic for me. I think if I had read this book as a child, I would have liked it, but for different reasons than those that appealed to me now. Clare, the fourteen-year-old protagonist, has been orphaned and lives with her two great-aunts (aged 78 and 80) in a three-story rambling Victorian house in England. Servants no longer help maintain its many rooms and it is settling and crumbling around its occupants. Other similar houses in the neighborhood have been turned into apartments. You learn that, even though the house has been in the family for many years, it is only held under a long-term lease, so when the aunts are gone, the house will probably leave the family as well. The two aunts had never married and were sharp, intellectual women, although now frail and rarely able to leave their house or wander from their routine. There is a woman hired to help clean and cook, but Clare herself must take on responsibilities beyond her years. She exhibits a rare maturity. To make ends meet, Clare and her aunts take in two boarders, who add interest to the story. One is a twenty-something working girl, the other an African grad student. Clare's great-grandparents (the parents of her aunts) had been anthropologists who had studied the people of New Guinea. Along with the layers of family history in the attic are items her great-grandfather brought back from New Guinea, including a ceremonial, painted shield. This shield figures large in the storyline and in Clare's interest in working through the changes time brings, both to her and to the objects in her life. For me, some of the best British children's books are set in large, atmospheric old houses, and this book follows that pattern. The shield adds a very slight bit of a supernatural mystery. The real interest for me though (at this point in my life), was how the author addressed the passage of time and the questions that confront us all when we realize that, as my father pointed out to me long ago, "this is not a permanent arrangement". Clare is precocious for her years in the way she grapples with this life-problem. This book is peopled with interesting, well-drawn characters and with lots to think about. I very much enjoyed it.