Rating: 4/5

Morality Play

A very early Philip Hosea Farmer novel. The book's themes are colonialism, racism, miscegenation and genocide and it hits you over the head rather bluntly with a murder, by a human, of a satyr - that is a male member of a gentle race known as the "horstel" (a contraction of horse tail). Ed Wang is a young hot headed swaggering racist and a member of a Klan like group known as the HK, or horstel killers. His cousin, Jack Cage (as in someone trapped) witnesses the event, and is coerced through social pressure to join. And the appellation HK could mean human killer as well.

Both horstrel and human have been deposited by a third race the Arra on the planet Dare, which is devoid of iron. The humans were drawn from 16th century Earth some from a missing caravan of Circassian slave girls captured in Turkey, others from wrecked Portuguese ships, but many from the legendary "lost" colony of Roanoke Virgina. Legend has it that humans have 500 years redeem to learn the peaceful ways of the horstrel. The two races have an uneasy truce through a series of pacts, but the human population has been rapidly growing. But behind the conspiracy is yet another conspiracy from the more technologically advanced human country of Socinians, who think that time is running out and that all humans need to be united in time so that they can develop the technology to fight the Arra and seize their ships when they arrive.

And then a ship from the stars arrives.

For Jack, who falls in love with the horstrel R'li, it's a matter of principles and loyalties to family, love, homeland, role and honour and how they get applied when the ground keeps shifting underneath. Like Richard Burton and Mark Twain in Farmer's Riverworld series he finds that human character remains the same, but there is always the possibility of finding a higher purpose.

It's an enjoyable read because of the constantly changing perspectives and I really enjoyed the main characters of Jack, Chuckswilly and R'li, the extrapolated puritan society of the humans and the unusual nature and the psychologically based culture of the horstrel who turn out to be more advanced than we think. There are even skittish unicorns and some talking dragons thrown in for good measure. The edition I have is an unillustrated hardcover from 1980 with an interesting introduction by Moshe Feder and David G. Hartwell who point out some similarities to The Lovers along with some of Farmer's other stories.