Rating: 3/5

I think I’m beginning to get the sense of how to read a Lew Archer novel. Above all, the trick seems to be to look sideways at the whole business.

On the one hand, we don’t seem as if we’re supposed to care all that much about Archer himself. He’s competent, of course, and he has the occasional existential insight worth savoring, but his life seems largely irrelevant. We meet him when his clients arrive, and we leave him when the case is settled. There’s none of the larger private life that seems to define more recent series protagonists (like in Walter Mosley or Lawrence Block, to name a couple favorites – though I plan to revisit Block soon). There’s also little of the pure strangeness of Hammett or Chandler. We don’t get the foregrounded sense of a man-of-a-code quality.

On the other hand, the mysteries themselves seem incidental. They’re hardly whodunits since our original clients seems to fade and even die. Things go for a while and then, suddenly, someone new gets killed and the story jumps forward. Outside of some procedural insight, Archer doesn’t seem a great solver of mysteries. He gets by more on shoe leather than insight.

That doesn’t make these less impressive, though. There’s a world-weariness here that I find appealing. He seems to want a better world, but he doesn’t know how to find it. And, as someone who does divorce work for most of his living, he’s not about to find it. He’s like a sanitation worker who’d like to stay clean himself. Even if he succeeds, he can’t help see (and smell) all the garbage around him. And, can he really expect to stay clean?

In this one, we get a wealthy woman who hires Archer to look into a potential blackmail letter that someone has sent her. That plot point peters out quickly, though, as her wealthy mother-in-law winds up drowned in their pool. We see all sorts of suspects, and everyone’s motives seem colored by greed and despair. I confess that the individuals blur together for me, but that’s OK too. The overall effect is interesting; I can begin to see some of what so many admire in the series.

The end [SPOILER:] makes things all the more depressing when we find that it’s a quietly pathological daughter/granddaughter who has killed her grandmother and driven her mother to suicide, all in part because she has an Electra complex for her stepfather who is himself gay. Archer has effectively failed to protect anyone who came within his scope. He’s not even Philip Marlowe, who seems able to preserve a small square of traditional decency in the corrupt Modern world he encounters. For Archer, it’s just a matter of glimpsing what might have been better.

I want to like these more than I do, and I plan to keep pushing though them for a while. In these early ones (I understand that something changes about a third of the way through) there are still too many coincidences, too many casual murders for me to feel I’m reading something masterful.

I think I’m in good hands, and I find a congenial mind at work.