Rating: 4/5

Istanbul, January 1940. English armaments engineer Graham is in Turkey on business crucial to the Turkish Navy's preparation for war. On the night before he's supposed to return to England, upon getting back late to his hotel room, he discovers an intruder who fires three shots before escaping out the window, wounding Graham's hand.

Just a failed burglary, he tries to persuade Kopeiken, a Russian employed in Turkey by his company; but Colonel Haki, head of the Turkish secret police (with whom Kopeiken enjoys some sort of mysterious connection), persuades Graham that he has misread the situation, that there are people with Axis sympathies who want to ensure that Graham's work for the Turkish Navy goes uncompleted, and that it would be safest for Graham to miss his scheduled train to Paris that morning, and instead take an Italian freighter to Genoa.

Once aboard the freighter, however, Graham encounters a motley crew of fellow-travelers- a Turkish tobacco salesman, a dancer Graham met in a nightclub the night before and who is now coincidentally (?) traveling with him, a French couple who never stop arguing, an archeologist who introduces himself as "a good German"- any one of whom could be an assassin.

I settled down with this book sometime around noon yesterday. My lamp light was flickering every few minutes, as the east coast was being menaced by a quote tropical storm unquote, but all the storm really did was whip around the branches of the trees outside my window for an hour or two. And there was some rain. Frankly, it was one of the puniest tropical storms I've ever experienced. A little disappointing, I must say.

In any case, I finished the novel by about 9:30. It's a real page-turner. Sharp dialogue, interesting characters, great suspense. Ambler is very perceptive about the actual physical effect fear can have on the body. He makes it easy to visualize the boat, the sea, the faces of the characters as well as their shoulders, their hands; you can almost hear their voices. The novel reminded me of a well-done old Hollywood thriller, in the vein of Five Fingers or The Third Man. Sure enough, it turns out that Orson Welles wrote a film adaptation for RKO (released in 1943; Ambler's novel was published in 1940) and gave himself the role of Colonel Haki; Welles's buddy Joseph Cotten stars as Graham.

He plays it subtly, but I particularly enjoyed Ambler's hints that there is a part of Graham that has been waiting for this kind of experience, that it offers him something that his quiet life back in England simply can't. The stakes are always high for all of us, they're always life or death, but we expend a great deal of effort in civilized society towards forgetting that. With the veneer of civilized life stripped away, maybe the question is whether Graham will find unknown capacities within himself, or will be paralyzed by fear and the proximity to death. On the world-historical level, Graham's "journey" mirrors the journey of Europe in the 30s from uneasy peace to the reality of war.