Rating: 1/5

I really, really want to try to understand the thinking of others in the political spectrum.

This man is either a colossal liar or just bad at science.

For example, he says that 40% of pregnancies in America now end in abortion. In 1995 there were 3,978,497 live births and 71,740 abortions, which means about 1.77 percent of pregnancies end in abortion, even less if you factor in miscarriages. Surely in 1998 when this was published the math wasn't much different. 

He says that women no longer get child support due to no-fault divorce. What? He says that divorce drops women into poverty and that 75% of Medicaid recipients are women. Well, in Texas adult men and women can't get Medicaid unless they also get Medicare but women of childbearing age can while they are pregnant or for a year afterwards. It's the children who get Medicaid, and it's really hard to argue that giving immunizations or preventive care is more expensive than treating illnesses. 

And for the women who don't have work skills because they grew up believing that an abusive or drunk guy would take care of them or because like many they really thought the child support check would be in the mail, well, none of this falls on the guy. If the woman hadn't asked for the divorce she would be OK. Ironically the example he used was of a couple that divorced after their child was killed in a car accident and the dad became a drunk. She divorced him, an attorney covered his assets, and he then re-opened his business and married a sweet young thing. Then mom became a drunk and their surviving kid too. It seems as a lack of male coping skills and a plethora of male double dealing led to that woman's temporary poverty.

Oh, and as to the topic? After discussing a few shootings, he puts the action of these kids down to bad manners, absent moms, video games, and, oh, yeah, bad manners and a lack of moral fiber. Then he rants on women being in the workplace and abortion for 100 pages. 

I only gave it one star because I wanted it factored in somehow.

Oh, I forgot to mention that environmentalists and gay activists are responsible for these sociopaths shooting up schools or knifing their families too. I just never figured out how.