Rating: 3/5

(2.5 stars) I guess my attention span is getting shorter as I age, because it took me two attempts to get into this. I found the many characters introduced in the early chapters confusing and seemingly unrelated. We meet a Lord Grimfield, his sister Miss Thompson, his daughter the Honorable Mary Thompson, a Viscount Stayne, a poet named Mr. Thornton, a book illustrator named M.E. Merriweather, the Earl of Bridgeport, his cousin Harold Parrish, the earl's friend the Marquess of Carrington and his cousin Reggie Taylor, a Mr. Hardwicke, Lord Wainwright and his wife, Elaine Thompson and her friend Anne Becklin, etc, etc.

But by about 7% in things were much clearer. The Earl of Bridgeport was formerly Viscount Stayne. Mr Thornton is a pseudonym for a member of the ton who doesn't want the public to know he's a published poet. Mary Thompson and Elaine are one and the same and her pseudonym as an illustrator is M. E. Merriweather. That clears up things nicely. And the H and h are narrowed to the Earl of Bridgeport and Mary/Elaine, who were in an arranged agreement to marry but Mary took a hike, leaving Bridgeport a bit peeved. He moved on from there to marry someone else, father a child and become a widower and then proceeded to live a very hedonistic self-centered life of drinking, gambling and womanizing.

They meet again when Bridgeport is forced to rusticate to one of his country estates because of gossip, lies and scandals someone is putting out in London. One of these lies has a bit of a foundation of truth. He was challenged to a duel by Lord Wainwright for shtupping Lady Wainwright and Wainwright died of a heart attack some days later. The rumor mill had Bridgeport cheating at cards, poisoning the tip of the sword he used in the duel, and just in general having run totally out of money. Someone is out to get him, but who?

Well, you'll find out by reading. It's not hard to figure it out. The best part of the book is the romance and the redemption of the character of the earl, who it seems had a sad and lonely childhood with parents who didn't love him. (Don't they all? All these rakish nobles of HRs seem to have had daddy or mommy issues.)

But here's why I just couldn't give this book more stars. It's an "ick" scene about 11% in. The Earl of Bridgeport is in bed having sex with Lady Wainwright. Lord Wainwright bursts into his wife's bedroom followed by two footmen. He calls his wife a strumpet and challenges Bridgeport to a duel. The author goes on to say, "With unabashed sangfroid, [Bridgeport] finished what he had started, rolled off Lady Wainwright...and sat up." That was a little much for me, going over the line from being a rake to being a bit of an exhibitionist. You'd think being caught in the act would be a deflating experience, but not for him.

Call me crazy but that one little sentence set me up to not like Bridgeport very much. And the fact that he hadn't seen his daughter once in the six years since her birth and didn't even know her name didn't help his cause with me. Now, the author does a good job of getting us to see the good in him and his character does improve considerably, but I just couldn't get those two details out of my head. It's a shame. I wish I had been reading less carefully and had accidentally skipped that part, because mostly it's a good book, although it has nothing out of the ordinary in plot points. (Well, except for that bedroom scene, which I've never read before in a Regency.)