Rating: 3/5

Jack Aubrey the frustrated naval officer, at last after a long wait on shore receives his own ship to command the brig Sophie, but by the strange ways of the British Royal Navy called a sloop. The year 1800 Napoleon is unstoppable on land, but the British rule the Seas. In Port Mahon on the Mediterranean island of Minorca, captured from the Spanish, allies of the French. Aubrey tries to gets his ship ready, war rages it has for many years. He a music lover meets Stephen Maturin on dry land, during a private concert in the Governor's House, a doctor they desperately need on the Sophie enemies at first, but later become good friends. An educated man and scientist too, is the physician. Inspecting his crew the First Lieutenant ( second in command) is another Irishman James Dillion. Like Stephen both were secretly rebels in the unsuccessful rebellion of 1798, back in their native land and fugitives now. After much work the ship is finally ready for duty, small but adequate however his men still need training many days of it. When he goes to see the Admiral Lord Keith to thank him, his bride Quenney is also there, a close friend the former neighbor and tutor of Jack's in his youth. It doesn't take long for the astonished Aubrey to guess how he got to be captain. Nonetheless Captain Harte commandant in Port Mahon, will not help the new master and commander of the Sophie with needed material and supplies, the jealous man knows about his wife Molly's dalliance with him. He receives help elsewhere though. Leaving the great harbor on convoy duty in his first assignment at sea, protecting merchantman's ships heading east to Italy. A surprise attack by Moors from North Africa, guns blaze plenty of broadsides are fired and a few hit, destruction occurs still he does well and all arrive safely. The beautiful Mediterranean Sea is full of enemies but storms can be as deadly, the Sophie discovers. Rolling and going up high into the sky and down deep into the valley of water, while looking at the sea above them yes, you have to have a strong stomach to be a sailor and a little nuts too. Luck is with Aubrey and he lives to take prize ships of their foes and a share of the profits also back to port. His crew naturally love him they share the money and seamen always can use some extra cash. So a small increase of drinking on shore, wine, women and song what's the harm? Don't ask the natives of Minorca or the tavern owners. More tense sea battles with enemy warships, French and Spanish ( ships of the line) some larger and with a greater number of guns, they foolishly followed Aubrey, he is a very brave man maybe too much so...Exciting novel the first of twenty by Patrick O'Brian, if you don't get seasick it will be a very pleasant read and voyage.