Rating: 4/5

Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this sun of York,
And all the clouds that lowered upon our house
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.

Rating: 3 1/2 for reading, 4+ for seeing.

Richard, Duke of Gloucester. The lead. The future king Richard III.

He that hath here, in the first 41 lines of the play, surely the most revealing opening monologue in any of Shakespeare’s plays.

Further on, Richard declaims
  But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;
I, that am rudely stamped, and want love’s majesty
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time
Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely an unfashionable
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them –
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
And descant on mine own deformity.
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
I am determined to prove a villain
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
By drunken prophesies, libels, and dreams,
To set my brother Clarence and the King
In deadly hate the one against the other.
And if King Edward be as true and just
As I am subtle, false, and treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mewed up …

Richard one of the great stage villains

This monster, both physical and moral – a view of the future King Richard III (called Gloucester throughout the play) not invented by Shakespeare. But it was invented! And by whom?

By Sir Thomas More (1478 – 1535), known to Roman Catholics as Saint Thomas More, the English social philosopher, author, and noted Renaissance humanist, the writer of Utopia. More also worked on a History of Richard III for several years, which was published after his death. In this biography More set forth the idea that Richard was “a lame and twisted hunchback whose misshapen body reflects the evil heart within it”, as John Norwich (see Reviewer’s aside below) puts it. From More, it went to Richard Halle’s Chronicle, thence almost verbatim to Holinshed’s Chronicle - from there to Shakespeare, and thence to us, becoming the most enduring legend of any of the English Kings.

The earliest man to gain fame playing Richard was the great English actor Richard Burbage, the star actor of Shakespeare’s theater company. He played the part when the play was introduced at the Globe Theater. (Burbage also played the leads in Hamlet, Othello and King Lear.) Many other famous actors have played Richard – to name just a few, Alec Guinness, Laurence Olivier, Vincent Price, George C. Scott, and … John Wilkes Booth.

 Portrait of Richard Burbage, Dulwich Picture Gallery, London

I’m sure there are many ways of playing the part. I recently saw a production of Richard III put on by the Chesapeake Shakespeare Company, starring Vince Eisenson. 

  

for the costume, see last section

As hinted in the photo above, Eisenson played Richard in such a way that he made him almost likeable, at least through much of the play. When Richard had asides, he would turn to the audience, smile, and speak as if he were letting us in on a secret – that he was both amused and amazed that he could blatantly lie to and mislead the other characters over and over, and they just never got it! 

Can be a tough play to read

The introduction to the play in my edition of Shakespeare’s Complete Works notes that to anyone “unfamiliar with an intricate period of English history, Richard III is difficult to follow in the reading”.

This is because (for anyone familiar with the history of the period) Shakespeare completely ignores the actual timeline. Of course he compresses events that took place at particular times in a multi-year saga. We must allow him that. But the details of this compression are enough to quite confuse a knowledgeable reader of the play.

Beyond this (not much of a problem for me, since I wasn’t much in the historic know) there’s the simple matter of keeping the characters straight, and remembering how they are aligned.

Knowing that Richard III was king of England for only a couple years, I assumed that there would be quite a bit of conflict between the Houses of York and Lancaster. But not so. Only in the last act does Henry, Earl of Richmond, take the stage. At least he is there to announce, in the final scene, that as Henry VII, he will wed Elizabeth of York to bring the two Houses together. (This Elizabeth was the first child of Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville, the latter the Queen Elizabeth of the play. 

Elizabeth of York was in fact the daughter (of Edward IV), sister (of Edward V), niece (of Richard III), wife (of Henry VII), mother (of Henry VIII) and grandmother (of Edward VI) of six successive rulers of England.

No, the conflict in the play only latterly comes down to the York/Lancaster war. Before that, it is a conflict embroiling different royal members of the House of York (much instigated by Gloucester – that is, Richard), and also between factions for and against Edward’s queen, Elizabeth Woodville. For Edward had married one of his subjects, a woman of surpassing beauty but not from the highest ranks of the English nobility. This was a source of contention throughout nobles and the House of York ever after. 

In the play, the Woodville faction consists mainly of the brothers, relatives, and hangers-on of the Queen. All these are wont to capitalize on the good fortune thrown their way by Edward’s unseemly marriage to the Woodville beauty. Gloucester’s machinations take advantage of the enmity this engenders.

Reviewer. [Aside]

I got hold of two books when I started the histories: Shakespeare’s Kings by John Norwich (a popular historian), and Shakespeare’s English Kings by Peter Saccio, a professor of Shakespearean Studies and English, and “an accomplished actor and theatrical director”. I should someday do a syntopical review of these books. I find both these books useful, but don’t want to say anything more about them now, since I could easily mislead. [Exeunt.]

See it on the stage – or in a movie

The play has been more popular over the years on the stage than as a read, I think.

With a good production, with a good lead actor, it’s both easier to follow and more interesting.

But you will never see an uncut, unedited version on the stage. It’s Shakespeare’s 4th longest play, over 4000 lines. So it’s invariably edited, cutting scenes and parts of scenes to make a tighter, less rambling narrative.

Because of the nature of Richard, the arch-villain, it has also become popular to shift the play into different historic periods. The version I saw was set in the years around World War I. The costumes were from that era. Why was this done? Frankly, it wasn’t entirely clear, though one reason was to allow some singers to serenade the audience before the action began, and again at intermission, with songs associated with WW I that had been written and sung by a Baltimore native of that time.

The battle scene in Act V was also very exciting in the production, lasting several minutes, strobe lights, sounds of explosions, characters appearing and disappearing on the stage, combatants carrying rifles and wearing gas-masks (very spooky).

There have been several movies made of Richard III. A very popular one was produced in 1995, set in a fascist England early in the last century. Starring Ian McKellen, it was nominated for two Oscars.

The trailer on YouTube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OXc0-...

Much of the movie can be viewed on YouTube, but whether it’s all there isn’t clear.

The 1955 British film starring Laurence Olivier is also recommended.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Previous review: The God of Small Things
Random review: Life and Writings of Abraham Lincoln
Next review: Animalia guess what it is, then check it out