Rating: 5/5

The novel “The Interrupted Journey” gives the details of the events of the evening of September 19, 1961, a span when an unassuming interracial couple — the Hills — saw their weekend drive in New England interrupted by a…flying saucer. When they were returned from their UFO experience they went back to their normal life activities but felt something was missing. Then they started to remembered in small glimpses. They wanted to know what they forgot. The Hills were aided in this endeavor by a reputable, rock-solid psychiatrist, Dr. Benjamin Simon, who utilized hypnosis to excavate the Hills’ buried (or blocked?) memories of the close encounter on September 19th 1961. Their stories — told separately in marathon individual sessions — matched one another’s very closely. Husband and wife both spoke of an alien visitation that featured missing time, medical exams and so on. These thorough hypnosis sessions — which often read as decisive cross-examinations — are featured in “The Interrupted Journey” in the form of transcripts. These word-for-word accounts make for absorbing and anxiety-provoking reading. Fuller does well with the remainder of the text too, his prose devoid of unnecessary drama, hysteria, or silliness. Fuller downplays everything in a just-the-facts writing-style that disarms the inner skeptic and generates a fair bit of, uneasiness. The idea of alien visitation is made entirely believable. The Hills don’t seem like attention-seekers. They waited for years to come forward in the public square to tell their version of the story, and then only after a journalist with no morals published their story without permission from them.

In The Interrupted Journey, when Barney first sees the alien leader’s inhuman black eyes glaring down at him it seemed so real that I believed their story. UFOs have been a controversial subject in that many do not believe in them. Those that do believe in them are still considered “crazy.” I myself think that are UFOs as I believed I saw one but did I? I had been so far away from it, I was sure it was one by the way it flew and didn’t fly staying in one spot for several minutes. This book is a fascinating read. Read it if you dare.

I received an arc of this book from the author/publisher from Netgalley. I wasn’t obligated to write a favorable review or any review at all. The opinions expressed are strictly my own.