Rating: 4/5

Kana Karr - if the story had been written in the 1930s he would probably have had the sobriquet Warlord of Mercury, or Saturn, or wherever; as Andre Norton wrote it in the early 50s he is a young army recruit off on his first mission to an alien planet. 

Some background is necessary before moving to the main, and quite subversive subtext in the plot. Terra has pulled away from its sadistic history of nuclear warfare and the descendants of the survivors have reached out into space, only to be confronted by Central Control. CC is a form of Federation of Planets which has always been more than a little iffy about human membership, or even a human presence in space. Their decision has been to allow humans access to spaceships on condition that their only role will be as mercenary soldiers available to deal with those situations most likely to be violent.

The Terrans being, well, human, have never liked it and have been working behind the back of CC to slowly build up alliances with other dissatisfied species and quietly colonize other worlds. By the time Kana Karr finishes his training and is off on a peace-keeping mission to the planet Fronn, things are coming to a head in the galaxy. Kana and his comrades find they have been sent as pawns to play in a Great Game of espionage that may decide Terra's future and, perhaps, its survival. Can Kana live to tell his tale and bring freedom to his planet and his people or will he end up as a discarded chesspiece?

Now, to jump back a little. I mentioned subversive. When the book was published America was in the Senator McCarthy era of Reds under the beds, communist infiltration everywhere in high places and in the worlds of show business and writing, and there was unadulterated racism in all walks of life. It was a courageous step for Ms. Norton to have a mixed race hero, part white Australian, part Malaysian, part Pacific Islander, representing a completely changed Earth - racially speaking. The old ruling elites had incinerated each other centuries earlier along with their whole populations of followers. The survivors had mainly been from the peripheries: Australia and the Pacific, large parts of Africa, smaller areas of Asia and South America. The old powers of North America, Europe, Russia, China, the Middle East and Japan stopped existing by the time the final missile was launched. For Andre Norton new-Terra was no longer a white-controlled world and it was a world that had already achieved more than the old civilization could only fantasize about.

The novel is a military S-F adventure for boys and a very good one within the bounds of the 1950s. Norton allows her imagination to roam free and bring an alien world to life. She was well aware of her readership and omitted women and girls completely. Presumably they were all back on Terra working as receptionists and secretaries, or at home looking after the next generation of Star Troopers and cooking the dinner. And while the novel is too short for the story making the conclusion rushed and awkward, it works well enough. However, working away below all of that, is Norton the surreptitious educator. Racial equality is the norm or at least the aspiration in the Norton universe, and not only among humans. Relations between humans and aliens, be they reptilian, feline, frog-like, any shape, size, colour or form - other than those that want to chop your head off or swallow you whole - must be in a state of equality. We are all equal is the message. Hopefully there were some young readers who were influenced while, thankfully, Mr. McCarthy and his sidekicks did not seem to read science fiction or dismissed it as irrelevant.

As a side-note, I recall reading somewhere that an influence on the story was Xenophon's Anabasis and elsewhere that the idea came from a story of the final years of the Roman Empire when a legion was sent off to find out what was at the end of the world. I know Andre Norton was a librarian to begin with but I don't think classical literature was that much of an inspiration. I felt that if any historical period was appropriate it was from the 19th century and Britain's rivalry with Tsarist Russia over Afghanistan and northern India. I use the term "the Great Game" in the review which I think was Rudyard Kipling's view of what was happening the days of the Raj. The Great Game seemed to fit better with Kana Karr's predicament than ancient Greek hoplites or Roman legionaries.