Rating: 5/5

From the blurb:

  A timeless American classic and one of the most beloved children’s books ever written, Old Yeller is a Newbery Honor Book that explores the poignant and unforgettable bond between a boy and the stray dog who becomes his loyal friend.

What was a fourteen-year-old boy to do when a nasty stray thieving rascal of a dog pitched up at their Texan farm one day, grabbed their middling meat and eat it clean up while the man of the house was gone on a cattle run to Kansas. Travis was the man of the house now, as his father told him, and he had to take care of things, but nobody seemed to listen to him, especially when he wanted to shoot the dog. (Paraphrasing)Losing the the only meat left of last winter's hog butchering was bad enough. What made Travis even madder was the way the dog acted. He didn't even have the manners to feel ashamed of what he'd done. He rose to his feet, stretched and yawned, then came romping towards Travis, wiggling that stub tail and yelling Yow! Yow! Yow! Just like he belonged there and Travis was his best friend.

Thus was the introduction to this immensely popular children's classic ever written. Published in 1956, it won numerous awards.

The book was my first choice in preparing for a visit this summer holiday of two charming, delightful young ladies, ages nine and eleven. Quite the city, (read: electronic-infused gamers) with little knowledge of farm life, I was hesitant to introduce this book. Nevertheless, I thought they were staying two weeks on a remote farm, and life was a little more adventurous in their new surroundings and they could benefit from down-to-earth adventures with a dog called Old Yeller.

I tried my best to get the Texan sing-song into my voice and make it a more authentic Texan experience for the delightful princesses, since they insisted that I should be the narrator but my effort only resulted in us giggling and laughing our way through the first two chapters. The narrator was clearly not Texan!

To my delight, I discovered an audio version on Youtube. After that, Old Yeller in the proper rhythmic cadence of a Texan drawl, went swimming, hiking, and yes, even scuba diving, and whatnot, with our family. The two city girls were so hooked to the story, that the Youtube narrator dared not take a break. We were all madly in love with Old Yeller. When ear infections kicked in as a result of too many hours of swimming, the beloved dog stepped in and kept the two youngsters company for a couple of days indoors. They received other books for Christmas as well, but nothing could keep them as hooked and enchanted as Old Yeller.

The ending, well, yes, the ending: hubby had to step in and hug all four of us. Grown-up auntie have joined us in the meantime, and hubby throughout listened with one ear (he pretended to be hanging around on the sideline by chance, although he miraculously appeared whenever we switched on the Youtube audio), making him the firth partner. Oh, he tried not to look too interested, but his empathy with the heart-broken heap of girls on the bed, was quite memorable. 

I cannot remember how I found the book, but am so glad that I did. Our next read will be Where The Red Fern Grows by Wilson Rawls. I think there will be enough room to fit in the old movie Lassy Comes Home too.

Absolutely RECOMMENDED.

Happy New Year!