Rating: 2/5

This is listed as Long Tall Texans #19 and Hutton &amp; Co #4. H/h are both from Jacobsville, but most of the action takes place in San Antonio and many characters haven’t been referred to in the LLT series yet, so I’m going to declare this one an outlier from the “Hutton” series that crossed streams. 

The hero from Beloved is the Texas Attorney General and he’s the big boss trying to solve a murder because there is a “Texan in the White House now and they don’t want to make him look bad.” The H/h are both involved in the investigation and zzzzzzzzzzzzzz 

I’m not going to give an in-depth review of the suspense/police procedural plot points because I skimmed those parts. I don’t willingly read these types of stories because I like my romance undiluted. I don’t like mysteries or suspense and violence makes me queasy.

And even though I don’t read these kinds of stories, I could pick out the villain from a country mile away. So thank you DP for all the foreshadowing. You didn’t play any tricks on the reader.

Unfortunately, the romance was enraging in a lot of ways. The hero had been a rookie cop in the Jacobsville when the 15 year-old heroine was assaulted at a party after being plied with a date rape drug. She was examined in the hospital and was determined to still be a virgin, so the hero testified against her – even though he saw her injured and in distress right after the attack. The rapist was acquitted and heroine was labeled a liar. Her father, a minister, was driven from town.(Nice job, Jacobsville) The rapist went on to rape at least once more, but was killed in a police chase some years later.

The H/h met again in San Antonio when the heroine was in her last year of college. Hero was in her criminal justice class and they began to date. The heroine fell in love. The night of her graduation the hero took her to bed and discovered she was still a virgin because she had a super hymen. That’s what saved her from full penetration on the night of the party – and the guy had certainly raped her – he just couldn’t break through.

Hero feel guilty about his poor judgment in thinking the heroine was a liar at fifteen, so he calls her a tease and berates her for letting him get excited knowing her steel hymen would keep him from pleasure. True DP hero logic. Heroine feels terrible and says she never wants to see him again.

A few weeks later she goes to a party where a guest is murdered. It’s set up to look like an accidental drowning, but heroine had talked to the victim and alerts the cops to look further into his death. She thinks the murderer was the hero’s friend. She testifies at the trial of the innocent suspect, but the prosecution brings up her lying in her rape case at 15 to invalidate anything she might say. Heroine thinks the hero told the prosecution about her losing the rape case to help his friend and she feels doubly wronged by him.

That's the backstory. It’s been two years. The heroine’s parents have both died. The hero’s sister has married a sheikh. The heroine has learned to trust no one but her stray cat.

The H/h begin their investigation of the murder of the innocent suspect from the party two years before. (Total conflict of interest, btw) Hero is pretty obnoxious at first, but eventually he tells the heroine how guilty he felt about the rapist who got away and heroine chalks it up to God working in mysterious ways and how she was wrong to defy her parents and go to the party in the first place.

GRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR

This was published in 2001 and by this time there is no need for rape apologists in romances. The hero screwed up. It shouldn’t be the heroine’s job to make the hero feel better about his appalling judgment or the injustice of the courts. 

Okay, back to the story. The heroine gets shot. The hero takes care of her. There are biscuits, meat loaf, chicken and broccoli crepes. 

They find the murderers. There are jokes about just letting the suspects die of their injuries rather than giving them aid.

GRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRR

Police are not judge, jury and executioners, Ms. Palmer. And that’s not funny.

With the case solved, the H/h finally go to bed after heroine explains she got her super hymen clipped. They’re engaged from that moment and then marry in Jacobsville. All the cops from every DP cop novel show up unexpectedly. Then the Queen of somewhere (hero’s sister) shows up. Heroine is pregnant at the end of the story.

So DP got more political in this one and I didn’t like it. Why DP wanted to add realism to a mythical town with ever expanding attractions is beyond me. She has been world-building Jacobsville since 1988. It’s distracting to bring up George Bush in the White House or hear characters lament that police budgets are cut because of foreign aid* or how crimes have been obscured so the right guy would win the Senate primary in Texas. I don’t want/need that in my romance reading. Don’t even get me started on a rapist walking free and the travesty of *two* trials that did not achieve justice.

The less said about this romance, the better. The heroine had to forgive the hero twice because he was the only guy she was ever attracted to. He’s betrayed her twice – he’s got one more betrayal to go for the magic three. I guess she’s risking it because she didn’t want to be a lonely cat lady the rest of her life. 

This hero was a terrible cop. And the Attorney General never should have put two people with obvious biases and conflicts of interest on the case.

*Hello – foreign aid is federal. Police are paid by either state or local taxes, but never mind. I think DP’s philosophy is baked in the cake at this point. 

I can’t even do my Diana Palmer checklist because there were no fun details like her other books.
*pouts*