Rating: 2/5

In this non-fiction microhistory I expected to find a lot of really fascinating stuff about this amazing mineral without which humans (and many other animals) cant survive and which has shaped trading and cultures. Also, I expected to be fascinated, informed and intrigued as I have always wanted to read microhistories about coffee and salt.

I am really. really  sad to have failed to enjoy this book.

A lot of that information is there, as expected but it it failed to fascinate and intrigue. It also informed less often than I had been hoping. There was virtually no science of any kind, it was about trade and human history, which is ok, but it was not well done. The writing felt like it was lists a lot of the time, it repeated itself SO much of the time that one became bored by the information, even though the information itself could have been interesting. For example: So many cultures used salt pans and because of the physical chemistry nature of salt they were all very similar, I get it. But instead of detailing exactly what every single culture did - when they are nearly identical - maybe having described the first one you did not need to write exactly the same minutae of detail for EVERY subsequent culture that did the same thing? I think even the narrator must have been bored; he is a very experienced narrator/actor, as I understand it, but the long lists of salt pans and cultures was often read in an unvarying drone. It might be better read than listened to, as one would be able to skim over repetition and recipes.

A problem I had with it personally, is that I have read another book by this author Cod: A Biography of the Fish that Changed the World which I thoroughly enjoyed, and a large part of Salt: A World History seems to have the exact same stuff in it, down to the recipes. Those recipes which I mostly skim read over the first time, but had to listen to in agonising detail here, as it was narrated in a drone.

As we progressed through this book, I was so bored that I was spending more time analysing my responses to the book than what was being said. Here is the conclusion I reached; the author is a great researcher, GREAT! He is especially interested in history and trade but not so much in science and the natural world. Not at all, in fact. Over many years of research and note taking, he noticed how often salt cropped up in both history and trade. At some point, he or his publishers decided it was a shame not to use a lot of that research even if most of it HAD been used in other books. 
So he wrote Salt, a book that could have been a dream of a book, but is instead tedious as it repeated large sections from pervious books. It reads more like a pile of notes assembled by a Phd student who keeps changing his major and can't put his notes in order properly or assemble them into a cognitive narrative for his thesis. I would send this thesis draft back for further editing, which is what the publishers should have done with Salt: A World History.

This was a Did Not Finish for me at the end of chapter 14. I realised my library loan had expired and my main feeling was relief, I had no urge to renew or re-borrow and I am seriously doubting whether I want to read anything more by this author.