Rating: 3/5

What a fun book this was (thanks, Trevor, for the recommendation)! There are many reasons I think I like (good) nonfiction -- a sense of direct relevance, gravitas, frequent insights into the workings of the universe (and people), but mostly for knowledge narcs -- high levels of information density served up into an intriguing package by someone else who has undertaken the heavy lifting (research, organization, thinking). So, here in Singh's work I get a solid lay understanding not only of the proof to Fermat's Last Theorem, but of much of mathematics (and the lives of mathematicians) since the seventeenth century.

I've been thinking also about what attracts me to books on mathematical topics -- the works by Martin Gardner, William Poundstone, and the various other authors in the company of whose thoughts I've had pleasure to spend a week or more. What I've come away with, is that the best of them feed off surprises, those bits of counterintuitive anecdotes that leave you blurting out, "Huh. How about that," and then looking madly around for someone to tell. Like a book of jokes, riddles, or puzzles that provides immediate gratification in the back of the book, Fermat's Enigma plugs at least ten conundrums (and their easy-to-understand, logical solutions) into its appendices. For example -- say you're unlucky enough to be forced into a three-way duel. If everyone gets to take turns in order of their skill such that worst shoots first, what should the worst do? Aim at the best in the hopes of getting lucky and eliminating the most dangerous gunsel? Nope, the correct answer is to pass up the turn in the hopes that your first shot will get to be expended against only one remaining combatant. That way, even if you miss, you at least had a chance to take aim at the only person able to shoot back.

Pierre Fermat turns out to have been quite the prankster, often tweaking professional mathematicians and academics by mailing them problems they knew full well he had already solved. For those who don't keep this type of trivia at the forefront of their brains, Fermat's the French recluse (and hanging circuit jurist) who once famously scribbled in a copy of Diophantus' Arithmetica that x^n + y^n ≠ z^n for any number n greater than 2, a propostion for which he had "a truly marvelous demonstration… which this margin is too narrow to contain." This gets to be Fermat's Last Theorem, simply because it ends up being the last of his conundrums to be proven (not necessarily the last one he wrote). Just think, were it not for the scrupulous care taken by Fermat's son to go through and publish all of Fermat, Sr.'s writings, the world would not have been tantalized by this particular gem for 
  over 350 YEARS
.

Andrew Wiles published the first (and only?) proof in 1994, and Enigma does a tremendous job of walking the reader through not only the stunning depth of his intellectual achievement, but its significance as well. Suffice it to say that I was happy here to read that Taniyama-Shimura get their well-earned due and that modular and elliptical equations can finally be understood to be mathematically analogous (whether or not I have any idea what modular equations actually are). Still, all of this leads to what I think is an even more tantalizing problem. We now know that all of Fermat's conjectures ultimately proved to be solvable and that Fermat's own notes would seem to indicate that he had indeed apparently found ways to solve each of them. But there is no doubt that Fermat's solution could not have relied on the up-to-the-minute maths Wiles employs over 200 pages. So if it was really the limitations of the margin and not of Fermat that inhibited publication… what was Fermat's proof?