Rating: 1/5

The author really doesn't know the bible. He knows some things about the bible, and knows the basic idea of the bible, but he really doesn't get it. Second, he does a terrible job at investigated the translations that he uses. Third, he is very clearly not a theologian, archaeologist or authority on the subject that he is writing on. It's as though he had a hobby that he was descent at, and convinced himself he was great at it, then wrote a book. Fourth, this work is very dated and should really only be read in light of more recent finds. If you don't know anything about archeology, or history, stay away from this book because you'll just confuse yourself. As you read, it is important not to consider things as infallible. History will tell us one thing, but then we find out that it's not that simple. Science shows us the possibility of one thing happening, and gives us probability, but there are many things widely accepted that cannot be absolutely proven and tested in the confines of science. Archeology can show us something, but only a fool is too confident in what can be known about the ancient past. It is good to have a healthy level of skepticism with many things, especially in the light of many recent things that have been proven in recent years. With that being said, the author had too many rushed conclusions. He saw problems where they didn't exist, and often delved into an area of skepticism that was not healthy. It was very common for the popular scholars at the time to view the bible with over-board skepticism, and he was obviously a product of that line of reasoning. Throughout the entire book, there is the assumption that there cannot be a god and that miracles cannot exist - even though such assumptions come from bias, and not fact. If someone claims a miracle, it cannot be rejected simply because it does not fit in the confines of a pre-conceived bias. It has to be analyzed, observed, and studied scientifically. There have been many well-documented cases which suggest there is more than just the physical, things from demonic activity to supernatural, unexplainable, miracles. He has a lot of assumption present, even when it doesn't make the most logical and obvious sense. He doesn't look at all the evidence but only the evidence that supports his view: that some things in the bible are sort of right, from a certain point of view. He tries to be objective, but his bias is too often shown, and though he sets out to show the bible as historical, he fights against himself without making the most sense of the data. He takes a very long time to say a very little, and then contradicts himself - all things that could be said in the space of a paragraph. In the end, he sees the bible from the view of an almost atheistic, completely naturalistic partially true pseudo-historical account. He ignores the limitations of present knowledge, archeology, science and historical accounts. People see insurmountable problems that don't exist, and then those problems are resolved and people imagine more problems. He often even treats the bible as inferior to other historical works, which doesn't make sense since it is a historical work. He assumes it was written for reasons it was not. The bible contains history, but it's not interested in saying things in a modern, scientific, and chronological pattern. It is unconcerned with evolution and many other things that modern minds are concerned about. Finally, the guy who worked on the revised edition said it best:
It would be foolish to criticize these texts because their authors did not yet adhere to the standards which we are now accustomed to apply to the writing of history and which in their turn are not destined to be eternal... We must not squeeze the bible into the procrustean bed of our demands for historical truth and scientific objectivity... The bible does not attempt to be a neutral, objective account (437)
Thank God the editor realized the limitations that the original author was too arrogant about. The writer assumes he knows more than people who were there, as though he is more advanced than they. Yes, we are more "civilized" in ways, but that doesn't mean that people back then were idiots. He often doesn't follow evidence and reason but the skepticism of others. He also includes the books of maccabees and the works of josephus. He makes broad claims that are unfounded and just roles with them. For instance, in chapter 26 he assumes that Judaism and its monotheistic beliefs were a natural progression from polytheism, even though human systems become more complicated over time, not less. Also, it has been well argued that history and archeology points to polytheism coming after monotheism, a major view of Wilhelm Schmidt. There are many reasons to believe in such a system, yet the author decided what he wanted to believe and assumed the evidence guaranteed his view. There are many differences between YHWH and other gods, but he ignores them. There are reasons to believe that the texts were written long before he states, but he ignores that too. The bible has been shown in more modern works to not be a product of its time, see for instance "the bible among myths". As time goes on, more and more proof surfaces to prove the historical value of the bible. Israel never got rid of all the Canaanites, who continued to live among them. The bible also says that the Israelites started repeating their practices. So of course we find that in archeology as well. His conclusion? The laws was a product of years and years of rewriting history, and Israel wasn't really monotheistic. The law has no contending traditions for what happened yet it's not believed. The New Testament has sects and cult-galore, and it's not believed either. Some people will never be satisfied with the obvious, but instead will try to disprove things that are more than likely probable, simply because they don't want it to be true. The bible gives details of what happened, and people make stuff up anyways. If it would have given more details, people would have missed the message and the main point. If it would have given less details people would reject the message as not factual. The truth is, people are looking for things to be preoccupied with so they don't have to accept the message. But still, this book is not about faith, but about the bible as history. His refusal to acknowledge miracles and God is natural, because he wants to show history. Still, he missed the purpose of the bible, he rushed conclusions, and he assumed what was not definite. Thank God there are better books than this to give us a fuller picture.