Rating: 4/5

Because, should you have the misfortune to fall into an animal trap in deepest Africa, as did the 19th century explorer-traveller-ethnographer, Mary Kingsley, a good thick skirt can help shield you against the massive spikes at the bottom of the pit.

Not exactly the sort of thing your average modern day traveller would consider par for the course while journeying. But the women Mary Russell writes of in The Blessings of a Good Thick Skirt were a tribe apart: dozens of women, from medieval times till the 1980s (this book was first published in 1994), who upturned conventions and social norms in order to travel. 

Russell begins with an introduction to the women who’ve been the greatest travellers of all, the ones who would’ve notched up huge air miles had the concept (and air travel, in many cases) been around in their time. After that introduction, she goes on to cover the different types of travel, with a few paragraphs devoted to each woman who exemplified that. There are, first, the pilgrims who went to the Holy Land; then the missionaries. There are aviators, mountaineers, sailors, women who trekked deep into Tibet and Africa, cycled across Europe and into India, and so forth. The last few chapters of the book cover some interesting and thought-provoking issues concerned with not just these women, but with women’s travel, and women’s liberation itself. Clothing; self-defence; coping with dangers and challenges; how women travellers are different from men; feminism and how it was regarded by not just society as a whole but by these famous women travellers. 

I found myself fascinated by these women. Many, of course, have had the support of substantial funds to enable them to travel; but there have been those, too, who have managed despite obstacles like poverty, unsupportive families, censorious critics, and more. And that’s what seems to have come before the travelling itself. The anecdotes Russell quotes—of women climbing mountains in long tweed skirts, of women trekking through West Africa with babies in their arms, of an all-women expedition to Annapurna, and so on—are both revelations of the grit and will-power of these women, as well as the prevailing social norms. That so many of these women could achieve their goals despite such staggering odds is inspiring indeed.

I have only two grouses regarding this book. For one, because Russell covers so many women in so (relatively) few pages, the names and their accomplishments soon fade into a blur. By the end of the book, I had an impression of lots of fascinating, adventurous women, but only a handful of names that stayed with me (and those, like Amelia Earhart and Mary Kingsley, invariably of women I’d already heard about). In many cases, Russell begins a brief biography of the woman in question, and then abruptly switches to someone else. Fewer women, more complete biographies (or at least not just a few paragraphs per woman) might have had a greater impact for me.

And, I do wish it had not been so completely European- and American-centric. Yes, I suppose these were the areas with the wealthiest and best-educated women, the women with the means to travel; but I would have loved to have at least an exploration, even if brief, of why Asian or African women weren’t included in this book. Given that Russell does talk about several medieval women travellers, I would have thought some of the Mughal ladies (Gulbadan Begum perhaps first and foremost) deserved at least a mention for their many travels across the length and breadth of Asia.