Rating: 5/5

A DANCE TO THE MUSIC OF TIME is a 12-volume epic which is frequently compared to Proust's oeuvre. Anthony Powell wrote about 20th-century English life in times of war and peace, through the exploits of a protagonist who bore a close resemblance to himself, along with an accompanying cast of hundreds of other characters. Educated in Eton and Oxford, Powell was an avid reader of Proust and the Russians (Chekhov, Lermontov) and it shows, because his novels are rich with social texture and psychological acuity.

Tome I (Spring) includes the first three novels:

A QUESTION OF UPBRINGING (1951) takes as its setting an Eton-like boarding school on the edges of open country (after a brief opening description of the Poussin painting from which the series derives its title). We learn a little of the family background of the narrator, Nicholas Jenkins. We also meet Kenneth Widmerpool, a heavyset, bespectacled older boy Jenkins sees running ponderously through the misted landscape. The comically awkward Widmerpool will gradually emerge as the series’s antihero.

In A BUYER'S MARKET (1952) Nicholas Jenkins, who we last saw at University tentatively starting out on a London social life, is now in his early twenties and fully launched upon the London social scene. The social scene is that enjoyed by the privileged, educated classes of the late 1920’s.

Out of school and working a literary job without prospects, Jenkins seems indifferent to most things except women and the company of friends. He drifts, he observes, and doesn’t spend any time considering where he would like to be or what he would like to do. He attends balls and parties without clear purpose and mingles closely with both the upper classes and artistic circles.

Widmerpool continues to show up and exhibits his craving for power, money, and status. He remains the butt of jokes but his determination seems to suggest that he will succeed. Jenkins observes him with both astonishment and mild disdain.

THE ACCEPTANCE WORLD (1955). After Jenkins's boyhood and university years, around which the first two books revolved, this novel focuses on the messy world of break-ups, affairs, and life after divorce. There is a slightly harder edge of the world Powell is writing about, because of the intrusion of politics and societal changes.

I feel it is rather pointless to try to describe in detail what these books are about because they are simply about life. We see the ebb and flow of human relationships as Powell teases us with hints of things to come. On many occasions I found that a sentence would suddenly cause me to stop short, as the depth of Powell’s understanding and insight into life and humans hit me. Powell is a talented stylist and nearly every one of his sentences buzzes with dry, subtle humour and perspicacious observations on human behaviour. An English Proust indeed.