Rating: 3/5

This book consists of three stories, each previously published as individual books. I had a hankering to read The Conjurer's Game, as it was a story I'd heard adapted for childrens radio when I was young and it stuck with me. The library only had the story available as part of this edition, not as an individual book. I've not read the other two stories before, but I'll get to them in due course.

The Conjurer's Game ★★☆☆☆
Not as good as I remember it. For a short story (it's only about 90 pages long) it took me a surprising while to get through it. I just wasn't drawn into the story, so I didn't have any desire to keep reading it. A lot came back to me when I read it, so it all felt quite familiar. However it's not very well fleshed out, so it's not that satisfying. A lot of the imagery is very interesting and well written, I had a good mental picture of the scenery and action, but the story is sadly a bit weak. 

The game, fidchell, is a real game, although it's imagined quite differently for the book! It's pronunciation is given, in the book, as Fee-kell. Unfortunately, after I read that all I could think of each time the word appeared was 'fecal'. Not quite the same!

One thing I did notice is that there are zero female characters in it. The main character, Alick, is a young lad who lives with his father (in a bookshop, which is awesome). There's no mention of his mother at all. Our other main characters are his friend Jamie, Luke (the conjurer), Tod-lowery (a sort of kitsune I think), and Tam Lin (a shape changer of unspecified gender, but when assuming human form he's a young male). The only mention of females is those of the game pieces who are female - a grand total of one, unnamed, female game piece gets a few lines. That's it. Rather disappointing, especially from a female writer.

Some stories from your childhood hold up to an adult revisit (e.g. The Ghost of Thomas Kempe, which I re-read earlier this year), others, sadly, don't. This is one of the latter.

The Candle Man ★★★★☆
My favourite of the three stories. I can understand why this is the one out of the three that won a prize. The writing is more cohesive than the other two stories in this book, and the story easier to follow. The other two stories were published in 1990 and 1991, this one was 1994. Perhaps the later publication date of it also means that Catherine Fisher's writing had got better over time.

Meurig is sympathetic; Sara is fantastic - it was very nice to have a central, and well written, female character in this story (unlike in The Conjuror's Game); Conor is complex and interestingly flawed. The descriptions of the countryside and the damp work very well, and the personification of the river is wonderfully done. There's lots to like about the story, Conor's relationship with his mother and the exploration of courage and the forms it can come in are two examples. 

Fintan's Tower ★★☆☆☆
My least favourite of the three. It held little interest for me this story. It was a little slow to start, and then had a rushed finish at the end. The 'twist' was obvious, and the narrative was often a little confusingly written. None of the characters had much substance to them and were all rather one dimensional. Not much else to say about it really.