Rating: 5/5

Upon listening to this again, I have to say that this must be one of the most underappreciated romances in Heyer's bibliography. I do understand why, because Ivo is not exactly likeable, but the reason Heyer gets away with this, when so many other romance writers do not, is because Ivo and and Serena are extremely compatible. Heyer is very good at showing rather than telling us this. 

For some reason, when I first read this, I was not overly impressed. I enjoyed it as I always enjoy Heyer's work, but I never thought of it as overly romantic before. This time around, I really felt it, and the ending seemed really hilarious to me. Maybe as I have grown older, I read these books a little differently. It makes me think that I really should revisit some of my least favourite Heyers to see if my opinion on them has changed too.

2023 re-read: Still a wonderful book. I think one of the reasons it's the sort of story you can only enjoy gradually more and more after each read, is because so much of the real story, and especially the real romance, happens off screen. Superficially, it's a book mostly made up of conversations, and as is usual in Heyer, it's conversations about people, and especially the quality of the people she populates her books with. They feel really real, so you gallop through these swathes of dialogue, while nothing much seems to happen, forming ideas about people's characters. And meanwhile, the grandest, most earth-shattering things that can happen in people's lives, happen, elsewhere, conveyed to you in a letter, or by someone's report. We mostly get to see the conversations afterwards. And for the most part, because so many times the real emotions of the characters are hidden, swallowed, ignored, swept over, you don't even get to experience them. You can only guess at them, and what that might mean. It's supremely ironic that this happens in a story about two people who are characterised by a distinct inability to reign in their tempers. 

On this re-read, I felt a little less sympathy for Fanny. While I am sorry for the fact that she'd been made to marry a guy so much older than her, and to live in a way that made her unhappy, even if no one was outright unkind to her, when she and the Major confess their feelings to one another and she proposed that he should still marry Serena, while they would secretly continue to love each other (even without acting on it), I really could have smacked her. You don't do that sort of thing to someone you like. Hell, I wouldn't do that to my worst enemy.