Rating: 5/5

I'm pretty stunned by the middling rating for this book. Sure, it's a little dated: we don't say "manic depressive" anymore and nor do many of us still see tattoos as particularly shocking (though I can say from experience that being covered in them oftentimes begets loud and unsavoury opinions from strangers). But there's an earnest, powerfully lovable tone to Dolphin's voice, as she struggles so hard to be seen, and later to survive as her life at home spirals completely out of control. She is so penned in by misery that she invents wild scenarios and stories inside her own head, idealising every situation and so ending up disappointed when reality proves expectedly ugly.

There are layers upon layers to this book that, when I first read it about twelve years ago, I couldn't have picked up on: the pattern of Marigold's depression and mania, her delusions about Micky, her alcoholism; Star desperate to conform, both to protect herself from the viciousness of the uncaring community and to experience the comfort of "normality"; the overwhelming stigma against mental illness in the community; Oliver's mother's circumstantial depression; the emotional abuse inflicted upon Dolphin by her schoolteacher. It's a heavy novel, heavier when you read it again as an adult. I cried multiple times, particularly in those dark moments when Dolphin believes that she is always second best, never good enough, utterly forgotten. It's even more upsetting when we find that she was conceived while Marigold was in a relationship with a man she was using as a substitute for the infamous Micky. Dolphin is a painfully lonely child, so much so that it's often difficult to read. 

There's a loose, messy ending to this story, a hallmark of Jacqueline Wilson, who writes with incredible and sometimes shocking realism for her young audience. But life is messy, and things don't tie up, and there truly are no happily ever afters. Better this - better that young people understand that what they're striving for is not perfection and undiluted happiness, but to always be moving upwards. Maybe some people don't like that, and maybe they'd rather this was a nicer story. But real life is harder and more terrifying than any make believe. We may as well prepare for it.