Rating: 5/5

AN ASTRONOMER ANALYZES THE MYSTERIOUS STRUCTURE

Astronomer Gerald S. Hawkins served as Science Advisor to the United States Information Agency, where he was appointed the Director and where he remained until his retirement in 1989.

He wrote in the Author’s Preface to this 1965 book, “Every visitor to Stonehenge wonders in some way or other what its purposes could have been. The rugged stones are blank with no word of dedication, no constructional notation, and no readable clues. Because of this the word ‘decoded’ needs some explanation. As this book will show, there is a wealth of information in the positioning of the stones in the successive master plans of the structure and in the choice of the site itself…. It presents a unique cryptic puzzle, the solution of which has led to an understanding of the minds of prehistoric people. Before, with only vague legends to guide us, the remote past seemed incomprehensible. Now, perhaps, the door of prehistory stands ajar. My working hypothesis has gradually developed over the past two years: If I can see any alignment, general relationship of use for the various parts of Stonehenge then these facts were also known to the builders… There can be no doubt that Stonehenge was an observatory… In form the monument is an ingenious computing machine, but was it ever put to use? As a scientist I cannot say…”

He states in the first chapter, “Stonehenge is unique… What was it? What purpose did it serve…? Was it a city of the dead? A druid place of horrid sacrifice? A temple of the sun? … Stonehenge was so old that its true history was probably forgotten by classic times… When the practical Roman invader came to Britain they paid it little reverence---after all, Rome had her temples, and Egypt her pyramids, in better condition, perhaps, than this group of stone blocks… Not until the Dark Ages brought back mystery did the old stones begin to stir men’s fancies. By then any clear memory of the origin and use of the ‘gigantick pile’ had long since evaporated. It was necessary to create for it a biography…” (Pg. 1)

He says of the Druids, “Later accounts of them stress their wisdom, healing and teaching ability, and their judging. Their mystical powers were described as less savagely dependent on human sacrifice: they raised magic mists… prophesied and in general attended to the ritualistic life of the people without demanding blood---or so say the accounts. It is always hard to find out about pagan priesthoods like the druids because so much of the literature about them has been filtered through Christian transmission. The best present estimate is that the druids came with the Celts to Britain in about the fifth century B.C., and soon became the most influential priestly cult in the land For centuries they were powerful… And the memory of them was never lost. In the seventeenth century interest in them revived… In 1781 a group calling itself ‘The Most Ancient Order of Druids’ was established in London, and still flourishes… These modern ‘Druids’ have somehow established in the official mind so firm a conviction that they have legitimate connection with Stonehenge that they are allowed to conduct unauthentic ceremonies there… It is possible that … the real druids, ha something to do with Stonehenge when it was operative… But it now seems extremely unlikely. There MAY have been sacrifices at Stonehenge… but such sacrifices, if they took place, very probably were not directed by druids, since druids very probably were not present in England then …” (Pg. 17-18)

He summarizes, “The ‘when ‘ of Stonehenge is now known to be long before Saxons, Danes, and even before the Romanized Romans. The ‘how’ of the massive structure---how these great stones were assembled ad erected---has not been so definitely established… The ‘why’ of Stonehenge is one of the main subjects of this book.” (Pg. 27)

He explains, “The bare facts… are as follows… Stonehenge was built between the years 1900 and 1600 B.C. … The building at Stonehenge took place in three waves of activity. First traceable construction at the site occurred about 1900 B.C. … Late Stone Age people … dug a great circular ditch and piled up its removed earth into banks on either side… Slightly farther inside… the builder dug two deeper holes… These seem to have held upright stones… A third stone, the now famous ‘heel stone,’ was erected 100 feet outside of the circle… Thus, the first builders made Stonehenge a relatively simple enclosure…” (Pg. 39-42)

He continues, “About 1750 B.C., the second wave of construction began… by a different race of people: the Beaker people. These second builders brought the first assembly of megaliths, or ‘large stones.’” (Pg. 48) Beginning about 1700 B.C., the Bronze Age proper came to Britain, and with it the final wave of construction at Stonehenge.” (Pg. 50) He asks, “Why was there such an unusual number, 59, of them? Why were they so irregularly spaced? Why were they never used as stone emplacements? Why is their filling material… unlike the coarse rubble of the Aubrey holes? Why was there at the bottom of practically every one of them that solitary bluestone fragment? … The answers to these last four questions we may never find.” (Pg. 58)

What was the purpose of the stones, and their positions? He analyzed it with a computer, and “I was prepared for SOME Stonehenge-sun correlation. I was not prepared for total sun correlation---and … almost total moon correlation as well… the significant Stonehenge alignments pointed to an extreme position of the sun… [and] to an extreme of the moon.” (Pg. 107) He admits that there are SOME errors in the positions, but argues, “the sunset trilithons are presently in a sorry state. The great trilithon is broken, having fallen hundreds of years ago… To support my suggestion that some of the errors are modern, note that the trilithons and archways which have never fallen are more accurately aligned.” (Pg. 113) “To sum up, then: Stonehenge I had 11 key positions, every one of which paired with another, often more than one other, to point 19 times to ten of the twelve extremes of the sun or moon; Stonehenge III with its five trilithons and Heel stone axis pointed 8 times to eight of those same extremes. Such correlation could not have been coincidental.” (Pg. 116)

He summarizes, “The machine has established an extraordinary sun-moon correlation throughout the structure. Astronomy has done its best. It now rests with the prehistorians, the archaeologists, anthropologists, mythologists and other authorities to make use of these new findings to advance our understanding of the ‘gaunt ruin,’ which should no longer stand QUITE so lonely in history as it does on the great plain.” (Pg. 148)

This book will be of great interest to those seriously studying Stonehenge.