Rating: 5/5

Margaret Laurence knows how to create a character that seems so real you feel you have crawled inside her skin and looked out through her eyes into the world she inhabits. I hadn’t intended to read this book until next month, but having completed A Jest of God, in which Rachel Cameron talks of her sister, Stacey MacAindra, I felt compelled to know more of Stacey’s story.

In many ways, Stacey is every woman. She is a housewife, a mother, a spouse, but she is also herself, a woman who cannot conceive of how she went from being young, pretty and full of life, to being taken for granted, overweight, and insecure.

Man how antediluvian can you get? Is that what she is thinking? I don’t know. But I have this sense of some monstrous injustice. I want to explain. Under this chapeau lurks a mermaid, a whore, a tigress. She’d call a cop and I’d be put in a mental ward

 She is frightened, but mostly of things that even she could not define, she loves her husband and children, and sometimes she hates the constraints and responsibilities they throw onto her shoulders. She wonders if she misunderstood her own mother and she worries what her children will carry forward from her attempts to shape their lives, when she has been so ineffectual at shaping her own.

I stand in relation to my life both as child and as parent, never quite finished with the old battles, never able to arbitrate properly the new, able to look both ways, but whichever way I look, God, it looks pretty confusing to me.

She dreams of being something she is not; she looks back and wonders what might have been. She is searching for some meaning in the way things are, but at the same time she knows she basically has a good life. What she is longing for is that moment of untroubled freedom that only youth have, and that flies out of our grasp before we can even define it. Hers is the perfect inner voice, tinted with both wisdom and sorrow, and recognizing the irony in her situation.

I wish I could see you. No, I don’t. I wouldn’t want you to see me, not now, not in my present shape. Of course, you’ll have changed, too. But not as much. Women may live longer but they age faster. God has a sick sense of humor, if you ask me.

She recognizes that she is not the only damaged person. She is surrounded by them, but she wonders why it has to be that way and whether anyone can ever escape, even for a moment. What she most seems to lack is anyone to whom she can candidly speak the truth and receive the unvarnished truth back again.

Nothing is ever looked at and torn up and thrown away like scrap paper. The abrasions just go on accumulating. What a lot of heavy invisible garbage we live with.

In many ways this book is heartbreaking, but in just as many ways it is comforting. There is a strength to Stacey and a resilience in her that gives you hope. You want to comfort her, to tell her she is doing fine, and to assure her that everyone suffers from some of what she is feeling, but most of us survive.