Recently I discovered that after "renovation" a local library got rid of all of one of my favorite author's (R.A. Lafferty) books. So immediately I checked out this book whose cover has haunted me forever. Because if Lafferty's gone, some other random and obscure science fiction novel with blackface on the cover can't be long for the chopping block (not that Lafferty's covers had blackface on them but I digress). 

Well, what a strange, strange book. Like a Lafferty, I don't think it really wants to be scifi, although unlike him this one would seem to fit squarely in the "magical realism" genre, i.e., respectable scifi. Sometimes I wanted more background on the world- not so much on the flying machines, which I could take for granted, but on the prevalence of blackface (which didn't show up until 2/3rds of the way through, leaving me for awhile thinking the cover was just some artist's weird interpretation). America being America, I think one has to tread carefully when tackling a taboo like that one, and because of the lack of background on its resurgence, how it could at all be possible, it became the one fantastical-futurical-satirical element I couldn't believe in, and like one domino block falling it started to effect my belief in others. Indeed, there were times when I wondered if this book even wanted to be a scifi, what was gained by it being scifi, if it couldn't have been better if all scifi elements were removed, save, of course, the flying.

I did find it gripping, breezing through it at a fairly prodigious pace for me. That's not to say I liked everything. I guess I can sometimes grow tired of constantly being introduced to eccentric set-piece characters who really serve no purpose, and sometimes Disch's abstruse vocabulary, which had me looking up the meaning of words on almost every page, infuriated me. Sometimes I wondered if this was all just some bizarre send-up of  The Jazz Singer . But like the other Disch books I've read, I would recommend it for those looking for an offbeat, sophisticated read. 

"He kept thinking of the mixing bowl that the potato salad had come in. Something about its shape or its color seemed to sum up everything he'd ever loved. And lost forever."