Rating: 1/5

Man was this book ever a slog. I had high hopes for it - I have a morbid habit of reading accounts of failure analysis. Plus, I thought I might learn something useful, since I work on a complex system, where (at least we'd like to think) we've done a pretty good job of planning for single component failures, but we do still have potential for unanticipated system interactions. I was aware this book was written by a sociologist, but I thought it might be even better for that reason - could be good to a get a perspective from outside my field. Sadly, I just found myself wishing the author had consulted a few more engineers. In the early chapters on Three Mile Island (which, by the way, he led off by saying "It is not necessary to understand the technology in any depth"), he'd give a confusing halfway explanation of some aspect of the situation and then just throw up his hands and basically say "it was all just too complicated for anyone to understand." I mean, just because YOU don't understand it, or even if most of the people who talked about it didn't understand it, that doesn't mean that NOBODY could understand it. And don't even get me started on the space section; Tom Wolfe's The Right Stuff is immensely entertaining, but not exactly the best resource to draw on as a technical reference. Plus, Perrow refers to the Houston flight controllers as "middle managers", which misses the point sort of hilariously - there is plenty of middle management at NASA, but that's a poor descriptor for most of the people actually on console (especially back in the days of the space race).

I think part of the issue is that this book just hasn't aged that well. Maybe it was revolutionary in 1984 to suggest that operator error was a convenient scapegoat but not necessarily the whole story, but by now that feels like an obvious baseline assumption. Plus, I'm looking back from the other side of over 30 years of exponential growth in computing power. (Speaking of computers, there's a blast from the past in the 1999 reprinted edition I read; there's a whole postscript about the Y2K problem. Yep.)

I have to admit I don't actually disagree with some of the conclusions Perrow draws; if a technology has a high potential for catastrophic disasters, we should consider whether it's worth pursuing because its benefits are so great and there's nothing else comparable (or because we could make it significantly safer with reasonable effort), or whether we should give it up because it's not that much better than safer alternatives. I even more or less agree with his classifications of various technologies based on those criteria. But I can't help feeling like he got to those conclusions almost in spite of himself. In most of the accidents he described in the original book, as well as the notable ones he touches on in the afterword of the updated edition (Bhopal, Chernobyl, Challenger), the root cause didn't seem to be that the system was just too complicated for anybody to understand. Instead, there were plenty of more prosaic reasons: poor maintenance, insufficient training, management pressure, schedule pressure, etc. It wasn't that we just couldn't anticipate all the dangers; it's that somewhere along the line, people made choices that made things less safe, usually because of external pressures which seemed to have more certain and immediate negative consequences, and maybe sometimes because the people making the decisions weren't directly in the line of fire of the catastrophic failure. Perrow gets there himself! He walks right up to the idea of "externalities," and then he unfortunately drifts right back into waving his hands about how complicated all this technology is. Sigh.

(Also, this book could have stood a better copy editor. There was a significant number of typos, and one lengthy section where Perrow kept referring back to the position of "flying" on a certain chart, when the word didn't actually appear anywhere on the chart at all. Came to find out he'd used "aircraft" on the chart in question, and "flying" on a table showing a different arrangement of the same set of activities, SIX CHAPTERS LATER. Consistency isn't that hard, people.)

I sat down to write this review expecting I'd rate the book two stars, and instead I managed to talk myself into giving it just one instead. Maybe I should write about the books I actually liked more often, just for a change of pace.