Rating: 4/5

Empire of the Atom
The Wizard of Linn

  

  

I'll review these together - you really need to read both of them to get the full sense of what van Vogt created.

Hail Lord Clane Linn - despised mutation from the long line of powerful Linn leaders. Hated, misunderstood, marginalized, and despised - can Clane become the "Pariah Messiah" needed to save humanity?

There are many other examples of this type of character. Consider Elric (by Michael Moorcock) - weak albino, outcast, last of a mighty line, hated by his own family. Or consider the first couple chapters of Harry Potter (by J. K. Rowling) - outcast (marked by a deformity on his forehead), hated, treated cruelly. It's the old Cinderella archetype - misunderstood to the point of injustice.

Yet Clane is extraordinary in one area - he has developed his mind to superhuman genius. Can this alone allow him to save humanity? Will he even be compelled to fight for those who have treated him so badly?

The first volume, Empire of the Atom, is not the stronger of the two, but needs to be read to understand the complexity of the politics of the world into which Clane is born. His family is ruthless and complicated. The degree of treachery in politics permeates both volumes. 

Clane is not yet at the height of his powers, and the first novel is a bit disjointed, yet culminates in a significant test of Clane's ability (and will) to protect and preserve the human race.

But again, politics is King in this future setting. Absorbing this political basis of the postapocalyptic Earth is essential to understanding the first book, and also in appreciating the second volume, The Wizard of Linn. 

The second novel is more cohesive, in which Clane travels through interstellar space to learn how to defeat the alien invading race, the Riss. Upon his return, with tactics in hand, he first has to deal with the humans who use political intrigue against him before he can deal with the Riss.

The early SF pulp style of writing permeates the novel, but this was first class work when it was published, and it holds up well even now. Again, I strongly urge you to read both volumes, in order. And revel in the way van Vogt reveals just how much the misunderstood Clane transcends!

4 stars for Empire of the Atom
4.5 stars for The Wizard of Linn