Rating: 3/5

RE Past Secrets - August 1992 is passion month in HPlandia, JM does her passion contribution with an h who says 'NO' but really means yes and the H who is determined to make a big story headline.

This one has a 24 yr old h who lives an ordinary life and has no clue who her father is. The h's mother would never discuss him and since she is a cold and distant woman anyways, the h's questions were soon frozen out and the h stopped asking.

The story starts with the h noticing a really snazzy black car with a personalized license plate following her around. She gets a bit alarmed, but this is HPlandia so obviously she isn't thinking lurve club traffickers here. Instead she gets angry and goes out to slam her hands on the car's roof a few times.

Out pops the H, who claims that he is an investigative journalist who knows who the h's father is. The h dithers about for a few pages, but her long red curls and yellow tinted cat eyes convince the H that he is on the right track and he bullies the h into going to Greece to meet her mega-wealthy but dubious businessman father.

The h pulls a sickie from work and off to Greece for lurve club trafficking, er, investigative reporting we go. The h's supposed father has a little vacation villa on a remote island and in between non-witty banter that the H wants the h and she wants him but claims she doesn't and various other H bullying moments, we finally get to the place.

The h's potential chromosome donor is off on his yacht, but the motherly housekeeper is pleased to offer the H and h the guest apartment until the h's maybe dad shows up. Cue up more H flirty/bully moments and the h's no/yes torture of the reader. 

While we are waiting for the h's dad to show, we get the H's backstory of being abandoned as a child and now he claims he wants the h to find her father as a panacea to his own lack of parental knowledge that he has no hope of ever attaining. (That I did believe, being a dumped kid really affected this H and JM does a decent job of showing it.) 

Eventually the h's dad arrives, right as the H is roofie kissing the h. He throws them out of his house, but the h really does look like him, right down to eye color, so we can tell there is some doubt.

The h wants to leave period, the H bullies her into trying again and after a night spent on the open beach, (which had me cringing cause they had no tent and beaches are full of bugs at night, so EWWW!) the h goes to talk to her father again. 

He claims he threw her mother out when she came up preggers because he was told he was infertile and even tho he loved her mum, he hated that she cheated on him- or so he thought. He did pay the h's school fees and for her tonsils to be removed, but other than that he hasn't even thought of her mother for 25 years.

Then the father claims that the H wants to seduce and marry the h to get a shot at the chromosome donor's wealth. The h doesn't believe him and yells at him that all he cares about is money. The h's now accepting of fatherhood donor explains. It seems the H wrote a flashy big money making book and lived a life of luxury for a bit but then the royalties went down and now he needs another big money maker and the h and her potential as an heiress to her father is it. The h tells him that she doesn't want his money, she can see why her mother hates him and she doesn't want to know him either.

The h storms off back to her father's house and ends up lurving it up with the H when he demands she sleep with him to prove she believes in him. (Seriously, the h has to go to bed with this guy in her unknown father's house to prove she doesn't think he is a fortune hunter, can it get any more tackily whacktastic than that? That is truly an HPlandia first.) 

The H and h have their purple aubergine mojo moment and it is all dark ecstasy and then they dress and leave the father's house. On the way out the father tries to buy the H off and then offers gobs of money to the h to hang around. The h spills out a nice little 'you don't want a daughter, you want a possession and my price is high cause it is virtually unobtainable for you but I reject you' speech and she and the H take off back to England.

Where they decide to get married and live in a grotty flat, cause the H can't afford the luxury pad he has now and the h's mother is finally told that the h met her dad and why the h's dad chucked the h's mum out to begin with. 

 That whole situation is just ripe for a sequel that we will never get and probably should have been part of the main story, as the h's mum finally shows some affection for the h and admits that if the h's dad calls she will probably talk to him. The h thinks she might want to meet the dad once again if he is nicer and so JM sets up the probable eventual HP approved family forgiveness reunion - another thing that isn't actually in the story and should have been. 

We leave the H and h making out in the H's snazzy car that will probably have to be sold, the h will go to law school and the H will continue to be a journalist and they will have some kids and have a happy, but most likely poor life for the HEA.

This book was a whacktastic trip on the after-effects of assumed HP H infertility and the chucking out of mistresses. Really I wanted more on the h's parent's situation and I am not too keen on the h and H being poor, but it was interesting and a nice twist. 

Tho there were incredibly tacky moments and the H was a bully for the first part of the book , his sincerity about being sorry he bullied the h into meeting her father and things going so badly kinda redeemed him a little and this definitely was a most unusual HPlandia outing. I gave extra points for the trope twist wackiness alone and because I did believe the H by the end - tho he was still kinda tacky.