Rating: 3/5

Schaef's experiences and perspectives are valuable, often illuminating, her compassion and accountability are honorable, and her points are well taken and important.

However, her generalizations are overbroad, her language is imprecise and sometimes contradictory, and her highly repetitive stream of consciousness style made finally putting the book down a relief.

Her stake in the underdog seems to make her subject to credulity at times (even if psychotherapy is a fraud, it doesn't make homeopathy less one). And if psychotherapy really is a bandaid to get people a fix so they can get on with the show of a fundamentally broken society (as I tend to agree), there is no attempt here to confront the consequences of the fact that the same forces that have impoverished us spiritually and destroyed the planet have also supplied a material abundance to some that they are demonstrably loath to relinquish, claims of sobriety notwithstanding. 

If we are going to imagine a cosmic transformation, we can't deny or omit the countervailing force of desperation that has driven the impulse to control. Communal healing and respect for autonomy are not compatible with a minutely specialized workforce atomized by the demands of panglobal communication and social organization. Choices between these ways of living are ultimately the result of circumstance or privilege and can't be enacted universally in a finite world.

Monastic orders of traditions that have practiced methods similar but more profound than Schaef's method-of-no-method for thousands of years recognize that they live in dependence on generosity from lay people who themselves are addicted to control and security which produces such surplus. The "wise old woman" and the shaman she idealizes are themselves economic dependents in their communities; just as she accuses the psychotherapist of being in self denial about. Why we must assume one of these is institutionalized codependence and the other is divine wholeness is an exercise left for the reader. 

For all her talk of non-dualism, there is an optimism that seems to hide the unfortunate but necessary coexistence of these forces from her unconditional acceptance of "Life as Process." And there is curiously absent any reference to certain traditions which prefigure and totally transcend any of her "discoveries," which one would expect a child of the sixties and a student of spirituality to be familiar with, given how similar her philosophical outlook seems to be.