Rating: 4/5

4 ⭐

Update 17/4/21: Read alongside the free LibriVox audio recording, translated by William Jennings and read by Jing Li. While I preferred Annping Chin's translation, Jing Li performs an excellent reading of Jenning's work and it was great for reinforcing what I'd already read.

  A little bit of History:

Confucius (aka. Kong Fuzi) was a Chinese philosopher and minor government official in the State of Lu, born midway through the 6th Century BCE and active for approximately 20 years into the 5th century BCE. This era is referred to as the Spring and Autumn Period, a violent and divided time in China in which any remnants of symbolic control that the surviving line of the great Zhou kings possessed had been entirely undermined and centuries of civil-war had broken the kingdom into 14 feudal states run autonomously by lesser Dukes and brazen Aristocratic (hereditary) families who would openly try to wrestle power from their rulers. A lack of strong and virtuous leadership led to the moral decline of the people. Society was no longer in harmony and Confucius believed the only means of restoring the Way was by returning leadership to the righteous who would lead by example “using the past as a mirror”, building on the ritual practices and cultural vestiges of their ancestors. As a minor government official and later advisor, Confucius had a great level of success and when the neighbouring state of Qi realised that he was trying to restore full power to the Duke by destabilising the hereditary families (an action that would bring together and strengthen the State of Lu), they devised a cunning (and rather far-fetched) plan to weaken the faith that Confucius had in the Duke. The plan involved a gift of 100 fine horses and 80 dancing girls which, to Confucius distaste, had the Duke neglecting his official duties for 3 days. Confucius left office and went into exile in order to seek better opportunities elsewhere and for years he would travel with his three favourite disciples (Zigong, Zilu and Yan Hui) across the 8 smaller principality States, expounding his political and philosophical beliefs. Upon his return to the State of Lu, at the age of 68, Confucius never again sought a position in government, but this didn’t stop government officials from regarding him as 
  guolao
 or “elder statesmen” and regularly benefitting themselves with his sagacious advice. Aside from his unofficial advisory role, Confucius spent the rest of his days educating an ever-increasing number of disciples on the ideas of virtue and the moral requisites for serving in government. Confucius was a master of guiding his disciples each according to his temperaments. An example of this is the passage 11.22 in which Zilu and Ran You ask the exact same question and get opposing answers designed to get the exact same result from each disciple.
 Like the works of Jesus or Socrates, Confucius’ Analects were not written by the man himself but by his disciples after his death. A number of disciples thought to have been responsible for drafting early version of the Analects are You Ruo, Zixia, Zizhang and Ziyou.

  Ideas/Philosophy:

Much of Confucius’ philosophy on how one should conduct themselves seems elementary, at times, but it’s important to remember that this probably wasn’t the case 2500 years ago and China was in a magnified state of moral decline. The key ideas in Confucianism include: 
Introspection, virtue, integrity, respect, courage, humaneness, empathy, trustworthiness (actions speak louder than words), fairness (incl. meritocracy), morality over profitability, filial piety, ritual propriety, gentlemanship (the superior man) and a love of learning.
These last four are the most critical and come up time and time again throughout the analects.

Love of learning, as Confucius regards it, should be an unquenchable thirst for the acquisition of knowledge. Learning, not for the admiration of others but for oneself. Finding joy and freedom in education and balance and perspective through knowledge of the rites are fundamental ideas within the text.

  ”The Master said: “Is it not a pleasure to learn [xue] and, when it is timely, to practice what you have learned? Is it not a joy to have friends coming from afar? Is it not gentlemanly not to become resentful if no one takes notice of your learning?”

The Junzi or gentleman, in Confucius eyes is a man with impeccable integrity and moral acuity. Such a man is affable, kind, respectful, fair-minded, generous and wise. The term junzi could also be translated as the “superior man” or “lofty-minded” and is often used in direct opposition to xiaoren, meaning “petty man” or “small-minded”. In his time Confucius, incredibly, changed the definition and use of the word “gentleman”. Earlier, a suitable word only for those that were born into a position of authority or power but then re-evaluated as a term referring to any man with the personal attributes required to hold a position in government. This is the earliest account of a belief in meritocracy that I have heard. A man well and truly ahead of his time yet, ironically, stuck in (and obsessed) with the past.

The passages referring to filial piety are not so recurring but Confucius’ thoughts on the matter are summed up succinctly and, honestly, it’s had an instant and tangible effect on my thoughts regarding family and respect for one’s parents. Not in the sense that I lacked respect in the first place, but it made me reflect on Western society’s tendency to place our parents in aged care once they become too heavy a burden to bear. Well, I’d never given it much thought but now that I have, I couldn’t stand to put my Mum in aged care and actually decided, while reading the Analects, that I’ll never do it. Confucius believes that respect and loyalty for our leaders is cultivated at family level (If you don’t respect your parents than you’ll never respect any form of authority). This was very “lecture-y” to me and not just a little bit too subservient to authority but it’s understandable given the era that the ideas were conceived. There are fundamental differences between the relationships between father-son and ruler-subject, in my opinion. At one stage, Confucius states, ”Where I came from, those who are considered upright… cover up for their sons. And sons cover up for their fathers.” This type of loyalty can only be found in the relationship between oneself and friend/family, I would never expect such loyalty from the State.

There is also an interesting passage in which Confucius makes a clear distinction between ones relationship to a friend and to family saying, ”friends are drawn together by their sense of rightness; brothers stay together because of the love and affection they have for each other”. A later prominent Confucian, Mencius, expands on this saying, father and son would be at odds if they were to tax each other over a moral issue. It is for friends to demand goodness from each other. For father and son to do so would seriously undermine the love between them.” I really like the idea of unconditional love for one’s family regardless of how you perceive their goodness or lack thereof. Having said that, it doesn’t align with Confucius’ opinion that one should strive to improve the moral grounding of the leader they serve.

  ”A gentleman looks after the roots. With the roots firmly established, a moral way will grow. Is it not true then that being filial to one’s parents and being respectful to one’s elders are the roots of one’s humanity [ren]?”

If you did a word count of the Analects, I daresay, Ritual propriety would be the most frequent term by far. Confucius believed, strongly, that one should cultivate virtue through the study and familiarity with the odes (‘Book of Poetry’, ‘Sayings of the State’ and the ‘I-Ching’ etc.) and to steady (or check) oneself with relation to the rites/guiding principles (‘Book of Rites’, ‘Doctrine of the Mean’ or ‘Book of Etiquette’ etc.). 

  ”Learn the odes and let the rites guide your conduct to the proper measure.”

  ”The gentleman broadens his learning in literature and holds himself back with the practice of the rites. And so he is able not to go beyong the grounds of the moral way.”
 

The main elements of Ritual propriety, or Li, are ceremony, ritual, decorum, rules of propriety, good form and good custom. These are the foundation of the Confucian human-centred (as opposed to worship of a deity) “religion” and the idea is heavily influential in Chinese society, to this day.

   Confucianists vs. Taoist:

As I’ve discussed, Confucianism focuses on societal etiquette, ritual propriety and moral values. On the other hand, Taoism advocates simplicity and taking the path of least resistance.
I have found, in a number of texts now, allusions to a 2pac/Biggie, East-side/West-side style beef between the followers of Confucianism and Taoism. There are even rumours that some of the more unflattering passages of The Analects were fabricated and inserted by Daoists or other rival schools. This might be the case, but in terms of the founders of both philosophies, I have to say, I see an acknowledgement of obvious, fundamental differences but, otherwise, nothing but mutual respect and, in some cases, even admiration.
Confucius mentions, on a number of occasions, individuals that may have been old Taoist sages and at no stage does he speak of them in a derogatory sense. Quite the opposite actually. He only acknowledges that where they were quite happy to exclude themselves from the toxicity of public life and live as hermits, he would prefer to be involved in public life, and more specifically politics, where he was better able to make positive change. In D.C.Lau’s translation of the ‘Tao Te Ching’, Confucius was said to be absolutely awestruck by and unable to comprehend the potentially mythical Lao Tzu.
This respect seems to stem from Confucius’ belief that these men, these recluses ”all know to adjust the length of their garment to the depth of the water – letting themselves steep in the world when virtue is high and plenty, and lifting themselves up when virtue is shallow and scarce.”

  Commentary:

Annping Chin's commentary augments the text, wonderfully. It's illuminating and absolutely essential to attaining a deeper understanding of the Analect's contributors and the nuances of the Spring and Autumn period in China. Different interpretations are offered up from multiple scholars followed by Chin’s opinion and a brief explanation of how she came to such conclusions. The ambiguous nature of the Chinese characters in the original text often lead to some wildly differing translations. The commentary that Chin refers to most commonly is that of Liu Baonan, a scholar and author of ‘The Correct Meaning of The Analects’, the most detailed scholarly commentary on The Analects written in premodern China and she makes sure to acknowledge this towards the back of the book. I would say the next 2 most prominent sources are ‘The Commentary of Zuo’, an Ancient Chinese narrative history of the Spring and Autumn Annals, and commentary by Mencius, a 4th generation disciple of Confucius, often referred to as the “Second Sage”, placed after Confucius alone.

Confucius, himself, did not believe that he developed any of his own ground-breaking ideas, saying:

  “I transmit but do not innovate. I love antiquity and have faith in it.”

Regardless, as key editor and teacher of the Ancient Rites he has had an influence in death that he never saw come to fruition in his lifetime and there are still kernels of ageless wisdom in The Analects that we can learn from today. A timeless classic of Chinese Philosophy.