Rating: 2/5

1 1/2.
 (I'm being generous here)

This was the Silliest, the Fluffiest book I have EVER read. Why did I waste my time on this? 

I admit it! That cover grabbed me and made me buy it. I do read fluff, in fact I love fluff. But there is good fluff, and bad fluff. This was the latter for me. You will all think I am the worst snob ever when I say this but, it was Nothing like Georgette Heyer. I really shouldn't ever begin to compare them. And the sooner I get my head out of the sand a realize that the better. 

Laura was the heroine however, Olivia sort of took over. The books not named after Laura, Olivia is the Baroness. 

Olivia sounded and acted about Thirteen, a super silly Thirteen at that. In a large gathering Olivia asked Lord Hyatt about his mistress! Is she stupid or what? I don't care if she's never been to town. You would Never ask someone that, especially in front of people, Especially when you've never met them before. Then the same man chooses to paint her picture. Why? 

Because Laura isn't head over heals in love with him like all the other brainless cream puffs! (apparently he wants her only because she isn't interested, Arghhhhh!) Can you believe that chit of a girl, (Olivia), posed for a picture just like the cover? Hem raised and all. Nooooooooo…! 

Lord Hyatt is the 'hero', he is also an artist. Who gets Paid for his work by the Ton. Seriously? (I nearly slammed the book closed at this point and I should have as it only got crazier) A Lord who paints, and gets paid for it like a commoner. Well, that's not something you hear every day but, who knows? Perhaps he has no pride.

As for Laura I have nothing to say. If she wants a husband who falls in love with everyone he paints, go for it. If she doesn't care that he had/has a mistress well, I'm done with her, she can get out of her own scraps. (isn't it amazing that Lord Hyatt's mistress went about in the same circles as Laura? just a side note)

Then there is the Racy kiss near the end. That was terribly Crude, Vulgar and Nasty. Do I want to know about her bodice slipping down? Nope. Do people Groan and Moan when they kiss? NO! ( and if they do I don't want to hear about it) 

So if this is a lousy review I don't care. Because I am Done with this book! Hooray! I can't wait to pawn this off on someone else. Now I think I'll go read something worthwhile. 

  On an end note;
 Was this 'Clean'? Umm… yes. Could young teens read it? Yes the writing it Disney esquire, so they could easily comprehend it. But the Kissing was just TMI. a strong PG