Rating: 3/5

Yevtushenko - Selected poems 

(Goodreads posted a spoiler alert about a book of poetry--What's the spoiler?)

The winters in Salmas (Shahpur), Western Azerbaijan, Iran, were very cold and most of the time with lots of snow. I had just spent Thanksgiving with other Peace Corps volunteers and other expatriates at the home of Carlton Coon, Jr., the US Consul in Tabriz, where food, drink, board games, and fascinating conversation stretched the holiday into more than 2 days. (See my review of his book.)

I was told that there was a USIA library in the center of Tabriz, so before I caught the bus back to Salmas, I went there and checked out a relatively new book of Yevtushenko’s poetry. I had read of him and understood that he was some sort of media child from the Soviet Union who was allowed to travel abroad, unusual at that time which was at the height of the Cold War. I didn’t know a lot about contemporary poets then, but I trudged on through what I found to be mostly boring poems. There were a few of them that sort of stuck in my mind but none that I would go back to for depth and the music of language.

The end of December, two years later, I was headed with a dozen or so others for Jiddah, Saudi Arabia, to teach English to Arab soldiers who manned anti-aircraft defenses. We were boarded on a KLM flight from JFK Airport headed for a stopover in Amsterdam. I was sitting next to a dour looking person who kept to himself. I studied him carefully when we were passed our cocktails by the stewardess. It was Yevtushenko. I had been reading about him in the paper over the last few days. He had been in New York City on some sort of cultural exchange. (A spy I thought—still do.) 

“I should be thrilled,” I thought, "...Maybe ask him to sign the KLM menu." (I've never liked doing that anyway.) But, I didn’t. With a streak of Texas mule in me, my mind ran thusly: “If he’s going to be stuck up about it then I will too. After all, he’s already established and is his country's State pet poet, whereas I’m just starting. It’s not poet meets poet here.” I had lately discovered that all you had to do to call yourself a poet was to put a thought down as nonsensical as you like, keep the margins straight—or not, confuse readers with inappropriate metaphors, and discard meter and rhyme. Easy-peasy.

We did have our own self-proclaimed poet in our little group who insisted on writing his poetry with a special fountain pen (and who would get mad when he ran out of ink or forgot his pen). No pen, no opus. As we disembarked at Schiphol, I asked our stewardess if that was indeed Yevtushenko and she said that it was and that he was “big in Russia”.

Later as we sat down for drinks during the stopover, I told my fellow sojourners about whom I had been sitting next to. They did not know about Yevtushenko, except for the fountain pen poet who denied that it could have been him, because he was in Russia.

In later years I tried to read Yevtushenko again and thought how proud I was of myself for not engaging him in conversation and “asking him about his work”. If he was such an observant writer, curious about the world, he should have asked me about what I was up to, but knowing me back then I would have made up a wild story totally untrue just to thwart another spy, or any strange guy.

Now I know more about him as a brave opponent of the Communist regime, but savvy enough to survive a world of Orwell's "1984". I'm still glad I did not engage him. What was he going to do, smile and pretend? Years later I read "Babi Yar" and appreciated him a bit more. Lucky to have sat next to Yevtushenko and drunk a cocktail while he was drinking his...in silence.