Rating: 3/5

Robin Bruce Lockhart is the son of Sir Robert Hamilton Bruce Lockhart, and was acting General Consul in Moscow in 1917 (and also served as a secret agent) when the Bolsheviks overthrew the government in Russia; then later arrested by the secret police there for purportedly being involved with a plot to assassinate Lenin. He knew Sidney Reilly, the subject of this book, and passed along several stories to his son, who compiled them in this book. There are stories from others about Reilly here as well, and Robin Bruce Lockhart, the author, had actually met the enigmatic Reilly as a child. The book covers Reilly's life &amp; career, then moves along to examine different conclusions as to whether Reilly actually died in 1925 (when he'd gone back to Russia) or whether he remained a prisoner, escaped, or whatever. 

I first became aware of Sidney Reilly when, in the 1980s, PBS first broadcast that phenomenal series "Reilly: Ace of Spies." I watched every episode without fail. Lockhart's book was the basis of that series. The book was really interesting, and it was an intriguing look at some of the inner workings of spycraft &amp; espionage from the British, as well as that of the Germans &amp; then the Russians and Bolsheviks. I have 2 issues with this book. First: it does tend to read like a group of stories passed down and then transcribed onto paper. Second: there is absolutely no documentation of sources anywhere. The historian in me (my college majors) always views undocumented work etc. with a bit of skepticism, especially in a work that is definitely historical in nature. 

Overall, though, it was very interesting and whetted my appetite enough to compile a list of other publications that deal with the same subject matter in Lockhart's book. I'd recommend it to people who are interested in real-life British spies, or in the Bolshevik takeover of Russia, in the machinations by the CHEKA in order to maintain Bolshevik rule, or to anyone who might wish to read an interesting biography.