Rating: 5/5

Snow Joke

This poem starts with the story of a contemporary men and his hidden life, he is late, he is driving his car, he feels safe, immune to be stopped by a patrol, but the nature plays an horrible joke.

Through a stanza we feel that we are dying with him, the snow slowly is reducing our breath and the death is like the "Wisky...warm and smooth"

We do not know if the man is dead or not but he is certainly unconscious, this is fundamental because is the bridge to the last stanza where we can choose three possibilities about the destiny of this man.

Personaly I chose the last one because the nature try to suffocate him, he reacts with all of his energies but the nature is invincible it is killing the man with his apparent innocence, it is a soft death like soft flakes falling silently on the asphalt.

The Bears In Yosemite Park

The most dramatic line is the first stanza: "The bears are busy in the trash cans, grubbling for toothpaste but the weather on Mam Tor...."

This phrase is worrying because a natural park must preserve the bears from the humans, they have been contaminated.

The denunciation of this poem is that the irresponsible tourism will pollute Mam Tor too.

Mam Tor is a 517 m (1,696 ft) hill near Castleton in the High Peak of Derbyshire, England. Its name means "mother hill",[1] so called because frequent landslips on its eastern face have resulted in a multitude of 'mini-hills' beneath it.[2] These landslips, which are caused by unstable lower layers of shale, also give the hill its alternative name of Shivering Mountain.[3] In 1979 the continual battle to maintain the A625 road (Sheffield to Chapel en le Frith) on the crumbling eastern side of the hill was lost when the road officially closed as a through-route.

At the base of the Tor and nearby are four show caves: Blue John Cavern, Speedwell Cavern, Peak Cavern and Treak Cliff Cavern where lead, Blue John, fluorspar and other minerals were once mined. Source: Wikipedia)

I appreciated the description of the cavern, which is realistic because he explain poetically how they have been shaped by the rain.

The news by the radio are not good, the humans are destroying these natural beauties, we must return to be "in boxer and the nature is too cruel.