Rating: 5/5

Tepilit Ole Saitoti grew up as a Maasai and had not even seen a car or money until he went to school. Sheltered and isolated from the rest of the world, the Maasai thrive with their cattle currency. Saitoti narrates his life story in The Worlds of a Maasai Warrior and he does so beautifully and evocatively. Saitoti's journey takes him from the Maasai lands to school and then to the Serengiti in Kenya, and further on to Germany and the US. It's quite fascinating how the author adapted at each step of the way.

I really enjoyed this book, and it was like reading a travelogue, only from the inside. It is indeed a valuable document because as Saitoti says - the way of life is lost forever. These accounts are invaluable in keeping a vivid portrayal of old societies alive. 

The author is quite critical of his culture in some ways. Abuse appears to be endemic in Maasai culture, with polygamy and child abuse. If the mother dies, as the author's did, the children are neglected and abused by the other wives. Fathers are exacting and don't hesitate to beat even young children for small mistakes. I felt rather sad that little Tepilit left his father only to go get beaten up by his teachers at school. 

However, he did go to school and managed to get a taste for a better life. His fascination for books stood gave him a good grounding for doing what he later did, write books and papers on Maasai life! His life in the US is also fascinating. A trip to Harlem shows him that not all black people live as proudly as the ones in Africa. It was interesting to note that Saitoti refused to get involved in African American racial fights since he could not relate at all to their problems. 

There is some sexism in the book, especially with how women are viewed. Saitoti says once that he prefers women to be 'natural' and called her 'artificial'. And he also discusses how the Maasai warriors objectify women on a regular basis. In fact, there appears to be a lot of sexual harassment in Maasai society. Toxic masculinity pervades the whole culture! Another problem appears to be the indiscriminate killing of lions. Every Maasai warrior mentioned by Saitoti has killed a lion, which would add up to quite a lot. It appears as if it's not just white hunters who made the African lion population vulnerable! 

The most fascinating part of the book was when Saitoti talks about bridging the gap between where he came from and who he has become. His entire family now has no idea what he talks about half the time, which is rather bittersweet. His closest friends and brothers and sisters have lives that no longer resonate with him. I wonder what his life is like now! I am also curious if he married and to whom. I want more and more and I am sad this book is finished.