Rating: 4/5

In CHILDREN OF THE ISLAND, T.M. Wright delivers one of his most gory and entertaining tales, but also least frightening. The eerie sense of dread and unpredictable domestic menace that he normally cultivates, so memorably in CARLISLE STREET or the home invasion scenes of NURSERY TALE, here are replaced by a wild tale of urban entropy and chaos. There are dozens of characters we follow all over central New York state from August to October of 1997 (not specified, we are told it has been 15 years since the events of 1982's NURSERY TALE, which was set 15 years after STRANGE SEED). Here, a group of humanoid creatures hatch from the ground about 60 miles outside the city and messily chomp their way to the Bronx. Meanwhile we follow a decrepit apartment building for elderly and disabled that gets violently taken over by a small, vicious gang:
"
"We're gonna make her sign her checks over. Like all the rest are gonna do."
"Oh," murmured the sixteen-year-old dimly. "Yeah."
  "And maybe we'll have some fun with her too."
  The sixteen-year-old grinned expectantly. "Are we gonna throw her down the elevator shaft, like we done with the super?" 
...
  "Sure," Snipe answered finally. "Why not? We'll throw 'em all down the elevator shaft after a while. How's that sound?"
"
It sounds bonkers, because it is! We also learn more about the creatures and their creepy, energizing empathy. They see emotions as an aura or tinted mist surrounding their human prey, which they experience physicially:
"
For his kind, it was a process similar to digestion, or respiration. It happened. And controlling it was nearly impossible.
"
As the creatures draw near to the city, their growing wake of carnage awakens a primal urge to violence in the "city-dwellers". In addition to the gang at the apartment building, we glimpse acts of violence breaking out, as trigger-happy citizens start packing firepower and letting loose at the slightest provocation. Police are portrayed as impulsive, accident-prone, and abusive, so they only contribute to the chaos. Citizens also start reckoning with death. Many scenes in the book concern how death "looks":
"I didn't know that people could die with their mouths and eyes open" one character tells his child. He is explaining "Cowboys and Indians". He says it does not matter which one he was playing, because they are both the same. At the conclusion, another character sees his friend and realizes she is dead: "Her body flowed away from him; her lips parted, her eyes rolled." We are reminded of the description from the children's game. Even though the parent said the roles don't matter, we see the stakes are very high.

 After the colossal climax of NURSERY TALE and this book's volatile buildup, the conclusion felt a bit muddled. Most characters wind up in Bellevue hospital, some of them struggling to get out or even to understand why they are there at all. Some characters we have been following turn out to be creatures that stopped gobbling up humans and adapted to life as "city-dwellers". But overall nothing works out well for anyone, including the 'children'. They are not prepared for all the asphalt and filth they encounter in the city! The leader realizes their kind didn't actually lose the island, so much as they adapted to it. They had been there all along, and the violent intrusion upset their own 'city-dweller' kind which started the deadly chain reaction. (Lucky for NYC this time the cold snap just kills off the creatures, before they had a chance to burn the whole place down like their firebug ancestors in NURSERY TALE and STRANGE SEED.) Meanwhile their leader, who was raised as a human introduced in NURSERY TALE before going on to eat his grandparents, reassumes his human identity. If you can't eat them, join them? He takes a job at a massage parlor! 

"Peter Minuet purchased the island from the Manhattan Indians in 1624, for twenty-eight dollars worth of trinkets."
As this quote from the interlude introducing "Part Two:Assault on Manhattan" suggests, we have to consider the difficult but obvious question of reading this as sort of allegory for Manhattan's Native American history. Sadly I am not familiar with this history, but little G tells me it concerns the Lenape tribe and their Manahatta island. (I also haven't read Whitley Strieber's THE WOLFEN or seen the film adaptation, but I gather it touches on similar territory.) I don't think it is fair to read these carnivorous creatures, emerging from the ground like invading ants, as an exploitative, dehumanizing depiction of Native American rage. I can see how some readers might see that, but the book points apologetically to the actual history and to "Cowboys and Indians" lore too often (as noted above) to suggest a 'revenge of the savages' storyline. The book's greater message is that any abuse of power (by gangs, police, "Pioneers", Seth &amp; Elena, the building super, spouses, or doctors) is a destabilizing force with violent repercussions over decades or centuries.

 Finally, one reason this book is one of Wright's most entertaining: his writing is remarkably disciplined here. Only three or four dialogue scenes allow characters to endlessly repeat each other's names, and all the storylines get wrapped up (plus even a few left over from NURSERY TALE). Negatives include distractions like a character named after a star from tv's "Three's Company" (ok, but why???) and a tendency to slip into Vonnegut pastiche that I have never noticed in his writing before. Here's an example:
"
The thin man knocked the gun against the window. Once. "Open up, guy." He gave Jim a long and thorough once-over and saw what he supposed was a bulge in the pocket of Jim's jacket. "Hey guy, what you got in there?" Jim had nothing in the pocket. It bulged because the fabric had decided to bulge."