Rating: 5/5

Waterloo: The True Story of Four Days, Three Armies and Three Battles This is the actual book that I read and reviewed here. What is shown in the header is Cornwell's 20th Sharpe novel ... This is the first non-fiction book by Bernard Cornwell, but he brings all the talent that he has honed over the years in writing his many historical novels to retelling the story of Waterloo. It's worth mentioning up front that those who have read a lot of military history may be put off by the repetitiveness of some points that he want to drive home, e.g. the way that the Duke of Wellington would invariably position his forces on the reverse side of slopes to protect them from artillery fire. He repeats this perhaps ten times at different times in the books. Notwithstanding the repetition, I found it a great read. Again, I think his skill in writing fiction that allows him to build suspense of this battle, even though you know the outcome.

He starts his story as Napoleon has returned from exile and sees most of the French army join him. The action really gets underway as Wellington attends a ball in Brussels, where most of his senior officers are in attendance. The next day, the Allied army is underway, heading to a fateful encounter with the French forces near the small town of Waterloo. Several engagements happen over the next few days, beginning with Quatre-Bras. Wellington, with maybe only half of forces being of the quality that he needs goes into battle, knows that if Blucher doesn't arrive with his Prussian army, he probably will lose the battle to Napoleon. And he had hoped never to fight Napoleon. The suspense continues to build.

The battlefield action is terrible, and it is well worth reading to fully comprehend what war really meant back then. You will understand how the battle was won by the British and Prussians and how it was lost by the French generals. In the end, you will come to understand why Cornwell says that Napoleon was worshiped by his men, Blucher was loved by his, but Wellington was only respected by his. One of the closing scenes has Wellington crying as he read over the casualty list of his officers. 

It is a book that I will heartily recommend to anyone who wants to understand how the battle of Waterloo was fought and what it meant.