Rating: 5/5

There 23 to 24 chapters in Winesburg, Ohio, depending on whether one wants to include the first story that does not speak directly of the town, Book of the Grotesque. After that is a major heading, Winesburg, Ohio with 23 chapters or as the book portrays them, “ a group of tales of Ohio small town- life”. I read this short story collection over 15 years ago, but I wanted to re-read it for two reasons. One, I remembered liking it a great deal, and two, a GR reviewer had said this short story collection reminded them of a style that I have not seen a lot of, but which I greatly enjoy – when each tale can stand alone, but a character in one tale who might be the protagonist is mentioned in another tale…I suppose that is not surprising in this book since it contains tales about a small town of some 1800 citizens. I noticed that style or genre when reading Yoko Ogawa’s short story collection, Revenge. And this from a Chicago Tribune reviewer giving other examples of this style and which may have been inspired by Sherwood Anderson: Steinbeck's "The Pastures of Heaven," Ray Bradbury's "The Martian Chronicles," Louise Erdrich's "Love Medicine," Gloria Naylor's "The Women of Brewster Place," Amy Tan's "The Joy Luck Club," Tim O'Brien's "The Things They Carried," Russell Banks's "Trailerpark," Stuart Dybek's "The Coast of Chicago" and "I Sailed With Magellan," Elizabeth Strout's "Olive Kitteridge," and Jennifer Egan's "A Visit from the Goon Squad."

The short story collection was published in 1919…actually some stories first appeared in magazines – The Little Review, The Seven Arts, and The Masses. According to Wikipedia the short stories are based loosely on the author's childhood memories of Clyde, Ohio. Clyde is in northern Ohio in between Toledo and Cleveland.

The one central character is George Willard, a newspaper reporter for the Winesburg Eagle. His mother inherited the town’s hotel from her father.

After reading several of the tales and getting used to them, I decided to use a rating system to characterize a story on four aspects: weird, sad, hopeful, and interesting in which 0=not at all and 5=extremely. With almost no exception, the central protagonist in a story or the circumstances surrounding the character were very-to-extremely weird…very-to-extremely sad…not at all to just a bit hopeful, and most tales/stories were very-to-extremely interesting. This collection of short stories is considered a classic as considered by such notables as F. Scott Fitzgerald, William Faulkner, and John Steinbeck.

Although the stories are from the early 1900s there seems to be a timeless quality to them…at least for me. In short, this book is nothing short of magnificent. 😊 

This is a very interesting review… https://www.chicagotribune.com/entert... 

https://www.npr.org/templates/story/s... 

From Tom Perrotta: Sherwood Anderson's strange and beautiful book made me remember why I'd wanted to be a writer in the first place.