Rating: 3/5

Poirot wants to retire and grow pumpkins instead of having to solve murders every day. Before he retires, he wants to have one big epic swansong to stroke his own ego. Twelve cases are carefully chosen to mimic the Twelve Labours of Hercules.

The Nemean Lion - 3/5

Poirot is asked to find a kidnapped dog. Poirot thinks finding a missing dog is beneath him at first, but since he doesn’t have any other more interesting cases lying around, it’ll have to do.

A Pekinese dog substituting for a lion feels like a bit of a stretch, but alright. The mystery is solid.

The Lernaean Hydra - 3/5

A doctor’s wife dies. Rumors float around the small town that the doctor himself is responsible for her death, which ruins his reputation. He asks Poirot to let the truth come out and to stop these rumors before he is completely ruined.

Small town gossip can definitely be poisonous, but it’s up to Poirot to find out if there’s any truth to these rumors or not.

The Arcadian Deer - 3/5

Poirot is asked by a mechanic to find the girl he fell in love with.

The old love at first sight problem. Leave it up to Poirot to find the mysterious girl of his dreams.

The Erymanthian Boar - 3/5

Poirot is on holiday in Switzerland when a friend of the Swiss police asks him to help capture a murderer described by his friend as a “wild boar.”

Very convenient that Poirot’s friend describes the murderer as a wild boar, but a solid display of Poirot’s deduction skills.

The Augean Stables - 2/5

Poirot is asked to stop a scandal newspaper from printing a harmful gossip about a politician.

I’d very much prefer Poirot to stay out of political scandals to be honest. Also, another very convenient way to add a connection to Twelve Labours of Hercules.

The Stymphalean Birds - 3/5

Poirot comes to the aid of a young politician who gets blackmailed.

I’m glad this has less politics than the previous story. It’s a solid short story.

The Cretan Bull – 3,5/5

A young woman asks Poirot’s help as her fiancée wants to break off their engagement because he thinks he’s going mad.

Solid mystery with an interesting twist.

The Horses of Diomedes - 3/5

Poirot is asked to help a girl with her drug addiction.

There’s more to this story than you might think at first sight. Interesting twist.

The Girdle of Hyppolita - 3/5

A painting depicting the titular Girdle of Hyppolita gets stolen, Poirot can’t resist finding the painting.

Finally there’s an actual connection between these stories and the Twelve Labours of Hercules.

The Flock of Geryon - 3/5

A character from a previous story returns and asks Poirot to help her friend who’s joined a cult.

This story’s more about a character infiltrating the cult and Poirot coaches her from the sidelines.

The Apples of the Hesperides - 3/5

A golden goblet was stolen, Poirot is asked to retrieve it.

Interesting story about a character who’s so unhappy that they don’t realize how unhappy they truly are.

The Capture of Cerberus - 3/5

Countess Vera Rossakoff tells Poirot to meet her in Hell. So he goes looking for her.

A story about drugs with a bit of a twist.

I like the concept, though the connection with the Twelve Labours of Hercules doesn’t feel strong at all. By announcing this epic swansong theme from the start, you also create certain expectations. When the first case is about a missing dog, it doesn’t really feel like this book tries to match those expectations. All these stories are solid, but none of these stories manage to stand out. It’s more like a collection of light and cozy short stories that are very loosely connected to each other. So it’s important to go into this book with the right expectations.