Rating: 5/5

Successful societies reproduce excessively as a hedge against the death (accidental or purposeful) of those intended to fill necessary positions in the coming generation. An upper-class redundant (the unneeded lesser son of a noble family) can move down a notch (fill some ranked position in the church, government, or military). A merchant’s second son might start a new business, become a craft apprentice, or descend to the less-protected ranks of labor (depending on the good graces of the inheriting son). But at the bottom of the underclass, there is really nowhere to go. Society keeps an underclass to fill breeches in the higher ranks caused by war, pestilence, or natural disaster; but it also tries to keep the underclass at some manageable level through those same disasters (in addition to famine). 

As we move from a dispersed (hunter-gathering) to more condensed (agriculture-industry-information) societies, the underclass is joined by primitives, farmers, and industrial workers who are no longer required. Paying the landlords for cash-crops produces famine. Crowding primitives and agrarians into “reservations,” ghettos, and airless factories produces pestilence. War exhausts not only your own underclass, but might free lebensraum for your survivors (so you don’t have to invite them home, where they might menace your daughters). In the process, some of the underclass can be elevated (armies, police, prisons) to control the rest of the underclass.

Looking at other societies from the outside helps us to recognize the reprehensible nature of our own society. My anthropology instructor in college used to spend the lecture hour rehearsing some arcane and gruesome ritual (e.g., the Australian aborigine’s practice of sub-incision) and would always end his lecture with the same phrase: “the whole world ain’t like Sebastopol” (the local Podunk). I think Benedict’s point is that we are Sebastopol, we just can’t see it.

Benedict writes beautifully, and she always seems to have interesting material.