Rating: 5/5

In July 2003 I first came across Anne Perry’s “Charlotte and Thomas Pitt” series. I read 17 of them, including this one. However, I read them all out of order – and many of them were not available at all at my Library so it was a bit of a scrambled mess. One thing I do remember: I loved reading this series.

When I decided to fill in the gaps, I noticed that I had not read #2 through and including #5. So as soon as I had an available series spot, I decided to rectify this. Then I decided to read the very first one over again so there would be a bit more cohesion. I am very glad I did!

This series takes place in the Victorian era in England and Anne Perry did her research. So many of the “rules for women in polite society” would probably come as a gigantic surprise to many younger women today. It is even possible they might read this and decide it was all made-up nonsense, but I hope they read my review first! I can assure them that this was indeed the way women were required to behave, and we have come a very long way in a relatively short time (historically speaking).

Then there is Charlotte. The middle daughter, she is independent in her thinking and frequently gets into trouble with her family for her forthrightness. At the same time, her mother (especially) admires this daughter who doesn’t bother to hide her emotions and speaks her mind – possibly because that is what she would prefer to do herself.

We meet the rest of Charlotte’s family in this novel as well. There are several murders that take place and the frequency, combined with everyone knowing the victims, terrorizes the entire neighbourhood as they all take place on Cater Street. Inspector Thomas Pitt meets the family – and Charlotte – when one of their young maids becomes a victim.

Anne Perry is a terrific storyteller and guess what? I love reading terrific stories! If you are looking for a series that will keep you entertained and absorbed into a different time and place, I can highly recommend this series as it will definitely satisfy.