All the loveliness has gone

The Cheltenham Street Women's Hospital seems almost too convenient a device for Mr. Trevor to bring together women who would never meet in their normal lives, divided as they are by class and all that entails; upbringing, accent, background, income, interests and concerns. Thrown together by gynaecology. And as each one of the four women's circle of friends and family is opened before our eyes, as we catch glimpses of the nurses and doctors and even the porters and caretaker in the hospital, and wonder at Trevor's capacity to invent names and yet more names, almost to the point of being overwhelmed by Ibbs, Pidsley, Thring, Rinsal, Bastable, Antler, Rammage, Passes, Hopegood, Feuchtwanger, Middlesmith, Giltrap, Pengelly, Proctor, Frowen, Vendericks, Pennance, O'Keeffe, Emamooden, Tracy, Hobson, Mars, Studdard - and those are just the minor characters - there comes a creeping doubt to the mind. What is Mr. Trevor up to?
Watch out for the woman without a name, the one who runs a red thread through the multiple narratives, who parades up and down in front of the hospital with her banner: Liberation Now.
For this is a story of awakening, more or less rudely, more or less successfully, to the idea that magical thinking will not do. Miss Samson has lost her faith in the fatherly male figure up in the sky, the other women lose faith in the male figures down on earth, for they are feckless and hopeless and weak, and only shored up by those of the female persuasion who are foolish enough to fall for their dubious charms. 

And Elizabeth.

She steers past what would have been a disastrous second marriage (with catastrophic consequences to her gentle refusal), but comes to the realisation that her first husband was no better than flimsy, forceless Henry:

  He was more of a failure than Henry. Everything went wrong for people like Henry, while other people efficiently laid out their lives like maps in front of them, covering each mistake artistically up, employing guile. He'd married her and he'd hidden his shortcomings beneath hers. He'd drawn hers out, so that in their marriage her shortcomings gathered strength, and stood in the end as an element that was a daily stumbling block. Looking back on it now, she knew he couldn't have done without the irritation of her shortcomings. She was to blame, she had done wrong, it was her fault.
He had taught her all that in their marriage. He had made her the woman she was at forty-one. For ever she'd carry the influence he'd left with her: her own acceptance of the guilt that crept about her now like other blood. He'd carry, for his part, the greater confidence he'd gained.

1973. Very definitely and precisely 1973, with the Sweet's Blockbuster in the charts and Mother's Pride bread being delivered to the hospital kitchens. The inedible school dinners - oh Christ yes, do I ever remember the inedible school dinners - and Cilla Black and Dick Emery on the telly. I suppose that, at least, has changed, even if The Archers is still going strong.