Rating: 5/5

This was my Mark Twain selection for 2022. As the subtitle to this book is or The New Pilgrims' Progress, I wanted to read it on the heels of just having read John Bunyan's The Pilgrim's Progress (1684). While Bunyan's was a spiritual journey, Twain's journey was a physical journey to see famous historical and religious landmarks.

As a travelogue of Twain's trip to Europe, the Holy Lands and Egypt right after the American Civil War, this book was such a treat to see these places before they had been permanently altered by globalization. Twain provided wonderful glimpses into the peoples, the places, the cultures and the mores of each place he visited. Each place was so unique, and it was obvious how much Twain enjoyed himself, often with his unique sense of humor.

Some of the most humorous passages related to his visits to numerous cathedrals and Christian holy places. He was always amused at how so many of these places held "the" thorn of crowns, fragments of "the" cross, "the" ashes of St. John,... He would say he didn't want to disbelieve, but it did make one wonder. However, his humorous observations were not intended to mock religion, as he himself was a believing Christian.

The sheer amount of artwork created by Italian artisans simply overwhelmed Twain. By the time he got to Florence and was told how much was credited to "Michael Angelo", Twain irreverently exclaimed, "He designed the Pope!" and "Say no more! say that the Creator made Italy from designs by Michael Angelo!" (There were times I wish I could have been one of Twain's traveling companions and experienced Europe alongside of him! That would have been a trip to remember.)

There is just so much history and interesting anecdotes in this lively 531-page book. I have only touched on a small part of the places he visited and the adventures he went on. I read it slowly and savored every page (even doing a little side research into what he was describing). I was amazed with Twain's vast knowledge at the age of 34. Several times, he would comment on how he had wanted to see one place or another since he was a child. I wondered how a child growing up in rural Hannibal, Missouri could have known so much of the world. It left me with an even deeper appreciation of Twain. He was obviously very inquisitive and an avid learner all his life.

I wish I could give this book more than 5 stars. It was fantastic!