Rating: 4/5

Summary: Our Lady of the Forest is great book that allows a great plot and the characters to expand themselves. The book spans over a short time of less than a week, telling the story of a young girl, Ann, claiming to see the Virgin Mary, while picking mushrooms. Ann is a poor girl, who lives by herself in an old car that does not run, in a campground, and suffers from severe asthma and allergies. She is a teenage runaway who was born to a teenage mother and a drug - addicted father. She picks mushrooms in the woods, and lives off the money she gets when she sells them. Ann is also notorious for taking several anti - allergy medications and asthma pills. 
One day while in the national forest, Ann claims to see the Virgin Mary. At this time, another girl in the same campground, Carolyn Greer, comes forward. An atheist, and a person who yearns for wealth, Carolyn befriends Ann. Soon, the sighting of the Virgin Mary attracts thousands of people to accompany Ann on her sightings. The people treat Ann like royalty and are loyal to follow her. The people believe the Virgin Mary can offer them redemption through Ann. Father Collins, the local catholic priest, is skeptical of Ann's visions and does not allow himself to fall into their belief of seeing the Virgin Mary. Soon, a trial is put into place by the Catholic church. Ann is interviewed numerous times about her sighting of the Virgin Mary. During this time, Ann's allergies worsen, and it is evident she is not doing well. At the church one morning, a man comes claiming he needs to see Ann. After a rough altercation Ann begins to choke badly. Wanting to protect Ann, Carolyn offers a can of pepper - spray to Ann insisting it is Ann's asthma inhaler, hoping she could spray the man. Unfortunately, because of Ann's severe asthma, Ann ends up choking to death on the pepper spray. 
The story then transports the readers to one year after the death of Ann In the town of North Fork, life is slowly getting back to "normal". The people who came to see Ann left after she died and the town became another small - town on a map in Washington. The town is also left wondering if Ann's sighting was real. Questions arise as people realize Ann was a pill - popping teenage. The town's people are divided as some believe she was hallucinating from the drugs she took, while others believe it was a true sighting. 

Selected Quotes - 
"His (problems) were enough to ruin somebody and that made her want to pursue him again, to find out if Tom was someone she could talk to, a person she could peel open, reveal, because of all his wounds (85)"

I enjoy this quote that Guterson wrote because I feel it expresses the truth about people today. I think people want to know about other's secrets and problems because it makes them feel better about their own. It gives others pleasure to know someone else is going through pain. 

My Personal Review:
I enjoyed reading "Our Lady of the Forest" because it made me realize a lot about things I did not really know about. The novel revolves around catholicism and the question of whether to believe or not. This book forced me to ask myself questions about today's society. Thousands of people came to North Fork to see Ann, only because she claimed to see the Virgin Mary. This made me question who the people were actually worshipping...the Virgin Mary or Ann? Guterson also uses strong characterization in the novel. I was able to "believe" in the characters as they seemed to have reality in them. His characters are very honest and exude the true emotions that people have. Guterson does not use quotations when using dialogue. I felt this only added to the tone in the novel. It made me concentrate more on the interaction between the characters. I would highly recommend this book to anyone who wants a thoughtful book that will leave them with questions about today's culture and faith.