Rating: 3/5

Having been going through the old Star Wars Legends books in chronological order in recent months, I’ve read some good ones and bad ones. But I’m always pleased when I see that the next one in line is by the late Aaron Allston. I wouldn’t call him my favorite Star Wars author; he’s certainly not in the same league as Timothy Zahn, in my estimation. But Allston has a delightful sense of humor and flair for whimsy and idiosyncrasy that distinguishes him from all other authors in this universe, so that even if it’s not the most memorable of Star Wars stories – and Starfighters of Adumar certainly is not – it’s still sure to be at least an enjoyable read.

Starfighters of Adumar isn’t as strong as the three Wraith Squadron X-Wing novels Allston previously penned, which in my view were the three strongest books in the series, thanks in large part to its quirky characters and Allston’s distinctive spin on the traditional Star Wars starfighter squadron storyline. But, as is often the case with Allston, Starfighters of Adumar at least boasts an interesting enough storyline, centered around an unusual diplomatic mission amid a most unusual world and peculiar subculture with a sense of honor far different from the one shared by the novel’s protagonist, Wedge Antilles.

With almost all of the action confined to this world of Adumar, Starfighters of Adumar lacks the feeling that the stakes are particularly high, especially compared to other novels like Timothy Zahn’s Heir to the Empire trilogy and Kevin J. Anderson’s Jedi Academy trilogy where the ramifications of the events have a galaxy-wide impact. Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Leia Organa, and most of the characters from the Star Wars films with the exception of Wedge and a few other minor pilots are absent from Adumar, but that’s case with all the X-Wing novels, and regular Star Wars readers won’t be bothered by this at all.

Despite the smaller scope of this story compared to other Star Wars novels, I found Adumar was an enjoyable setting, and the competition between the New Republic and the Empire to win the allegiances of the planet raised some interesting narrative questions. With their misguided emphasis on honor from combat and blatant disregard for human life, was it worthwhile for the New Republic to win over this planet? Would it be acceptable to do so was to engage in their practice of fatal dueling and resort to tactics similar to those that the Empire would engage? If Wedge were ordered to do so against his will, could he do it, and should he? Or should he resign, or face a possible court martial?

But for my money, Allston’s sense of humor that distinguishes Starfighters of Adumar more than the themes above do. At times, he maybe gets a little too far with the humor – at one point, Wedge and his fellow pilots literally dress in drag – but there are lots of fun touches in this novel that reflect the kind of thinking-outside-the-box eccentricities Allston so excels at. One of my favorites was the documentarian who, when first introduces, wears a 3PO head on her shoulders for use as a recording device during interviews, giving her the impression of a most unusual two-headed creature, because studies suggest her interviewees find 3PO units “nonthreatening.”

Wedge Antilles, the recurring hero of the X-Wing novels and comics in particular, is always a fun protagonist because he is a direct tie-in to the original trilogy films – he appears in all three, and is the only character to survive the battles against both Death Stars – but his role in the movies is so small that there is a very wide canvas for the novelists to expand upon his story. (Geeky side note: The culmination of the romance between Wedge and Iella Wessiri, the New Republic intelligence official who had appeared in a half-dozen novels and several comics before this one, was far more rewarding than the arbitrary romance Wedge got tossed into with Death Star designer Qwi Xux in the Jedi Academy trilogy. That subplot seemed like nothing but an excuse to find something to do with Wedge and Qwi, unlike all the groundwork that had been previously set between Wedge and Qwi, and I’m glad that Allston wasted no time to dumping Qwi in literally the first chapter of this book.)

But it’s really Wes Janson who steals the show in Starfighters of Adumar. An extremely minor character in The Empire Strikes Back who rides with Wedge during the snowspeeder assault on the AT-ATs over Hoth (“Good shot, Janson!”), Wes has evolved into a comic relief character of sorts in the Star Wars Legends universe, with a wise-cracking and mischievous personality that serves as a perfect stand-in for Allston’s own sense of humor. Allston really puts him to good use in this novel, both in multiple comedic moments, and in scenes that demonstrate the military competence that tends to get overlooked due to Janson’s regard as a joker (like a particularly enjoyable scene where Janson challenges an arrogant assailant to a duel).

As with most of the X-Wing novels, the dialogue sometimes falls a bit flat in Starfighters of Adumar, and my attention wavered a bit during a second brief starbattle at the end of this book immediately following a much interesting one in the novel’s climax. But overall, it was a Starfighters of Adumar quick and enjoyable enough read, and as I continue reading through the Legends books, I’m looking forward whenever I reach Aaron Allston’s next one.