Rating: 4/5

Thoroughly enjoyed this account of Matthiessen's extensive travels in South America. The Mato Grosso and Beyond the Black Drunken River chapters are written with tremendous skill for describing particular people and experiences in a particularly isolated and dangerous place: the high-stakes jungles of Peru. The fact that he floated the Urubamba in 1960, at a time when it was one of the last areas on the planet where modern civilization was yet to exert its influence (Matthiessen asserts in multiple instances that the global track record of this influence to-date has been, at best, a dubious one), leaves no doubt as to the author's sense of adventure and ability to keep a cool head in pure wildness. If you've ever been on a long backpacking trip and suffered through the pain of tough terrain, then there are dozens of passages in the book about Matthiessen's difficulties in the jungle and on the river that you will feel in your bones. 

My favorite aspect of his narrative voice in this book, much like in the far superior Snow Leopard that Matthiessen published in 1978, is how honest he is about his impressions, his mood, his apprehensions and doubts. He has no issue making it known that he is not enjoying the surroundings, the people, and even himself. This is especially true in the book's first half, when he was in Patagonia. He did not like it and he makes that clear without spelling it out. I had similar feelings at times in parts of Patagonia and perhaps that is why it seems notable and interesting to me. Where Doug Chatwin can come across artificially enthusiastic at times in Songlines, Matthiessen is assiduous in his authenticity. While reading, I also caught faint, fleeting suggestions of Joan Didion's tone in his style, not in specific phrases or phrasings but in a more holistic and generalized way. She was writing in Vogue and the National Review around this time, moving around in what were likely some of the same New York-centric Ivy League circles Matthiessen did, so I wonder if he'd read her work and admired it. 

'Money pretty much has its way throughout all of South America, to a degree quite startling even to a mind grown hardened to the spectacular graft and corruption in the United States. One wonders at times why the Communist Party hasn't made more progress, Church or no Church, because it is the peasants who are getting it in the neck. But one forgets about the appalling ignorance which stands in the way of constructive resistance, an ignorance which the Church itself, with its use of mystique and sacrament, tends to perpetuate--I hesitate to say "encourage," but the fact is that in backward countries or communities ignorance appears to be the Church's handmaiden; at the very least, the two are often seen in company.' - Mato Grosso

'At the airstrip, early the next morning, George Glass, the missionary-pilot, asked me to lead him and the Templetons in the prayer usually offered in these planes before a flight over the wilderness. I refused, rather too abruptly, saying I did not feel qualified, and afterward felt a sudden sense of being cut off from the others and at loose ends. How serene these people are--as if religion were a state of shock, deep, peaceful shock, that good men like these are driven into by the spectacle of reality. Or is it that we, on the far side of the same abyss, do not wish to relinquish our tiny identities to a higher power? At least, I don't, and I'm just as aware as the next man that temporal ambitions are insane.' - Mato Grosso

'It was a sunny afternoon and, while humid, not uncomfortable in the shade, and I was able to absorb the atmosphere of mountain jungle as I went.' - Beyond Black Drunken River

'I photographed the building process--the first photographs I have taken in some days, as the camera has been tied into a rubber bag while traveling, because of the frequent stream and river crossings and the rain. Unlimbering it has been more trouble than I have cared to take, perhaps because I dislike carrying a camera: it seems to me that one misses a great deal of seeing and feeling when thinking of one's experience in terms of light and angle.' - Beyond Black Drunken River