Rating: 3/5

My third Henry James, but only the second I managed to complete. He didn't set the world on fire for me with this either, more like a quivering flame. I was hoping for great things, somewhere along the lines of Edith Wharton's brilliant 'The Age of Innocence'. As classic fiction generally goes, it was written impeccably well, but my problems were with the characters, who seemed to drift in and out of my consciousness all too often. Well over one hundred pages in, wasn't doing anything for me. Slowly, this changed for the better, and how he handled the cultural clash between naive Americans and the sophisticated, often decadent Europeans of the time was done with much enthusiasm, but Henry James, ultimately, may be a writer that's just not for me.
Do I give him another chance? It's 50/50. 

The story takes place in London and Venice (two great settings), Kate Croy is a Londoner who encourages her secret fiancé, Merton Densher, to woo and marry the wealthy young American Milly Theale, who is dying of a mysterious malady. Thus, Kate reasons, although Milly will likely die soon, she will at least be happily in love, Merton will pocket her fortune,, and Kate and Merton can marry and be filthy rich. But Milly learns of Merton’s and Kate’s wicked motives, leaving a guilt ridden Merton a legacy that he is struggles with. The greedy Kate on the other hand is playing hard ball leading to their relationship hitting the rocks. The novel looks closely at consequences and differences between characters, than it does on the events that carry the story. 

Most books these days are ninety percent plot heavy, so is it any surprise that for some, we have trouble understanding an author who isn't bothered by any of that. 'The Wings of the Dove' is told almost entirely without events. it’s almost all character interiority, not that I had a problem with this approach, I just found the main characters more like echoes, rather than a feeling of riding up front along side them. The second half of the novel definitely left more of an impact than the first, and had I read this in 1-2 hour sittings to get accustomed with it's pace, rather than thirty minutes here and there, then things may have been more positive. 

I will now ponder on reading 'The Portrait of a Lady' (which was my first choice anyway), but that's now probably fallen back in the queue. This was very well written, but for me, maybe just read in the wrong way.