Rating: 3/5

Worth reading but not as sublime as Democracy in America. In this work, Tocqueville conducted exhaustive research into how France was organized and run in the lead-up to the French Revolution. He explodes many myths about pre-revolutionary France, many of which, unfortunately, remain solidly believed myths taught in school as fact to this day. His deep, penetrating insights into people, government, and society are not as numerous here as Democracy in America, but there are still a few sprinkled in and leavening the work. It is also not nearly as long as the former work and fairly easy to read. 

In essence, Tocqueville highlights the benefits of liberty, as well as the difficulties in achieving and maintaining it. He notes the dangers of tyranny, the ease toward which people tend to slide, and the masks it wears to creep into power. 

As for pre-revolutionary France, Tocqueville notes how many post-revolutionary forms were already present: a near-total power in the center (though based in the monarchy), a bureaucratic state that preceded Bismarck's by a century (run from the Royal Council and its subordinates), democratic mentalities and vocabularies (spoken most often by those most obnoxious to its tenants, such as the nobility and upper middle class). He also goes through the vestiges of the feudal system that made the pre-revolutionary system so incredibly intolerable, despite its near total eradication. Principally, the nobility no longer formed a governing class of any import, but they retained their many tax immunities and claims against the commoners, they were typically absentee and out of touch, and the minor tasks, duties, and privileges attaching to them or their lands made daily life intolerable for ordinary people. The clergy had their faults, but their closer proximity to the people might have made those bearable in isolation. The upper middle class, much like the nobility, carved out exemptions for themselves that left the poor holding many of their burdens, and frequently they were the class most opposed to representation and any real movement toward a more democratic or free society.

Any serious student of the French Revolution or revolutions generally really ought to read this work; Tocqueville's research and findings remain fresh if only because they are so often overlooked. There are some gems of wisdom for the general reader here too, but the topic may be a little dry and in-depth for those not principally interested in it.