Rating: 4/5

Loving: Four Stars
Living: Three Stars
Party Going: Three and a Half Stars

Each of these three novels follows multiple characters representing different social strata: the servants and the served in an Irish country house during WWII (Loving), generations of steel foundry workers and owners in Birmingham (Living), and wealthy travelers stuck in a train station hotel (Party Going). The stories can be a little difficult to follow at first: in each, characters are referred to by several names, the narrative jumps around from one situation to another much like a soap opera, and important plot points and aspects of character development are (artfully) revealed through dialogue. These stories are not mysteries (though Loving has what could be called a mystery element), but reading them is a little like solving a puzzle. At first, you have to get your bearings. You are presented with many different pieces, and it takes a little while to figure out what you’re looking at. The further you progress, the clearer the picture becomes and the more quickly it goes. By the end, you have something that seems much more than the sum of its parts. I guess this is true of most books to some extent, but I found it especially true here.

My individual ratings for each of these novels are based partly on the author’s craft—which is admirable, partly on how enjoyable they were to read, and partly on how rewarding they were. I don’t mind doing a little bit of work when I’m reading if there’s a great payoff. Loving rates highest on all three of these criteria. As I got further into Loving, I found myself thinking that it’s begging to be made into a film, and wondering if perhaps maybe it HAS been (as far as I can tell, it has not). 

The best ad I can give for any and all of these novels comes from Green himself. Of his inspiration for Loving, he told The Paris Review: "I got the idea of Loving from a manservant in the Fire Service during the war. He was serving with me in the ranks, and he told me he had once asked the elderly butler who was over him what the old boy most liked in the world. The reply was: 'Lying in bed on a summer morning, with the window open, listening to the church bells, eating buttered toast with cunty fingers.' I saw the book in a flash."