Rating: 5/5

This volume, along with a similar one edited by Hugh Greene (his is shorter, but the stories are of an overall higher quality) gives a wonderful overview of the golden age of detective fiction. Although that term is usually taken to refer, at least in British detective fiction, to the period between World Wars, when country house parties were reinvented by Bright Young Things and writers such as Ngaio Marsh, Dorothy Sayers, and Agatha Christie made their debuts, I believe it is a misnomer: my own belief is that this was not a golden age but rather a Renaissance--the literal rebirth of a genre that had foundered upon the rocks of World War I. 

 The true golden age of detective fiction, I think, began with Poe's M. Dupin, and ended with the Conan Doyle story "His Last Bow." It seems no coincidence to me that one of the final Holmes stories is set in the overcast summer of 1914, while Agatha Christie's first novel, the thriller-like "Secret Adversary", concerns the adventures of two freshly-discharged veterans (Tommy, a soldier and Tuppence a nurse). 

 For those who do not believe me, read "His Last Bow" and see if the elegiac scene of Holmes and Watson upon a terrace does not seem, in many ways, a goodbye to a world that can be dealt with the purely rational terms of a Holmes or Hewitt or Thorndyke. "There's an east wind coming, Watson," says Holmes. "...such a wind as never blew on England yet. It will be cold and bitter, Watson, and a good many of us may wither before its blast." 
 
 As Vincent Starrett wrote, in an essay about why it is Holmes appeals to us...
 "We love the times in which he lived, of course: the half-remembered, half-forgotten times of snug Victorian illusion, of gaslit comfort and contentment, of perfect dignity and grace. The world was poised precariously in balance, and rude disturbances were coming with the years; but those who moved upon the scene were very sure that all was well: that nothing ever would be any worse nor ever could be any better. There was no threat to righteousness and justice and the cause of peace on earth except from such as Moriarty and the lesser villains in his train. The cycle of events had come full turn, and the times were ripe for living--and for being lost. It is because their loss was suffered before they had been fully lived that they are times to which our hearts and longings cling. 
	And we love the place in which the master moved and had his being: the England of those times, fat with the fruits of her achievements, but strong and daring still with the spirit of imperial adventure. The seas were pounding, then as now, upon her coasts; the winds swept in across the moors, and fog came down on London. It was a stout and pleasant land, full of the flavor of the age; and it is small wonder that we who claim it in our thoughts should look to Baker Street as its epitome. For there the cabs rolled up before a certain door, and hurried steps were heard upon the stair, and England and her times had rendezvous within a hallowed room, at once familiar and mysterious…"

 For those who long to return to such a room, if only for an hour, I highly recommend this collection--as well as its eponymous cousin edited by Hugh Greene. Some stories are better than others, of course--the Martin Hewitt story "The Loss of Sammy Crockett", along with the novella "In the Fog", are as good as many Holmes tales. In fact, Conan Doyle himself has four stories in this collection, all mysteries of excellent quality...and two of these make reference, however oblique, to a certain private detective of great renown...