Rating: 3/5

I read the vast majority of this book at a desultory, generally unenthusiastic pace, and I wish I'd known how it would come together at the end, because I would have given it better attention. 

The good parts: le Carré's close observation of meetings and interiors (he's sort of like a domestic novelist of the office, among his other interests) and wonderful bits of scene-setting, like this: "It was a day to be nearly free; a day to stay in London and dream of the country. In St. James's Park, the premature summer was entering its third week. Along the lake, girls lay like cut flowers in the unnatural heat of a Sunday afternoon in May" (37).

The less good part: I found that this particular novel frequently trafficked in emotions that heightened too quickly to feel quite right--it felt to me like the author was trying to make his characters angry (or despondent, or whatever) and the characters were only grudgingly coming along for the ride. It took me a while to figure out what this reminded me of: it was the recent literary novel Swimming Home--though there's a difference of degree; le Carré's characters seem strangely tetchy whereas Levy's appear to be, in fact, Martians. 

So Alan Turner goes to Bonn, the titular small town, in search of an employee who has gone missing and is possibly a spy. What is going on here? As Turner interviews all the uncooperative staff of the embassy, one of them quotes the missing man: "We've got the big memory and the small memory. The small memory's to remember the small things and the big memory's to forget the big ones" (103). 

And that's where things begin to get interesting, because this book is specifically about German memory and German forgetting. In that country, the entire postwar period has consisted of conflicts between ways of remembering, in waves that often have a strong generational component. There is the sense of general guilt, and the sense that German civilians were victims too, the rejection of that self-indulgence, the reassessment of group and individual responsibility, and enduring questions of who was entitled to have responsibility or power when nearly everyone was tainted in some way. This book is a snapshot of a fictional future that appeared plausible when it was written (1968). The "spy" Turner is hunting turns out more a romantic Nazi-hunter than anything else, impractically taking it upon himself to stop a war criminal from assuming a position of political power in Bonn. You can move your capital from a big city to a small town, but you can't forget the big things. 

Turner spends much of the book on the small things, tracing odd little details of the suspected spy's life, his romances, hobbies and failures. I confess that le Carré tricked me into looking in the wrong direction, too.