Rating: 4/5

Russia invaded Siberia in the 16th century, extracted wealth, planted forts and settlements and, mostly, ran roughshod over the indigenous people living there over the next two centuries. It's not a pretty picture of conquest and empire-building that forced tribute quotas on native people while infecting them with deadly Western diseases they had no immunity against. And the major role fur-trapping played in the enormous wealth the Russian Empire gained at the Siberian people's expense is clearly set forth.

"The Shaman's Coat" is an exploration of that sorry Russian/Soviet history, focusing on eight distinct indigenous tribal cultures and their environments- large and small- and each's adaptation to or rejection of the colonialization and repression brought to bear on the native cultures. 

Anna Reid asks: "Where did the real Siberians, the native people, fit into all this (history)? The answer, usually, was nowhere very much. Russians' perceptions of them progressed through familiar stages. For the Cossacks, they were an economic resource; for Enlightenment scientists, natural curiosities; for Romantics, noble savages; for empire-builders, an excuse-- so as to rescue them from cruel Chinese or Japanese rule-- to conquer new territory, and a canvas on which to display civilizing prowess. Pre-revolutionary travel writers usually only featured them as a side-show... There were exceptions. Condemned to remote settlements for years on end, nineteenth-century exiles often staved off despair by turning themselves into ethnographers. Outcasts themselves, they empathized with their subjects."

One significant literary (1900) and film (1975) representation was Vladimir Arsenyev's "Dersu Uzala", a very sympathetic portrait of a seasoned native hunter/tracker whose skills and survival wisdom saves a Russian military contingent in the Siberian wilderness. I highly recommend both the book and Kurosawa's film adaptation. 

Reid draws upon varied sources, letters and records to capture these perspectives on the Khant, Buryat, Tuvans, Sakha, Ainu, Nivkh, Uilta and the Chukchi, moving from the Urals eastward to the Pacific. The book has very useful maps to orient the reader. Reid, herself travels to locations throughout Siberia to try to interview remnants of the cultures she investigates as well as observe their Post-Soviet status, economic prospects, and -if possible- cultural vitality. 

The concept of Shamanism as an authentic unifying thread among various tribal cultures is posited as a link that, she finds, has been rooted out, degraded or commercialized by waves of assaults on native faith practices over the generations. "The state of Siberian shamanism, I thought when embarking on this book, would be an indicator of the extent to which the indigenous peoples had preserved their identities under Russian rule. The tsars tried to replace shamans with priests. THE communists ostracised and imprisoned them, and under Stalin shot them or threw them out of helicopters, saying that if they could fly, now was their chance. If shamanism had survived all this, other aspects of native Siberian culture probably had too."

In closing, she concludes that shamanism "like broader native identity, it had been stripped down to the essentials by Russian rule and especially by Communism, reduced from a detailed, consistent way of apprehending the world to a rag-bag of vague, disconnected beliefs and rituals. It was now in the process of reconstruction, with spare parts from the West."