Rating: 4/5

I read "A Door Into Ocean" by Joan Slonczewski years and years ago and this novel set on the same planet has been on my wish list for a long time. I got it as a gift this Christmas so I was finally able to read it.

I'll need to reread the first book again but this second novel seems to be set at least a thousand years after the first, possible thousands of years later. The Sharers are still there but the novel focuses on newcomers Raincloud, her husband Blackbear, and their two children who have been hired in one of the floating cities that make up Elysium. Thrust into a world unfamiliar, we get to see the culture, society, and science of the world through their participation in this new world and as part of a greater galactic community. I'm not a huge hard science fiction fan but Slonczewski is one of those authors that balances the descriptions so common to hard science fiction with a look at social issues and the personal lives of our viewpoint characters.

The book is divided into four parts that function as almost four shorter novels even though they built on each other. Before parts 2-4 we get sections from The Web, a collection of writing from a Sharer who was part Elysium (perhaps a connection to "A Door Into Ocean") and thus is trying to understand her world. The role of The Web is complex and a bit confusing both while you are reading it and how it functions into the plot; I felt a bit like it could have been left out, made an appendix, or simply woven into the rest of the stories instead of set aside at the end of each part.

A lot of things are coming to a head during the year this novel is set and it really felt like too much. I don't want to give away too much about the story but the final part also felt unnecessary to me as a reader, it could have been another sequel frankly. Also the fourth by trying to get to one of the major threads really seemed to leave the initial thread, threats from another planet, the very reason Raincloud is brought to Elysium too conveniently wrapped up. Spend more time on that issue, the Elysium longevity issue that Blackbear is working on, and the Sharers.

I did really like the book, I found the family unit as our viewpoint characters very engaging, I really liked how I didn't feel bored by the hard science, and I'd read more Slonczewski books based on this one and the prequeal.