Rating: 4/5

You can rely too much, my love, on the unspoken things. And the wry smile. I have that smile myself and I’ve learned the silence, too, over the years. Along with your expressions, like No notion and Of necessity. What happens, though, when it is all unsaid, is that you wake up one morning, no, it’s more like late one afternoon, and it’s not just unsaid, it’s gone. That’s all. Just gone.  A fascinating book told in a fragmented start-stop-startover-shift-tellsomethingesle style (at least through the first third), with hints that the Kate of the narrative might be or overlap with the author, yet, at its heart, is about the end of a relationship (or an ended relationship); or, as Greene would put it, the end of the affair.

Broken into three sections, the first and the third are similar in style, being fragmentary in form, and looping back into each other, they build on similar motifs, continue prior conversations, and the third part resolves many open questions and connects many loose ends of the first. The middle part is also fragmentary, but is mostly self-contained, and tends to only loop in on itself; even being fragmentary it is considerably more straightforward than the first section (the third section is, as noted, not exactly straightforward, but it does resolve quite a bit, and as such is in its own way clarifying). The second part is considerably different in tone than the rest of the novel, being much darker; more paranoid - it also contains the biggest mystery of the novel. This, also, is resolved in the third part.

There is also a brief, sad, vignette with a raccoon. It had direct parallels with the Szabò book I just read and greatly enjoyed, which I note mostly for me, as to say more would give too much of that book away.

A conversation with my wife, when I was about 50 pages into the book:

[she walks into the room] "what are you reading?
[i tell her]
"what's it about?"
"i'm not really sure yet"
"is it good?"
"oh yes"

Okay, that might have only happened in my head. But this is good. Oh yes, it is good.