Rating: 4/5

Second Joan Lowery Nixon book I have read and I enjoyed it slightly more than The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore which was also really good so that says something...maybe.

Written again in first person which still isn't my favorite narrative style. It just makes the other people being described seem like they are being judged by how they look and even act as well as the narrator themselves. I don't know...sometimes it works other times it just gives more of a rambling feeling.

For someone like me who writes in third person all the time and still seems to ramble that should tell you something. I mean...do I sound pretentious to you or just yapping on like a little kid? *shrugs*

Anyway...

Being written in 1980, there is also another decade's thoughts of the time being thrown in by adults against the morals or lack thereof of the teenagers at the time. Lots of paranormal talk but not a lot of paranormal action as well which is why it is missing that one star to be a five star review.

Again only my opinion...

Lauren has lived with her Aunt Melvamay (yes one word instead of Melva May I guess to save time spacing it out) since her mother died when she was four, her father sent away and killed in an Army incident not even knowing she was born.

Small Texas town full of God fearing, Christian folk who won't refuse to take care of those who need it. That's how Sara Martin came to live with them four months ago. No one to take her in and the preacher mentions Melvamay would be kind enough to offer her roof to the teenage girl since her own great-niece lives there.

Lauren and Sara may both be seventeen and seniors in high school but that is really all they have in common. Lauren is thin (she uses gaunt but I'm imagining her being almost skin and bones so I'm sticking with thin) and Sara blossomed early in all the right places.

Lauren hears Sara sneaking out almost every night and sometimes she comes home alone or parked just far enough with her beau of the evening to have him hidden in shadow but Lauren can see Sara leaning over to share a kiss.

Lauren doesn't like Sara from the start out of jealousy and the other girls at school will be nice to her face but call Sara a tramp behind her back for having attention from almost all the boys in school and even the men in town.

Heck even the older women say she is quite a Jezebel and we know that is probably the nicest thing a church going person should call someone.

The people in this small Texas town have known each other since they were born and are not very keen on outsiders so Sara isn't the only girl being judged and maybe even slightly ostracized.

Roberta Campion and her family moved here a year ago, renting a house on the outskirts, and not too many people jumped on a welcome wagon. They're from Louisiana...Cajuns so you know that must mean they are all into voodoo and such.

Roberta claims that she is psychic and she can communicate with the dead, spirits from the other side, and Lauren thinks it is only a way to get some kind of attention than none at all. Sara seems to believe it and soon she has all of the other girls in the senior class eager to go to Roberta's house and have a seance.

This includes Lauren's best friend Allie and Lauren just can't believe how gullible they are to take Sara's word on anything just the way all the guys hang onto her every word and drool over her. 

Lauren soon has enough when Sara claims she had a really good childhood to rub in her face but also lies to her aunt, saying she was at the library when Lauren saw her get into a car. The car belonging to the much older Ashe Norvell, town sheriff.

In an exchange of heated words, Lauren says she wishes Sara would just go away and never come back. Sara oddly says that maybe Lauren should just wish her dead but Lauren says no one deserves that.

 To try and make up for what she said and show Sara that she isn't scared...Lauren agrees to join the other girls at the seance Roberta will be having at her house that Friday night while her parents are out of town.

It all seems like a game to the others but Roberta is serious, Allie is frightened and Sara seems so eager to get answers...Lauren confused on how she should actually feel.

The lights are turned out, they begin to ask dumb questions but then Sara lets out a scream, knocking over the only candle lit in the darkness. When the main lights of the house come back on, Sara Martin is gone but the doors are still locked.

Wild speculation is that the girls messed with forces they couldn't understand, didn't need to meddle with and evil spirits whisked Sara away. Sheriff Norvell, level headed policeman he is, believes maybe Sara ran away with a boy. Perhaps a man instead but when no one else in town of the male population is missing it turns into maybe hitching a ride with a stranger?

All the doubt is put aside when Sara Martin's body is found drowned in the swampy water of The Thicket, supposedly haunted but still a hunting spot nonetheless despite its history. Yet was she murdered by evil spirits for messing with the unknown or by a pair of human hands?

A jealous wife of a married man Sara was messing with or perhaps an overbearing sister like Lauren's neighbor Feenie Lester for her brother Fant, who Sara had an eye on? Another girl jealous of the attention Sara received...maybe even one of them present at the seance?

A town full of suspects especially when another girl goes missing and is soon found dead, drowned in the same marshy spot...another girl present at the seance.

There are still other girls but Lauren has an unsettling feeling that she just might be next...

We get a lot of good suspects, some reveals if not that many twists and a pretty good climax. The ending may feel like it just put the kibosh on all of the "spooky" elements but that made it seem a little more creepy. There were nice grounded themes of family, jealousy and gossip thrown in and that was the saving grace that kept me from hating most of the characters.

So much hen squawking and good old boy nonsense but some of the characters had growth and development while some just kind of flitted out of the story. Good riddance for some and a welcome change to the others who got more focus that was rightfully deserved.

I would recommend The Seance more than The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore if you want to start on some Joan Lowery Nixon. More conflict and tension yet intriguing enough to check out the other books if you become curious.

So good so far...