Rating: 3/5

After reading reviews of this book and "Perfect Happiness" earlier edition of "Emma and Knightly" and seeing that many people had criticized this book, I was skeptical to give it try. Since there aren't many good sequels to "Emma" out there, I was willing to try something that was not raved about. 

I wasn't disappointed. The story was intriguing, perhaps not the greatest sequel written. But overall, ended up being a bit of a page turner! 

We find Emma a year or more into her marriage with Mr. Knightly and she finds out that she has a lot of learning and growing to do. She is put to the test when her quiet little life and the lives of people around her are undone with a few life-chaning events. Emma herself struggles with her new role as "wife" especially since her relationship with Mr. Knightley for so many years has been one of brotherly love. In this continuation of Emma, there are deaths, about three marriages, two new likeable characters, and a developing of the character of Frank Churchill (which in my opinion is very close to the portrayal Jane Austen made of him in Emma). I really enjoyed the character development in this book: I think Jane Austen created some of thhe most unique, realistic, and flawed characters in literature and it is interesting and comforting seeing them develop into the type of people they should be. Just like we should be doing. There are a lot of good lessons for us to learn about communication, jumping to conclusions, grief, finances, trust, and love. 

I recommend this book to those who love and long to live in Highbury, those who are not too critical as far as Jane Austen continuations and sequels go, and who like the caharcter of Emma and are curious how she matures and handles being married to Mr. Knightley. I do not recommend this book to those who desire a certain level of writing in Jane Austen continuations and sequels. If you want writing in the style of Jane, in the voice of Jane, and characters that are true to Jane, you might not enjoy this book.