Rating: 1/5

WTF was this? This is a train wreck without all the positive qualities...I think some of the stuff was just too tragic and too annoying. In the first half of the book, you've got Gina, a hormonal 16-year-old who is chasing after Rhyder, a 26-year-old guy. She's in luuurve and wants him to be her first and boy does she chase him down for all she's worth. He is, of course, only a man, and while he does get credit for turning her spoiled ass away time after time, he absolutely fails for not remembering that she's only 16 and it is NOT okay to lust after her. He gives in a bit here or there and takes a few liberties before spurning her and getting all mad at himself for not being disgusted at his own behavior when he knows he should be. This all culminates with her grandfather blackmailing Rhyder into marrying the teenage chit or face attempted rape charges. Naturally Rhyder is pissed and believes that Gina was in on this. His poor opinion of her is supported when she overhears him talking to his friend about how he'd pay to get rid of her and she takes him up on the offer. They get an annulment...supposedly.

Flash forward 10 years, Gina is supposed to be so much more mature now that she's a single, adult lawyer. Only she's not so single after all...and she's not really that much of an adult either. Ten years haven't brought much insight to Gina, who still believes that Rhyder is totally at fault and now blames him for her grandfather's death, since the marriage/annulment ruined her or something. Well, grandpa is the one who forced it and she's the one who put herself in that situation. So how is it Rhyder's fault that he didn't want to be married to her? Huh? But anydelusionalidiot, she runs into Rhyder, who inexplicably has been haunted by the memory of Gina and is determined to get her back...for some reason. We never get his POV, so we never really understand what he's thinking. In fact, we don't get much explanation of his motives or behavior at all...we're all just as surprised as Gina when he does shit. Like there at the end...when he never explains why he loves her or why he suddenly wanted her back...or explained why he'd told his parents about her...or apologized or explained away his cruel words in the beginning or his pretty shallow opinion of her currently. He just told her he loved her and wanted to stay married and that was the end. No idea why. This was definitely a train wreck, but not the good kind -more like the cringe worthy kind.