Rating: 5/5

What this ISN'T is a review of an indisputably profound book. No review here could do it perfect justice.

What this IS is an in-depth look at an early episode of the book - that of that notoriously sticky wicket, the Slough of Despond - from the particular angle of waking up to life, coming of age, in our modern day and era.

So let's keep it simple. 

Let's say you have just had a revelation of all the ruefully intermingled glory and all the cheap ugliness of becoming an adult. Here's where also (as Hegel says) you choose either the Social Darwinian way of dominance or just staying cool - master or slave.

You have two further options: you can take the high or the low ethical road. 

Now, the pressures of life are now (probably not entirely coincidentally) so high that it has become excruciatingly difficult to choose any but the low road, and just go with your friends' inborn flow. The easy way.

You may not know now that it's the easy way, and will probably certainly not know that it is all just a cheap facade in front of inner bankruptcy. In fact if you're completely in sync with media trends and public fads, you may not realize it until you're of an advanced age.

You may, like Rip van Winkle and me, fall fast asleep for half your life.

You see, before we were programmed with hype over fads and trends, we were programmed by Mother Nature with Conscience. Something you may fight or dismiss. But the longer you dismiss it the more strongly it will rapidly reach a crescendo in your SUBconscious.

The result?

The Slough of Despond, AKA Deep Moody Depressive Gloom.

That's the beauty of the human machine, you see. We're built with BRAKES. The full stop is for our, and our species', self-preservation. And it can lead you, as Robert Pirsig says, to discover real VALUE - for the first time in your life.

Turns out the easy path is our own self-inflicted punishment in the end. And if we don't believe in God like John Bunyan did, by the end of our trip we'll believe in GUILT. 

You know, that dead albatross tied round your neck like a noose?

Fortunately, turnaround at any stage of life is possible. Better late than never. And the dawn of the love that turns us around is forgiveness.

That's why the title of the book says Progress, and not Stalemate, because progress to the sunshine of self-actualization is always possible. There can always be a happy ending.

So Nature forgives.

But Nature told us right in the beginning to start the right way - by paying attention to our conscience.

Don't ignore it.

Cause, kids, if you're not watching the traffic signs -

Sooner or later you may crash.