Rating: 4/5

Opening the pages of Bogeys and Bandits, I received a little surprise from God and have to smile, with joy really, at how all things are connected in this amazing circle of life: 

“Splash One!” Mongo called on the radio. 
“Splash Two!” called someone else.
Two? Mongo had forgotten for a moment: The controller called out two Bandits. Someone had just taken out the second one. Over on the opposite side of the formation, the second MiG was trailing fire and smoke, going down like a gutshot crow. Lieutenant Commander Mark Fox, who was Dash Four out on the right flank of the formation, had reached the same conclusion as Mongo: Shoot…… 

Now y’all can smile with me, you know who you are, prayer warriors and patriots all. 

Robert Gandt’s Bogeys and Bandits was fun, I mean really fun, a short, sweet taste of what it’s like to work and ride with American naval aviators, more specifically those who fly the FA-18 Hornet. The book takes us for a fast ride with strike fighter Class 2-95 and it’s not all warrior fun and games as there is a very serious, real, element of danger in flying supersonic jets designed for combat. The author describes the inherent risk of becoming “one with the earth,” and the reality is that skilled aviators are lost each year on training/combat missions, with equipment malfunctions, and pilot error. My respect for those who serve is immense and the author’s visual living color description of Navy culture/careers inspires. I ponder what my life would’ve been like had I signed aboard as a trauma nurse with the Navy. While it is nearly impossible to imagine flying and fighting at over 1000 miles per hour, testing oneself against the best of the best in any field is a Navy specialty and there are moments when I still long to accelerate my life, serve my country, and “Go Navy!”

“Navy pilots, in fact, accounted for only 2 MiG kills in the Desert Storm air war. And now both the veteran MiG killers were stationed at Cecil Field, where they dwelled among the new fighter pilots like living icons.” 

http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/Crosstalk...

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_I._Fox

“Until one afternoon in the summer of 1980, JJ Quinn has no notion what he was going to do with his life. He had never given a moment’s thought to the military or the Marine Corps or airplanes. But that afternoon something happened. He was standing there in the July sun, baking on the ramp of the Willow Grove Naval Air Station with several thousand other air show spectators. Silhouetted up there against the Pennsylvania sky, trailing smoke like a swarm of flaming arrows, were the Blue Angels, the Navy’s crack aerobatic formation team.”

http://www.blueangels.navy.mil/

From the Alliance Air Show 2009….it was indeed fabulous, a perfect day!:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGS041...

http://www.allianceairshow.com/