Rating: 4/5

India
The illustrated Jungle Book is a mixed bag of positives and negatives, and if your only experience of the story is from the films then you are in for a surprising revelation. Firstly the Jungle Book is not one story but an anthology of 7 short stories and 7 songs, and understandably with some more appealing than others. The contents include:

Mowgli’s Brothers (Story)
Hunting-Song of the Seeonee Pack (Song)
Kaa’s Hunting (Story)
Road-Song of the Bandar-Log (Song)
“Tiger! Tiger!” (Story)
Mowgli’s Song (Song)
The White Seal (Story)
Lukannon (Song)
“Rikki-Tikki-Tavi” (Story)
Darzee’s Chant (Song)
Toomai of the Elephants (Story)
Shiv and the Grasshopper (Song)
Her Majesty’s Servants (Story)
Parade-Song of the Camp Animals (Song)

This is also not a child’s book, it is dark, threatening and violent. Even Baloo while teaching Mowgli the ways and language of the jungle, leaves him heavily bruised. The general story, we all know, as Mowgli the Man-Cub (the Frog) is found as an infant and reared by wolves, taught and watched over by Baloo and Bagheera, and hunted by Shere Khan. However, if you’ve only seen the films and are unaware of the book, then expect a few surprises. The role of characters are transformed, interactions are altered and plots are changed. Death is a typical outcome, often clinical and ruthless, but with a purpose. The written narrative and dialogue from Rudyard Kipling reminds us just how great a writer he is, how he constructs a layered storyline and uses such lyrical prose to describe the scene and activities. Each story starts with a little poetic verse that magically blends with the story.

Only the first 3 stories relate to Mowgli, the others are a seal, mongoose, elephants and the ensemble of animals in Her Majesty’s Servants. This is an illustrated version with two types of images; black and white sketch which are exceptionally well drawn, and full-colour prints that seem to vary in quality. This is a Kindle version and the formatting with the images is really poor and inconsistent, I actually can't believe how poor the formatting is.

I wasn’t quite sure with this and would probably rate it more accurately as 3.5 stars.