Rating: 2/5

It pains me in my soul to say this, but I did not like this book very much. Although Wikipedia has informed me that my new hero Penelope Lively began life as a children’s author and still writes for both children and adults, this book is a weird hybrid that fits neither one nor the other category. (Given it was written in 1976, it is very much a children’s book, not YA or NA or whatever new two letters is being invented as I type.) I’ll say this for it: it’s weird as shit and probably wouldn’t have been published now, let alone won a Whitbread Award, but it might have carved a nice niche in literary fiction if Maria was aged up. 

As it is, it’s a very slow and thoughtful inspection of the inner life of a pre-pubertal girl, who’s growing out of her magical thinking childhood phase, during one summer in a holiday house that isn't as eldritch as Maria makes out. I’ve had this on my bookshelf since I was a child (it’s why I thought I owned the similarly named ‘A Wrinkle in Time’ – this is, at least, not as bad as ‘A Wrinkle in Time’ to the adult reader). At some point I must have tried to read it. I retain a vague memory of being put off by how plodding it was, as well as by the tiny tiny font. This 1994 Mammoth edition has what looks like size 6 font and squashes the book into 140 pages. I don’t know much about the conventions of children’s publishing, but I’m really starting to suspect that pre-JK Rowling there was a rabidly-enforced limit on page counts.

Where Lively is best – unsurprisingly – is describing, in the margins, the lives of the quiet, introverted Foster parents, who were ambivalent to the prospect of child-rearing until they had one and clearly still are. The denouement, which gestures at a supernatural deus ex machina and then shies away from it, is weak. If the story was supposed to be about Maria and her mother learning to understand each other better, it probably should have been about that.

There is some good writing here, of course. 

“There are some supremely agreeable moments in life that are best savoured alone – the first barefoot step into a cold sea, the reading of certain books, the revelation that it has snowed in the night, waking on one’s birthday … And other the full wonder of which can only be achieved if someone else is there to observe.”

“ ‘If you feel sick in the car, tell Mrs Lucas.’
No, thought Maria. In front of them all? Do you really think I would? Die, quietly, just like that, is what you’d have to do.”’

“ ‘Super nosh … Once,’ he began reflectively, ‘we roasted an ox on Wandsworth Common. Well, not really an ox – a leg of lamb from Sainsbury’s but it was the same idea. That was the time James got his head stuck between those iron railings.’ Mr Foster picked up the newspaper and retreated into the drawing room.”

I think I’ll probably read through all of Lively’s adult backlist before I attempt another of her works for children, all the same.