Rating: 5/5

What strikes me most about this biography is that McCasland made every effort to get out of the way and let Chamber's life speak for itself. Often, biographers have a bias for our against their subject, which comes out, inevitably, in their work. For example, if you read A Light So Lovely: The Spiritual Legacy of Madeleine L'Engle, Author of A Wrinkle in Time, it quickly becomes apparent that Arthur doesn't love Madeleine L'Engle. On the other hand, if you read Becoming Madeleine: A Biography of the Author of A Wrinkle in Time by Her Granddaughters, written by two of her granddaughters, you can tell that they loved their grandma. 

How does McCasland feel about Chambers? Well, it's hard to tell—and that's a very good thing. Readers can see he has a high respect for Chambers; for example, in quoting from his letters, McCasland omits names of ministers about whom Chambers held some unkind thoughts. This is to protect those ministers and their families, McCasland says in a note, and there's no reason to air this dirty laundry to a broader public. Thus, McCasland shows his respect for Chambers, respect which can also be seen in the care with which McCasland put together this book.

The book consists primarily of letters, diaries, parts of sermons, and poems in which we readers get to hear Chambers' thoughts about his life. It's a refreshing style. McCasland doesn't share his theories about Chambers' life, nor does he attempt to psychoanalyze Chambers in any way. 

That said, I sometimes wished there was more of McCasland's commentary on Chamber's life. For example, Chapter 7, "Dark Night of the Soul," moves TOO quickly: McCasland doesn't have much material to quote from during this period of Chambers' life (1897-1901), just a handful of letters and poems, and without his commentary on the dark night that Chambers experienced, the chapter passes too fast for readers to be able to empathize with what Chambers went through. On page 73 we get this retrospective from Chambers' future diary: "After I was born again as a lad I enjoyed the presence of Jesus Christ wonderfully, but [from the day I asked God for the baptism of the Holy Spirit] on for four years, nothing but the overruling grace of God and the kindness of friends kept me out of an asylum. [During those years] I had no conscious communion with Him. The Bible was the dullest, most uninteresting book in existence, and the sense of depravity, the vileness, and bad-motivedness of my nature was terrific" (73). On page 85, we hear, from the same document quoted at the first, that the dark night is over in a flash: "I had no vision of heaven or of angels, I had nothing. I was as dry and empty as ever, no power of realization of God, no witness of the Holy Spirit. Two days later I was asked to speak at a meeting, and forty souls came out to the front. Did I praise God? No, I was terrified and left them to the workers, and went to Mr. MacGregor and told him what had happened.... And like a flash something happened inside me, and I saw that I had been wanting power in my own hand, so to speak, that I might say—Look what I have by putting my all on the altar." The dark night is over in a matter of pages, most of which contain Chambers' poetry, and the resolution of the dark night happens this fast, too fast for us readers to digest.

There was another section I wish McCasland would have given more commentary on, and that is the section when Chambers describes his philosophy about money. In his journal in early 1916, Chambers writes, I have not had one penny of salary, and yet everything I have asked for has come. However, I always feel Our Lord's caution in Matt. 7:6 ["Don't cast your pearls before swine"] in talking about this matter, for it has been, through a long spell of hearfs, an amazement to find out how few even of God's real children believe me when I have spoken of money matters, they imagine I have a supply other than I say. But never have I had, and if any saint should read this, take courage and never be sore if other saints cast doubt on you. 
(This is a private matter but it may be useful. When Biddy and I married we determined before God we would never talk of money matters before anyone, nor ever use the phrase 'we cannot afford it,' and God has undoubtedly blessed that decision. For so many have their intercourse with God rudely corrupted by the perpetual [com]plaint of chronic impecuniousness [pennilessness]. It is to my mind more of a shame to mention money in the way one so often hears than many another thing considered more shameful. Now this is a betrayal of myself. I feel like the sentiment of 2 Cor. 12:11 ["I have made a fool of myself, but you drove me to it."]
Of this most intriguing diary entry, McCasland simply writes, "[Chambers] would freely ask for contributions to build a hut or feed the soldiers but rarely mentioned his own financial needs. A diary entry early in 1916 provides an usual glimpse at the approach he and Biddy [Chambers' nickname for his wife Gertrude] took to money" (226). My own thoughts on this passage is that Chambers lived out quite radically the verse "seek first the kingdom and his righteousness and all of these things will be added unto you" (Matthew 6:33). And not only did God never short-supply Chambers and his wife and daughter Kathleen, God provided for them in abundance. For example, anytime a guest would come to visit them in Egypt during WWI, Chambers would arrange to take them to the Pyramids, treat them to dinner at a fine restaurant in Cairo, etc. 

Based on my review, it may sound like I wanted McCasland to comment more, but these two examples I've mentioned are minority cases. The majority of times, McCasland's style of feeding us with as much source material and as little of his secondary commentary as possible is wonderfully refreshing. I got to clearly see into Chambers' life without the filter (which, inevitably to some degree, is skewed) of another person's perspective. 

As you can tell from the diary entry quoted above, Chambers did not write a lot of personal or family matters down in his diary. Instead, he listed more banal details, such as the names of sermons he'd given at various places (which, McCasland notes, was likely a system Chambers used to help him not repeat a message twice at the same locale). But his early diary is more personal, and combined with his letters and the reflections of others, provides us with a surprisingly robust picture of Chambers. I would like to read more biographies by McCasland—I've already looked them up, and I have Eric Liddell: Pure Gold : A New Biography of the Olympic Champion Who Inspired Chariots of Fire and Blind Courage: Journey of Faith on order.