Rating: 5/5

Combines the two brilliant works by Nancy McKenzie about Arhur's Queen Guinevere and one of the best reteallings of the Arthurian legend.

An extremely engaging book, full of adventure, passion, intrigue and emotion.
Engages the reader evey step of the way.
It traces the early life of Gunievere , who would be Arthur's bride, from her birth to the king and young queen of the Kingdom of Northgallis, where a witch predicts the night of her birth that she would live to be the greatest lady in Britain, but also that she would betray her king and herself be betrayed.
What is unique about this retelling of the Arthurian legend is the deep emotional and pyschological depth of her subjects.
It is the best Arthurian retelling I have read.

Growing up in north Wales, to be a great and engaging beauty , together with her cousin Elaine, her life is turned upside down when she is chosen as the bride of the High King of Britain, Arthur.
Guinevere's love for the King's most trusted knight, Lancelot causes her great pain. Her cousin and childhood friend Elaine, turns into a deadly rival, who out of jealousy because it was Guinevere who became Arthur's bride, will do anything to hurt Guinevere.

Included in this saga are others in Arthurian legend such as the King's adopted brother Kay, Arthur's half-sisters Morgause and Morgan , the battles with the invading Saxons , and the various kingdoms in Britain in the time.We read of Guinevere's abduction by the thuggish minor king Mwelas and her rescue by Lancelot. McKenzie did her research well, while introducing an exciting take on the world of Arthur and Camelot.
Nancy McKenzie makes for relaxed reading while bringing alive the true magic, colour and drama of Arthurian legend, and exploring the hearts and passions of Arthur's beautiful and captivating Queen Guinevere who captures the hearts of so many men at Camelot.

In the second of two magnificent novels, Guinvere, unable to conceive agrees to raise Arthur's son Mordred born from a cursed encounter with Arthur's sister the evil sorceress Morgause.
As she raises Mordred to love him like son, he will eventually be the seed of her destruction. Meanwhile she struggles with her agonizing love for Lancelot as McKenzie creates high drama and narrative from this ill fated love.
And of course the shadow of the great and terrifying Merlin always hovers over all.
The total effect creates a compelling and spellbinding epic which serves as an imposing example of the author's enthusiasm for her subject