Rating: 4/5

My husband and I read this book together and thoroughly enjoyed it! We appreciate the inclusion of a theological foundation for understanding the purpose of marriage along with lots of practical suggestions and examples for how to live it out in daily love. Perhaps most insightful was the exposition on the five different kinds of love along with inspiration for cultivating each one in your marriage.

Two specific disagreements with the author resulted in the 4 instead of 5-star rating. The first, a minor one, is in his application of the “S” for “sharing” in his principles for having the B.E.S.T. marriage. He advocates for a totality of shared interests, positing that if one spouse has a particular hobby or interest that the other should always learn to participate and enjoy it as well. While we generally agree with the principle of sharing interests and experiences, we think it’s also fine - perhaps even healthy - to maintain some separate interests and appreciate each other’s differences.

Our second disagreement, much more significant, was in his instruction that if one spouse has been involved in extra marital affairs in the past that the other doesn’t know about, he should keep it to himself and not place the burden of that knowledge on the other. We vehemently disagree! For a book that so unapologetically advocates for a depth of intimacy in every area of life, we can’t imagine a couple being able to achieve this if one is keeping such a secret. Transparency and honesty are always preferable to secrecy. And Proverbs 28:13 likewise cautions that “Whoever conceals his transgressions will not prosper, but he who confesses and forsakes them will obtain mercy.”

Those two issues aside, we recommend this book to any other married couples looking to improve their marriage, provide topics for discussion, delve into deeper issues of intimacy, and gain a better understanding of all that God designed marriage to be. The timeless truths and even a chapter on “How to Save Your Marriage Alone” also make it a valuable resource for just a husband or wife looking for guidance on how to work through difficulties in marriage without the support or participation of their spouse.