Rating: 4/5

"Don't tell me that you had a wonderful time reading this book, tell me what you are going to do differently on Monday". The higher up the organization, the less time he has under his own control (senior executives rarely have more than quarter of their time under their control), so you have to take control of your time. Understand what are the things that waste your time without contributing to effectiveness. Ask your subordinates how you are preventing them from doing their work effectively.

The first version of the book was written in 1965, but majority of the assumptions are still valid on 21th century (like the perception that computers will take over decision making VS actually expecting serious mental effort from people because one cannot compete with computer on standard computation). 

1. Know where your time goes; relentlessly prune unproductive activities.
2. Know the contribution you're expected to make - to others' contributions and to the organization.
3. Make your strengths productive and hone them; focus on the absence of weakness leads to mediocrity.
4. There are always more opportunities available than time to pursue them – prioritize and focus on the truly impactful.
5. Continually shed unproductive programs and processes by asking, "If we didn't already do this, would we go into it now?"
6. Most events are generic and should be handled by rules, policies, and procedures; solutions to truly unique events should be formed on the highest conceptual level possible. Decisions without disagreement are not effective. Doing nothing might be a good option (Warren Buffet).

“Converting a decision into action requires answering several distinct questions: Who has to know of this decision? What action has to be taken? Who is to take it? And what does the action have to be so that the people who have to do it can do it? The first and the last of these are too often overlooked—with dire results.” 

“Working on the right things is what makes knowledge work effective.”

“If the executive lets the flow of events determine what he does, what he works on, and what he takes seriously, he will fritter himself away “operating.” He may be an excellent man. But he is certain to waste his knowledge and ability and to throw away what little effectiveness he might have achieved. What the executive needs are criteria which enable him to work on the truly important, that is, on contributions and results, even though the criteria are not found in the flow of events.” 

“A well-managed factory is boring. Nothing exciting happens in it because the crises have been anticipated and have been converted into routine.” 

“The first rule in decision-making is that one does not make a decision unless there is disagreement.”

“The danger is that executives will become contemptuous of information and stimulus that cannot be reduced to computer logic and computer language. Executives may become blind to everything that is perception (i.e., event) rather than fact (i.e., after the event). The tremendous amount of computer information may thus shut out access to reality.” 

“The executive’s time tends to belong to everybody else. If one attempted to define an “executive” operationally (that is, through his activities) one would have to define him as a captive of the organization. Everybody can move in on his time, and everybody does. There seems to be very little any one executive can do about it. He cannot, as a rule, like the physician, stick his head out the door and say to the nurse, “I won’t see anybody for the next half hour.” Just at this moment, the executive’s telephone rings, and he has to speak to the company’s best customer or to a high official in the city administration or to his boss—and the next half hour is already gone.*” 

“The job is, however, not to set priorities. That is easy. Everybody can do it. The reason why so few executives concentrate is the difficulty of setting “posteriorities”—that is, deciding what tasks not to tackle—and of sticking to the decision.” 

“Executives are not paid for doing things they like to do. They are paid for getting the right things done—most of all in their specific task, the making of effective decisions.”