Rating: 3/5

One of the primary reasons climate change in particular, and environmental degradation in general so confounds us is the mediocre state of our ecological literacy. Preoccupied with testing and related standards and overwhelmed by disciplinary struggles, we find it difficult to truly engage and excite our children. Yet teaching about the environment in which we live should seem, not just relevant, but fascinating and crucial to our very survival.
This book uses two dozen essays by respected environmental educators to make the case for such efforts and provide insights into how we might break the current mold to do so. And many of the essays impart valuable insights, even inspiration. Arizona State's David Orr emphasizes the importance of connecting students to the place they live, particularly in these times when we are so disconnected as a society. "Place is nebulous to educators because to a great extent we are a displaced people for whom our immediate places are no longer sources of food, water, livelihood, energy, materials, friends, recreation, or sacred inspiration."
Native American environmental educator Jeannette Armstrong believes that it's not just about teaching the science but instilling the related stewardship values, "The clear imperative that individuals within the community must cooperate willingly to demonstrate sustainability values ensures the survival and well-being of the whole. Community exists to be shared with, rather than to be competed against. The whole earth needs to be healthy for families to be healthy and for individuals to thrive."
Orr and Armstrong are joined by Fritjof Capra, Maurice Holt, Wendell Berry, Ernest Callenbach, Donella Meadows, and Peter Berg to provide insights and new ways to look at old problems. Their half of the book was refreshing and often inspirational.
The book, unfortunately, became preoccupied with incorporating the lunchroom into the environmental curriculum. While I agree with the value of school gardens and using lunch as a vehicle to teach nutrition the value of local resource management, a third of the essays focused on the topic. Meanwhile, I felt like they gave short shrift to methods and approaches which truly engage the kids in ways that would ignite the fires of enthusiasm and passion for learning. We need an environmental education revolution that will transform our youth into the agents for change we so desperately need at this point in time. Only half the book accomplishes that goal.