Rating: 1/5

Post Listen Review: Stop me if this has happened to you before because this book has a very believable premise and I am sure it happens all the time. 

You are a vetrinarian who has worked very hard to become one and you feel like your life would only be fulfilled if your boyfriend Marcus Marks would propose to you so that you could have your career as well as your 2.5 children. So when he calls and says you have to meet because "we need to talk" you go and aren't exactly thrilled about it. But instead of your boyfriend Marcus Marks (whose name reminds me of Marky Mark and the Funky Bunch) you find his... gasp... wife. 

Well, naturally what happens is that you become fast friends with her and soon you are invited by some relatives that you don't know very well to go to Provence, France and you invite the woman who was married to your boyfriend to go with you. Yay! 

Before you go, a man comes into the vet's office with a dog named Criminal. First you chastise him for naming his dog Criminal (because names like Fluffy, Fido and Mr. Fancy Pants are much more dignified) and then you make a dinner date with him. What do you do next? Watch him sprain his ankle and sleep with him because it is a great idea to get in bed with the next guy you meet, it helps you get over heartache.

Then he doesn't call the next day and you are furious. Eventually you find out that he is an ex-spy or something whose first wife was tragically killed months before giving birth. And he was just checking you out because he has ties to your distant relatives and he wants to make sure you are not trying to rob them or pass bad wine off to them or anything and so you forgive him.

Then you and another distant cousin, who is a young asian school girl, and your friend who used to be married to your ex-boyfriend hang around France for a while so you can get to know the ex-spy better and have some sex with him. But while there you find out that the woman who was married to your ex-boyfriend isn't Miss Georgia in a beauty pageant way but rather in a stripper stage name way. You stay friends though and she is split between two French guys that are both hot on her.

Unbeknownst to you, there is a murderer in the family and he is on the loose, despite your current boyfriend, the ex-spy turned private investigator's efforts to catch him. The murderer naturally hates the ex-spy and wants to kill him in the same way he killed his own brother. But instead the murderer tries to kill you, yet your current boyfriend the ex-spy turned private investigator is there in time to rescue you. Although you do end up in the hospital. Whew. 

Also you have more sex somewhere in there and/or think about sex. One of the French guys hooks up just fine with your friend who used to be a stripper and was once married to your ex-boyfriend even though she used to be a stripper and not a beauty pageant winner.

Sometimes while you are in France you help out at a winery also. But that is before you are almost killed.

Imagine all that with a narrator whose voice reminds you of the part in Monty Python and the Holy Grail where the French soldies says, "I fart in your general direction," and you have a pretty good idea of what this book was. 

I don't recommend it.

Pre-listen guess: The description on the back sounds like the logline for a Dianne Keaton movie. Not a fan.