Rating: 3/5

In the end, it all makes sense.
I have to admit I had many issues with this book. It seemed full of inconsistencies and without a real unity, that is: it’s like the characters have sudden changes of personality and their behavior is very bizarre.
Sometimes it’s almost psychotic because when something very bad or very good happens, they don’t have a behavior and feelings which are congruent to the situation.
Adding to this, they both are unpleasant characters.
And I think the author didn’t really revised her work, and it lacks a proper editing, even if in the end it all comes out.
It’s a good revenge story, and it should be much better if the author hadn’t pictured the heroine as a spoiled and selfish narcissist. A young woman who’s beautiful and rich and at 21 acts like she was 15.
Her selfishness and lack of empathy is really annoying. This is not a heroine who’s hurt easily, I thought.
She meets the hero and wants him, and since he’s indifferent to her she wants him more, until she really stalks him and is bitchy to his dates. This behavior was appalling and the hero of course is annoyed and tries to avoid her going out with ow. After some weeks suddenly he changes his mind and wants to date her, but since she’s selfish and childish, they keep on quarreling until one night he rapes her. That was bad. He really rapes her and that was meant as a deserved lesson because she defied him.
Really? 
Oh and she was a virgin so you can imagine the shock.
The woman then has a complete personality transplant because when he follows her and asks her to forgive him she easily allows him to have sex with her again- still sore and bruised from the rape- and oh it’s wonderful this time so she loves him and he asks her to marry him and she accepts and it’s all right.
WTF?????
No, sorry, ok it’s only a hp but a rape is a rape and a woman cannot so easily dismiss such a traumatic experience in a matter of hours and with the same man who raped her! This is madness! I found disgusting this way to deal with rape, very offensive to all women who are victims of rape, and even after years, they cannot forget the abuse. CM really made a big mistake here. Huge.
So now it’s all love and happiness and the heroine decides to give her shares in the family company to her future husband as a wedding present. Really? How stupid can a woman be?
And she’s now turning into a real doormat, because the hero has suddenly become cold and indifferent and she apologizes. For what? We don’t know. The man behaves horribly, flirting with ow at his engagement party, then tells the heroine he still wants ow, and the heroine tells him she’s sorry. 
Madness again.
They get married, and this was really stupid on her part because he was awful during all their engagement, but after their marriage he becomes still more horrible, a real monster, never touching her, going out every night and taunting her with ow.
And she? The selfish bitch who used men like she used toilet paper? She lets him treat her like dirt and whines and cries.
No, please, this is not my narcissistic girl! She should treat him with contempt and try dating om. This behavior was inconsistent. Eventually the hero tells her the truth, that he does not want her any more and he never did, that it was all a revenge plan against her and her father. And I don’t want to spoil what he had against the man. But it was a good reason, even if it was not true. Of course he was deceived and his fil is innocent and has proof of it. There’s a lil drama, the heroine is pregnant, the hero apologizes and everyone is happy in the end. The hero loved her since he first met her but his revenge plan was all he could think about and he was so unhappy when he had to hurt her, so in the end he had already given the shares back to his fil and decided to have a divorce to get the heroine free of his nasty being.
Oh, and he never had ow, it was all a plan to persuade the heroine to leave him. He also says he never wanted another woman after he met her, so it would seem he was celibate? But he dated ow for some time so what’s the truth? It was confusing.
And the heroine? She didn’t really love him. She was a narcissist and needed attention and his main attraction was just that he didn’t give her any so she wanted him more than all om. Typical narcissist trait.
It should be two stars but it was really angsty so since I’m a sucker for angst I’ll enjoyed it in a way.