Rating: 4/5

Alistair MaClean is one of the more difficult thriller authors to endorse. The problem is, that he was so uneven in his output. He wrote what, 30 books? But quality is entirely "hit-or-miss", throughout. He was the 'junk-food' of the classic-era thriller-writers. So sometimes you reach for one of his titles; knowing its possibly bad ...but you just keep stuffing it into your craw. He's the writer that you're always a little-bit-embarrassed to be caught reading.

People talk about where the 'rot' in his technique ...'began to set in'. Here? Could be. I agree this particular plot has some minor issues with credulity. It's a combination gold heist and a stolen nuke story. Err..

But really, this is only his eighth book! I've read his earliest works and unfortunately I found them no better than anything else he wrote later. So where exactly does his 'best' writing lay hidden? I think its found right here in this very same novel. Yep! Here, and in a few others of the same circa, (such as, 'When Eight Bells Toll').

I remember this title (Golden Rendezvous) as being particularly well-paced and gripping. That's what MaClean does best. The yarn here seems to all take place between a pair of ships confronting each other in the mid-Atlantic. One ship hijacks the other by sending out a false distress signal. So, this means a single, unified location ...as even Aristotle would approve of. Tight, taut, condensed. 

Yes, the protagonist 'First Officer John Carter' does seem far too sure of himself and far too daring...but I believe that's because he is not--after all--'just an ordinary first officer'. He's a 'ringer' --as usual in a MaClean tale. 

In the beginning of the story, you see him dangling over the side of a ship by a rope. Just accept it, because MacLean really could handle such action scenes (regardless of their overall sense) with dab finesse. Its great as long as you suspend disbelief. A man is hauling himself up a rope, hand-over-hand, up the side of an ocean liner. Focus on that. Don't think about 'why'. This is the same enjoyment you get when you're in the *middle* of a bag of crisps. When you're at the *end* of the bag, and you look down--and only then, do you feel slightly sick.

Bottom line: if I had to select a few favorites from MacLean I would toss out a lot of other titles before tossing this one. When MacLean sets a story somewhere out on the ocean you just gotta respect it. Sea tales are his forte'. You feel the spray in your face and the roll of the deck. Just don't look down!