Rating: 5/5

It’s depressing to think that the teachings of Confucius constituted a religion in most of East Asia – i.e. they were wise sayings and stories of a great man from a certain time, that have been selectively reinterpreted by kings and heads of state, force-fed to generations of schoolchildren in various eras as a substitute for original thought, and generally manipulated out of context to subjugate a nation into obedience over and over again.

That’s probably why many Chinese intellectuals and progressives (who have not studied The Analects objectively, or perhaps cannot) abhor Confucius and consider his teachings part of the machinery of imperialism and feudal tyrants.

Note that my five-star rating is not for  The Analects per se, but specifically for the edition with Simon Leys’ excellent translation and notes (see below for more details).

Three Things you need to know about Confucius:

1) Though he is lauded as China's Supreme Teacher, his goal in life was to be a politician and he failed at that. He basically believed he was the Hari Seldon of China (witnessing the crumbling of the Zhou dynasty, his Heavenly mission was to “revive [the Duke of Zhou’s] grand design, restore the world order under a new ethical basis, and salvage the entire civilization”). That’s why he educated and built up a ‘cabinet’ of disciples around him in order to usher in a new model government*.

2) The Analects are to Confucius as the Gospels are to Jesus: not written by him personally, but a record of his sayings and deeds compiled by (in Confucius’ case) a group of his disciples and grand-disciples.

3) Confucius lived and taught in the 6th century BCE. To put things in perspective, that’s when Buddha and Zoroaster were active, and 10 years after Confucius dies, Socrates is born. That means these teachings in the Analects are old. As Mr. Leys states in his introduction, “no book in the entire history of the world has exerted, over a longer period of time, a greater influence on a larger number of people than this slim volume."

* Ironically, this led to the failure of his political career, because Confucius and his disciples threatened the incompetent incumbents and thus were not offered positions in court.

Ideas

- The greatest innovation Confucius devised is inventing his own occupation of the private teacher.

- Confucius’ second most revolutionary idea was redefining the term 君子 (junzi, meaning nobleman / gentleman) to mean anyone who was educated and moral, so that commoners could aspire to become junzi and join the ruling class even though they were not born to aristocratic families.

Selected Quotes from The Analects

Each of the 20 chapters contains passages on various topics; they are largely not organised thematically. For my own records, I’ve included one or two sample quotes that represent(s) one of the strong themes from each chapter.

Chapter 1: virtue
1.9. Master Zeng said: “When the dead are honored and the memory of remote ancestors is kept alive, a people’s virtue is at its fullest."

1.16. The Master said: “Don’t worry if people don’t recognize your merits; worry that you may not recognize theirs."

Chapter 2: filial piety
2.6. Lord Meng Wu asked about filial piety. The Master said: “The only time a dutiful son ever makes his parents worry is when he is sick."

Chapter 3: ritual
3.13. Wangsun Jia asked: “What does this saying mean: ‘Flatter the god of the kitchen rather than the god of the house’?" The Master said: “Nonsense. If you offend Heaven, prayer is useless.”

(Translation note) Wangsun Jia: minister of Duke Ling of Wei, to whose court Confucius had come, seeking employment. The proverbial saying which W is quoting here is an expression of cynical folk wisdom: rather ingratiate yourself with the servants who can feed you than with their master, whose distant benevolence is of no practical use. The exact intention of Wangsun Jia is not clear. Either he is asking advice for the advancement of his own career: should he court the favour of the duke (“the god of the house”) or of his favorite (“the god of the kitchen”)? Or, under the guise of a question, he may be addressing a veiled warning to Confucius: Do not trust the duke too much; if you wish to succeed here, it is with me you will have to deal. The question may be ambiguous, but the answer is clear: Confucius condemns all opportunistic maneuvers––the only right policy is to follow the dictates of morality. – See why Leys is a delightful guide for this voyage?

Chapter 4: ren, i.e. humanity, benevolence
4.16. The Master said: “A gentleman considers what is just; a small man considers what is expedient."

Chapter 5: evaluating the disciples
5.10. Zai Yu was sleeping during the day. The Master said: “Rotten wood cannot be carved; dung walls cannot be troweled. What is the use of scolding him?"

The Master said: “There was a time when I used to listen to what people said and trusted that they would act accordingly, but now I listen to what they say and watch what they do. It is Zai Yu who made me change."

Chapter 6: modesty
6.15. The Master said: “Meng Zhifan was no boaster. In a rout, he remained behind to cover the retreat. It was only upon reaching the city gate that he spurred his horse and said: “It was not courage that kept me at the rear, but the slowness of my horse."

Chapter 7: Confucius on himself
7.7. The Master said: “I never denied my teaching to anyone who sought it, even if he was too poor to offer more than a token present for his tuition."

7.27 The Master fished with a line, not with a net. When hunting, he never shot a roosting bird.

Chapter 8: cultivation
8.17. “Learning is like a chase in which, as you fail to catch up, you fear to lose what you have already gained."

Chapter 9: gentlemen do not specialise
9.7. Lao said: “The Master said that his failure in public life forced him to develop various skills."

Chapter 10: Confucian humanism
10.17. The stables burned. The Master left court and asked: “Was anyone hurt?” He did not inquire about the horses.
Note that in Confucius’s time, a horse was much more valuable than a stable hand.

Chapter 11: moderation is best
11.16. Zigong asked: “Which is the better: Zizhang or Zixia?” The Master said: “Zizhang overshoots and Zixia falls short.” Zigong said: “Then Zizhang must be the better?” The Master said: “Both miss the mark."

Chapter 12: ritual is preferable to laws
12.13. The Master said: “I could adjudicate lawsuits as well as anyone. But I would prefer to make lawsuits unnecessary."

Chapter 13: principles of government
13.1. Zilu asked about government. The Master said: “Guide them. Encourage them.” Zilu asked him to develop these precepts. The Master said: “Untiringly."

13.6. The Master said: “He is straight: things work out by themselves, without his having to issue orders. He is not straight: he has to multiply orders, which are not being followed anyway."

Chapter 14: loyalty
14.22. Zilu asked how to serve a prince. The Master said: “Tell him the truth even if it offends him."

Chapter 15: discouraging glib talk
15.41. The Master said: "Words are merely for communication."

Chapter 16: learning
16.9. Confucius said: “Those who have innate knowledge are the highest. Next come those who acquire knowledge through learning. Next again come those who learn through the trials of life. Lowest are the common people who go through the trials of life without learning anything."

Chapter 17: polite insult
17.20. Ru Bei wanted to see Confucius. Confucius declined on the grounds of illness. As Ru Bei’s messenger was leaving, the Master took up his zithern and sang loudly enough for him to hear.

Chapter 18: Confucius withdraws
18.4. The people of Qi sent to Lu a present of singing and dancing girls. Lord Ji Huan accepted them and, for three days, he did not attend court. Confucius left.

Chapter 19: flexibility
19.11. Zixia said: “Major principles suffer no transgression. Minor principles may allow for compromise."

Chapter 20: meaning and function of language
20.3. Confucius said: “He who does not understand fate is incapable of behaving as a gentleman. He who does not understand the rites is incapable of taking his stand. He who does not understand words is incapable of understanding men."

My Reactions

The first thing I need to remember when thinking about Confucius is the context that he lived in. It’s easy to blame him for an East Asian culture where originality and disagreement have been so taboo for so long. In the Warring States era, a feudal society with a high turnover rate of kings and lords, it’s not surprising that harmony was valued (perhaps overvalued) because it was so rare.

Maybe one of the most important myths to debunk about Confucianism is that LOYALTY DOES NOT EQUAL SUBMISSIVENESS. Confucius emphasizes loyalty, and teaches disciples to advise kings to do what is right and to correct them when they are wrong (3.6, 14.22), and he himself stood up to many monarchs in his time. To him, loyalty is to stand by your king and advise him and protect him. It doesn’t mean to obey orders when those orders are immoral. If the foolish king refuses to listen, then it’s time to bounce (and bounce Confucius did, between many kingdoms when he couldn’t get a word in, see 18.4).

Another notable concept absent from The Analects is the concept of punishment. When we today learn about the cruel traditional punishments inflicted by Chinese regimes, or the perverse measures that civil service scholars went to in the name of studiousness, little do we realise Confucius would cringe at such extremities. This punitive culture developed as a result of Legalism, which enforced harsh discipline and helped the state of Qin ascend to empire a couple hundred years after Confucius died.

Further Reading:  Mencius, who unified all the fragmented schools of post-Confucianism, and advanced the philosophy in the directions of both politics (opining that the common people were more important than rulers, and legitimising tyrannicide if necessary) and human nature (believing that all people were inherently born good).

Translation

I highly recommend the W. W. Norton edition, with translation and notes by Simon Leys. Most of these sayings are actually responses to certain events, and reading the responses without understanding the events will leave you scratching your head or wanting to ragequit. Leys' extensive notes are excellent; they tell us the stories and explain his rationale as well as what D.C. Lau, Arthur Waley and other previous translators have thought.

It helped that prior to this, I had primed myself with a picture-book version of his life and stories: Confucius – Sage of the Orient by Singaporean publisher Canfonian. (I loved these books growing up! Must buy for future children.)