Rating: 4/5

The third in Judith Kerr's "Out of the Hitler Time" trilogy, describing the emigration of Anna, her brother Max and their parents; a family of Jews fleeing from the growing persecution of the Nazi regime. All three books are from Anna's point of view and as she grows, so too does the style of writing. 

The first book, When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit, deals with the early years from 1933 and the family's escape to first Switzerland, then Paris and finally London. As Anna is only 9 years old at the time, the severity of their situation is glimpsed but not fully revealed until later, both in the books and in Anna's own mind. 

The second book, The Other Way Round, follows Anna in her late teens, following through on her passion for art, discovering herself and first love as any teen does. However, Anna has to deal with the displacement of the refugee, the trilingual confusion of having spent her childhood in several different countries with different languages and cultures. As is usual, the people around her find this far more interesting than she does- the whole family strive for normality but this is a luxury only available to those young enough to adapt, to be able to settle in new surroundings and fight the curse of the refugee accent. Both mother and father are immensely proud of their eventual British citizenship but, ironically, this pride marks them as not really belonging. Anna and Max are able, as childish minds are far more malleable than adults', to actually become English, not just citizens. This is not to say that they forget their German heritage or regret the course of their lives - as they discuss in the first book, all the greats had troubled childhoods- but in post-war Britain and just as they grow up, it is easier and safer to belong to just one nation.

In this third book, Anna is grown up and married, as such this book differs from the rest as the family is no longer together. Max is a successful barrister, Father has passed away and Mother has returned to Berlin, leaving the pages to much more of Anna's solitary thoughts rather than basing them on the family interactions as in the previous volumes. Although the central plot of the book is Anna going to visit her sick mother in Berlin and Max also plays his part, the narrative is far more internalised as she tries to make sense of the situation, her fears about returning to now divided and occupied Germany, the fragility of memory and trying to find a connection to her childhood amongst the rubble (both literal and metaphorical), to hone in on that small person far away.

What I find particularly interesting about this series is that, contrary to other stories of this ilk, their being Jewish is almost an unlucky coincidence rather than the driving force of their lives or their emigration. They are Jewish by descent, not by practice, in fact they are a family of agnostics, and references to Judaism are few and far between. The real issue for the family is that the father is a writer, one who refuses to roll over to the will of the Fuhrer, and it is when he goes one article too far that they realise they have to flee. The issue of language becomes ever more poignant as they move on from France to England. The father can write in French and therefore has both an outlet for his creativity and a means of income but after the move to London, he begins to withdraw within himself. Due to the nature of the German language, heavy on metaphor, symbolism and turns of phrase which cannot sustain translation, he loses his words and so his strength. This barrier is evermore heartbreaking as Anna tells us that as she grew older, her German began to fade and due to her father's loose grasp of English they resorted to jokingly talking in formal French. Although she says it was a joke between them, this formality highlights one of the effects of emigration- parent and child finally belonging to different nations.