Rating: 4/5

What is there to say about Wodehouse? Certainly one of the wittiest writers in the English language, a master of constructing a plot and piercing snobbery whilst reinforcing the systems that drive it. I had dipped in to Jeeves and Wooster before, but wanted to read the canon. My intention had been to read them in order, but on seeing the first two omnibus volumes on sale on kindle went with that. In order, the first volume contains #5, #7 and #2, for which I am sure there is some logic.

Thank You, Jeeves begins with Bertie falling out with both his neighbours in his mansion block and his trusted manservant after being infected with a passion for playing the banjolele. He retreats to the country, to stay in a cottage on the estate of his old friend Chuffy to practice his music in peace, only to be descended upon by a beautiful American heiress to whom he had briefly been engaged, her father (who bears no love for Bertram) and the man who had been responsible for scuppering the affair. Cue witticisms, misunderstandings, idiocies, a rather unsuitable replacement for Jeeves, kidnapping and minstrels.

Oh yes. The minstrels.

While the music troupe do not make an appearance in person, they are referred to and become a major plot point. And herein lies a big problem with this novel.

Bear in mind, this was published in 1933 by an upper class, white (those were and possibly still are the only kind of Upper Class) Englishman, and we have to keep in mind that we should read things in view of when and where they were written, however then Bertie begins to casually refer to the "n***** minstrels" it was a cold slap in the face. This isn't Twain knowingly using the word fifty years earlier, although I realise most (white) people wouldn't have thought it as poisonous as it is today. Jeeves uses the "politer" version of the word, although I think that is simply to compare his propriety to Bertie's slang-laden speech.

The inclusion of the minstrels (in absentia though it is) is merely to allow two instances of blackface later in the book - one for purposes of deception, another for entertainment. Whether inured - or numbed - by the language, this only caused me to roll my eyes, but also made me think how much part of British comedic culture this was until amazingly recently. I grew up in the seventies and eighties and racist stereotypes, including black-, yellow- and brownface, were so common in "light entertainment" as to be unremarkable. The Black and White Minstrel Show ran - stunningly - until 1980 on British TV. The Carry On films, It Ain't Half Hot, Mum, Mind Your Language were all influenced by this strand of British colonial racism.

So, I repeat to myself "it was a different time!" and am thankful that things have changed so much. I hope this doesn't put me off continuing with J&amp;W but fervently also hope that such things aren't repeated, and I grit my teeth and mark the book on the merits and qualities and award it 4 stars.

OK, maybe 3.5.