Rating: 5/5

"You need not be afraid of coming across a man here. This is Ladyland, free from sin and harm. Virtue herself reigns here."

From SULTANA'S DREAM: A Feminist Utopia and Selections from THE SECLUDED ONES by Rokeya Sahkawat Hossain, ed. and tr. from the Bengali by Roushan Jahan. Original text - 1905, this compilation and translation is from 1988 by @feministpress

#ReadtheWorld21 📍Bangladesh / India
#WomenInTranslation

Yep. You read that right. 1905. 
This subversive feminist utopian scifi short story was written over 100 years ago by a Bengali Muslim woman!

The title character, Sultana, dreams of a technologically advanced utopia, where women rule, and men are cloistered at home. They live in a solar-powered cloud city, travel by air cars, full of gardens and water. Women spend their days learning, governing, and studying science in laboratories.

Written in English (1 of the 7 languages Hossain knew), this story was originally printed in a women's magazine in colonial India and present-day Bangladesh.

"The Secluded Ones", was originally written in Bangla, translated here by Jahan. It is a collection of personal stories, both Hossain's and oral histories of other South Asian (Muslim and Hindu) women living in purdah, or complete seclusion from society.

This observance is discussed in detail through Hossain's reportage (sometimes to very tragic ends), and through 3 additional essays in the book, the introduction and a biography on Hossain by Jahan, and an afterword by Czech sociologist of purdah in South Asia, Hanna Papanek.

Begum Rokeya began the first school for Muslim girls in Kolkata in 1911, teaching languages, literacy, mathematics, and various trades. She was a relentless activist for women's rights and education, as well as a gifted writer in many styles - both the imaginative scifi with political overtones, as well as reportage and critical analysis.

Sultana's Dream as a short story is available widely online as it is beyond copyright.
This particular edition, including her writings, academic analysis, etc. is highly recommended for the historical, religious, and sociological context.