Rating: 5/5

Emily. My dearest Emily; my childhood friend and childhood idol, my inspiration and my consolation. There are books so special, read in such a tender age, that they become part of you. I wouldn't be the person that I am today if it wasn't for Emily Byrd Starr.

“It had always seemed to Emily, ever since she could remember, that she was very, very near to a world of wonderful beauty. Between it and herself hung only a thin curtain; she could never draw the curtain aside-- but sometimes, just for a moment, a wind fluttered it and then it was as if she caught a glimpse of the enchanting realm beyond-- only a glimpse-- and heard a note of unearthly music.” 

Emily is a dreamer. A hopeful artist, poetry-writer, and a whimsical little creature with pointed ears and almost violet eyes. She is touched with a child's honesty and a strong sense of righteousness. She is constantly making up beautiful scenes in her mind, and she cannot write them down fast enough. But even though her pen is in constant motion, her mouth is hardly ever moved. She is quiet. Not necessarily because she is shy, but because she is cautious of her words; she doesn't spill them randomly. She values them.

Emily's life is bittersweet. While she is able to perceive all the glistening beauty in the world, she is touched by sorrow, her father's death and the stern eyes and expectations of her aunts. She is constantly misunderstood by everyone – even herself. But still, she lives. She hopes, dreams, laughs and she lives. She is able to observe and appreciate the little wonders in life, which people so easily overlook. She is someone to admire and someone to aspire to.

“She will love deeply, she will suffer terribly, she will have glorious moments to compensate.” 

Even now, this story pulls at my heartstrings. Emily still wins my heart, over and over again. As I started to reread this cherished book this morning, I thought I would just read a chapter or two, but I couldn't put the book down. I am completely under Emily's spell, and yet again I find myself wondering how my childhood would have been without her. Would it be there at all?