Rating: 5/5

Loved it. Loooved it. Yes I know, it wasn't "Comanche Moon", which IMO is Catherine Anderson's epic romance, and it would be hard to compete with that one. This one was a little different, more of a straight romance between two people who haven't seen each other in 15 years, since they were kids. Both Amy and Swift Antelope(Lopez) have each been through hell during those years and changed so much, I wasn't sure if they could recapture the young love they had when they were a mostly carefree 12 year old and a blossoming-into-manhood 16 year old. This book details the painful journey they must each take to reclaim the happiness they once shared, and how they battle racial prejudice, deal with regrets, and rediscover the deep love and trust they once shared with each other. I shed many a tear while reading this one, both for Amy and for Swift. Amy was practically a shell of a woman when Swift came back into her life, hiding out behind her teaching job and the protection of her cousin Loretta's family. Sure it was a safe life, but it was no life for the former spirited young girl from Comanche Moon. And she gave Swift such a hard time when he finally came back into her life and tried to make her honor her youthful promise of marriage. Yes, I understood that she was unhappy and afraid of what he'd become on the outside (a notorious gunslinger who rode with comancheros), but I was hoping she'd look deeper and realize this was her Swift, the man who would never intentionally hurt her. Sometimes her reluctance to accept Swift irritated me, even though I couldn't blame her after all that had happened to her. This girl had enough horrors to last a lifetime. Since she clearly hadn't really dealt with her horrific past, I had my doubts that Swift would be able to reconnect with her. But boy he was tenacious and single-minded! Sometimes he was a little ham-handed and insensitive, but I never for one minute doubted his love for Amy. Many a time I thought "Don't give up Swift" whenever Amy tried to shut him out.

I really adored Swift as a hero. I thought he was caring, sexy, sensitive, and wonderful. The things he was willing to do to be with Amy...the guy never gave up. A couple of times he made me cry (the spelling bee; when he decided he would finally leave Amy alone and almost made it out of town; when he finally realized the scope of all that Amy had been through; when he was framed for a murder he didn't commit and still tried to protect Amy's reputation) and I so wanted him to have a HEA, but I was also nervous that he wouldn't get one. Just wonderful storytelling by Catherine Anderson.

And Amy, oh she came a long way. I was so proud of her when she finally found her self worth again--her 'Comanche heart'. Her defense of Swift when he was accused of murder brought tears to my eyes. That's when I was convinced of her absolute love for him.

I enjoyed getting a look into the next book which will be Indigo's (Loretta and Hunter's daughter) story. She reminds me a little bit of the brave and spirited young girl that Amy was. Although I have to admit I was a little surprised with Loretta and Hunter's parenting skills--I thought they gave her waay too much freedom--and Indigo nearly paid for that.

This was a wonderful romance, one I wouldn't hesitate to recommend to any reader. Just be sure to read "Comanche Moon" first--you won't want to miss out on the significant backstory that it provides. There's romance, passion, tears, and a bit of suspense, and a very satisfying HEA. What more could you want? 5 stars.