Rating: 3/5

3 Stars ~ Though not her chosen career, Cara is thankful for her job as PA to the owner of a mid-size promotional firm. Her boss, Brooke, is a bit of a slave driver but the pay is good and Cara's needed every penny to support her younger brother and sister through their education. Brooke's insistence that Cara snaps up computer magnate McCauley as the star attraction for the celebrity bachelor auction that Brooke is chairing, proves to be a thankless task. Wyatt has dodged every effort Cara has made to persuade him, so she decides to tackle him face to face and heads over to his office, two dozen yellow roses in hand. Wyatt can't deny that he admires Cara's tenacity. There was something about her that commanded his thoughts, excited him. 

Nothing surprised Cara more than Wyatt showing up at her office and tackled by Brooke herself, relented on participating in the auction. What Cara didn't know was that he'd hatched a plan that his own secretary would submit the winning bid but under Cara's name. There's no way Cara can cast a shadow on the legitimacy of the auction so she's forced to go on the weekend away with Wyatt. Determined to treat the trip as a mini-vacation and enjoy herself, Cara lets Wyatt wine, dine and charm her. But all too soon the weekend is over and Cara has to face the music with Brooke who wanted to win Wyatt for herself. Brooke blasts her, not only for taking her man but for deceiving her about her financial situation; obviously Cara wasn't struggling like she claimed, if she could afford to win Wyatt. Out of a job, Cara's first move is to share her joy (not!) with Wyatt, face to face. 

This was a light-hearted romance well suited for a lazy afternoon. I really liked Wyatt and Cara's sparring matches. Both come with their own history of a bad relationship, and this holds them back and makes their motives easy to misunderstand. But it soon becomes obvious that Wyatt is well and truly smitten, even though he tends to jump in and want to fix all of Cara's problems. Cara is strong minded and very independent, but she comes to realizes that part of loving someone is allowing them to love you back and take care of you too. I enjoyed this charming love story.