Rating: 3/5

Diana Palmer kicks off a five book series (which ends up crossing over with her Long Tall Texan Series in books 4 &amp; 5) with this really lovely May/December romance and absurd kidnapping/terrorist plot.

The heroine is the unwanted stepdaughter of the hero’s enemy. Stepdad wants to drill for oil in a desert kingdom, run by the sheikh hero of book three. Stepdad will do anything for access, including marrying off his 19 year-old daughter to the sheikh who is rumored to have “perverse desires.”

The hero has lost his beloved wife of ten years and is in a suicidal funk at the Louvre when the heroine approaches him. Her attraction to him is instant, his takes longer as he is first grieving and then feels guilty for lusting after the heroine. There is a sweet scene in a bar where the heroine comforts him as he drunkenly cries into her neck. They meet again in the Bahamas where the heroine’s stepfather and the hero have residences. The heroine is creeped out by the sheikh and begs the hero to take her virginity so the sheikh won’t be interested in her.

The hero is tempted, but refuses. Once the stepdad tips his hand (and hits the heroine's mother) the hero decides they should marry in a quickie Las Vegas wedding but not consummate the marriage. He thinks he’s too old for the heroine and he’s still feeling guilty about moving on. 

The sheikh kidnaps the H/h. In a bid to save the heroine’s honor, the H/h have sex? And this is when it got really stupid and I was skimming. We’re introduced to the hero’s bodyguard/right hand man who will be the hero in book two. And there is a lot of running around and action. And zzzzzzzzzzzzzzz I hate action/adventure/thrillers.

Back on the romance front, the heroine is pregnant and the hero freaks out. He goes to sulk on his oil platform and leaves the heroine alone (with a bodyguard) in Paris. When the sheikh - who is now a good guy- stops to visit, the hero is informed. He takes the first flight to Paris to fight for his woman. They each declare their love for an HEA.

Like I said – loved the five star romance. Heroine was great. Hero was affecting in his grief and only turned into a DP asshat, afraid of his own feelings, halfway through the narrative – so that’s a great track record. But the oil money/terrorist/deep state plot was so out there and so boring (to me) it reduced my pleasure in the story, so three stars. 

Diana Palmer checklist:  
Hairy chest  Check 
Breast Description small with mauve nipples
Cigarettes Hero is clutching an unlit cigar in the Louvre where they first meet. He also smokes cigars elsewhere in the story. 
Alcohol  Heroine gets drunk on two glasses of champagne on the plane after their Vegas wedding
Town Descriptions  Travelogue of Paris, the Caribbean, and whatever desert country they’ve been kidnapped to
Gardenia Scent No, but heroine smells like spring flowers
LOL detail  Hero calls heroine a minor because she’s under 21 (!) and shouldn't be served alcohol.