Rating: 5/5

THE unabridged AUDIOBOOK
I wasn't as familiar with this GH Regency romance as others I have read and re-read happily (Frederica, Arabella, Grand Sophy, Unknown Ajax, Sylvester, Venetia, etc.) but it's a corker! 

Not one star-crossed pair but three sets of lovers disentangle themselves after much brinksmanship and hilarious, distempered arguments. The main duo, a fiery, independent, self-possessed earl's daughter and her lifelong neighbor, a marquis to whom she was once betrothed but jilted unceremoniously just before the wedding. Upon her father's passing, she discovers that her inheritance was left in trust with this marquess as her trustee, giving him power of the purse over her until she marries --with the marquess' approval -- which precipitates an eyebrow-scorching scold during the will reading. She's got a seriously sharp tongue, and it's a delight to hear the two go at each other, (thanks to the readers remarkable skill). She's outraged at her father's posthumous meddling. The marquess is all cool, aloof reserve and mockery. Her rumblings escalate dangerously like a volcano coming out of dormancy. Her name, btw, is Serena. Ha! Each knows the other so long, and understands the other so well, they also know exactly how to goad the other for maximum effect -- and at times, for their benefit because deep down they do care for one another.

Left with only pin money, Serena sets up house with her younger step-mother and together they eventually decide to remove to Bath, rather than watch the uncultivated cousin, the new earl, dismantle all the fine traditions and the pretty grounds of the great estate that he plans to occupy with his shrew of a wife and their offspring.

In Bath, fate intervenes and Serena's long ago first love, now a retired army major, crosses her path and they renew their acquaintance and fall back in love. About that time the marquess announces his betrothal to a young debutante, Serena's major approaches the marquess about their marriage plans. The marquess does not object and all is settled, until it isn't and the tangle starts unraveling a bit at a time. I mean, this was truly delightful to listen to, and worth paying close attention, so much zings back and forth as things grow ever more complicated.

The reader, Sian Phillips, was EXCELLENT, she makes even the heated arguments crystal clear and funny, and best of all, not uncomfortable to listen to. The secondary characters play important roles and are extremely well differentiated. I loved both this story, a new one to me, and the performance.