I've had this collection since I was a little kid, as I was a big fan of Alfred Hitchcock and the Three Investigators and Hitch's anthologies (both the ones for kids and those for adults). It's an adequate set of stories for a kid - nothing *too* scary (well, we'll get to that in a moment) and nothing too deep, that might bore a kid. A fun collection of (mostly) monster stories.

A moment should be taken to acknowledge the weird and disturbing collage illustrations of Earl E. Mayan (which hopefully are retained in later printings, although I doubt it) - who also provided disturbing illos for Rod Serling's The Twilight Zone Revisited. Here, working in Clyfford Still-esque washes of purple and black, with little Dada-type photo collage snips of anguished, screaming faces and people without eyes, it's some really great stuff!

I ended up re-evaluating a few stories here on the re-read, sometimes with an eye towards their inclusions for children and sometimes just because my tastes have expanded somewhat. On the weaker side: Miriam Allen deFord has a cute little thing called "Henry Martindale, Great Dane" (aka "Gone To The Dogs"), in which a writer wakes up one morning to discover he has turned into a Great Dane (he can still talk and think, though). It's a nice fantasy story for a kid's book (Charles Fort even gets name checked, and lycanthropy gets a call out) but a bit thin for an adult. "Shadow, Shadow On The Wall" by Theodore Sturgeon - in which a young, imaginative boy suffers under his cruel stepmother's care, until his shadowplay allows for a supernatural comeuppance - is a fairly standard and straightforward "revenge fantasy" story, fine for what it is, but this wouldn't be the first time I've found Sturgeon's prose oddly choppy and hard to engage with. And Richard Parker's "The Wheelbarrow Boy" has a schoolteacher turn a recalcitrant student into the titular object (seemingly a common occurrence for punishment) but then can't change him back. A droll little bit of urban fantasy, meant to be read symbolically I suppose, but not my thing.

Paul Ernst's "The Microscopic Giants" is a standard pulp yarn, simple but enjoyable, as workers at the bottom of an incredibly deep copper mine shaft encounter weird beings, who live in the rock as if it were their atmosphere. A good kid's story with some concepts to chew on, and some inadvertent (?) evocation of gnomes and earth elementals. "Doomsday Deferred" by Will F. Jenkins (aka Murray Leinster) features an entomologist tasked with finding a rare butterfly in the Amazonian rain forest. A native seems to have remarkable success at fulfilling his requests (and only asks for help in obtaining a large head of cattle as pay) but as it turns out his helpers are anything but typical. This is a solid little SF yarn with a well-handled, implicit threat (which does not achieve fruition during the course of the story but which lingers on after the last line). Solid. Jerome Bixby, meanwhile, in "The Young One," tells us about an average American kid who befriends a strange, Hungarian boy who just moved into the neighborhood. The boy is dark, disliked by animals, his family eats raw meat and they want him back before the moon rises on certain nights of the month. Fill in your blanks. It's not bad, just predictable, but as a story for younger readers it works well (and coincidentally - or maybe not - sets up Bradbury's "Homecoming" that finishes the books, with its tale of familial monsters just trying to get along). Finally, in the "good but unimpressive" section, is Joseph Payne Brennan's "Slime" which - when I read it as a kid - impressed me mightily (and was probably the longest piece of fiction I ever attempted at that age). This last bit makes sense as it's (again) a very simple, straightforward tale (essentially, a 50's monster movie compacted into a longish short story) as a volcanic upheaval throws a monstrous piece of formless, predatory slime (think a slightly more fluid, and pitch black, version of "The Blob", or that "Blot" episode of the 60s Spider-Man cartoon) from the sea-bottom up into the swamp near a coastal town, where it begins to prey on the locals (only at night - it can't stand the daylight) until the Army is called in. Juvenile, and without a thought in its head beyond being a ripping good monster yarn, it succeeds admirably at that goal.

I had previously read all the stories here that I would rate solidly "good" (although in two cases, I re-evaluated them up to that level). I was probably too dismissive of Idris Seabright's "The Man Who Sold Rope To The Gnoles" when I read it originally because it's a droll, Dunsanian (his "Gibbelins" even get a specific shout out!) piece of sardonic, dark urban fantasy (and I was probably too pretentious to have time for that stuff when I was feeling my critical way forward earlier in my life) in which a self-assured door to door salesman makes a fatal faux-pas in his pursuit of gaining the lucrative trade from some monsters. Short and cute, I can appreciate it a bit more now that I'm older. Meanwhile "The Desrick On Yandro" was probably considered too unambitious for my younger self, being another of Manly Wade Wellman's "John The Balladeer" stories of Appalachian backwoods folklore. Here, John gets conscripted by a rich and powerful man into leading him to the mountain which is the source of a folk ballad that concerns his singular family name, which leads to a witch who his Grandfather betrayed. It's an amiable thing, the thin plot used as an excuse to hang appearances on by a bunch of backwoods folkloric creatures - like the flying Skim, the hunching Flat and the unseen Behinder (which John *sees*, but find indescribable). I myself quite liked the impossibly quiet and stealthy Bammat, a lurking Woolly Mammoth thing that inexplicably sneaks up on you through the trees (it reminded me of Winnie The Pooh's Heffalumps). Fun. "The Day Of The Dragon" by Guy Endore, is a somewhat satirical tale that starts with a classic piece of Forteana (a Toad In A Hole), moves on to yellow journalists exploiting both a scientifically ignorant public (how contemporary!) and the mad dreams of an impoverished professor of Biology, finishing with the end of all mankind! Darkly humorous. And Stephen Vincent Benét's “The King Of The Cats” is a charming little fable – it put me in mind of a more light-hearted take on the film CAT PEOPLE – and it has a nice feel of an old folktale deployed in a modern setting. In circles of high society, average man-about-town Tommy Brooks is infatuated with the aloof, exotic Princess Vivrakanarda - who seems to tolerate him until the arrival of the famous, suave and urbane orchestra conductor, Mr. Tibault - who has a prehensile tail. And Tommy's friend Billy Strange suggests a remedy for the romantic triangle, derived from folklore. Breezy and humorous, this reminded me also of the Stephen Crane story “The Black Dog.”

"Homecoming" (which I probably skipped when I was a kid) is the best thing here and one of my favorite Bradbury stories ever, ur-text for Charles Addams's famous Family (here, The Elliotts), The Munsters, etc. and thus a component of the whole 1950's "Monster Kid" culture. It also still brings tears to my eyes. The "monsters" ARE REALLY monsters (as Cecy's interaction with the old woman and the mud-pits illustrates). I hope he continued to walk the fine line the originals tread so assuredly in his later re-use of this material (which I have not read). I wonder if all the Tim Burton fans even know a story like this exists?

A solid collection of stories for a kid!