Rating: 3/5

Singer gives a long overview of Jung’s philosophy. Our unconscious is filled with various collective archetypes that manifest themselves in everyday life, for good and ill. In addition, we have innate dispositions and acquired experiences that make us individually unique. Together, these collective and individual elements form complexes, which are the typical ways we interact with the world. Our uniqueness puts us at odds with social norms. We hide ourselves. We put on masks. We play roles. We project our troublesome sides onto others.

Jung’s task is to bring the unconscious into the light and to integrate it with our consciousness. The former, if left unrevealed, retains control. Until its role is brought to light we remain separate from ourselves and the world. With integration, through therapy, we become integrated and whole. Yet wholeness does not mean we submerge ourselves. We become self, true to our individual nature, yet an integral part of the whole. In a nutshell, we are born as wholes, we become individualized and separate as ego but, through therapy, we re-emerge as individuals and we are whole. The same process occurs at the collective level. Unless enlightened, the unconscious is in control and this results in violence and war. 
 
Jung states we have a collective unconscious and collective archetypes. Though he does not account for their origin, his strong religious views might suggest that they have a mystical source. When viewed through the lens of biological evolution, Jung’s general theory might be interpreted differently. For example, species energy related to the need for nurture and for protection might account for mother and father archetypes and projections of internal needs toward external objects that address those needs. An extension of that view may have a bearing on belief systems related to personalized deities. Anima and animus might be expressions of sexual energy, and our search for opposites that can satisfy internal need. Persona and shadow may be “survival” projections for the self, where the need to preserve our individuality while living within a collectivity is achieved through deception and the wearing of masks. It could be that war and collective insanity has less to do with unexamined egos and more to do with our tribalism for the tribe is the way the individual survives, and that demon figures are those who stand apart from our group ("not us") and, therefore, they are suspect.

In addition to this identification of collective phenomena within, Jung’s emphasis on “individuation” is excellent. We have collective, species needs that at their core serve individual self-interest, but we also have inborn dispositions that reflect Darwinian variability which, along with the experience, creates uniqueness that often stands in conflict with the interest of the collectivity. To be “whole” and “integrated” and “healthy” – requires that we to a degree learn to be “true to ourselves.” While Jung believes that such integration presumes an “inherent” goodness (and presumably deep therapy will achieve this for many), an intriguing question is whether self-fulfillment for some or many might be expressed as extreme individualism and the dominance of the ego in its negative, social sense. This too might be a reality that is out there.