Rating: 3/5

Much of this was surprisingly dry, but Moorehead broke out the Leigh-Fermorish adventure and enchantment at frequent enough intervals to keep me reading. I will never forget his description of the exultant mood of the fleet before the landings. Rupert Brooke thrilled to the idea that he might fight on the wine-dark Homeric seas, as part of what was romantically called the "Constantinople Expedition," the young poet's dream of war, as Moorehead defines it, "the Grecian frieze, the man entirely heroic and entirely beautiful, the best in the prescence of death." 

At the outset, at the embarkation, their hearts are light, as hearts always are if you have a large force on your side and nothing but space to oppose you. Their weapons are in their hands; the enemy is absent. Unless your spirit has been conquered in advance by the reputation of the enemy, you always feel yourself stronger than anybody who is not there. An absent man does not impose the yoke of necessity. To the spirits of those embarking no necessity yet presents itself; consequently they go off as though to a game, as though on holiday from the confinement of daily life. 

(Simone Weil, "War and the Iliad")

And Moorehead recounts many instances of that stereotypically English courage: casual, sporting, nonchalant. The young Lt. Commander Freyberg, who had helped bury Brooke in an olive grove on Skyros days before, was tasked with fooling the Turks by lighting flares on a diversionary beach. Announcing that one swimmer could do with less risk what he had been given a platoon and a small boat to accomplish, Freyberg "had himself taken towards the land in a naval cutter, and when the boat was still two miles from the coast he slipped naked into the icy midnight sea" trailing a waterproof bag that contained the flares, a signalling light, a knife and a revolver. He lit the flares, investigated the Turkish defenses, and swam out again, to be pulled half-dead out of the sea by the crew of the cutter. And there was the British submariner who swam to the Marmara shore, planted and detonated explosives under a viaduct over which Turkish supply trains ran, then swam back to his lurking craft. Air Commodore Samson came upon a German U Boat in the Sea of Marmara. Though he had ready jettisoned every one his bombs in a previous attack, Samson swooped low and leaning out of the cockpit made a defiant gesture of emptying his rifle into the U Boat's hull. "In a world that has since grown used to the unearthly courage of young men with fantastic machines it is still difficult to credit some of the things that happened."

I'm off to Gallipoli in less than an hour!