Rating: 4/5

CRITIQUE:

Trials and Appraisals

Often, novelists use the short story form to experiment with style. Here, while there is an element of stylistic innovation, Jonathan Lethem uses the form to test characters, concepts, settings and plots.

Loosely speaking, the "men" of the title are the characters (some of whom are based on comic book characters), while the "cartoons" are the settings and plots (some of which are analogous to comic strip action).

The Men

Some of the stories have been constructed around ideas for, and the conceptual implications of, particular characters:

* the Vision (who might be both a man and a cartoon character);

* the Dystopianist;

* Super Goat Man (which might be an experiment with both a man and a cartoon);

* the Crab (ditto, as per the Super Goat Man).

Super Goat Man Source

"The Vision"

The narrator of this story first met the kid known as the Vision in primary school. The kid was named after "the brooding, superpowered android from Marvel Comics' 'Avengers'". He usually wore a costume and a cape.

The narrator meets the Vision again, when he is a grown man (a professor at Columbia) wearing a sweatshirt, in the process of moving into the brownstone next door with a carton of CD's (one of which is a Captain Beefheart album).

The Vision's paramour invites the narrator, now single, to a dinner party at which they plan to play a parlour game called "Mafia".

Eventually, the story focuses on the interactions between the guests, both during the game and afterwards.

The paramour tells the narrator that she had once had a relationship with a man who dressed up as a character from a comic book. Subsequently, she had discovered that the comic book character had gotten married to another comic book character called "the Scarlet Witch".

There's some uncertainty as to whether the man was the Vision, and the woman was the paramour.

In a way, the story reveals what behaviour is sometimes disguised by the apparent sobriety of academia and similar communities.

In a later story, one character says to another, "You need to get yourself a life that's free of this kind of academic horseshit."

"Access Fantasy"

"Access Fantasy" concerns a narrator who sits in his car while stuck in a "startup", watching and listening to "Apartments on Tape", a type of real estate advertising that sounds like it could have come out of a Philip K. Dick novel.

"The Dystopianist"

The Dystopianist meets a talking sheep in the corridor of his apartment building. Once again, it's not clear whether the sheep is an electric sheep (of the Dickian kind) or a fantasy sheep (of the Murakamic kind). Strangely, the sheep only visits the Dystopianist, because he wanted to take "a look at you".

"Interview with the Crab"

In this story, a narrator called Mr. Lethem interviews a crab that has acted in television programs called "Crab House Days" and "Crab Sex Dorm". Lethem proclaims that he is a fan of the crab's work. The crab responds:

"Don't confuse show business for real life, Lethem." 

"Super Goat Man"

The Super Goat Man once lived in a single room in a dorm for college dropouts in Brooklyn near another narrator's family home. He didn't have any particular super-powers, and had been at best a minor star (published by Electric Comics rather than Marvel Comics). He was however interested in bebop jazz and modernist/post-modernist literature (Norman Mailer, Sergei Eisenstein, and Thomas Pynchon). Eventually, he becomes a professor at Corcoran College.

Yet again, universities, colleges and nearby burrows are homes to the eccentric, off-beat and unconventional (not to mention the bourgeois bohemians), and these stories tell their tales. It's almost as if you could walk around the corner of a building at Cornell, and find Vladimir Nabokov and Thomas Pynchon deep in conversation.

I hope one day soon to work out whether these stories had any influence on Lethem's later political novel, 
  "Dissident Gardens".

SOUNDTRACK:

Captain Beefheart - "Old Fart at Play"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pHjOu...

The Soft Boys - "Return of the Sacred Crab"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i64vY...

RUN DMC - Walk This Way (ft. Aerosmith)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4B_UY...