Rating: 4/5

A very interesting piece of non-fiction history writing.

There are several levels to the story told here. Furthest back in time is the story of Martin Frobisher in Elizabethan England in the 1570s. He is persuaded that there is a way to reach China (then called Cathay) by sailing over the top of North America. England had been largely excluded from the exploitation of the New World through a series of papal directives which basically carved it up between Spain and Portugal. England was at the time a relatively minor power and at odds with the papacy because of Henry VIII's split with Rome a generation before. Frobisher manages to convince enough investors and gain the blessing of Queen Elizabeth to equip a few ships and set off.

The second level to the story is that of the American Charles Francis Hall in 1859. A journalist and publisher, Hall had long been fascinated by stories of the Arctic. In particular, he became obsessed by trying to find out what had happened to the Franklin Expedition, a much later attempt by Britain to find the mythical Northwest Passage. Franklin and his crew never returned and mystery surrounded what happened to them. Fourteen years later, Charles Hall believed that there was a chance that some at least of Franklin's men might have survived in the north and been taken in by the local natives of the area, then known as "Eskimos" though we now more properly call them Inuit. Hall managed to raise enough money and supplies to set off north, but he couldn't afford his own ship and took passage on a whaler.

The third level of the story is that of the author himself, Robert Ruby, who visited the areas of interest and spent considerable time with the Inuit to research this book.

It's a fascinating story, full of adventure and excitement, and very well written. Here for example is a passage by Ruby describing the environment:

  Frobisher Bay and the hills were draped in the moonlight's white silk. The landscape was frozen into white curves and sensual whorls. The bay, in the moonlight in spring, was a plausible setting for a perpetual afterlife cool and spare, economically lit, everything so finely tuned that you heard, or thought you heard, the flapping of a bird's wings as it flew by, and heard the bird's breath.

Martin Frobisher failed (of course) to find a passage to China in the far north, but in his explorations he landed at several places. He treated the Inuit as savages and failed to learn anything from them about survival in the north. He kidnapped an Inuit man, a woman and her child and took them back to England, where they soon died. Still, it's quite remarkable to think of "Eskimos" being in England in the time of "Queen Bess".

However, during their initial voyage, one of Frobisher's men picked up a large black stone on one of the shores they visited. The collection of this stone triggered off a series of further expeditions and disasters because a dubious assay of its material back in England suggested that it was rich in gold. Spoiler, it wasn't! But Frobisher's interest, and that of Queen Elizabeth, turned quickly to the idea of making a fortune by mining this black rock in the Arctic. Further expeditions were mounted, and a short-lived mining colony established on a small island just off what we now know as Canada's Baffin Island.

Charles Hall had some success in finding traces of Frobisher's expeditions, but found little of use about Captain Franklin's doomed mission. But he at least was prepared to listen to the Inuit, follow their guidance, and credit what they said, but he treated them as though they were children. I was struck by this passage, referring to the Inuit people who had taken him in and enabled him to survive when otherwise he would certainly have died:

  He was Father Hall, as he described himself; they were his children and he wished them to obey him. They had fed, clothed, and housed him, yet he considered them the dependents.

You can only shake your head at such blindness and ignorance, failings certainly not shared by Robert Ruby on his much later expedition to the north.

Each of these interleaved stories is well told and full of interest and unexpected turns. Recommended.

See here for my regular book-review newsletter.