Rating: 5/5

When I was fourteen or fifteen I thought I had a pretty good idea about the accomplishments of the great scientists. Copernikus was the greatest of them all. Because he was the first who dared to put the sun into the center of the universe, he singlehandedly dragged mankind out of the middle ages into the present. He put theology into second place and science in first. He was scared though and only published his book when he was on his death bed. He gave the world not only a new cosmology but also a new concept: revolution!

Then there was Galileo Galilei. Who proved that Copernicus was right, who invented the telescope and established modern physics. And he was as brave as he was brilliant. Although when put on trial by the stupid representatives of the Catholic church he stepped back. But not really Eppur si muove and all that. He was very nearly a martyr.

And in between was Kepler, famous for his three laws but not really in a league with the other two guys. And planets moving on an ellipsis? What is so great about this?

Since then I had to change my views a bit (especially about Galileo) but was still in for a surprise when reading Koestler. I learned many things. Copernicus did not put the sun into the center, but the center of Earth’s orbit (outside the sun), his system was not simpler than Ptolomeys, he needed more epicycles. And so on. But mainly, that it was Kepler who was the greatest mind. It is in fact not the heliocentric system that was brand new but the fact that planets did not move in circles and that their speed was not constant. And Galileo is presented, let us say, not in the brightest of lights. Not only did he behave badly, he was foolishly wrong on many points, e.g. with his theory of tides, but mainly for ignoring Kepler’s insights.

The best thing is that Koestler admits having his own biases. In the case of Galileo, he judges the man by his correspondence with Kepler. And that is the main thing one can learn by reading this book. Although we know a lot about these men it is sometimes simple facts that influence our view. And this is true not only for individuals. One intriguing thing I learned is that Kepler’s mother was very nearly burned as a witch (and much nearer actual torture than Galileo) and that in a span of 20 years in her village Weil der Stadt out of 200 families 38 witches were burned! (If Koestler is really to be trusted here.)

The main subject of the book is Koestler’s view of progress. There is no straight line. The influence of Aristotle and Plato shifted a number of times during history. Great results were made by making mistakes that canceled each other out.

Koestler was not a scientist but a journalist. Which is a good thing in this case. He knows how to write and when reading you are always aware (and so is he himself) that maybe he will be stretching truth to make a point. 

For a book on science that is 70 years old, it is amazing how much it still has to say (at least to us laymen). For one thing, he gives us a view on the history of science that very nearly makes the work of Thomas Kuhn redundant. 9/10