Rating: 3/5

Paul West was a deft and versatile writer, able to employ a variety of voices and styles in treating a wide range of subjects. None of the six novels I’ve read have been remotely similar in subject, but all of them (The Place in Flowers Where Pollen Rests; The Fifth of November; O.K.—The Corral, the Earps, and Doc Holliday; Cheops—A Cupboard for the Sun; and Terrestrials) have been similar in the way they eschew plot/action for milieu, rumination, and nuance. Lord Byron’s Doctor is no different. West voices the real-life Dr. John William Polidori in a suitably florid early 19th century style, and Polidori relates events around his time spent with Lord Byron in Switzerland in 1816, when they resided together at the Villa Diodati with Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Claire Clairmont (Mary’s stepsister). 

Polidori acknowledges early on that he has none of the acumen of a Boswell to recount character or event, and the novel becomes a long suicide note. The novel begins brightly enough with promise and ambition, Polidori plucked from the hoi polloi to accompany Lord Byron on his tour of the continent, to tend to his club foot, his diet, and his venereal health. Polidori presumes that he has entered the realm of genius on equal footing, but he can gain no purchase, and he feels himself continually ignored, scorned, and humiliated in the company of Byron and Shelley. Polidori fawns and grovels, snarls and jousts, but all his maneuvers to win and retain Byron’s affection and respect are second-rate, mediocre, lacking sufficient wit. The tragedy, however, is that Polidori cannot rise by his own genius, and once banished from Byron's company, he finds himself unwilling to abide convention as a house-calling doctor in provincial Norwich. 

It is both uncomfortably painful and comic to observe Polidori’s contortions and his self-deceptions. What pleasure Polidori does offer the reader, however—even as he spirals downward, his vision/emotion tainted by resentment—are revealing glimpses into the idiosyncracies of Byron, Shelley, et al., meant to tarnish but which instead liven personalities that have faded to monumental blandness.