Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars 

This is an action… maybe; but with less action than most action stories. This is an espionage thriller … kinda; but without any thrill? It is a spy book though. That is accurate. In fact, it’s so full of the finite details of what a spy in this era would need to know, that I’m pretty certain this “fiction” was really a text book written for the English War Department to ready them for World War I. I mean, outlined German railroad time tables, charts of Northern Germany’s inlets and islands described in detail - not exactly what you’d say are items that move a story along, but certainly incredibly helpful things to include in a textbook. And according to sources, this little book did help England see some easy targets for invasion and so fortified their borders. So there you go! Someone in the War Department thought to commission an author to make the textbook reading more fun for the guys! And then it somehow got mixed in with fictions at a bookstore along the way. 😜 

All kidding aside, I did enjoy the book even though at times it was a little more detailed than I wanted. The writing was superb and aspects of the tale reminded me of the Sherlock Holmes stories, which I love! It felt somewhat mysterious and eerie from the beginning, which made it fun, because I had no clue where the story was going. And I thought the wrap up at the end was satisfying! 

I’d definitely recommend you giving this a go! 

Ages: 14+

#England #Germany #pre-WWI

Cleanliness: blasphemy is spoken a number of times. I think d*mn was used once or twice. Drinking and someone drunk. Mentions a suicide. 

**Like my reviews? Then you should follow me! Because I have hundreds more just like this one. With each review, I provide a Cleanliness Report, mentioning any objectionable content I come across so that parents and/or conscientious readers (like me) can determine beforehand whether they want to read a book or not. Content surprises are super annoying, especially when you’re 100+ pages in, so here’s my attempt to help you avoid that!

So Follow or Friend me here on GoodReads! And be sure to check out my bio page to learn a little about me and the Picture Book/Chapter Book Calendars I sell on Etsy!