A couple of years ago I saw the TV series "Mrs America", which was broadly about the women's movement and opposition towards it during the 1970s in the USA. One of the characters in it was Betty Frieden who had made a splash in the early 1960s with her book "The Feminine Mystique" but by the 70s was a figure straining to have her voice heard  at least for the purposes of that drama, maybe that's not the story she would have told about herself so when I saw it in the library, and taking into account my commitment that at least half my reading will be of female authors, I resolved to give it a go.

I felt it was an interesting piece of polemical writing, rather cool and dispassionate  the exception to this will be noted below in tone despite it being grounded in her own frustrations as a post war sub-urban housewife. It is also a very specific piece of writing; it deals with higher class women or specifically those who had had at least some higher education by the early 60s in the USA, it's focus is internal - on the psychological or spiritual state of those women, towards the very end she mentions that bowling alleys have crèche facilities while government offices don't - but this observation is not expanded into a discussion of what we might call structural or institutional sexism. Even within that quite small cohort her focus is even tighter in that her sample groups that she questions or observes are invariably fairly small - in the low hundreds at most. I was generally unclear if her comments about the education provided in American colleges were specific to one institution or representative of several or all of those August bodies. This education was adapting itself by for instance offering courses in 'advanced cookery' intended as a replacement for science courses, a more suitable garnish in turning out a well risen woman, moulded to be an effective housewife in the early post-WWII USA than Chemistry or Physics.

What she observes and seeks to address is 'the problem which has no name' a grim malaise that sounds rather like depression, that she tells us is typical of the women this book is about - housewives, some years and a few children into marriage. This arises because of the mismatch between 'the feminine mystique' ie the ideology that housewifery and motherhood will be entirely fulfilling and the orgasmic  this is a book in which orgasms are mentioned relatively frequently, but as I said in a fairly cool and dispassionate way  peak of womanly experience, and the actual experiences of cleaning, cooking, and child minding. Typically women who suffer from this malaise end up being sent to psychiatrists and psychotherapists, because being a housewife is obviously the peak of human female attainment and no true woman could deny that, any person generally assumed to be a woman who does not whole heartedly embrace housewifely is by definition in need of professional psychiatric intervention. This to my pleasure reminded me of the situation in the latter years of the Soviet Union when one way of dealing with dissidents was to send them to mental health institutions because since the Soviet Union was the most perfect society on Earth, anyone dissenting from it must be crazy.

In terms of the long unfolding development of women's rights and developing roles, I was interested to note that for Frieden, in this book, Feminism was in the past. It was already something historical that she associated particularly with the struggle for the right to vote, by implication what she was discussing then had nothing to do with Feminism, at least for her, it was mostly an individual matter, though with some hopes for action by educational institutions and the government  which is viewed as a positive, we're still in a new deal-post war glow of optimism about the US government as an agent of progress.

The twist to all this is her metaphor of the lives of the women she discusses as being like those of people imprisoned in a Nazi Concentration camp  chapter 12 "Progressive Dehumanization" passim  this is the exception to her general coolness of tone, at the end of that chapter Friedan attempts to tone down her own metaphor, which for all its extremity, was I feel, a mistake because essentially it seems to me the metaphor correctly captures the implicit message of her book which is that a group of US citizens feel that they are deprived of the rights of that citizenship for all their residency and presence. That metaphor then also provides the only response to her hope of Government intervention to support (suitably qualified) women back into the work place - persons who find themselves in concentration camps are not valued as full citizens by their Governments and hopes that said Governments might treat them as full citizens are misplaced.
 
Enlightenment for Friedan comes from the person of Abraham Maslow and his hierarchy of Needs  and this no doubt biased my reading as I do like the hierarchy of needs as a concept and have long thought it would make for a good wallchart to track your state of mind on and those of the people you are sharing your life with as in 'today I feel my security and safety needs are not being met' . Maslow if you are a little familiar with him is hanging about throughout the book lurking in the spaces between paragraphs, but he is only mentioned by name from page 255 and from then on forcefully. For Friedan what she and women like her are suffering from is the impossibility of self-actualisation within the constraints of their society and in Maslowian terms if you are suffering from problems lower down in the hierarchy of needs then Friedan has got little to say to you.

Pleasingly, once we ignore Friedan's hope that the Government might intervene to help dissatisfied married women even as they assisted soldiers returning from WWII, suggested solutions hark back to De Tocqueville and his democracy in America obviously we can recognise the tendency to conformity that he observed but Friedan sees in his observation of the capacity for self organisation at the local level see pp 280-282  a way out too - suburban committee work in the arts or politics as an outlet and way to self actualisation  which brings me neatly back to Mrs America  I guess  however Friedan sees that Parkinson's law is a risk here, such work may not be intrinsically satisfying (can you achieve self actualisation if you are committee member #221b?) nor supportive of growth for the insecure.

Friedan does invoke a waste of talent argument but not so strongly developed, and perhaps much less so than it might have been in a book written a couple of years later when there was more of a panic that the Soviet Union might surpass the USA.

Interestingly the un-self-actualised US housewife of Friedan's era suffers from a precise architectural problem in her husband's ranch style house - she literally does not have a room of one's own. I am not sure if the architects of 50s and 60s US suburbia would acknowledge that they designed in inequality into their housing but it is all the same an interesting example of how, presumably unconscious, assumptions have concrete  or maybe in this case timber and plasterboard consequences.

PS
there were a couple of weeks between me finishing the book, starting a review and completing it, there's plenty else that is curious about this book, her negativity about homosexuality is striking. At one moment she mentions mixed marriages and thought that maybe she was more radical than I supposed by by the end of the page it seemed from context that she meant marriages between Catholics and Protestants. Which in itself gives a flavour of how buttoned down the USA of the early 60s could be.