Rating: 5/5

In my book, Colson is one of the truly great men of the second half of the twentieth century. No other man accomplished as much, with as little fanfare, falling from the greatest heights to the lowest lows, only to find that the heights weren't so great and the lows weren't as bad as they were cracked up to be...if you understood what was REALLY high and what was REALLY low. Colson understands well that the height of his life was not by the side of the President in the eye of the public, but by the side of a hardened criminal,with only God as their witness. It is this understanding that makes him a truly great man. 

From a literary perspective, Colson doesn't do anything spectacular. It's a series of chapters that tell a series of stories that he's seen and heard in the first few years after starting his ministry in prison, (after being a prisoner himself for 7 months on an obstruction of justice charge during Watergate, FYI). But what is contained in the stories is truly moving. Not Hallmark movie moving, moving in the kind of way that the only way you can not be touched, or at least confused, is to deny the truth of the stories themselves. But they are true. 

One story toward the end of the book floored me especially. It seems that upon one of the first visits to Death Row Colson and some of his locals involved in his ministries, featured one person who refused to leave, even though the next meeting was with the Governor. Colson explained the situation, only to have the local explain to him, "But you see, I'm the Judge who sentenced this man to death. And we must pray together some more, I cannot go just yet." Colson immediately realized the Governor could wait. 

I was reminded of the end of another book I'd read, "Charlie Wilson's War." Dealing with the sort of Islamic extremism that the U.S. would face only a little over a decade later, the USSR lost less than 20,000 Soviets in a war that killed up to 2 Million Afganis. I was horrified, wondering, "How can anybody defeat an enemy who is willing to take those kinds of extreme losses?"

But as I thought of Colson, his Judge friend, and his death row inmate, and prayer, I realized there are forces far, far more powerful than the kind of reckless hate you saw in Afghanistan. It's the same kind of force that caused Stephen to say, as his final words, "Lord, do not hold this sin against them." That fundamentally changes the rules of the game to something that cannot be won outside of Christ, and can only be won inside of him.