Rating: 5/5

I’ll pour you a cup of wine, while we sit by the shores of the sea; and when all our cups are filled, we’ll turn toward the wreck of the grand old city, and drink a toast to proud, lost, magnificent, ruined Troy.

The Iliad is the first great book in the Western literary tradition. Sad, and in some ways appropriate and inevitable, that the West’s first great book is an epic of war. But it holds its pride of place in the canon because it tells an important story in an unforgettable and powerful way.

The story is likely to be familiar to many. As Homer begins his epic tale, the Trojan War has already been raging for years; Greek armies from the various city-states of Hellas, united under the rule of the Mycenaean king Agamemnon, have been besieging Troy. The Trojan War, as Homer tells it, began not because of economic or political differences between Troy and the Greek city-states, but rather because Helen, the wife of the Spartan king Menelaus, absconded to Troy with the Trojan prince Paris. All of the leading Greeks, suitors for her hand, had agreed to go to war to bring her back home if she were abducted; hence, as Christopher Marlowe put it hundreds of years later in Doctor Faustus (1604), Helen of Sparta -- once she became Helen of Troy -- had "the face that launched a thousand ships." 

The presence or absence of a beautiful woman is also at the heart of the key conflict among the Greeks as The Iliad begins. Under the rules of warfare for that time, each prominent Greek leader is awarded a Trojan woman as a “prize”; Homer does not question this practice of sexual slavery, and indeed it is left to Euripides, centuries later in The Trojan Women, to call this "custom" into question. 

But this barbaric practice is at the heart of the central conflict of The Iliad; for Agamemnon has been forced to surrender his concubine Chryseis, the daughter of an Apollonian priest who has cursed the Greeks with plague, and Agamemnon spitefully responds by taking Briseis, the concubine of his best warrior Achilles, in return for Achilles’ many and virulent critiques of Agamemnon as commander and as man. As Briseis is led out from Achilles’ tent to Agamemnon’s – “reluctant, every step” (p. 89) – Achilles decides that he will no longer fight for the Greeks; and from that time forward, the Greeks reel from one military disaster to another. It will take the killing of Achilles’ friend Patroclus by the Trojan champion Hector to bring Achilles back into the fray.

I have read The Iliad many times, and always return to it with pleasure. The edition I have before me – the Penguin Classics Deluxe Edition, translated by Robert Fagles of Princeton University, with notes by Bernard Knox of Harvard University’s Center for Hellenic Studies – has been widely praised. My one year of Classical Greek at a Catholic prep school in Washington, D.C., does not qualify me to differentiate meaningfully between one translation of The Iliad and another; but what I can do is look at the way the poetry speaks to English-speaking people of the 21st century A.D. I remember the challenge of translating those first two lines of The Iliad -- 

“μῆνιν ἄειδε θεὰ Πηληϊάδεω Ἀχιλῆος/
οὐλομένην, ἣ μυρί᾽ Ἀχαιοῖς ἄλγε᾽ ἔθηκε…” 

And as I look at Fagles’s translation of those lines – “Rage – Goddess, sing the rage of Peleus’ son Achilles,/murderous, doomed, that cost the Achaeans countless losses…” (p. 77) – I find that it works well. Fagles’s use of blank-verse iambic pentameter conveys the epic and poetic quality of Homer’s lines in a clear and no-nonsense manner.

Aside from its greatness as a poem, and its compelling qualities as a story, The Iliad commands our attention because of the insights that it offers into the classical Greek culture that is at the core of the Western cultures of the present day. The Iliad was probably composed around 750 B.C., in commemoration of a war that probably took place around 1200 B.C.; for the Greeks, it was the beginning of their world, and they looked to The Iliad as an expression of the values of their culture.

Those values, as Homer sets them forth in The Iliad, include a decided sense of fatality; as the Trojan ally Glaucus proclaims in a confrontation with the Achaean king Diomedes of Argos, “Like the generations of leaves, the lives of mortal men” (p. 200). In this world where life is short and uncertain, where each human being’s fate is foreordained by the gods, the only real path to immortality is to try to excel, to stand out among all others. 

Later in the same conversation, Glaucus recalls the words of his father Hippolochus: “Always be the best, my boy, the bravest, and hold your head up high among the others” (p. 202). In a society as competitive as that of the ancient Greeks – a society that dated its calendar from the first Olympic Games in 776 B.C., the same way that we in the modern West date from the birth of Jesus Christ – these words no doubt resonated, just as today they tell us much about what the ancient Greeks thought and felt about life.

Centuries’ worth of readers of The Iliad have remarked on how sympathetically the Trojan characters are drawn, compared to the Greeks. Agamemnon comes off as an arrogant, power-mad lout; Achilles seems like a spoiled, pettish overgrown child, sulking in his tent while his comrades-in-arms perish on the battlefield. Hector, by contrast, emerges as a dutiful warrior with a decidedly proportional sense of the world and his place in it; when fellow Trojan Polydamas complains that the omens gathered from bird-signs seem unfavorable for a Trojan attack on the Greek rampart, Hector scornfully replies, “Bird-signs! Fight for your country – that is the best, the only omen!” (p. 333). Small wonder that some scholars have posited that the composer(s) of The Iliad may have been a Greek or Greeks of Asia Minor who identified with the Trojans as a matter of possible ancestry and heritage. 

This edition of The Iliad is rich with bonuses and extras. Translator Fagles provides a helpful preface, and commentator Knox offers not only a thorough introduction but also guides to Homeric geography, the spelling and pronunciation of Homeric names, and a genealogy of the royal house of Troy. For anyone who wants to be plunged into the mindset of classical Greece, this edition of The Iliad can truly be your muse.