Rating: 5/5

Watchman Nee was one of the first authors to which I was introduced on becoming a Christian, and has remained one of my favourites ever since. He has a wonderful gift of expounding God's word that takes you to the heart of what it means to love, trust and follow Jesus.

So it may seem surprising that I had never read his book on the Song of Songs until now. But, as I began my own study of the Song, my desire was to let the Holy Spirit be my main guide; and I know how easy it is to be influenced by other people's opinions – especially those whom you most admire.

Exploring God's word is rather like mining for treasure. As you dig, you become aware of ever-deeper layers, often – but not always – following the contours of the surface layers; and each containing new secrets. And this is especially true of this Song.

My own approach was to begin with the surface layers – the narrative, as presented and understood by Solomon – and then consider how this foreshadows our own relationship with Jesus, from first encounters to full commitment.

But many authors go on to dig deeper, taking a more spiritualized approach to the Song, interpreting the symbolism of its descriptions from a Bible-wide and New Testament perspective. In doing so, they are expounding truths that were probably never perceived by Solomon himself: but inspired and hidden there by the Holy Spirit for discovery by later generations.

We can often also find that, like the underlying strata of the rocks, the progression of events in prophetic writings are applicable across multiple scales of time and dimension. This is because the principles underlying God's dealings with us hold generally true, whether dealing with individuals or nations, specific events or the generality of human history. So, in our own lives, lessons learned in one situation often have to be re-learned at a deeper level as we progress in our walk with God.

Thus Nee points out that, whereas King David had to fight to gain his kingdom, Solomon stands as a king of peace. He therefore views the Song on a different timescale: treating it as a description of the progress of one who has already found Jesus as their Saviour and is now seeking a deeper relationship with Him.

So because of Nee's different perspective and his gifting as an expositor both of scripture and spiritual life, you will find that this book can take you even deeper into the things of God. It has challenged and encouraged me, and I can highly recommend it.