Rating: 4/5

Personal Response:
I thought that this was a good book. It was fun to read and very interesting because it was about kids my age. Overall, I thought it had a good storyline that made you want to keep reading.

Plot:
In the plot there was a lot of interesting things that happened to the main characters Seth and Jimmy. Seth's dad died when he was a very young boy. One day Seth walked to a park he didn't usually go to. That was the first day he meet Jimmy. Jimmy was playing baseball with his Dad and he asked Seth to come play with them. Jimmy's dad was a jerk to Jimmy because he wanted him to be the best he could be. Jimmy's dad would never be mean to Seth. They would meet at the park every Sunday and play baseball. Jimmy and Seth became best friends. They played baseball together all the way from Little League to Babe Ruth. Jimmy moved away with his mom for a year because his dad would get drunk and threaten them and they got a divorce. They came back and got to play their freshman year of baseball together. The Freshman team got a new coach that year and he was a former professional. They started off slow but when Jimmy joined he turned everyone's attitude around because of his worth ethic and how good he was. Jimmy played shortstop and Seth played second base they made a great duo. Sophomore year Jimmy played on varsity but Seth wasn't good enough. Junior Year they both made it and there team was ranked 1st in the state. Jimmy and Seth would go to there friends house and would drink beer. They started drinking before Sophomore year. Jimmy's dad got remarried and Jimmy and Seth went to the wedding together. After the wedding Jimmy took two bottles of Champagne and he and Seth drank it. After, Jimmy dropped Seth off at home and Seths mom found out that he was drunk. He got grounded and banned from ever riding with Jimmy again. They did very good that year in baseball they were in first place with only two games left and all they needed to do was win one to be the champions and make it to the state tournament. The night before there second to last game Seth got a call in the middle of the night from his friend saying Jimmy was at a party and crashed his car on the way home and was in the hospital. Jimmy died that night.

Characterization:
Seth was a nice kid that lost his father early and had a hole in his heart from that. He filled it with baseball and his best friend Jimmy. Jimmy was a nice kid who was addicted to alcohol, he was great baseball play and had the heart to do anything to be the best.

Recommendation: 
I would recommend this book to all males that are in high school. It would be good for them because it's relatable and the main characters are males.