Rating: 5/5

At the end of this story one mystery lingers: Did something magical happen? “If you answer yes,” the book seems to say, “humans are inescapably haunted. If you answer no, people may be safe, but the cost will come elsewhere.” Either way I now see clearly why Prussia suddenly vanished.

What instigates the mystery is the protagonist. Abel Tiffauge is a fairly normal French guy despite thinking of himself as an “ogre” with his over-muscled shoulders. But what’s normal is relative. Who among us hasn’t experienced this: You’re listening to someone you’ve known just a little while. Every sentence he utters makes perfect sense, but you gradually realize that the more he talks, the crazier he sounds. Some strange force subverts the logic of his discourse, and you end up staring, not hearing. Tiffauge has that effect

Our ogre’s conversational detours, however, dazzle rather than annoy. At times he gets caught up in his private notion of the phoric, referring to things that carry. Cars fascinate him because they carry people – anthropophoria. And people carry objects and other people, in their arms and on their shoulders. Ancient spirits might carry things, too, if they existed. Or as another example, purity in Tiffauge’s mind becomes opposed to  innocence. Then come his ideas about symbols. What moral status do they possess? Are they able to act own their own? Exceptional meanings, for this man, affect the ordinary incidents of life.

The story and its musings take Tiffauge from the Paris garage he owns to German Prussia during World War II. Once there “the violent bear it away,” as Flannery O’Connor, quoting the Bible, once expressed it. Tiffauge’s changed environment eerily resembles The Erl-King, a mythic 19th century poem by Prussia’s own Goethe. Tiffauge’s passions soon become entwined with Prussia’s destiny. As the war reaches its climax and the Russian Army pours over Germany’s borders, we learn who Tiffauge takes himself to be and what he intends.

This novel ranks high for its originality and style. Because the particulars of the story also appeal to my own tastes, I give The Ogre the highest rating. Indeed, this book won France’s top literary award in 1970 – that’s one of the reasons I ordered it. Barbara Bray has done a fine translation which reads smoothly in English. This provocative tale never actually insists anything mystical took place within its ken. Yet on the whole a phoric spirit enfolds the plot.