Rating: 4/5

i wish it was more recent, would have liked to hear his thoughts on EFCA + the latest dance between big labor and the Democrats. 

p. 42- "A fine labor historian, Irving Bernstein, wrote about this period in his book The Lean Years, and there is an uncanny similarity between labor in the 1920s and labor in the 1980s. Whole passages of the book, which he wrote in the 1950s, by the way, could be lifted verbatim to describe American labor today.
For example:
Union members vote for Hoover then, and Reagan now.
Employers start "work teams" then, or "quality work circles" now, which are supposed to replace unions.
Union membership drops and drops.
There is the same cult worship of the businessmen, of Andrew Mellon then, of Donald Trump today.
And Bernstein quotes one journalist after another saying that unionism is jot only dead but "obsolete" in the new, post-industrial, service-sector economy of... yes, the 1920s. Every thoughtful observer, in The New Republic, etc., seems to agree, by 1928 that organized labor is through and that history has passed it by.
I can read The Lean Years and laugh on every page and say "this is great."
Yes ... but this doesn't prove the Depression will save our necks again. "

I love that on page 49 he writes, "That's my only point."

Taft-Hartley had three effects:
First it ended organizing on the grand 1930s scale. It outlawed mass picketing, secondary strikes of neutral employers, sit-downs: in short, everything that Lewis did in the 1930s.
When people ask me, "Why can't labor organize the way it did in the 1930s?" the answer is simple: everything we did then is now illegal....
The second effect of Taft-Hartley was subtler and slow-working. It was to hold up any new organizing at all, even on a quiet, low-key scale. 

P 214 "Formerly, the rich depended in some way on the well-being of the whole nation. Henry Ford paid his autoworkers good wages, Reich says, so they could go out and buy his Model T, and he knew his prosperity was tied to theirs. But now we can let the workers shine our shoes, and it will not hurt "our" prosperity one bit. Other countries will pay the bills we run up at Convito Italiano, because other countries will always need the fancy postgrad services we provide, with our fancy postgrad educations. There is no such thing as a national economy."
Baaahh comparative advantage and out-of-date paradigms of endless growth vs sustainable cycling. We have to buy local.

"Maybe there are paths open to an "upper one-fifth," namely: (1) love your country and build up its economy, or (2) throw in with the world economy and send your own people into Third World hell. This is the choice facing us. And in a way, so little was asked of us, historically, as an elite: simply that we not make America any worse than is was, any more of a class society. And we blew it, we could not even do that."

some great messaging on being 'all-American'