Rating: 3/5

3.5 Stars 

Imagine if you will a society that expected women to stifle their feelings for the good of all. A proper lady would marry, bear children and serve her husband and family. She was to be pleasing and her household was presumed to run with complete order. Her goal was to avoid any cause for upset and she was expected to look the other way when necessary.

Charlotte Ellison was a product of the times. Though they loved her immensely, she was the bane of her parents. In her early twenties, she lived at home with no marital prospects on the horizon. She had never learned to mask her feelings as her sisters had done. Tempers flared, a few choice words were said and, depending on who the recipient was, forgiveness was asked. 

I had to remind myself of two things as I was reading The Cater Street Hangman. This was Anne Perry's debut novel and it was first published in 1979. If I thought it was a standalone, I might have rated it lower. But I knew, going in, that it was the first story in a series. One of Ms. Perry's main purposes was to set up the background and introduce characters. 

Charlotte was not the most likable heroine for the brunt of the story. For that matter, I had issues with most of the characters. Except Inspector Thomas Pitt. He was tall, his looks were plain but he had a beautiful voice. His clothes were rumpled and his hair needed to be brushed. He was also intelligent, patient and managed to overlook the continual rudeness that plagued him by the upperclass. Charlotte, included. 

Charlotte, Charlotte, Charlotte. She thought she was in love with someone that was unattainable. She argued with her sisters. She pestered her father. She was snooty and abrasive at times. I thought, more than once, why was Thomas fascinated with her? 

Besides the mystery, which was good, the novel was about hierarchy, social classes, and mores. Unlike so many historical romances, it did not glorify the Victorian era. Besides the actual murders, there were secrets, hidden agendas, guilt and, for lack of a better term, characters with eyes-wide-shut.