Rating: 2/5

I read this on a whim and found this incredibly flawed, but incredibly interesting. It is now more that 25 years old and dated, but a window and reminder into how we thought about sex when I was young. I read this at the same time as Jean Twenge’s ‘Generations’ which gave a contemporary view of what young people think about sex. Twenge talks about how avoidant young people today are about the physical experience of sex and describe this as the “meat”. This book has a strong focus on the meat of sex, and is oblivious to the coming effects of the digital and Cyber spheres with the closest reference being watching a saucy VCR together.

The mechanical advice it still useful as our biology have not changed, but this is covered in the opening 10% of the book. The rest covers sexual ethics, STI’s and Lesbian, Gay, and Bi people. 

Cox is clearly a journalist, and not a clinician. Her expertise is drawn from her experience as an Agony Aunt for Cosmopolitan Magazine. She judges sex through her own moral lens, and draws from magazine surveys as ‘research’. An underlying theme is that stable marriage is ‘unsexy’ and that casual sex is great as long as you where a condom. Cox pushes: recovered memories in a way that has been discredited; the nurture assumption that women like bad boys because of the way the were treated by their parents. She engages in hyperbole around good vs bad behaviour suggesting a ratio of 20 good actions to make up for 1 bad action (John Gottman places this around 4:1).

I found her use of language strange in the diary ‘entries’. She used clinical language in the body of the book (fair enough), but when quoted others had them use the same clinical language to name parts of the body, but her verbs were all slang. All the diary entries were cliché and had a sub theme of extolling the virtues of promiscuity and extra marital affairs. They were the style of Penthouse Forum or Cosmopolitan as far as I can remember. They only focused on relatively young people (tip people over 50 have sex too). Sex for Cox always seemed to be a young and glamorous fuck fest. Cox promoted one opinion, her own, as only a journalist can do. Lots of sizzle, but the substance is lacking.

In finishing this book I was reminded how much sex and our attitudes towards it have changed in the last 25 years. How permissive young people were encouraged to be when I was young. Young people are having less sex than their parents. Their libidos have dropped and then turn to cyberspace to meet their needs. Young people do not seem to want, need, or desire each other as much as their parents did. Sex and relationships is a messy space where people play less and then more ‘safely’ by themselves. I have been saying for sometime that the biggest threat to our species is Porno and PlayStation. We have given our mojo to these private and alienated spaces, so we can do these messy things alone. It is a strange era and I do not know how it is going to turn out. Whilst a technically flawed book in many ways, I am glad I read this for the reflection and thinking it provoked. In many ways this is a time capsule. I wonder what people will think about a book written reflecting the sexual issues of the current in 25 years time. AI might be the demise of us as a social species.