Rating: 5/5

Man stuck in his own character!
 
There is something endearing and sweet about the brutal consistency of Michael Henchard's eternal fight against his own bad temper. He is not a bad person as such - not bad in the psychopath fashion of careless evil doing at least.

Quite the contrary. He wants to be fair in life, but life keeps infuriating him to the point of boiling over, again and again. Even when he has murder in his heart, he makes sure to be fair in the fight, and therefore calculates that he needs to bind one of his arms before engaging in a deadly match - lest the opponent be without a fair chance! His kind of destruction is not the backstabbing kind. On the first pages, he sells his wife to the highest bidder, and that public shame remains his theme for the rest of his life.

Even in his most outrageous anger, he punishes himself more than the victims of his rage.

Woman, too, seems stuck in irrational emotionality though, I quickly add, in case it may seem as if Hardy tried to prove the "rational sex" to be the only one pitifully guided by impulses and fleeting states of mind.

Lucetta's life and death is a Tragedy Of Strong Feeling, Quickly Changed! In that respect, she and Henchard are the perfect couple, but it makes sense too, considering their characters, that they should never be together properly, as their feelings and impulses move like clashing waves...

After these two personae dramatis have left the stage, those less burdened by character remain to get on with life, settling in calm boredom most probably.

After Tess, I found this novel to have a soothing effect on my nerves, with some comic qualities I didn't expect, but appreciated all the more. If one could choose one's personality, it is doubtless better to be an Elizabeth-Jane or a Donald Farfrae. But as Hardy shows: ONE CAN'T! And it is good entertainment for the others when Men and Women of Character enter the game...

Curtain to standing ovations! Reading bliss in dark autumn weather!