Rating: 3/5

I once believed Larry McMurtry was the first author to write a true anti-Western, a demystification of the American West myth, but it turns out that honor should go to E.L. Doctorow who penned this hard little classic a good twenty-six years before anyone had ever heard of Lonesome Dove. 

Welcome to Hard Times is the bleak, almost nihilistic tale of Mayor Will Blue, an aging coward living on the western frontier in the Dakota flatlands. Blue watches his friends murdered and his town burned to the ground by an unnamed gunslinger, unwilling to put himself in harm’s way to stop it. Afterwards, he must take in the few remaining survivors and then attempt to rebuild the town from scratch, but Blue always fears the return of the Bad Man from Bodie and wonders if he will have the courage to fight back next time.

Like the best Westerns, this story tackles hard questions about man’s ability to survive in harsh conditions, what it means to build and live in community, and the consequences of confronting weakness within oneself. You get the feeling that Blue’s goals are doomed to failure from the outset—how can a sad man like this find love, or success, or even friendship in such a harsh landscape?—but you root for him because he tries so hard and his goals are noble. 

Doctorow is doing for the Western what Cormac McCarthy did for the crime novel in No Country for Old Men. He strips the genre down to its bones and removes the pretense of even the possibility of happy endings. This is not a world where the weak are redeemed. Instead, as one character says:

“Truth is, if the drought don’t get you and the blizzards don’t get you, that’s when some devil with liquor in his soul and a gun in his claw will ride you down and clean you out.”

In this time and space, even the concept of civilization can be shifting and illusory. Another great passage said this: 

“Every time someone puts a little capital into this Territory I’m called in by the Governor and sent on my way…. If a man files a claim that yields, there’s a town. If he finds some grass, there’s a town. Does he dig a well? Another town. Does he stop somewhere to ease his bladder, there’s a town. Over this land a thousand times each year towns spring up and it appears I have to charter them all. But to what purpose? The claim pinches out, the grass dies, the well dries up, and everyone will ride off to form up again somewhere else for me to travel. Nothing fixes in this damned country, people blow around at the whiff of the wind. You can’t bring the law to a bunch of rocks, you can’t settle the coyotes, you can’t make a society out of sand.”

Unfortunately, the story falls apart in the third act. Like many authors, Doctorow seemed to be trying too hard to make a point rather than tell a story. He allows his thematic message—that civilization is a just false veneer, that all men are violent and anarchic by nature—to overwhelm and overshadow the natural narrative arc. Predictably, Blue’s dreams for his new city fall apart, and the Bad Man from Bodie returns for a final showdown. The climactic situation devolves into almost satirical scenes of rioting, murder, and unrestrained mayhem that just did not ring true to the characters or the story itself.