Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars. (Somewhere between a 3 and 4 for me.) This is the 2nd book in the brilliant series by John Farrow and the 9th one in the Detective Emile Cinq-Mars I have read this year. It pains me to admit that this was my least favourite book of the series. I did not care for the structure of the complicated first 3rd of the book, where Emile was barely mentioned. There were some fillers, such as complex medical explanations and a sex scene that I found unnecessary. As the series moves around in various decades, this one is set in 1999 in a cold, wintery Montreal. Emile is in his 50s, cranky, and bothered by arthritis. 

 The premise was intriguing. Large pharmaceutical companies are smuggling and testing unproven and unauthorized AIDS drugs into the USA. These were injected by two women from Montreal, Camille but mainly by Lucy. The medicines were administered by Lucy, with the belief and promise that they would decrease the disease's symptoms or even cure the desperate AIDS sufferers. In fact, the greedy company was speeding up the disease's progress to study its later effects. 42 of these men died.

 Detective Emile became involved when the body of a man was found murdered inside a fishing shack under the ice. He was winter fishing in a nearby hut. A young SQ (Provincial) police officer permitted Emile (Montreal police) to become involved, although it was not in his jurisdiction. The dead man presents a mystery. How did a man still in his 20s rapidly rise from a test subject at one pharmaceutical company to head of Security at the other one? 
What were his duties and his connections? Emile becomes further involved when strangers invade the yard surrounding his home. He must move his wife away from their home for safety.

 We learn much about the austere Emile Cinq-Mars's religious background as well as his marriage and philosophical mind. He is a brilliant detective, intuitive, relentless in his dedication. I wouldn't say I liked the way he was portrayed in the earliest books. He was often grumpy and overtired. I found him arrogant, rude, angry, and he tended to overwork himself. In later books in the series, he is calmer, more patient, and becomes a more likable character. He notices clues that others miss.

 Soon, he becomes involved in the disappearance of Lucy, a young Mohawk woman, in Indian territory. It is learned that she was a scientist who worked for a pharmaceutical company. It is believed she was kidnapped for information about the drug trials and may be already murdered. Emile makes the connection that both Lucy and the young man dead in the fishing shack were both working for the drug companies. He is helped in his search for Lucy by Mohawk Peacekeepers and Warriors. He has reason to suspect the young SQ Officer due to his involvement with Camille, a fellow worker and Lucy's friend. What he learns from the SQ Officer gives him more information to connect Lucy's kidnapping to the 42 deaths of the American test subjects who were experimented upon with AIDS drugs. 

 The plot is further complicated by the appearance of the Mob, Hells' Angels, a monk with vows of silence, and several police forces with territorial conflicts. The involvement of the Mafia adds brutality to the complex investigation.

 Before the case is solved, there is a gruesome, prolonged torture scene and murder. It was so gross, heartbreaking, and disturbing I had to take a break.

 This was a cleverly plotted mystery with many twists and surprises. I especially liked the character of the brave Mohawk girl, Lucy, and Emile's young Anglophone partner. The antagonists were nasty and well developed. I grow to admire and like Emile in later books when he becomes my favourite fictional detective.