Rating: 4/5

I found this text book at a store for one dollar! I have long been interested in other cultures and how we relate to one another and although I have no talent for languages I thought this would be interesting. Salzmann writes in a very readable way, a true introduction. Although some of the ideas or terms were new to me I was able to understand what he was talking about. The book is not a linguistics text, though he does do a refresher course on what happens physiologically when we speak. The book covers how languages developed from early man through current language adaptations. It discussed how differences in communication cause misunderstandings between cultures. It also focused on how languages that do not have a written form, or are grammatically simpler than others are not inferior languages, nor is the culture that uses it, an incredibly important concept if you are going to study cultures for a living. You cannot have a superiority complex if you want to succeed in documenting the way another culture lives and views the world. It talks about pidgin languages and how they developed to ease communication between colonial powers and the natives. There is a strong focus on debunking the myth that African American Vernacular English is an inferior communication tool and explains how it developed from a pidgin into a Creole language and is still used in large swaths of the African American community and in the South. The last section of the book discusses the practical application to linguistic anthropology: language development for communities; documenting and preserving, and even trying to resurrect languages that are at risk of extinction, he makes a lot of references to Native American languages; legal proceedings such as making technical jargon comprehensible; working to help different cultures communicate better; and finally, the creation of a writing system for previously verbal only languages. I am happy that he added this chapter because some anthropologists don't want to spend their lives living and working in cultural observations and want to take an active role. I think it is important for students to see what opportunities are there for them if they pursue this education.