Title: Sam, Bangs, and Moonshine

Author: Evaline Ness

Illustrator: Evaline Ness

Type of Book (format and literary genre): Picture book/ Realistic Fiction

Awards the book has received (national): Caldecott Medal

Short original summary of the main plot, describe the content and themes of the book: Sam liked to make up stories. She told everyone her mother was a mermaid and that she had a pet lion and kangaroo. She also told everyone that her cat Bangs could talk. Her father told her to stop talking moonshine. There was a boy, Thomas, who would always come to her house and ask to see her kangaroo. Sam would always tell Thomas the kangaroo was out somewhere and she would send him to go look for it. One day Sam told Thomas the kangaroo was taking a nap down on the beach and sent him to go find it. She didn’t realize the big storm coming in off the ocean. Thomas and Bangs both got lost in the storm. Sam’s dad was able to save Thomas but Bangs was lost. The next day Bangs showed up at the window soaking wet and storm tossed. Sam’s dad gave Sam a gerbil that looked like a tiny baby kangaroo. Sam took the gerbil to Thomas and gave it to him and apologized.
 
Critique the book backed by one reason: This book really teaches a good lesson to children. Sam tells harmless lies like Bangs being able to talk. This lie didn’t hurt anyone and was fun for her to pretend that Bangs was her friend and was able to have conversations with her. But there’s lies that can hurt others too. Like lying to Thomas about the baby kangaroo. Thomas was so excited to see the kangaroo and almost died because Sam sent him out when a storm was coming in. So this book really teaches children the difference between big a little lies and the fact that there are consequences for lying that may hurt others. 

Prompts or questions you could pose when reading the book aloud to children:
1.	Does Sam really have a pet lion or kangaroo? Is her mom really a mermaid?
2.	What does Sam’s dad mean when he tells her to stop talking moonshine? What does he mean by moonshine?
3.	Why is Sam worried when it starts to rain? Where are Thomas and Bangs?
4.	What lesson did Sam learn?
5.	Could Bangs really talk to Sam?

Craft elements of the book that could be addressed in a reading or writing lesson: Have students write about a time they had to learn a lesson the hard way? This is also a good story to teach about cause and effect. Students can think about the cause and effect of Sam’s actions.