Rating: 5/5

The Portage to San Cristobal of A.H. is one of the most thought-provoking and demanding books I have ever read. Set in 1977, it's ostensibly the tale of Israeli NAZI hunters deep in the Amazon jungle who have caught the biggest fish of them all, Adolf Hitler. As they struggle to carry their quarry back to civilization, their success is discovered by Britain's MI6 monitoring their radio net. Other intelligence services have also listened in. As the word gets out, the outside world, particularly those nations most affected by Germany's WWII excesses, scrambles to figure out what it will all mean. Along the way we learn a little of the numerous legends of Hitler's demise and his mythical escape to South America. We also learn how different individuals processed their WWII experience. Each chapter contains a monologue of the hopes and aspirations of the Israeli agents and of various people abroad (East/West Germany, Soviet Russia, the US, France and the UK) for this capture to provide some kind of divine justice and closure for their personal suffering related to the Holocaust. The final monologue, Hitler's, is the most chilling, and, for the Jewish reader, the most existentially dangerous. The final verdict on Hitler is uttered by none of those who think they know him best but by Teku, the Amazon savage sent to intercept the team. Teku doesn't understand a word of Hitler's rationalizations and rantings. But he is moved by Hitler's intensity and innate spiritual power to declare der fuehrer's horrific testimony "Proven!"
The unprepared reader will likely miss the book's point. And one's preparation must be on several different levels. An understanding of both the horror of the Holocaust and the suffering of European Jews under the NAZI regime is essential, as is some grasp of the world's connivance in looking the other way. Yet one should also be aware of the paradox of NAZI Germany where "innocent" citizens drank from the devil's cup and became too morally inebriated to comprehend the full scope of their collective sin.
And this is a literary novel, a fever dream of unfinished sentences, stream of consciousness, nightmarish flashbacks and over-cooked imagination. The style and plot resemble the more farcical aspects of John Le Carre and Graham Greene. But the message is more Camus or Yasmina Khadra had they been Jewish and not Algerian.
George Steiner is a Jewish literary and social critic who has written a genuine masterpiece. It was immensely controversial when first published in 1979 (and later produced as a play in London). Most people were upset that A.H. was able to "get in the last word." Others thought the entire exercise anti-Semitic. It wasn't. And it isn't. Mine is a 1999 edition with a wonderful Afterward by Steiner. He proves to the reader that history, as of 1999, had vindicated many of the ideas in his book. As it had. He also clarifies that it is Lieber, the obsessed mastermind behind the NAZI hunters, whose tormented Holocaust survivor's monologue was meant to be the book's centerpiece. A.H., as usual, simply stole the show.
So read this book for all its worth, and ponder its intricacies. Its heady stuff indeed. It is also highly recommended.