Rating: 3/5

George RR Martin was rising up the ranks in sf/f and horror in the early 80s, winning awards left and right. Coming off his critically-acclaimed Sandkings collection and the highly successful historical vampire thriller, Fevre Dream, Martin's publisher rightfully pushed The Armageddon Rag as "the next big thing." Only no one bought it, and as a result the emotionally crushed author basically left the world of fiction-writing to become a Hollywood screenwriter instead.

At the time, this was Martin's most ambitious work yet, and one that was very close to his heart, he being a child of the 60s. Drawing from his own personal experiences of the Summer of Love-era, this supernatural horror/thriller tells the tale of Sandy, a rock journalist in the early 80s who's investigating the mysterious, gruesome murder of a promoter who managed several big-name bands throughout the 60s and 70s, including hard-rockers The Nazgûl, one of the most famous of the era. And they broke up exactly 10 years before to the day, when their frontman was murdered. Fearing a connection, Sandy decides to visit some old friends from back in the day, including the remaining Nazgûl members, to see if he can get to the bottom of it all. 

Much of the novel is just an excuse for Martin to reminisce about the good ole' flower-power days, as that's what main character Sandy does throughout the first half, while reconnecting with his old buddies. It's very well-written, but it takes a while to get to the more interesting, fantastical elements of the story, and I had a hard time keeping my focus during the first half. But it does shift to supernatural horror in a clever way that I won't describe, for fear of ruining it for others. 

Overall, it's not something I'd go out of my way to hunt down, but if you come across it for a decent price, it may be worth a look-see. But if you're really interested in reading some of Martin's early horror work, start with his excellent collections like Sandkings or Nightflyers first*.

3.0 Stars

*The title stories of each collection are two of the most chilling sf/horror hybrids I've read. "Sandkings" is around novelette-length (47 pages in my edition), while "Nightflyers" could almost be considered a short novel (over 100 pages). Both can be more easily found in Martin's Dreamsongs retrospective.