Rating: 5/5

I have long admired Loren Eiseley and especially have been inspired by The Immense Journey and The Star Thrower. He is one of my guides in life, along with some other naturalist/philosophers such as Carl Sagan and Annie Dillard. I knew that Eiseley was a respected professor of anthropology, but I was unprepared for how affected I would be by this autobiography, All the Strange Hours: The Excavation of a Life.

I was overwhelmed by his first two paragraphs, and knew instantly that this autobiography would be unique. Here's that amazing opening: 

 "When my aunt died I found among her effects a beautiful silver-backed Victorian hand mirror. It had been one of a twin pair my maternal grandfather had given to his girls. The last time I had seen my mother's mirror it had been scarred by petulant violence and the handle had been snapped off. It had marked the difference between the two girls--their care of things, perhaps their lives. I had looked into the mirror as a child, admiring the scrollwork on the silver. Mostly things like that did not exist in our house. Finally it disappeared. The face of a child vanished with it, my own face. Without the mirror I was unaware when it departed.
 Make no mistake. Everything in the mind is in rat's country. It doesn't die. They are merely carried, these disparate memories, back and forth in the desert of a billion neurons, set down, picked up, and dropped again by mental pack rats. Nothing perishes, it is merely lost till a surgeon's electrode starts the music of an old piano player whose scrolls are dust. Or you yourself do it, tossing in the restless nights, or even in the day on a strange street when a hurdy-gurdy plays. Nothing is lost, but it can never be again as it was. You will only find the bits and cry out because they were yourself. Nothing can begin again and go right, but still it is you, your mind, picking endlessly over the splintered glass of a mirror dropped and broken long ago."

My book is so filled with sticky notes--how this man ever overcame the challenges he did is a lesson to all of us. As the above opening shows, his strongest childhood reaction was to his deaf, mentally ill mother; because of her, he chose to never have children, fearing her condition might be passed on. And in the last chapter of the book, he returns to that mirror, saying: "I am coming to the end--the end of which I spoke in the beginning--the shattered mirror which can never be repaired but which lies in bits in the hallways of the mind itself."

The book is divided into three sections: "Days of a Drifter" with 7 chapters, "Days of a Thinker" with 13 chapters, and "Days of a Doubter" with 5 chapters. He overcame so much--dropping out of high school, riding the rails, tuberculosis--and then embarked on an academic career that resulted in many awards, none of which really mattered to him. As an anthropologist, he knew that we are all dust in the end. 

I'll only include a few quotations; reading Eiseley is the best proof that science and poetry are sisters. What I most appreciate is his sincerity--this is not a man who would waste his time on shallow humor or sarcasm. 

On p. 29, Eiseley tells of his childhood fascination with making tiny crosses and painting them gold, to be placed over small dead creatures--and of his sense of loss when a man with a scythe destroyed them. These crosses reappear throughout the book, most noticeably for me in chapter 10, "The Crevice and the Eye", p. 98:
"I have told of the miniature gold crosses that were hidden in the weeds next to my home and that were stolen by a callous reaper. Perhaps they symbolize in a way the conflict at the root of my being. Always, standing above excavations, I have been both excited about what the shovel would reveal and disconsolate and stricken at the sacrilege done to the dead." He goes on to tell of finding the small, wrapped body of a child from early times; "I could have spent a day up there on the great range just listening to the wind and talking to the child, murmuring to it across the centuries." But the leader of the dig turns the remains over to a local museum. He goes on to tie his experience to another man, digging in Eygpt, who finds a miniature chamber, 40 centuries old--and that same sense of conflict arises: to leave the dead where they were meant to be by their loved ones or to pursue curiosity about the past. 

p. 150: Eiseley had a special affinity for dogs, and was appalled at their use in medical experiments. He knew many came from the shelters, and says, when seeing stray animals, "I have never called a humane society because I, too, am an ex-wanderer who would have begged for one more hour of light, however dismal."

Perhaps the most telling of Eiseley's musings is his realization that to be fascinated by the past is to risk the danger of being pulled away from the present. On p. 95, he mentions a story by Algernon Blackwood that tells of a man consumed by his work in Egypt, and wonders if he himself will be like that. I took the time to find the Blackwood story, "A Descent Into Egypt", which can be read as an online pdf here: 
http://algernonblackwood.org/Z-files/...

I'm finding it hard to come "back to earth" after reading this book--as if Eiseley has guided me into considering all the vast expanses of time that filled his mind. That trip is not always comfortable--but it's an important journey to take in this world of trivia and busyness.