Rating: 5/5

I picked this thinking it was a new read and then I found several copies of it on Internet Archive and I recognized the cover of one - so this is in fact a re-read. At the beginning I struggled to recall anything and then quite quickly I remembered various elements, strangely enough the pine plantation opposite Edwin's house where he meets Daphne walking her dog, Prince and where Leila appears to be lost. The pine plantation is in fact an important element and is used as a frame for most of Edwin's reflections, and to indicate the seasons as the year passes:

Edwin called Leila dumpling and listened for the sound of her soft footfall in the passage ouside his door. They took little walks together in the pines, breathing in the warm fragrance. The pines seemed lighter and the bleached grass gave way to patches of sand. Leila had to stop to empty first one shoe and then the other. Edwin, as usual, was surprised how he could forget, from one season to the other, these gifts from the pines, the gentle sighing of the wind in the tops of the trees and the warmth and the sustaining quality of the air. While Leila emptied her shoes he supported her tenderly. 

Edwin is a middle-aged professor (53 to be exact), of Elizabethan and Renaissance literature, and his wife has taken a one-year leave of absence from her work as an ob-gyne at the Mary and Joseph. The hospital is within walking distance of their pleasant old house in the suburbs. Cecilia will be gone for a year and her absence is quickly noted by the mother and daughter pair who live next door, Mrs Bott, and her (20 year old) daughter, Leila. What follows could be said to be a re-write of Nabokov's 'Lolita'. In Jolley's story, however, it is the man who receives a painful comeuppance over his passionate indulgence with the young woman. By the end, poor Dr Edwin Page has learnt the full extent of his folly. There is, however, the slightest hint that Cecilia has also had plans of her own in her year off, and Leila is not the complete instrument that her mother would have liked her to be.

Jolley pulls the reader into the micro details of this story, especially in relation to how Edwin feels at every development and sometimes this intense focus is a little hard to stay with because I think readers are used to a broader outline in story development. The close focus, however is what is required to comprehend the painful process of discovery that Edwin is plunged into; and the story does open to include a cast of other characters. One of the most enjoyable is Cecilia's best friend, Daphne, who herself is somewhat under the influence of the handsome Edwin, but it is she who manages to direct and save nearly all the players from disastrous decisions. She has a kindness and intelligence which is rarely offered in characters in novels, but she is needed here especially when Edwin has to confront his 'indulgence' with the reality of his wife's return.

Here is a neat little snippet to give you some idea of the excruciating dilemma Edwin finds himself in. He was supposed to join Cecilia, in London, for a Christmas visit, but at the last moment 'misses the plane'.

Leila did not want Edwin to go away for Christmas. All along she said nothing, so that it was a surprise one night when she begged him not to go. She cried so much that Edwin was afraid some harm might come to the child. In the end he was obliged to fetch her mother, who made tea for them all.
They sat together like characters in a Russian novel, Edwin thought, who never slept but prowled about all night creating problems and facing terrible truths in their night clothes. Only the little dog, who had grown very quickly, slept on in his basket, twitching and uttering little growls from his dreams.

I love that - I laughed outright over 'the Russians in their nightgowns' but also it's so clever, because it shows how Edwin has suppressed the certain fact that Cecilia will return. He believes that Leila is as deeply attached to him as he is to her and so he justifies his cancelled flight and his cancelled promises to his wife, based on Leila's needs, which are really his needs. Complex psychology, but beautifully done by Jolley. And here is another reference to those pine trees just to finish off with. Don't miss this book - it's absolutely fabulous. 

He felt as if his chest would burst. He longed for fresh air. He wanted to escape into the pines and walk there. He wished, in a hopeless way, that he and Leila could be walking in the pines, in the dark, that they could be lost there together forever all night and he would protect her as he had the night she was lost. He wished he could walk endlessly in the pines knowing that they could be together for ever.

And it's strange that despite Edwin's immense, egotistical folly we feel sorry for him and believe absolutely in his love for Leila. It's the genius of Jolley's writing and her ability to know the depths of the human psyche. Please read Elisabeth Jolley: almost unheard of here on Goodreads. She is the author of 15 novels, as well as short stories, plays and other writings.