Rating: 3/5

I have spoken about it before, but I used to work at a grocery store. A part of my responsibilities was the selling of lottery tickets. I worked a lot during those years, trying to make a bit of money to fund my stupid hobbies (like buying books, ugh). It’s only natural that I came to be acquainted with a lot of the regulars. Short, stout old men that smelled like 50-day old cigarettes, no doubt because their barely buttoned up shirts had not been washed for that long; shifty young men that held in their hands the stubs of last week’s partial winnings on third division Brazilian football teams; middle-aged women buying a banana, an onion, an apple, and about $120 worth of scratch-offs. All in the hopes of scoring big. I think the maximum prize for the scratchers must have been 75K. Not too shabby, but I wonder how much they had spent on them across 10-20 years. Don’t get me started on the actual lotto. $5 to pick 7 numbers (I think you got a few lines of numbers with this one! You had more of a chance!!) and a lot of hopes, a lot of dreams. I haven’t done my fair share of sociological studies to have a proper opinion of what could be done with that money, but I have done my fair share of psychological studies. What’s more, I have a good friend who specializes in this shit – addictions. The pernicious cycle down, how it doesn’t feel like a cycle at all. How it becomes life and before you know it? There you are. Fuck the instant macaroni, I will go hungry for a few more hours to make sure I have the chance of winning 10 million or something. On the best of days, it was heart-wrenching to see these beautiful souls. That’s what they were. Not a single one was crabby, shitty, mean. They all put on their best smiles and asked me what my day was like, remembered particulars and asked how that thing I had planned had gone, introduced me to their kids, made jokes, made inside jokes. That’s why I wanted to physically grab each and every single one of them, on a bad day. Grab them by the shoulders and shake them until they realized that maybe they should take the instant ramen instead of the lotto. Say no to the 5 lines of numbers for a few weeks in order to make sure their kids ate. But it wasn’t my place. I was a background character in their lives and had to watch it all go by. Not to mention the burning question in my mind: Hey man, what in god’s ever living fuck would you do with that money if you won it? You’re not exactly investing it, are you?

I recall those days because I’ve finally finished Zola’s L’Assomoir, a sprawling, downward spiral of a novel. I had started to pick at it around the same time that I was reading Les Misérables, and the difference in style showed. To begin with, Zola’s naturalism was perhaps a direct response to the highfalutin Romanticism of those the likes of Hugo. At the beginning, it was a breath of fresh air. I was tossed right into the working classes of Paris. I saw everything that came with that, including the anxieties surrounding a few sous and francs, the struggle to find work and food, and the willingness to throw it all away on Saint Pay Day. On alcohol. Wine is good, as we come to learn, but the spirits, those darn spirits… they can ruin a man. The language was refreshing too. Zola said it the way it was. Slang and profanities all included (and as I understand, this was a massively controversial choice when the novel was published in 1877). I had just about had it with Hugo’s bullshit, where he would take the gaze of a young couple in love and write philosophy about war. Zola didn’t do that. But I was only a couple of chapters in. As the chapters began to go by, my pace slowed down. Granted, I was slightly busier, but we all know that we use that as an excuse to get relief from books that are affecting us one way or another, the books we don’t really want to go back to. By chapter 3 or 4, I was going at the pace of 10 pages a day, if I was lucky. 13 chapters in this book, and as I crawled along, I felt myself drawn to my grocery store days, but here I was, in l’assomoir (the dram shop), throwing away the few dollars that I had worked to line my belly with brandy, only to stumble home at 3 AM, vomit on the bed, slip and fall in my vomit and waste, wake up with a banging hangover, beat up the closest person to me, and do it all over again. It got tiring. I get that it was for a reason, and I get that it portrayed what life was like for this specific class in Paris, but it was tiring. As it must have been for them, I am sure.

By the end, I was just about ready to be done with this one as well. Maybe I just wanted to relax for a few weeks on summer vacation and kick it back with some other subjects. Who knows. But I’m not taking all of the blame here. Zola introduces a lot of characters, and I got the sense that he was stuck between exposition on the character and making them real, if that makes sense. How do I put it… he was so intensely focused on some trivial descriptions about certain characters but left key aspects of their dispositions vague. In a way, he gave me so much that the character was no longer relatable (e.g., quirky habits, very specific political opinions, etc.) and didn’t give me anything for me to see in him/her people that I knew. I feel as though that should have been flipped, that he should have left the specifics vague and the general more specific, so that I could know that 1877 Gervaise is very similar to 2022 xxxxx. That being said, the dynamics were better worked. The jealousies, griefs, and brief joys were realistic, as were the few moments of love and lust that characters managed to eke out for themselves. Outside of that, phew. A chunky, tiny slab of a book, and it is so what it is. There is no shying away from it. My friend described Zola’s writing as “disappointingly frank”, and so far, I agree.

Once I’ve had some time to rest and recover from the French, I’ll be back for the Rougon-Macquart series, but starting right at the beginning.