Rating: 5/5

As it is tradition the editor provides a very comprehensive summary of science fiction publishing and science fiction as a whole during the prior year. The introduction sections to each story are better than ever.

Mr. Boy by James Patrick Kelly: 5	
3rd best story of the anthology: The story of boy kept eternally young by a medical procedure and the ensuing adventures after he tasks his robot companion to steal an illegal photograph. This needs mentioning as his best friend is a human engineering to look like a dinosaur, his gf is a nudist, and his mom is an almost full size hollow replica of the statue of liberty. 

The Shobies' Story by Ursula K. Le Guin: 5	
The story of a peculiar crew tasked with the first mission of a new interstellar ship

The Caress by Greg Egan: 5	
The story of a cop and a genetically engineered chimera that suffer at the hands of an eccentric man obsessed with a painting 

A Braver Thing by Charles Sheffield: 5	
A chance encounter leads a boy down the path of academia and an eventual Nobel prize earned by the posthumously published work of his best friend that committed suicide 

We See Things Differently by Bruce Sterling: 5
A story set after the cold war which left the USA bankrupt and a decaying country, an Arab journalist seeks an interview with the most patriotic music artist in the USA

And The Angels Sing by Kate Wilhelm: 3	
A Mr. nobody finds an alien by the side of the road and requests the help of his journalist friend to take care of it.

Past Magic by Ian R. MacLeod: 4	
A woman convinces her ex-husband to come visit her after she has commissioned a clone of their dead daughter. 

Bears Discover Fire by Terry Bisson: 4	
The title says it all

The All-Consuming by Lucius Shepard and Robert Frazier: 2.5	
3rd worst story of the anthology: An eccentric Japanese man world renowned by eating the most exotic (and frankly inedible) dishes sets his eyes on the radiation mutated jungle in the south of México 

Personal Silence by Molly Gloss: 2
1st worst story of the anthology: A war protester goes around protesting war and meets a girl that has psychic powers?

Invaders by John Kessel: 4.5	
The conquest of the incas and the future alien invasion are not too dissimilar 

The Cairene Purse by Michael Moorcock: 3.5	
A man goes to Egypt in search of his archeologist sister after her disappearance under mysterious circumstances 

The Coon Rolled Down And Ruptured His Larinks, A Squeezed Novel By Mr. Skunk by Dafydd ab Hugh: 4
You can't stop democrazy and progrets! A skunk, a dog and a boy infected with a virus to escape from their containment area.

Tower Of Babylon by Ted Chiang: 5
1st best story of the anthology: Wow, just wow. A miner climbs the to the top of a tower extending to the top of the world to open the vault of heaven

The Death Artist by Alexander Jablokov: 2	
2nd worst story of the anthology: An being that is able to transfer his consciousness sets up his death over and over

The First Since Ancient Persia by John Brunner: 5	
During a trip in Argentina a woman stumbles upon a biological research facility which (spoiler?) leads to the creation of a new world 

Inertia by Nancy Kress: 5	
A virus that whose most prominent symptom is the disfigurement of skin becomes one of humanity's last hopes as it faces civilization collapse thanks to its more subtle symptoms 

Learning To Be Me by Greg Egan: 5	
2nd best story of the anthology: A man with a neural implant meant to mimic his every thought wrestles with the idea of going through with the surgery that would give the implan control of his body to gain immortality 

Cibola by Connie Willis: 4
A journalist searches for the cities of gold of Cibola in Denver, Colorado USA, guided by the claimed descendant of the man that was unable to guide the Spanish to the same cities centuries earlier. 

Walking The Moons by Jonathan Lethem: 4.5	
An intrepid virtual reality explorer is interviewed by a journalist that is not at all impressed by his "adventures" and living conditions 

Rainmaker Cometh by Ian McDonald: 3.5	
A man that serves a flying city arrives at a small town in the middle of a great drought. 

Hot Sky by Robert Silverberg: 4.5	
This is the first Silverberg story in these anthologies to not be a clear 5 for me. The story of the situation (dilemma?) that ensues after an iceberg trawler tends to the SOS call of a squid fishing vessel. 

White City by Lewis Shiner: 4	
Nikola tesla addresses his fear of the dark in a manner only he could... (spoiler?) by banishing the night

Love And Sex Among The Invertebrates by Pat Murphy: 5	
After a nuclear war, a scientist attempts to build a pair of robot lizards capable of mating before dying of radiation poisoning 

The Hemingway Hoax by Joe Haldeman: 4	
Multiverse shenanigans ensue after a man decides to forge Ernest Hemingway's lost works with his wife and a con-man