Rating: 5/5

As always, a wonderful collection selected by Mr. Dozios. You really can't go wrong with his 'best of the year' volumes. Contains:-

Summation: 1992 I always enjoy Dozois' introductions to these collections. I think he is a very entertaining writer.
Griffin's Egg by Michael Swanwick - Industrial workers on the moon face huge problems from within and without. Very good.
Even The Queen by Connie Willis - Amusing tale of when technology and gender politics clash!
The Round-Eyed Barbarians by L. Sprague de Camp - Alternate history story where conquistadors arrive in America to find the chinese have beaten them to it.
Dust by Greg Egan - Egan throws a bunch of brain-melting big ideas at the reader yet again. When I can keep up with him, I love Egan. Good stuff.
Two Guys from the Future by Terry Bisson - Comic time-travel story. 'Salright.
The Mountain to Mohammed by Nancy Kress - Terrifying and all-to-plausible near-future health care issues. Very strong story.
The Coming Of Vertumnus by Ian Watson - An art critic becomes the pawn in a battle between industrialists and ecologists. Or DOES she? Wonderfully written.
A Long Night's Vigil at the Temple by Robert Silverberg - Far future religion is shaken by a revelation. Started out really well, but I wasn't into where it went.
The Hammer of God by Arthur C. Clarke - Clarke's prose never really changed with the times, so this reads like a piece of old-school sf. It's good stuff.
Grownups by Ian R. MacLeod - I'm easily creeped out by human biology based stories, and this is a powerfully written example of the type.
Graves by Joe Haldeman - Haldeman brings another good story of creepy goings on during the war in Vietnam.
The Glowing Cloud by Steven Utley - A reluctant time-traveller is stuck way too close to the 1902 eruption of Mount Pelee. Excellent story-telling from an author I'm totally unfamiliar with.
Gravity's Angel by Tom Maddox - short-short about sexism in big science. Didn't do much for me.
Protection by Maureen F. McHugh - A dark near-future story of life in a labour camp in Kansas. Really good.
The Last Cardinal Bird by Neal Barrett, Jr - A one act play of life in the near-future. I guess it is supposed to be funny. I really disliked it.
Birth Day by Robert Reed - The computers have taken over the world, and given us a utopia of the creepy kind.
Naming Names by Pat Cadigan - When you know someone's true Name, you have absolute power over them. It might not be that great. Lovely bit of fantasy.
The Elvis National Theater of Okinawa by Jonathon Lethem and Lukas Jaeger - A far flung future where impersonating Elvis Presley is a revered Japanese ritual.
The Territory by Bradley Denton - Alternative history. Mark Twain joins up with some southern bushwhackers during the civil war. I liked it, but you'd probably enjoy it more if you knew a bit more U.S. history than I do (which is next to none).
The Best and the Rest of James Joyce by Ian McDonald - Alternate reality Joyces! Ian McDonald is a VERY clever man. I am not.
Naming The Flowers by Kate Wilhelm - A lonely man helps a very unusual little girl. Lovely story.
Snodgrass by Ian R. MacLoed - Alternative universe John Lennon. Was this the big year for alternate-history famous characters, or does Dozois just really like those stories?
By The Mirror Of My Youth by Kathe Koja - 'day after tomorrow' tale of the unexpected pain of cloning. Pwerful and moving - Koja writes good!
Outnumbering The Dead by Fred Pohl - nice and simple but very moving tale of a mortal man amongst an immortal mankind.