Rating: 4/5

Four Corners: How UNC, N.C.State, Duke, &amp; Wake Forest Made North Carolina the Center of the Basketball Universe by Joe Menzer (Simon and Shuster 1999)(796.32363). This is a well-told story of how the ACC became the pinnacle of college hoops with a focus on the history of the conference. As Coach Mike Kryzewski of Duke pointed out, "People can talk all they want about the Big Ten. About Michigan and Ohio State and Indiana and Kentucky or whatever, but there's no way that compares. They're in different states. Here, we share the same dry cleaners." (p. 287). Here are some great quotes and stories from the book: Charles Shackleford, a star center in the mid-1980's, described how he could shoot the ball with either hand by saying, "Sure, I'm amphibious."  Or when South Carolina native Cozell McQueen, another player under Valvano, told reporters he "came to N.C. State to get out of the South." (p. 242). Here's a mention of the Duke student section, which is known as the “Cameron Crazies”:  "On one occasion, the Crazies absolutely infuriated former (N.C.) State coach Norm Sloan when one of them jumped from the stands dressed as a rather large older woman and began crooning the national anthem.  It was a parody of Sloan's wife, who used to sing the national anthem at Reynolds Coliseum prior to State home games." (p. 273). 
 		"In 1984, when Duke was just beginning to become good again under Kryzewski, the upstart Blue Devils, led by Tommy Amaker, Johnny Dawkins, and David Henderson, were giving a previously unbeaten Carolina team all they could handle...Duke officials were under pressure to clean up the Crazies' act. So the Crazies arrived with makeshift halos on their heads, and they politely welcomed Carolina to the building during pregame introductions. 'It was kind of funny,' said Al Featherstone, who covered the game for the Durham Herald.  'It was good, clean fun-until the game started.  Then it got ugly because it was a brutal game.' With five minutes left, David Henderson hit a jumper to put Duke ahead 67-64.  Twenty-three seconds later, Sam Perkins of Carolina was whistled for his third personal foul.  Smith jumped off the bench.  He thought maybe the foul had been assessed to the wrong player.  He wanted to confer with the officials over it, but the crowd was loud and officials Mike Moser and John Moreau didn't notice him right away.  It was not a shooting foul, so they gave the ball to Duke out of bounds and play resumed. Smith went ballistic.  He started banging on the scorer's table, still demanding his conference with officials.  He implored Tommy Hunt, the scoreboard operator, to blow the horn and stop play.  Hunt refused. Then Smith really lost it.  He tried to punch the buzzer button on the scoreboard himself. He hit the wrong button. Smith inadvertently gave his own team 20 more points on the scoreboard, which suddenly read:  Carolina 84, Duke 67. 'The crowd went bonkers,' Featherstone said.  'At that point, the whole place was bonkers.'  The Crazies screamed at the officials, imploring them to give Smith a technical foul.  Smith kept pleading that he only wanted to dispute the specifics of the earlier foul call.  Kryzewski was yelling at the officials, telling them to keep Smith in line.  Yet Hunt quickly corrected the scoreboard and the game went on.  Carolina ended up winning 77-73, after Michael Jordan hit three straight jump shots down the stretch. Kryzewski was fuming.  He opened up his postgame press conference by saying, 'I want to tell you something.  When you come in here and start talking about how Duke has no class, you'd better start getting your stories straight.- because our students had class and our team had class.   There was not a person on our bench who was pointing a finger at the officials or banging on the scorer's table...So let's get some things straight around here, and quit the double-standard that exists in this league.  All right?' Three days later, (Duke A.D. Tom) Butters rewarded Kryzewski, who had a 52-51 record at Duke up to that point, with a five-year contract.” (p.274-5). My rating: 7.5/10, finished 5/27/11.