Rating: 3/5

WARNING TO MY BOOK CLUB: DO NOT READ THIS REVIEW!!!! IT’S ONE OF THE BOOKS WE PICKED TO READ SOON.

IT’S ALSO POSSIBLE THAT MY VIEWS WILL CHANGE AFTER A SECOND READ. 

SO DON’T READ THIS REVIEW YET.

DON’T READ THIS REVIEW

DON’T READ THIS REVIEW

This book was pretty good... about a family in the Bronx that she followed for ten years. 
It relates to poverty/race a bit- it's interesting to see how they survive- unfortunately jail shows up too often. 
I know "interesting to see" sounds detached... but that's the way I felt about the book in general. I didn't feel very attached to the characters (people, I should say) bc the book was pretty straight journalism. 

There certainly IS a place for straight journalism, but 300 pages of straight reporting... it was monotonous. The book, and the family in it, could have benefitted- or maybe I, the reader, could have benefitted- from just a LITTLE more angle from the author. 

Random Family got great reviews in the New York Times, but it was not THAT enjoyable a read because of the disconnect I felt from the story. It was more of a “this happened, and she said this, then that happened, and they went here, and back at the house, this was happening…” I just wished LeBlanc had reached more conclusions and had more opinions. Not TOO much, because I do think the family should be center stage, but I think this book needed MORE… more of something. I read the book several years ago, so when I reread it, I’ll more closely figure that out. 

You might think that the writer of a non-fiction book should not insert their own views- but when an author does that, it can give the reader more of a structure in which to place the story. 

Like the amazing book "Problem from Hell: American in the Age of Genocide" by Samantha Power. I know the book sounds depressing, but it had me spellbound. It is a DENSE book- full of facts about the genocides of the 20th century…but her writing is concise yet engaging. As I read, I found myself hating her bc she was doing SUCH a good job and I was SO jealous. 

Power had clearly reached conclusions about the subject and each chapter was organized accordingly- I don’t think I could have gotten through this dense book without her organization and the way her voice comes through… it’s one of the most incredible books I’ve read.