Rating: 5/5

“We Palestinians and Jews live in what the world calls the Holy Land, but what makes the land holy? Is it the stones or trees? Is it the churches? The shrines? The paths on which the patriarchs and our Lord Jesus Christ walked? Or is the land sanctified by what we do to make God present?”

“Mobile Western people have difficulty comprehending the significance of the land for Palestinians. We belong to the land. We identify with the land, which has been treasured, cultivated, and nurtured by countless generations of ancestors. As a child I joined my family and moving large rocks from the fields. We lay with our backs on the ground and our feet on the rock, and pushed, pushed, all together. Little by little, ‘slow by slow,’ the rock was moved to the side of the field. Perspiration rolled off our bodies, and blood often streamed from our feet, soaking into the ground. It took months to clear the stones from just a small field. The land is so holy, so sacred, to us because we have given it our sweat and blood. It rewards us with wonderful, immense crops. Father could collect up to three tons of dry figs from his fields. Palestinians are at one with their land, and part of them dies when they must be separated from it.”

“Remember, your roots in Galilee go back long before the two-thousand-year-old trees. Your Palestinian ancestors planted these trees, and loved the land. It is from this land you have been removed and into this land you will someday return. From this land God took human form. In this land Jesus of Nazareth gave his word for the redemption of the world. Perhaps you will have something to do with your blood to redeem Jews and Palestinians and to create an environment of negotiation, love, and tolerance.”

“My dear friends, we love you and regret that you hold these those machine guns to threaten, scare, and kill. When you face all olive saplings with machine guns, you have no hope for life. You are scared and you scare others. See these Palestinian youngsters who are all carrying an olive sapling, the tree of peace that promises to endure for centuries! The children are relaxed while you were very tense with machine guns. We shall never give up, but we shall never carry weapons to plant in olive tree and obtain our human rights to home and freedom.”