Rating: 3/5

Oh dear, this did not age well at all.
I remember buying this comic as it first came out in single issues. This was the first real reboot. This story by John Byrne turned Superman from an overpowered uninteresting unbeatable and frankly silly character into our modern hero of today. Before this reboot the editors would buy the silliest covers staring Superman and then make the writer or writers make a story that would match the cover. This was going to fix all that. Yet despite all the improvement to Superman and his backstory to make it something more modern; the story itself did not age well. 

Is it just me or did it all seem like making Superman and DC Comics more like the Superman Movie? Lex Luthor even looks like Gene Hackman! Which leads us to the worst part of the entire reboot and something that really needs to be fixed. Lex Luthor is now some super rich yet incompetent business man. A man obsessed with buying the affection of Lois Lane (well ignore the whole part where she strips to her undies and puts on Clark's suit jacket - though she managed to fight the terrorists well in the getup without exposing parts of her body). Luthor is just so rich that no matter how many people he kills or has killed, how many building he destroys, ships he sinks, lives he ruins his lawyers somehow keep him out of jail. Mind you he confesses to his crimes in front of live TV cameras at times yet somehow gets away with it. Apparently when the world knows you are jealous of Superman you can do anything you want and still get elected President. Having everyone in the world but Lois/Clark/Perry think Luthor is good is just boringly bad sloppy writing. 

Anyway, I had forgotten had bad this reboot was for Batman as a character. Oh lord. It is another darker grittier Batman. This Batman needs a friend stat!

So not a total loss for the time. But it just does not age well. You should read this volume for a look at a classic reboot. It should be a five star review but for the passage of time.