Rating: 3/5

A unique retelling with some truly surprising plot twists. Quite different from the other Gail Carson Levine’s fairy tale retellings that I have read. Ella Enchanted and more lush writing style and less deliberately comical and stilted interactions and it possessed quite an enjoyable style. 

Shock of all shocks - my favorite part of the book was undoubtedly the romance (I know. You don’t see me say that in a review very often!). The relationship between Char and Ella was sweet and well developed and a highlight of the book. I thought Ella’s sacrifice love for Char and her resolution to protect him from herself was very poignant and believable. 

The other element that stood out to me was Ella herself. At last – a rebellious character that makes sense and actually has a reason for being rebellious! Ella is definitely not a placid Cinderella and fights back against her tormentors with a stubbornness that almost borders on the heroic. This was really a brilliant bit of characterization and kept the book from being overwhelming disturbing (which it would have been if Ella had been taking all the abuse without a murmur) and gave me a feisty non-annoying heroine I could actually root for. For once! 

Ella Enchanted also contained some nice world building that still retained a streak of Levine’s signature zaniness and pacing moved along at a good clip and kept me turning the pages quickly to see what happened next.

But in spite of all this . . . when I closed the book I found it forgettable. It’s not a book that I’d treasure or a new favorite—I’m not even sure I’d read it again. For some reason, this book wasn’t one that stayed in my mind or claimed a permanent part of my emotions. 

Perhaps it was because I felt slightly worn after reading Ella Enchanted. I found Ella’s situation pretty stressful and much of the book focused on her impossible and worrying situation and her families endless abuse. Obviously, people taking advantage of Ella’s *gift* was what the story was about, but I found it genuinely stressful at points to read. However, I have read other stress-producing books that I loved so I still can’t quite articulate what ingredient this book was missing to make me like it more. I really wish I had loved this book more than I did – and I suspect that missing element shall puzzle me for some time. 

Overall – an enjoyable book, though.

Content: Ella is taken advantage of constantly by cruel people. Some magic and a few eye-rolling moments with the infatuated Ella admiring Char’s physicality – the hairs on the back of his neck, for one. *SNORTS*