Rating: 5/5

My second Elmer Kelton novel. The other was The Time It Never Rained, which I described in my review as a perfect novel for my taste. This one was too!

Kelton was born in 1926 (d.2009) and his father had been foreman of a ranch near Crane, Texas. He wrote this book after his father had suffered a stroke and comments in his Introduction that “The Good Old Boys was written on two levels. On the surface it was intended to be a humorous and good-natured look at West Texas country life of that period…But on another, less obvious level, I wrote in sadness, a lament for a less pressurised time and a simpler way of life that had died, as my father was dying.”

An difficult mix to pull off, you might think, but it works brilliantly. This novel manages to be both humorous and elegiac.

Kelton says that his lead character, Hewey Calloway, is based on several of the cowboys he knew during his boyhood in the 1930s, although the novel is set a generation earlier in 1906. Hewey is an old-style cowboy, riding all over the western US, earning enough to live on by working on ranches, and then moving on. 

“Ain’t you ever found anywhere you wanted to stay?”

“Just about every place, at first. Then directly I get to thinkin’ there might be somethin’ better down the road.”

“But it’s never there, is it?”

“It’s always there, for a little while.”

Hewey lives for the moment. He is in his late 30s but his life is a sort of permanent adolescence. This is where most of the book’s humour comes in. People find different things funny, but for me the humour worked superbly. There were a couple of comic scenes in particular, at Chapters 4 and 7, that had me rocking with laughter.

The book’s other main characters are Hewey’s sister-in-law Eve, his brother Walter and their two sons. They are homesteaders, and thus represent the opposite kind of life from Hewey, one of responsibility, financial worries, and unrelenting hard work. On the other hand they have each other as family, their own land, and their own home, all things Hewey does not have. On a visit to see Walter’s family, Hewey meets a woman he falls for, and is faced with a choice. He wants both to live with the woman and to continue his life of wandering and freedom, but he can’t have both. 

There are also a couple of significant sub-plots.

I daresay this book is a little romanticised in the way it portrays the values of rural Texas of 1906 – with a few notable exceptions the people are all honest, loyal and hospitable. However you also get the sense that Kelton was close enough to the time and place to capture it. I could be picky about the characters being archetypes, but I’m not going to because this book is just so enjoyable to read. I absolutely loved it.