Rating: 3/5

It pains me so much to put three stars next to a book of David Gemmell‘s because this now being the seventh book I’ve read of his, it is quite clear he’s my favourite author, but something about The Legend of Deathwalker just didn’t gel for me. 

The opening was strong, introducing interesting new characters and weaving threads of shady politics that would kind of resolve by its conclusion. The motivations were believable and as always, every moment featuring Druss and Sieben had the best dialogue and the best of all the book’s moments, the balance of these characters and their symbiotic relationship jumps from the page with each quick witted line they throw between them. As always the honour bound drive that propels Druss’ character is palpable. Every moment he has on the page makes for extremely satisfying reading. 

The new character of Klay became an instant favourite of mine and most side characters in the first third of the book felt well developed and plausible. I wanted desperately to dive deeper into all these characters. Don’t get me wrong, we get somewhat satisfying conclusions to the earlier introduced characters at the end of the book but I can’t help but feel we miss so much of their struggle in the middle third, so when those conclusions hit at the end, they lack that emotional oomph I’ve come to love with Gemmell. I don’t quite understand the decision to not jump back to these characters whilst the majority of the action is elsewhere in the world. I think even ten more pages for each would have really added some weight to their stories. 

As with all of Gemmells books, the action again is brilliant and I can, as I’ve said before, feel every axe swing or flight of an arrow as the words bounce off the page. Gemmell as always, puts this skill of writing battles to great use in the last third of the book with a satisfying siege which is then topped off in the calmer final pages with some excellently executed bittersweet moments… but it was the disjointed middle section that let it down for me the most. 

In the middle third the Drenai world expands to places and people we haven’t seen much of in any real detail previously and this is very welcome and a positive aspect of the book for sure, yet many new characters are introduced along side this and only a couple get the page time to allow them to breathe and really, truly develop. Rarely for me with a Gemmell book there were many moments where I felt no emotional connection or response to a side characters demise even though part of me really wanted to. I feel this was down to the jumping around of locations and too many characters. 

Whole sections with magic and the void kind of felt wedged in for me here and I felt those pages would have been better spent developing lesser characters in the “tangible” world. A lot of ideas were thrown into this book I felt, and I’m not sure the resulting cocktail is quite the way the author intended… for me anyway. 

In terms of adding more weight to books like Legend. It succeeds in this with the back story of Ulric being a true highlight and again like with previous books, there are some revelations that change your whole perspective of certain characters in a heartbeat, some seriously skilful writing at points to make a few new characters truly three-dimensional. 

I still liked this book and there were some fantastic moments but I’m afraid too much of this one missed for me. It’s a shame but maybe a second read through one day will change my mind. Still… I have the next of his books waiting beside me to read right now and I’m still as excited as ever to start it.