Layne MacDonald had been adopted as a baby by Keith and Colleen MacDonald. Since she turned 18, she had been searching for her birth mother. It had been 8 years and she finally had a clue. Her mother's maiden name was Martha Turner and her father had lived in Valentine, Montana. 
Layne took a leave of absence from work and traveled to Valentine. She got a room at the local motel and went to the diner for some lunch. A rancher didn't see her and almost knocked her down. She then went to the courthouse to look through the records there and ran into him again because she wasn't looking where she was going as she left the building. She had gotten her mother's married name. It was Mattie Gray. She had married John Gray who owned the Ox-Yoke ranch on the outskirts of town. John had died a little over 4 years previous. 
She went back to her room, looked up the number and called. She told Mattie that she had the wrong number when she answered. She decided to go see her the next morning. She arrived and Mattie thought she was there to apply for a job and Layne let her. Layne agreed to come to work for her and told Mattie that she worked for the newspaper in Omaha and wanted to write a story on ranch life. 
Layne went into to town to collect her things and to purchase some wore attire. She returned to the ranch to stay in a spare room in Mattie's house. She unpacked and overheard Mattie speaking to a man. She went downstairs and was introduced to the man she had been literally running into in town, Creed Dawson. He didn't appear to happy to hear that she had been hired but agreed to give her a chance to prove herself. 
Layne was sore for the first week or two but soon got used to the work and learned how to milk the cow. Creed wasn't convinced that she didn't have another motive for being on the ranch but did call the newspaper and found out that at least that part of her story was true. 
They worked closely together for a little over a month and Layne was determined to make him like her. He was a man of little words and he didn't seem to fond of having her around. Layne was determined to change that. He was a challenge to him that she couldn't seem to resist. She went to his house on the property and confronted him one evening. He ended up kissing her but Layne felt like he was making it more of a punishment thing to try and scare her off. It didn't work. She wasn't put off that easily. She got him to admit that he was attracted to her but he told her that he didn't care because she was too pretty to have anything to do with him. He was not attractive and had been teased as a child. Layne told him that it was more inside what counted and he took it to mean that she wasn't attracted to him. 
After a few more weeks, the weather started to warm up and she fell through the ice of one of the ponds on the ranch property. Creed happened to notice that her horse was wandering around without her on it and checked the pond. There he found her hanging onto the edge of the pond in the icy cold water. He pulled her out and took her back to the ranch. He undressed her and put her in the tub to warm her up. He then lit a fire in the fireplace and she laid by it to get warm. She was still cold and asked him to hold her. He did and they ended up making out in front of the fire. 
A short time later, they were invited to a neighbors for a party. Everyone seemed to notice that she was spending time searching out Creed's company. They didn't understand why because she was so pretty. They ended up leaving the party early and headed back to his place. He asked her why she was really there and she told him that she was Mattie's daughter. He didn't believe her at first and then told her that she needed to tell Mattie or he would. She convinced him to hold off for a bit. They argued and she went back to her room. 
Mattie noticed that they hadn't talked much for a few days. Layne was doing laundry and Mattie brought some of her clothes to her room. She asked Layne where to put them and Layne pointed to one of her drawers. She realized too late that the drawer had a baby blanket in it that her birth mother had given to her. Mattie recognized it and got angry. She confronted Layne and told her to leave. Layne tried to explain and apologize but Mattie told her that she had resigned herself to the fact that she had no child and didn't want to discuss anything with her. Layne left. 
Layne first went back to the hotel and got a room there. She asked Creed to meet with her at the diner and he did come by on the third day. She told Creed that she thought she might be pregnant. He chose not to believe her and left. Layne returned to Omaha and her old job writing for the newspaper. She got the pregnancy results and went and told Keith and Colleen. They were particularly thrilled but told her they would support her and they got her baby things together to take to her place. 
They were over at her house on the weekend, having brought the baby items with them. They were going through them and Keith was putting up her old crib. She was a little over a month pregnant. There was a knock on the door and it was Mattie. Colleen had called her and apologized again for Layne's behavior and took the blame for Layne not telling her right away due to her warning her to be careful and sure she was doing the right thing before she said anything to Mattie. Layne was surprised to see Creed standing in the doorway. Mattie didn't tell her that he had driven her to Omaha. 
Creed told Layne that he wanted to marry her and she said that was okay with her. He told her that he hoped that it time she would have enough love left over fro the baby for him. She told him that she loved him and that the left over love would be for their child. He was not expecting that she could really love him because she was so beautiful and he wasn't. He had thought she was using him to get close to Mattie and to keep him from telling her that she was Mattie's daughter. He thought that once she and Mattie had resolved their issues, she wouldn't have anything more to do with him. He was happy to find out that he was wrong...