Rating: 3/5

A Regency romantic comedy that abounds in farce and melodrama

Fanny Page is a naïve 17-year-old born into the gentry, and Sir Charles Deveney is a 29-year-old major who has been knighted for exemplary bravery in his service in the army during the Napoleonic wars. His father is a country squire, and their families live in the same county. Fanny and Charles are tricked into a marriage of convenience by their con-artist parents. Each set of parents is flat broke, and each couple deceives the other into believing they are rich just long enough to sign a marriage contract between their offspring. All four parents assume that, after a convenient escape to parts unknown for a year or so following their children’s expedited marriage, they can then comfortably batten themselves on Fanny and Charles the rest of their lives. 

The parents arrange the wedding so that Fanny and Charles do not meet in person until they are standing before the village vicar to speak their marriage vows. Both are utterly shocked on seeing each other, because the paintings the parents have showed them, of a beautiful woman and an extremely handsome man, do not look at all like Fanny or Charles. Certainly these two are quite attractive in their own way, but they are nothing like the diamonds of the first water in those portraits. 

Penniless, and with no parents on hand to call to account, the newlyweds decide they will not consummate their marriage so they can get it annulled. They head to London, hoping to stay with Charles's wealthy Aunt Martha temporarily while they decide what to do next. Fanny and Charles honestly explain their situation to Martha, and to their amazement—because she has not had anything to do with Charles’s spendthrift parents for years—she agrees to take them in. She even consents to Charles's scheme for his temporary wife’s happiness. He wants poor Fanny to achieve her heart's desire: a season in London and a chance to marry the man of her dreams. Thus begins their whacky scheme of Charles and Fanny's pretending to be cousins. In addition, both will claim to be wealthy, because riches provide an instant entrée into the highest echelons of tonnish society.

Charles has no thought of pursuing the woman of his dreams, because he has never considered himself filled with romantic notions in the way that novel-reading Fanny is. But when he and Fanny are circulating among high society, and both of them meet the real people behind the gorgeous portraits their parents sent them, suddenly Charles is just as prone as young Fanny to dangerously romantic fantasies of true love. 

This novel was written in 1993 and is a combination of two classic romantic-comedy plots, the marriage of convenience and a comedy of errors. While there are some lightly comedic moments in this book which provide a few chuckles, as is often the case with MC in her novels that are billed as comedies, she frequently veers off into melodrama. In this case, the melodrama comes from Fanny’s beau, whom Charles knows from the first is an evil rapist.

As is quite typical with MC, there is a 12-year age difference between Fanny and Charles. Her heroines are almost always between 17 and 19, and her heroes almost always between 29 and 32. Initially, Fanny comes off as naïve to the point that it is irritatingly easy for the villain and his accomplice to dupe her. But she redeems herself by outwitting the accomplice and, in the climax scene with the evil villain, she demonstrates admirable fortitude. 

As for Charles, I really liked him. I found him quite adorable. He is kind and even tempered. In appearance, unlike most of MC’s heroes, who are usually tall and heavily muscled, Charles is of average height, with a slight but athletic build. Also unlike many other MC, rakish heroes, he has never been to a prostitute due to an entirely reasonable fear of catching syphilis. And he certainly has not been wealthy enough to have a mistress, so it is possible, though not overtly stated, that like Fanny, he is a virgin. Over the years he has augmented his rather meager pay from the army with small wins from careful gambling. He wins mainly because he sticks to water when everyone else gets drunk while gambling. 

Since this book is supposed to be a romance, it got rather tiresome at times that about 75% of the book is comedy of errors, in which Fanny and Charles are spending time courting their two awful, narcissistic, alternate romantic interests. It leaves relatively little time for us to experience the two of them falling in love.

In addition, MC all too often falls into melodrama in her Regency romances, and one of her favorite, soap-operatic, villain tropes, and the most distasteful to me personally, occurs in this book, in which the Snidely Whiplash villain threatens to rape the heroine.

I experienced this novel as an audiobook narrated by British actress, Lindy Nettleton. She does an excellent job acting out all the characters, both male and female, of all ages.

I rate this book as follows:

Heroine: 3 stars
Hero: 5 stars
Subcharacters: 3 stars
Romance Plot: 3 stars
Comedy of Errors Plot: 2 stars
Melodrama: 2 stars
Writing: 3 stars
Audiobook Narration: 4 stars
Overall: 3 stars