Rating: 2/5

A mixed bag 2.5/5

This tome is a large anthology containing more than 30 science fiction stories that were written from the mid-1930s to the mid-1990s. It's a companion to a similar collection of fantasy stories. The included stories range in length from short stories to novelettes and novellas. Each begins with a helpful overview from editor Gardner Dozois about the author and the story. A lot of the content is mediocre, and some of the stories contain profanity and immorality, so I can't give an unqualified recommendation for this collection. But it's still worthwhile picking out some of the better stories to read. I also found it helpful to get a basic overview of each story before reading it, because that can help overcome the opaqueness that will in some instances be a barrier to enjoying the story.

There aren't that many entries that I thoroughly enjoyed, but these are the ones I especially recommend:

"Aristotle and the Gun" (L. Sprague de Camp) is a fun novelette with a classic time travel theme. After his team successfully creates a time travel machine, the project is shut down, but that doesn't stop scientist Sherman Weaver going back in history on his own. He decides to go back to ancient Greece, in an effort to convince the famous philosopher Aristotle about the virtues of the scientific method. But living in the ancient world turns out to be much harder than he expected, and while his dialogue with Aristotle was profitable, when he returns to the modern day he discovers that things have changed for the worse as a result of his interference in the past.

"The Other Celia" (Theodore Sturgeon) is a short story that has well been described as a tale of aliens among us. The first character in the story, Slim Walsh, is somewhat of a voyeur, and enjoys learning the secret side of other residents in the house where he lives by spying on them. But the real interest quickly turns to Celia, about whom he notices something extremely unusual each night when she goes to her room.

"The Moon Moth" (Jack Vance) is a novelette and my favourite of the bunch. Newly arrived from Earth, Edwer Thissel is struggling to adjust to the culture on the planet Sirene, where the locals all wear masks and follow carefully prescribed social patterns, such as playing of music to accompany speech. Wearing his Moon Moth mask, Thissel is informed that an assassin has arrived on the planet. But after a body is found, and with three suspects all wearing masks that hide their true identities, how can Thissel find the culprit? This story is great purely on the level of murder mystery and detective story alone, but also gets us thinking about the public personas we all adopt as "masks".

"The Fifth Head of Cerberus" (Gene Wolfe) is a classic Gene Wolfe novella that I've long admired. The story is presented from the first person point of view of a narrator whose father denotes him as "Number Five". Things turn weird when his father begins subjecting him to strange experiments in the middle of the night, and our protagonist slowly comes to learn some disturbing truths about himself, his world, and his family. You'll make some remarkable discoveries in the closing stages, which will make you want to reread the entire story in a whole new light. Among other things this story addresses important themes such as post-colonialism and the nature of personal identity.

Less satisfying, but somewhat good in one way or another were the following:

"The Lady Margaret" (Keith Roberts) is a novelette that later became part of the larger novel "Pavane", an alternative history describing a world where England has lost the war against Spain and has entered an extended dark age under a repressive Catholic government. Jesse Strange is the driver of a steam-powered road-train that transports goods across the country, and the story has two sub-plots, one featuring his unrequited love for a waitress he meets in a hotel, and the other featuring a man from his past who is now a highwayman. It's very evocative in how it describes a love refused, and how he gets the better of his old highwayman friend when at attempt is made by robbers to seize his road-train. It's a pity it's marred by some sexual content and blasphemy.

"Driftglass" (Samuel R. Delaney) tells the story of an aquaman who was seriously injured after an underwater accident,and; now meets a young man about to undertake the same deadly mission. The enthusiasm of youth reminded me of young men going off to war, as seen from the perspective of a veteran.

"The Ugly Chickens" (Howard Waldrop) is a generally amusing novelette about a protagonist who is a graduate student with a passion for rare birds. He has a random encounter with someone on a bus, and learns that the now-extinct dodo may have survived on a farm in a remote part of the US. It reads like a detective story, as he undertakes a quest to find the truth of this tale.

"Pretty Boy Crossover" (Pat Cadigan) is a short story with a cyberpunk feel, about a youth at a bar who discovers that his friend Bobby has made the choice to cross over into digital form. The protagonist "Pretty Boy" is pushed to make the same decision, but is skeptical about how real the digital Bobby is, and eventually realizes something more important about humanity and himself.

"The Edge of the World" (Michael Swanwick) is a short story that follows three youths down an endless staircase at the edge of an alternate earth, where they reach a monastery where one's greatest desires can come true. The outcome and clever execution of their three wishes at the very end is what made this for me, despite some blemishes along the way.

These last five all made some kind of impression on me, but were middle of the road at best. The ones I'd recommend reading and savouring are "Aristotle and the Gun", "The Other Celia", "The Moon Moth", and "The Fifth Head of Cerberus".