Rating: 2/5

I purchased this book for my Nook because it was only $5. I feel like I completely overpaid. I'm really shocked to read all the rave reviews on this site. It's as though I've read a totally different book. The writing is amatuerish. The dialogue is awful and often awkward. The characters are melodramatic and whiney. The mystery isn't really much of a mystery at all. I had all of the "twists" figured out before they were revealed. 

The characters in this book are unbelievable. Their development pretty much stops at Dad is a greedy yet spineless old man; Mom is a weak, dependent, alcoholic, etc. There is repetition around these characteristics, but nothing deeper ever emerges. The main characters are awful as well. I had a really hard time with David (the cop) because in one paragraph he is made out to be this aging ex-athlete with a degenerative spine, which doesn't paint a pretty picture in my mind. And then on the next page Melanie will place her hand on his "lean stomach" or notice the musculature of his pectorals or something horribly cheesy like that. Attention authors: you can't take an aging, out of shape, old guy and then make him some sort of sex God in the following chapter. It doesn't work. My mind just had a really hard time creating a picture of him because there were so many details about him that were at odds with each other.

The drama surrounding Melanie and her quest to find out who she really is just made me gag. I understand the desire to find out your true parentage and all of that. But everyone acting like, "oh, poor Melanie, we should have protected her. How could we have treated her this way?" The girl is 29. She isn't 7. yet everyone feels some sort of need to "protect" her. I don't know. it was just really odd to me. Like I said, very unbelievable.

I really thought this was an awful book. There's no two ways about it. But I did finish it, which says something. Granted my reason for perservering every time I picked it up was so I could move on to something better eventually. But I did continue to go back. Even after putting it away for awhile to read a different book. i went back to The Other Daughter. So there had to be something there that brought me back. For that reason, and that reason alone, I granted two stars. Otherwise I would have given one.