Rating: 5/5

I admit it. I have a Pinterest board for school and have downloaded a few items from Teachers Pay Teachers. They are mostly a mixed bag, however. "Here's a unit I developed. Feel free to use it once you've paid for it." To be fair, many items are free and some call for hard thinking on the part of students. What is problematic about even the very best of these ideas is that we rarely get to see the rationale behind them. Why am I supposed to start this way and finish that way? Sharing ideas like this is hardly new.They are the equivalent of teacher idea books I used to buy at Beckers.

One idea I gleaned long ago from such a book was to offer students choices of projects that appealed to one of Gardner's intelligences - kinesthetic, spatial, interpersonal, etc. The elephant above was submitted in response to the sundry items Boo Radley leaves in the knothole of a tree in To Kill a Mockingbird. She's a sweet little thing, but looking back on it now, I'm puzzled how I thought this would deepen anyone's connection to the themes of the book.

 Not so with the latest edition of Nancie Atwell's In the Middle. If you hadn't heard of Atwell before this year and her dozen or so books that she's written, surely you saw something of her when she recently won the inaugural Global Teacher Prize.When she published the first edition of ITM back in 1988, she used the proceeds to build a demonstration school where teachers from across the country can spend a week learning how to teach in a reading and writing workshop. Reading her books make me feel like I've won one of these coveted spots. She explains what she teaches, why she does what she does, and tells you what she tells her kids. Instead of being handed a script, you feel as if you're eavesdropping in on a conversation.

You may think if you'd read an earlier edition of the book, that you're already privy to Atwell's thinking. You'd be wrong. It's not that she's changed her philosophy. It's that it's evolved in the twenty-seven years since the first edition was printed. The second edition promised seventy percent new material when published in 1998. This one has an additional eighty percent . It still contains gems from the early days. When I see her conditions for a writing workshop, I greet them like old friends.

But there is much that's built on these principles since then too.When I come across advice like asking students to research your writing and interview you, a more proficient writer than they, it strikes me as pure gold. Weekly letters in dialogue journals have grown into letter-essays composed at book's end; an aversion to fiction gives way to microfiction; persuasive essays, barely warranting a mention in the first edition, have evolved into advocacy journalism in the third.

It's also one of those rare books that will not only improve your teaching but will improve your writing as well. For example, I'd been struggling to revise a tritina I'd written in class one day. (Here's a link to an explanation and a sample poem by Deborah Neyens if you're not familiar with the form.) Rereading advice Atwell had given to one of her young writers moved me to reconsider mine. I've also taken to heart her suggestion to write off of the page. I'm not surprised that this is so. Pultizer Prize winner Donald Murray was one of her idols. Mine too.

 
We've all heard the observation that some people teach for twenty years while others teach the same year twenty times. Atwell's living proof that our experiences in the classroom can profoundly affect our future teaching. In fact, it's the surest way to achieve what she inscribed in my copy of In the Middle all those years ago.

Reflective practice and refining our craft are essential to achieving this goal. I promise no more "arts and crafts" elephants that do little to grow learning if you'll do the same. In the meanwhile, this edition of In the Middle is already on its way to being just as dog-eared as the first.