Rating: 3/5

The three stars are for its being a much better book than the usual bodice ripper types of the late 70's/early 80's, though if I knew how I'd give it a half a star less, because the last part of the book didn't live up to the first and middle of the story. It reached its peak about 3/4 through and then slid downhill fast.

I give Ms. Payes credit for putting enough historic background to her novel, rather than just the token few sentences this type of book usually did. You learn about the political climate in mid 18thc England, the restlessness of the lower classes, political protests and reform efforts, a secret newspaper, and the infamous Hellfire Club, started by Sir Francis Dashwood, in the old Medmenham Abbey. This made for some informative as well as entertaining reading. (Sir Francis even makes an appearance in the middle of the book.)

The story starts out as a typical tale of innocence corrupted. Fiona McQuade lives with and works for her aunt, helping her make dresses for the upper class ladies. One of them, the diabolical Duchess of Lawton, hires Fiona, and she's soon living at the Lawton estate, where the lecherous Duke forces his attentions on Fiona, almost raping her, but she's saved by the Duchess's lover, Viscount Will Huxley. Fiona and Huxley have one of those "from the moment I first saw you" moments, but due to the difference in their stations, and his relationship with the Duchess, things don't appear very promising.

Fiona soon has a suitor from among the better class, Tor Werrington, courtesy of the Duchess, but her reasons are entirely selfish. Discovering Fiona has a planned tryst with Huxley, she instead traps her into going on a "sightseeing" outing with Werrington, to tour a famous old abbey. Unbeknownst to Fiona, she's being set up to be the sacrificial virgin at the Hellfire Club ritual, where men dress like friars, women like nuns, and all kinds of debauchery take place. (The Duke and Duchess are frequent participants, as is Huxley, and Werrington's eager to join them.) In an unbelievably un-PC scene - one of the worst - Fiona's given what could be called a "horny drug", dressed like a nun, and put on an altar for the friars to pump and dump. One after the other rapes her, while she's too out of it to care, until it's Huxley's turn, then the drug wears off and she's horrified and starts fighting to escape. He takes this as a rejection and his pride is hurt, while her heart is broken, that he could treat her so shamefully. What she doesn't know is that he came to the abbey that evening because he thought she'd deliberately stood him up for Werrington, when in truth she was unable to get a message to him, explaining that she had no choice. He believed she willingly came to the abbey and wanted to participate in the "fun". Fiona believed he knew she was being set up all the time. She now thinks Huxley's a depraved rake, he thinks she's a hypocritical slut, and they now despise each other.

May I add that they are both (and I'll use the words, not the letters) TOO STUPID TO LIVE!! Once the initial shock and horror wore off, Fiona should have stopped to think that if Huxley were as terrible as she thought then why did he bother to save her from the Duke, he would have just let him rape her. And for someone so sophisticated and jaded, Huxley sure was a dunce not to realize that Fiona was not participating willingly in the gang bang, or else she wouldn't have been fighting him off, what's one more f---? Easier to accuse others of bad behavior than accuse yourselves of lack of brains.

Fiona returns to her aunt and to dressmaking, but the Duchess soon poisons everyone against Fiona, by spreading the word about what happened (leaving out the drugging part), and that she and her husband were taken advantage of by a conniving trollop. Afraid of losing customers, her crummy aunt asks Fiona to leave, and wherever she tries to work next the same thing happens. Werrington magnanimously offers her what he considers an honor: the chance to be his mistress! After all, unlike everyone else, he's willing to overlook her immorality, though naturally he could never marry someone like her. Feeling like she has no choice (and not minding the nice house and lovely things he'll provide for her) Fiona agrees.

The story picks up, as she determines to revenge herself on the D and D and also on Huxley. Meanwhile, she endures Werrington's lovemaking, enjoys the house, clothes and jewelry, but knows it won't last forever. Soon, Werrington becomes engaged to a proper society lady, who knows about Fiona, and can't resist snarky comments. Fiona retaliates by presenting her with a very special book, Werrington's favorite: illustrations of his favorite sex positions that he insists Fiona perform! She says it should make a nice wedding gift! When the horrified young woman throws it to the ground and leaves, Fiona has it delivered to her, and Werrington has a fit! A bit of sweet revenge!

When that relationship ends, another one begins. She meets the social reformer Samuel Rogers, and they form an instant friendship, that soon becomes love for Samuel, and fondness (as well as gratitude) for Fiona, as he offers protection from the increasingly abusive Werrington, who, after his marriage, informs Fiona it's time for her to get lost. Samuel offers her a place to live. It's only his loyalty to his mentally ill wife that prevents him from petitioning for a divorce and making an honest woman of Fiona. She becomes his mistress, and when his wife dies, Samuel immediately marries her. 

Samuel becomes more politically active, as he had a friend and fellow activist who had both money and connections helping him out, and he was able to buy the house Fiona had lived in with Werrington, that she was so fond of. It's also where the secret newspaper is published, that often makes inflammatory remarks about people in high places, including the King. Fiona suspects the benefactor/writer is Huxley, and wants proof, so she can use the info to try and ruin him. At the same time, she finds herself fantasizing about him whenever her husband makes love to her, using Samuel's body and the pleasure he gives her to vicariously have sex with the man she really wants. (Samuel deserves better than that.)

To speed things up: Samuel makes frequent visits to the Abbey, hoping to make more converts to his cause among these debauched aristocrats (he can use their influence and power). Fiona reluctantly accompanies him, and on one such visit almost has sex with Huxley, who still thinks she's a whore. 
 Another time she helps rescue Huxley's sister, Nell, from the same fate as hers, since she, too, was set up by the Duchess, who wants revenge for Huxley dumping her. (Had things worked out as the Duchess planned, Huxley, as one of the friars, would have had sex with his sister!) When Huxley sees the condition Nell's in, he finally realizes that Fiona was, indeed, an innocent victim, and now he can't apologize enough. Fiona, in turn, realizes she let the perfect opportunity for revenge against him slip away, by rescuing Nell, and now she doesn't want revenge at all, just him.

And here ends the three star portion of the book.

Now, here's where the book slides downhill (and only merits one of those stars). Fiona and Huxley give in to their repressed desires, and make passionate love at his place, three times. Then, Fiona suddenly remembers she has a husband and she owes him fidelity. (A little late for that, wouldn't you say?) Now, Huxley changes from a sophisticated rake to a lovesick lad, as he keeps declaring that he loves Fiona, has always loved her, and wants her to be his wife. (Sure, just toss Samuel in the trash, what the heck?) Fiona says she cares for Samuel, respects him and is grateful to him, and won't leave him, after all he's done for her. She's determined not to see Huxley again.

That lasts about five minutes. Soon, whenever Huxley's at the house to work on the paper, and Samuel is at work at the H of C, making speeches, Huxley and Fiona are hitting the sheets, and despite her continual declarations (ad nauseum) that Samuel is a good man and deserves better, she keeps cheating on him, as she can't resist those orgasms with Huxley. And wouldn't you know it, she has some with Samuel, too. So now she feels like she's cheating on Huxley whenever she's in bed with her husband. Now she really is the trollop everyone thought she was, and can't believe her actions, though she keeps up the deception, with poor Samuel none the wiser, and Huxley sounding more and more like a silly schoolboy: "Please leave him and marry me! I love you so!" He went from alpha to beta overnight; I'd take Samuel any day over this simp!

Yes, I'm Team Samuel Rogers all the way! He was a good man, stood by his first wife a long time before he strayed, (and this was when he learned there was no hope of her recovering) then stood by Fiona and believed in her, giving her the benefit of the doubt despite all the stories about her lack of morals, gave her his protection, his name and his heart, and what did he get in return? A wife who opens her legs again and again for a man who happens to be his good friend and political ally and has no intention of stopping. (All the while, Huxley's whining, "I must see you again! I must make love to you again! I'll die if I don't bed you!" Talk about sickening!)

Then (big surprise), Fiona's pregnant, with no idea who's the baby daddy, though Little Boy Huxley keeps whining: "It's mine, mine, mine, I KNOW ITS MINE!!" Samuel, meanwhile, is looking forward to fatherhood, never suspecting that he might not be the father. Now what? Conveniently get rid of Samuel, that's what, by having him get killed in a duel with the Duke, over rumors he and the Duchess spread about Fiona and Huxley. (For once, I was on their side.) There's a stupid melodrama bit where his second, Huxley, is standing over his body with the gun in his hand, declaring, "I DIDN'T DO IT! I DIDN'T DO IT!" (Seems the Duke shot Samuel in the back, then ran away, and dumbo ended up holding the gun, as in all those bad murder mystery movies) He spends some time in jail, does some more whining, is soon free, then marries Fiona before Samuel's body is cold, and then she has twins that look like him, and HEA!!! BARF!! BARF!! BARF!!

And they also manage to stop the nefarious deeds at the abbey, by printing an article in the paper and naming names (not themselves, of course) of those who attended the festivities. Talk about a hypocrite, as Huxley had many a wild, debauched night at Medmenham and loved it, but now he's Mr. Morality! Give me a frigging break!

I revised the ending in my head, out of respect for Samuel (who deserved a better life, not death): the newlywed couple lose all their friends and social standing, Fiona dies of childbed fever (it takes a while, so she gets to suffer a bit for betraying Samuel), the twins look exactly like Samuel, and Huxley's a widower with babies that aren't his, and ends up in the loony bin, crying: "I SHOULD HAVE KNOWN THEY WOULDN'T BE MINE!! SHE WAS A TROLLOP, AFTER ALL!!"

THE END