Rating: 3/5

In 1986, Jayne Ann Krentz wrote and published her novel, Sweet Starfire. Krentz herself described her futuristic novel as a historical book from another world. 

It can be said about the author that she was reluctant to commit to only one specific genre and thus decided to publish different genres under different pseudonyms. She was born on March 28, 1948, in the US State of California and managed to successfully bring books into the world again and again in her life. 
In doing so, she uses the name Jayne Ann Krentz, which she adopted when she got married, for a contemporary romance with a certain suspense factor. 
Furthermore, she uses the name Amanda Quick for her historical novels. 
Lastly, she uses her maiden name Jayne Castle for the futuristic and paranormal romance. 

In her book "Sweet Starfire" she makes the reader dive into a completely new world. It is all about the division of the population. Thus, one-half is referred to as Harmonics. As the name here suggests, this species is primarily concerned with a certain harmony. They act intuitively and telepathically. Moreover, it is important to know that they are above all very intelligent, which is to their advantage in their scientific works. 
On the other hand, there are the so-called Wolves. They are the most similar to the humanity of today. Above all, physical closeness is very important to them. This species can also be very smart, but they don't always manage to keep up with the Harmonics. 

One of the main characters of the book is Cidra. Her parents are Harmoics, which only makes it harder for Cidra when she realizes that her Harmonic is not the one she should have as this species. In desperation, she goes in search of an artifact that she believes will give her the harmony she hopes for. 
On her journey, she meets a wolf named Teague, who reluctantly takes her along on his spaceship so that she can reach her destination. On their journey together, the two get into trouble, which they must overcome together, despite their different characters... 

The book shows many different sides of life, lets the readers recognize their own species, and still shows a whole new world. If you are ready to approach the book with an open mind and fully engage with it, the story fully captivates you and makes the world around you fade away. 
However, the book can also drag and become challenging over and over again, which is why you will probably never finish it if you don't manage to engage with the new world and Krentz's writing style. 
I would recommend reading into the book and making up your own mind about the characters and the plot.