Rating: 4/5

“When the Green Star Calls” is the second volume of the Green Star” series of “sword-and-planet” tales. This series was written in the 1970’s as Carter’s contribution (along with the “Callisto” series) to this sub-genre, pioneered by Edgar Rice Burroughs, A. Merritt, Ray Cummings and Otis Adelbert Kline. Typical elements include the hero being transported to the planet in question by some mystical means (in this case, transmigration of the soul into another body), and then battling fearsome monsters; evil sorcerers or other villains, using primitive weapons; rescuing a fair damsel (who tends to wear very little clothing, since these tales had an overwhelmingly male readership!); and finally being unwillingly pulled back to the point of origin and his own body, there to await the next adventure. In this volume, our hero finds himself in a different body than the one he inhabited in the first book and sets out to find the beauteous Princess Niamh of Phaolon from whom he was separated at the end of the previous volume, encountering fearsome monsters and evil villains and exploring new cities amidst the trackless 15000-ft. high forests of the World of the Green Star.

Readily seen in the author’s descriptions of this world, its miles-high forests, the exotic and terrifying beasts and insects inhabiting them, the various cities and peoples of the forests and the wars and intrigues always going on between them, the additional influences of Robert E. Howard’s Conan tales of the Hyborian Age and the monster-infested stories of Clark Ashton Smith (see, for example, “The Tale of Satampra Zeiros”). It seems as though the “sword-and-planet” stories and the “sword-and-sorcery” tales of Howard and others are at least first cousins, if not blood brothers!

Carter’s interest in eastern mysticism and occultism is evidenced by the (perhaps excessive, and if so, this reviewer’s only negative observation) amount of space devoted to the protagonist’s search for information on transmigration of the soul, and the discovery of an ancient manuscript in a monastery in a for-off corner of Tibet, zealously guarded for centuries by devoted monks; and his long effort to learn how to travel through space in a bodiless state and instantly arrive at his destination, no matter how far away.

Carter was troubled by various health problems through much of his too-short life (he died in his 50’s) and one cannot help but see that in these books, and in the Callisto series, he was identifying with his characters and expressing his desire to live the same kind of life and experience the same sorts of adventures as they did. While this may not be the motivation for most readers of these tales, they can definitely be called “escapist” literature and for anyone desiring to wander the limitless vistas of the imagination, they are highly recommended. 

***** review by Chuck Graham *****