Rating: 3/5

This was a rather intense, academic book about the rise and fall of Britpop. I'd say you'd really, really have to be into Britpop and English rock of the late 80's and early 90's to get through it -- because it's a dense and somewhat humorless tome most of the time. The author, John Harris, doesn't really come across as an enthusiastic fan of much of the music or any of the key players. He spares some reserved appreciation for Damon Albarn and Blur, but skirts around most of the others. The primary issue is he's still too close to the source -- the book was first published in 2003, so the legacy of Britpop just hadn't cemented yet. I mean, Tony Blair didn't even leave office until 2007, and Oasis pushed on til mid-2009!

The book primarily focuses on the lives and personalities of the times, both musical and political. Even as a hardcore Oasis and Blur fan, I still enjoyed the thorough introduction to the more secondary Britpop bands like Elastica, Suede, and Pulp. Frischmann, Anderson, and Cocker are name-dropped in any conversation about the era, so it was good to have the additional context of their stories as well. The music industry side was also pretty interesting -- Tim Abbott and the ever-colorful Alan McGee are intriguing figures in their own right, and the rise and enthusiastic adoption of "indie" music by the mainstream media made for a good through-line over the years. Still, though, even with the industry aspect, Harris comes across as quaintly dated. Currently, rock music as a whole -- not just English rock -- is on the downslide, and streaming has upended the whole shebang anyway. At the end of the book, Harris bemoans the state of English rock, but nowadays the industry itself is shifting into something far more amorphous and personalized, way beyond Harris' gloomy little complaints... 
  
The political side was probably the book's weakest point. I'm American, so English politics tend to pass me by, as the stereotype goes. It was good, though, to see the "Cool Britannia" movement from a British perspective -- the idea of a country trying to leave its more stuffy and imperialistic vestiges behind to embrace a younger, fun-ner, more worldly idea of itself. Even though the hard drug use and petty infighting eventually got in the way -- as they always do -- the ideas behind it all are compelling enough... The rejection of grunge and Americanization, the fall of Thatcherism, the cheeky throwbacks to London and the swingin' 60's. Amidst all the personal drama, Harris explored the zeitgeist of the time with equal care, helping to set the story on more solid ground.  

+++

So 3 stars/5: not necessarily an easy read, and still very much of its time... but for any Britpop enthusiast, dive right the fuck in.