Rating: 5/5

This is technically the second book I added to my 'want to read' list here on Goodreads way back in March of 2009. I had bought it back then and just never felt in the mood to read it. One item on my reading goals for this year was to read the first book entered on my Goodreads to read list. (I decided last year that I didn't want to read the book that was really the first on the list, so removed it and gave the book away.) So, I have accomplished that.

Why did I wait so long? I found this book to be powerful and enlightening and encouraging and educational. (hmm, if I remove 'powerful' I will have pure alliteration in that description....)

Bruce Hafen is a lawyer and that is evident in his writing. Not that his writing is incomprehensible to a layman, but because he is direct and lays down the facts in a coherent manner and makes thoughtful connections and draws logical conclusions. I'm saying that about a book about a religious concept :) His writing is pleasant and not too difficult most of the time, although I admit that a second or third reading would probably help me understand things even better.

I am dismayed but not surprised that many members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints do not have a good understanding of the doctrine of their own faith. I hope that in the 9 years since this book was published that situation has improved. And no wonder the world has such a profound misconception of our beliefs, when the members of the church don't even get it. It isn't because it is hard. The doctrine is pretty plain and straight-forward. Let's just call it a too casual approach to learning and living the gospel. I am guilty of this, too.

The examples and comparisons and stories used all help bring a better understanding of the Atonement of Jesus Christ, the role of grace, and our part in it.

I appreciated the overviews of belief systems such as Calvinism and the brief history outlines.

Favorite chapters:
5 Two Cheers for Excellence - talking about the need for perspective and not letting our pursuit of 'rewards' and 'success' distract us from the real goal of this life: to love God and worship Him.

6 Obedience, Sacrifice, and a Contrite Spirit - a fascinating exploration of "those who demand too much of themselves...and those who do not demand enough of themselves," two sides of the same coin. "Both reflect a basic shallowness in their understanding of the purpose behind the commandments, the significance of one's internal motivation, and the meaning of the Atonement. At issue is their comprehension of the law of obedience and sacrifice - specifically, their readiness to offer the Lord and broken heart and a contrite spirit."

Pretty much the entire book. I have highlighted about 75% of it.

If I have any quibble, it is Hafen's apparent/obvious dislike of mental health counselors. If every person had the highest level of faith and commitment and relationship with Christ, therapy would not be needed, I agree. But I don't know many/any people like that. Sometimes we need professional help. It is important to find a therapist who will respect your beliefs. Most good therapists are simply trying to help you discover the tools available to you to break out of detrimental thought processes, which, coincidentally, will help you in your quest to develop that faith and commitment and relationship with Christ.