This book was really good actually. It is about an American woman that lives in Boston, she's preganat and finds out that her husband is cheating on her. In the midst of finding this out Nora (the American woman) decides to go back to northern Ireland, where her and her husband and two children traveled twenty years earlier. But what she doesnt realize is that there is a major war going on between Ireland and Britian. when she reaches Ireland she has to make the decision on how she wants her life to proceed. As nora is waiting in a clinic in Omagh a bomb goes off. Like every other person would she comes to the aid of a wounded soldier. now shes on the run, moving from place to place to try to keep this soldier alive, whom she doesnt even know who he is at first. The soldier is Captin James Oliver Blackburn, the british intelligence, or IRA, are after James and Nora. The book follows them through eight days, and how Nora has James's life in her hands, and her life upended. The last night is a daring night crossing of the Irish sea to Scotland and then the moment of truth. 

I don't see much difference between their culture and American culture. I would say the biggest difference would be religion wise, because the whole book is based on the catholic religion.

The authors purpose was to inform the world and let them remember that August night in 1998 when many people lost their lives. And to make people realize that we live a sheltered life from other people in the world and whats going on in their country. The author talks a lot about the bombing and how many people died, he also has the main character realize that she did live a sheltered life from everyone around her, and in this book he makes it evident that she realizes how much she has and how fast it could be taken away. 

The theme of the book is to make people realize how much they have, and that it can be taken away in a instant. Also it shows Americans how lucky we are to have our freedom and not have a war going on in our country. The evidence is showing how many people died and how their families were affected. Also by following an American through the most dangerous, I guess I would say, adventure shows how everyone is effected. Even if they dont live in Ireland, throughout the whole book she could of taken the many offers of being sent home, but she chose to stay back and help James. 

I would recommend this book. I usually don't like reading about wars, but this book ties in a history lesson while also following a romance. I think that makes this book apply to all kinds of different people. And it also is based on true facts, the war in Ireland really did go on, and the bombing of August 1998 really did happen in Omagh.