Rating: 5/5

Issac Babel is the most literary of the practitioners of socialist realism that came out of the Russia (née Soviet Union). Despite his endeavor to situate his stories within realism, his lyricism shines through again and again. Had Babel been rounded up in one of Stalin's many purges, he just may have replaced the old vanguard of Russian literature and art. This collection is a beautiful collection of his work that could be unearthed, along with some beautiful writing from his daughter that situates Babel within a nuanced biographical framework which does not dodge his contradictions.

What sets apart Babel and Fyodor Gladkov, author of Cement, is that they do not write the collectivization of the Soviet Union from a purely ideological one. Both detail hardships of the proletariat and their struggles. Both support the move towards a egalitarian society, but do not spare the growing bureaucracy of the Soviet leadership from October 1917 through to today. Babel's section of reporting from St. Petersburg (Petrograd) demonstrates that Babel had an eye for detail to separate out the vulgar, everyday, detail and isolate it until it becomes a sublime symbol of the greater situation. Babel could have been one of the greatest journalist of any nation or time. But true to his life he chose to skip around genres and mediums. Perhaps one of his greater strengths is that his stories, especially the Red Cavalry, seem singular. While a downside of the collection appears as Babel tried to adapt his Odessa and Red Cavalry stories for the stage and early films. These adaptations may have been successful in those mediums but do not hold up on the page.

One last interesting comparison would be between babel and Hemingway. This seems counter-intuitive—but, it is not. Hemingway covers the same socioeconomic milieu, yet Hemingway uses the minutiae of everyday life to block out the entropy of modern ethics in terms of politics. Hemingway's oeuvre is that of anxiety: the anxiety of being unable to leap from the quantitative to a qualitative leap without the dependence upon dogmatic choice. 
Babel's works, especially the cavalry stories embraces the suspension of the ethical constantly. His characters struggle and fight, despite constantly acknowledging the world is shit. The lesson to be taken away from Babel's stories is that there is no moment where ethics reaches the Hegelian moment of synthesis and reconciliation. His literature and life testify to a world where aesthetics are the most beatiful and brutal of all things.