Rating: 4/5

The Fire-Dwellers by Margaret Laurence is the third book in the Manawaka series. The books in the series do not necessarily have to be read in order, although that is how I’m doing it. There are two common links between all five books - first, Manawaka is a fictional small town in the prairies where all the central female characters lived at one time and second, there is always a central female character who is also the narrator. Each book describes the innermost thoughts; as well as, worlds of the main character. 

As usual, Laurence’s writing in The Fire-Dwellers is brilliant. Her prose is very descriptive and her insight into human lives and relationships is remarkable. Laurence is also innovative and is way ahead of her time as a writer. It was almost 50 years ago when this book was published and yet there are zero quotation marks used with dialogue, despite dialogue being a major component of the story. Laurence also writes in a sort of stream of consciousness. In The Fire-Dwellers, the main character Stacey spends a lot of time in her head, thinking and critiquing herself and others and talking regularly to herself about what to do and not do etceteras. It is Stacey’s inner voice, like the one may of us have, that Laurence shares so cleverly so we can get to know Stacey.

The inner mind activity is part of Laurence’s other books as well, but it plays a particularly significant role in telling Stacey’s story in The Fire-Dwellers. Stacey Cameron MacAindre is Rachel Cameron’s older sister (the narrator in A Jest of God.) Rachel has been married for about 16 years. Her husband is rather uncommunicative and works a lot of time away from home. She is busy raising 4 children, from age 2 to 14, so she really has her hands full. Throughout the day while taking care of her children, she does not really have any adult company. Oftentimes at night when her parental responsibilities continue while her children are in bed, Stacey is the lone parent because her husband Mac is still working. Despite being lonely, Stacey is fiercely loyal to her husband and children and takes her responsibilities very seriously. 

At the same time however, she feels stuck and at times the responsibly feels seems overwhelming. She left her childhood home in a small town to get away to excitement and is now feeling terribly guilty about wanting to get away again from her isolation in Vancouver and the responsibilities with her children and husband that come with it. She feels much the same as when she fled her childhood home - a yearning for change and excitement.

I didn’t related as well to Stacey as I did to both previous main characters - Hagar Shipley, an older women with dementia who can no longer live alone and Rachel Cameron, a school teacher who never married and continued to live in her widowed mother’s home to take care of her. I am not sure why this was the case; although I do know that I am not used to a household full of children and found Stacey’s inner chatter a bit whiny and incessant to the point of becoming irritating. It was apparent she was lonely, felt unappreciated and wanted to have a more exciting life. I totally got this but felt she needed to stop complaining and to do something about it - talk to her husband, talk to a counsellor, try to meet new people or get involved in some activities outside of her home. Unfortunately, she seemed to take a lot of solace in her gin and tonic and used alcohol to numb her pain. 

I am a bit surprised that I did not feel more empathetic towards Stacey. It wasn’t until the latter part of the book, when Stacey displayed her vulnerability and started to reach out to help her husband and encourage him to be more communicative that I felt more connected. She experienced a few real life scares during when she fully displayed how caring, guilty and frightened she was about not being a good mother (her terminology.) She seemed to take her job so seriously (too seriously in my opinion) that I started to “like” her more. Her understanding of her father-in-law and his issues and the lengths she went to help him, despite her husband’s lack of initiative in helping his own father quite impressed me and showed me a softer, more loving side of herself.

There are lots of 60’s memories in this book - peace marches, house décor, hats, dresses worn while shopping, weekly hair salon visits etceras in this book. It was a waltz down memory lane. 

Like her first and second books in the series, as mentioned earlier, Laurence’s writing, her dialogue and descriptions are impressive. She can be sparse and to the point or write lengthy lyrical descriptions. Both demonstrate wonderful writing skills. Laurence’s insight into human nature and relations are incredibly astute but I think what makes her most impressive, as a writer who wrote this book 50 years ago, is her character development, not just describing with words but also understanding of them to their core and her innovation with the written word. 

Some extras you can look forward to - an Alex Colville painting reproduced on the cover and an interesting Afterword by Sylvia Fraser.

It is not surprising that Laurence’s Manawaka series, including The Fire-Dwellers has withstood the test of time and will likely remain a classic for years to come. While it took a while for the book to really engage me with the primary character. As usual Laurence’s writing was strong. The first half read like 3 stars but the second half was so much stronger that I rounded up an overall 3 1/2 star read to 4 stars due to the strength of the second half.