Rating: 3/5

This is a quintessential boys adventure story: Ralph goes to sea as a cabin boy, almost as soon as they 'round Cape Horn and enter the Pacific ocean a storm sinks their ship marooning him and his two friends on a coral island on which they have wonderful adventures before escaping the island.

This book is in fact a prototype of several story genera, Ballantyne was a prolific writer of stories for young people, publishing over 100 between 1847 and his death in 1894. The Coral Island is considered his most successful in that it has never been out of print since it was published in 1858. Surely that is some kind of record in print for almost 160 years!

One of the writers influenced by him was Robert Louis Stevenson, who was so influenced by The Coral Island, that he based portions of Treasure Island on it. Also, The Coral Island can be considered one forerunner of the genera of 'deserted on a desert island' that is a hugely influential literary theme.

I was especially excited to find it in Little Dragon format, hands up who remembers the little dragons? These children's books are practically historical their own right these days and this one was published in 1966, a 'Red Dragon For boys and girls (8-12 years). Price 2'6.

As excited as I was to read it, I was a little disconcerted by the superficiality of the beginning in which less than a page of introduction passes before our narrator was at sea and less than three before the shipwreck. The writing also, seemed superficial and unsatisfying compared to my expectations. Then I was sucked into the story and didn't really emerge until the end when the writing again was choppy, the story unlikely, and the ending astonishingly abrupt.

And then, of course, I realised that the little dragons of my childhood, like readers digests, must have aimed to give the story, stripped down for kids. This book says that it is 'a tale based on...' and as such a lot must have been edited out. Despite this it was a fun, fun story. An innocent, childlike and occasionally childish adventure of three impossibly nice and kindly boys between 14-18 years old that ends impossibly happily. 

Total suspension of disbelief is needed for it: the author had clearly no idea what coconuts were like, had never seen a coral atoll and possibly not even the Pacific ocean. The fact that Ballantyne was an educated man, familiar with the writings of Darwin and Wallace and very well read on 'current' subjects relating to the tropics does come through but it is an idealised fantasy island he has created. Also, writing as a 1880's man, it is imperialist and racist, though the missionaries have been carefully and entirely deleted from this book there are enough other references to ruffle the feathers of a modern reader.  I will not go into too many of them, but the notion that Islanders are less capable of emotions than 'white men' is pervasive and has to be read with a strong awareness that this is an actual historical novel if you have any chance of enjoying it. The idea that a 18 year old cabin boy with a tree branch can defeat a grown man who is a practiced warrior by virtue of his 'white superiority' left me with tears of laughter in my eyes. Also, the 1880's were convinced that every black race were inveterate, persistent cannibals and that element is strongly part of our youthful heros adventure's. 

Our young hero Ralph and his friends, Jack Martin and Peterkin Gay (no, I kid you not!) are impossibly nice children as seen suitable for the reading of 'juveniles' in the 1880's. They have no sex drive, they never swear, they are completely moral and never hurt each other beyond the occasional very mild prank. They are utterly unbelievable and yet strangely likable in their unreality.

Despite the innocence and fun of the story, In my view at least, it is no longer suitable for children, not even "Older boys and girls (12-15 years)" let alone ones 8-12, that are the Red Dragon's target market. I very strongly feel the the phenomenal levels of racism are unsuited to non adults in the 2000's. The very idea of having to explain to my 13 year old godson with his many Fijian friends, why the book is claiming they are all cannibals who kill each other without mercy or compassion gives me cold shudders.

But it has whetted my appetite for reading the whole, unabridged story that Ballantyne wrote, for sure!