Rating: 4/5

To someone my age Alaska’s statehood is a firm reality and Edna Ferber has disappeared into the unknown. Once upon a time, these realities were flipped.

Edna Ferber was a prominent mid-20th century American author I might have completely overlooked if not for taking one of those random internet quizzes about American Jewish female authors. And the only reason I plucked her book on Alaska from her collection was that it was the one available at a flea market I went to with a friend.

But in its day it made some sort of splash—with a publication date that preceded Alaska’s statehood by three months. (These two events are not unrelated, despite the author’s protestations.) A few years later it was turned into a movie which, from the trailer, looks far schmaltzier than the book vibes seemed to me. (One contemporary critic went so far as to complain of the novel: “when [Ferber] is faced with a choice between romance and a description of the Alaskan canned-fish industry, the cannery wins every time.”)

It’s a decidedly non-Jewish book for this assimilated author with Jewish ancestry, but one innkeeper is based off of a Jewish woman, and Ferber made the woman’s father into a rabbi from Russia. So there’s that.

But anywho. The title refers to a glass-walled building in a fictional Alaskan town that would be a stand-in for Alaska itself. Or maybe the stand-in is our protagonist, Chris(tine) Storm, who was born inside of a gutted caribou during a snowstorm. (As Dorothy Parker repeated in her review about Chris “Miss Alaska” Storm: “You heard me, she was born in a caribou.”)

If Chris is the future of Alaska, then her grandfathers are the foundation. Both are two distinctive pillars: “Czar” Kennedy is a millionaire mogul who only sees Alaska in terms of how it might enrich him. Thor Storm, on the other hand, came to the territory as an adventurer and, perhaps as a more masculine version of Ferber, fell in love with its rugged frontiers. 

He also had a son with an “Eskimo” woman, as the ethnic group was then described, making Chris part Eskimo. The 1950s casual racism is definitely on the page, but through Thor’s appreciation of Eskimo culture (as well as a side character of that ethnicity), it’s presented with more open-minded curiosity as well.

The plot of the novel, such as it is, involves Chris going off to college—her grandfathers disagree on the where (Kennedy says to the “outside,” and Thor says in Alaska.) We get to see how she’s been formed by these two men (and although Kennedy’s description is gag-inducing, he does have enough dimension at least to be forceful and entertaining.) 

Also molding Chris is Bridie Ballantyne, an Irish woman who came to the territories under false pretenses of becoming a “mail order bride,” and instead became the mother figure for Chris (and also all newcomers, it seems.) We do get into a fair few subplots about the types of people who move to Alaska during this time, and why. That, on top of the thick mid-20th century prose, made this book a chore sometimes. Ferber herself apparently regretted that she didn’t have time to iron out some of the threads (including Chris’s lackluster love triangle.) Falling ill before editing, she let the book go before she was ready, as it seems the public was hungry for her work. Celebrity hasn’t changed much in the intervening decades.

I did enjoy having a young female protagonist at the heart of the story, even when it was quite obvious she was more Team Thor than Team Kennedy. (At one point, when Thor interrupted a session in the U.S. congress, Chris shouted down her pro-state support from the gallery.) I don’t think modern sensibilities would say it’s a nuanced description of either character or plot, arguably even if Ferber had revised it. But she was a dreamer for her day, and after conducting lots of research, it’s compelling to read where her passions led her.

For more info: https://www.newsminer.com/edna-ferber...
https://www.literaryladiesguide.com/b...