Rating: 5/5

I had to pull a momentary rip cord on my Ross Macdonald Chronological Reading Society of One and bail out of The Doomsters for this one. I'll go back and finish it, The Galton Case, and The Wycherly Woman before moving on to The Chill. But it's summer, and the upcoming meeting of my Surf Noir Summer Supper Club/Alliteration Protection Society called. I stripped my responsibilities to their skivvies and took the plunge. 

First, what's sorta fun about this book is the extratextual history: set in July, published on November 15, 1962 (exactly two years before I was hatched), it captures the burgeoning surfing movement right as it was breaking nationally: exactly one week later, the Surfin Safari LP entered the charts at #114 ... maybe not the most impressive number considering the No. 17 album that week was The Stripper and Other Fun Songs for the Family, but one with wider cultural implications [unless you're a stripper]). At any rate, Zebra is an interesting generational novel, born partially out of Millar's grief over his daughter Laura's emotional problems. When Lew Archer has to hit the road looking for the runaway Harriet Blackwell, it's hard not to recall Millar's own odyssey in 1959 as he searched for his own runaway daughter in the skeezetopia of Reno. As Michael Kreyling notes in his wonderful study on Macdonald, Zebra can be read as a prescient foreshadowing of the moral collapse of Golden State youth culture. In her petulant contempt/dependency upon a disapproving daddy, Harriet Blackwell would later morph into Patty Hearst (or Leslie van Houten, the "spoiled little princess" whose surrogate pops was one Charlie Manson). Consider, too, that Zebra was Warren Zevon's favorite Macdonald bc he identified with the snotty surfer who owns the titular vehicle, and you begin to see why so many b-boomers, wondering why paradise rotted under the concrete jungles of their deviated septums, identify with this one.

OK, it's got a few faults. As far-flung as Archer has to go to solve the disappearance, we readers ought to get gold miles. And the dead-bodies pile up more neatly than shirts on a Gap display table. Then there's the big MacGuffin, a trenchcoat whose peculiar button is a major clue, which feels a little too convenient when it shows up in an abandoned baby's hand. That said, there's a sexual perversity here that hints at the fixation with youth and innocence that would soon become a generational (and cultural) Achilles heel. Doll imagery abounds as much here as in Djuna Barnes, and that's a freaky cool thing.

The sufers are really only in a couple of scenes, but they loom over the book like an ominous strain of sociopath disaffection. They're also closely connected to the bratty bohemian painter who oozes generational disdain like it's pimple puss. In this sense, Zebra makes a nice starting point for a study of surf noir, sort of the serious inverse of the absurdist (and go-nowhere while going everywhere) Inherent Vice. I have a feeling it's gonna be my favorite Macdonald.