Rating: 3/5

Beautiful words
do not flow like prose
chop, chop, chop. 

Those words came to me last night as I was reading this book. For me, if they don't flow, they don't work. But the translation in itself was beautiful.

The introduction to Han Shan's poems is excellent. I learned so much more from it, but at the same time there was much that I had learned from the other Cold Mountain books. He also has a commentary on the poems, but it is at the end of the book, so you have to go back and forth if you want to match it up with the poem. Perhaps, it was easier for me the way that Red Pine had placed the commentary after each poem. Still, I am not much into commentary as I am into reading and getting what I want out of each poem.

A poem that chops:

Diving gave me this 
hidden dwelling place:
T'ien-tai, it said, and no
more
Gibbons shriek; the mist
in the ravine is freezing.
Mountain colors, run
straight up to my grass
gate.
I've dressed a pine in
leaves. That's my fancy
hall.
I've cleaned out the pool
and channeled the 
spring.
Sweet, to let the world go.
Ferns, I'll harvest, to live
out the years left.

Now, if I look at this poem another way, I can say, it chops like Haiku, and that is okay. Thinking this way I can actually now relax with the poems.

He wrote in his introduction:

"At the tip of Han Shan's peak, there is the perfect mystical vision. You'll know these poems when you read them, even in my English, I deeply hope. I assure you that some of them would take your breath away if you could read the original Chinese." 

I would have loved to have my breath taken away, but I do not know Chinese. 

People ask about the Cold 
Mountain way:
plain roads don't get through to 
Cold Mountain.
Middle of the summer, and the ice 
still hasn't melted.
Sunrise and the mist would blind a 
hidden dragon.
So, how could a man like me get
here?
My heart is not the same as yours,
dear sir...
If your heart were like mine,
you'd be here already.

Comparing this to Bruce Watson:

People ask the way to Cold Mountain
Cold Mountain? There is no road that goes through.
Even in summer the ice doesn't melt;
Though the sun comes out, the fog is blinding.
How can you hope to get there by aping me?
Your heart and mine are not alike.
If your heart were the same as mind,
Then you could journey to the very center!