Rating: 4/5

Sorrow's Light is written by one of my favourite authors. I picked it up because I was looking for a bit of comfort reading during two very stressful weeks and I find her writing beautiful but uncomplicated and easy to lose myself in.

Iolithie is the daughter of a village chief, chosen to be the prince's wife after his intended bride is killed crossing the stolen land. But once she is married to the prince she realises that he is unwell, his obsessions with completing religious rituals correctly is overwhelming him and destroying his health. When no one will listen to her she decides she has to cross the stolen land herself, to reach the capital city of Onafross and get help from her father-in-law the King. 

I love the way Freda Warrington uses colour to describe her worlds. Every time I think about one of her books that I've read I get impressions of colours and crystals, purples and blues that stand out so strongly in my mind. I think it contributes massively to the way the worlds she creates just straight away come to life for me. 

"We were sitting in the cabin, looking out through crystal panes at black mountains and an eggshell-blue sky. The valley through which we moved was the lushest green meadow I had ever seen."

"There were such colours in their glassy-silky coats; from a distance, they looked silvery-grey with touches of gold, but when I came closer I saw that colours of immense subtlety rippled through their skin and hair. The merest hints of blue and copper and plum, hypnotically lovely."

The prince is suffering from what sounds to me (who admittedly knows very little about it) like obsessive-compulsive disorder, someone in the book calls it 'disease of doubt'. I think the book does a good job of tackling what can be a sensitive subject. Iolithie knows that her husband is unwell and that his behaviour towards her is unfair but not entirely his fault. The book challenges the idea that it's "just how he is" or "he could stop it if he wanted" and presents it as an illness, something that has to be dealt with like any other illness and needs help and support to tackle. 

Iolithie is just a normal 16-year-old young woman, there is nothing special about her except her stubbornness. She lives in a patriarchal society but refuses to accept that because she is a woman she should just accept what she is told and obey the men. She takes herself on a dangerous journey across the stolen lands to get help for her husband and she doesn't give up on what she knows to be true when everyone tells her she is wrong. 

I enjoyed the story and very quickly became engrossed in it, I very nearly missed a train stop because of it. Iolithie is a brilliant character, she has her flaws but I think she makes a good role model for young women. I loved seeing her stand up for herself and not allow anyone to silence her. She will never stay where she's put and I admire her for that! There are a few points where magic solutions and help pop up perhaps a little too conveniently but that's the only flaw I can find in this.

I recommend this to anyone that enjoys fantasy, especially fantasy that focuses on women. It's a hidden gem that will delight if you seek it out.