Rating: 4/5

If you like books that are about slavery, read Second Daughter. I say this book is Historical Fiction because slavery took place in the book. I think that this book is a pretty good, but not my favorite.
 This book took place in 1781 in Massachusetts. A slave Girl Aissa and her big sister Elizabeth were both sold to Slave owners, Master and Mistress Anna. Both sisters worked really hard but Aissa was more disobedient to Mistress Anna. When they did something wrong they would get whipped. Aissa hated it there and wanted to leave, but Elizabeth had no hopes. One day Elizabeth and a freed black man named Josiah got married. Elizabeth had a baby and protected her all the time. So they had there own little house but Elizabeth could only go to there house on weekends and then needed to go back to work at the Master and Mistresses house. That meant that Aissa had to do Elizabeth's work on the weekends, and she hated to be alone. One day when the sisters were sitting in the kitchen and laughing the Mistress came in and demanded them to get back to work. Aissa refused to move and the Mistress got very angry. So the Mistress took a hot shovel form the fire place and was about to his Aissa, but Elizabeth went in front of her and got hit. Elizabeth argued with the Mistress and she said she was going home and never coming back for hitting a slave cruelly. She took Aissa and her daughter with her of course. Elizabeth and many others went to Argue about still having slavery in court with the Master and Mistress Anna. They won, and slavery was illegal. They were finally free!!
 I was surprised when Elizabeth stood up to the Mistress finally. I was surprised because she never talks back to any of them and then she just yelled at her for hitting her. The main character was Aissa. I new this because the book is written in her point on view.
 My favorite part of the book was when they were free.I liked this because it made me feel happy they were finally free. An interesting thing I learned from this book was to not be judge the skin of people, but judge their personality.
 In conclusion I rated this book 4 stars because I thought it was a pretty good but not my favorite. I recommend this book to anyone who wants likes a book with slavery and their freedom. So don't miss out all the hard work they go through and read the book..