Rating: 4/5

Another collection of Wolfe and Archie novellas. The first two stories are very good; the third is okay.

Kill Now — Pay Later
A Greek immigrant who has shined Wolfe’s and Archie’s shoes for three years first falls under suspicion of murder, then is himself murdered. Of course the police see it as a remorseful suicide, but his daughter hires Wolfe to clear her father’s name and find his murderer. All the suspects are co-workers, and really, what would give someone a better motive for murder than having worked with a jerk for years? 

4 stars.

Murder Is Corny
Long before the current “foodie” movements like using fresh, local and seasonal ingredients and the nose-to-tail philosophy, Nero Wolfe spared no expense to obtain the best ingredients. From July 20 until October 5 of each year, he had 16 ears of fresh-picked corn delivered to him, picked no more than 3 hours before delivery, from an upstate farm — 4 ears each for Archie and Fritz and 8 for himself. (The farmer’s name was Duncan McLeod, but as we learn in the story, McLeod was not immortal.😁)

Because boiled corn is merely “edible and nutritious,” he has Fritz roast the corn in the husk on the highest possible temperature. The diners shuck it at the table and eat it simply with butter and salt.

One day, however, Inspector Cramer delivers the corn and it proves to be far below standard; moreover, the box of corn had been found in the alley behind Rusterman’s restaurant next to the dead body of Kenneth Faber, who had been delivering the corn to Wolfe’s house for the past five weeks.

But Cramer was not being accommodating by bringing the corn to Wolfe; he was there to question Archie, who the police suspect of murdering Faber. The farmer has a daughter (of course he does), Sue, who is a fashion model, and she has told the police she had an appointment to meet Archie in that alley just at about the time the murder was committed. (And yes, the plot revolves around who would have killed Faber because he had been telling people he had seduced Sue in an attempt to coerce her to marry him.)

Wolfe can’t bear the thought of being inconvenienced by having to do without Archie’s assistance, so he takes it on himself to solve the murder. Not only does Wolfe have to solve a mystery without a client to bill, he has to find another corn supplier AND he almost gets blown up before the case is solved.

4 stars.

Blood Will Tell
Archie gets a package in the mail that contains a tie with a brownish stain. Having seen his fair share of dried bloodstains, Archie is pretty sure that’s what it is. The package also contains a brief note from a James Neville Vance, saying merely: ‘Keep thus until you hear from me.’ — JNV. Later, Archie receives a phone call and the squeaky voice on the other end identifies himself as James Neville Vance and tells Archie to burn the tie.

Archie’s curiosity is now aroused so he takes a short walk to JNV’s address. While in his apartment — Vance owns the building and rents out the floors he doesn’t occupy — a policeman knocks on the door and asks Vance to provide a key to the apartment of Mrs. Martin Kirk. Her estranged husband has been trying to reach her and he’s worried. With good reason, for when they enter her apartment, they find her dead body. The police naturally suspect the husband — Mrs. Kirk was serially unfaithful — so Martin Kirk hires Wolfe.

This isn’t really a remarkable story but for once, I managed to keep up with Archie, if not Wolfe, and I knew the identity of the murderer fairly early on. Yay for me.

3 stars.