Rating: 5/5

I may as well hold a slight bias towards Michelle Reid books. They just speak to me and the writing just connects with my heart each time. I've thus far realized that never do I even skip or skim through a passage because I've felt the writer is droning on. 

This was a pretty fabulous plot with a man falling for his younger sister's best friend. The only problem being that while he's older and mature, the 18 year old friend is high spirited, immature and has no decorum. They both belong to wealthy families but the h is unaware of her own passion and the havoc she creates by acting on impulse in social situations amongst their families and friends. All she wants is the undying declaration of love from the H, while he feels that she's just juvenile and acts without thinking and is doing all this to make a spectacle of him. 

They are engaged, spurred on by their families who are friends and wish for this reunion of friendship as well as business. What follows are numerous situations where the h is doing things to embarrass herself and the H and their families and doesn't give two hoots about it. The final draw is when eventually the H is at his wit's end and has to unsuspectingly spank the h, as a way to shake her and stop her from her high of inhibiting wantonly, heedless behavior. (Like throwing a party to all her teen friends and then lying on top of some guy in just a tee shirt, being whore-like, or so the H accuses). 

This all spirals badly and to save face, the h just runs away to her birth mother in Boston to never return. Until she does finally return after four years and feels the same strings tug deep at her heart when she meets the H. 

It's like the h and H never really stopped loving each other to begin with. The h definitely needed some time alone to grow up and act in a civilized way, and the H had to realize on his own that he actually did love the h, despite her immaturity and unpredictability. They also work together to reconcile their families who are no longer friends thanks to the broken engagement of the h and H that happened in the past. 

I couldn't put down this book. Not much sexuality or love making in this book. The social norms are also different and hence I'm overlooking the spanking part. Well, I'll just say i loved this one!