Rating: 4/5

For me, salt is something you use in cooking or at the table. It is also something you put on walkways and roads in the winter when it's frosty. Compared to what is in this book that is like dropping those words into a thimble and then filling it up with, well, salt. I guess I sort of knew that we can't live without salt. Did I think about horses and cows not being able to live without salt? No, even though I knew that pastures had salt licks. I like to think of myself as curious, but I never questioned the existence of those salt licks.

Please note that the subtitle is "A World History". The book opens in China, about 6000 BC. Yes, humans learned how to make salt long, long ago. After China is Roman times and even earlier years of Europe. The book moves west to the Basque country and, for me living in fishing country, this is where it got really interesting because the next thing I knew he was talking about the North Atlantic cod fishery. He crosses the Atlantic to North America and then back again. It is truly a world history of salt.

I like words and this book told me about the origins of some words. The below are from different times and regions.The Roman army required salt for its soldiers and for its horses and livestock. At times soldiers were even paid in salt, which was the origin of the word salary and the expression "worth his salt" or "earning his salt". In fact, the Latin word sal became the French word solde, meaning pay, which is the origin of the word, soldier.

It became a requirement of prosciutto di Parma that it be made from pigs that had been fed the whey from Parmesan cheese. Less choice parts of pigs fed on this whey qualified to be sent to the nearby town of Felino, where they were ground up and made into salami. (The word salami is derived from the Latin verb to salt)

For a time, the Hanseatics were well appreciated as honorable merchants who ensured the quality and fought against unscrupulous practices. They were known as Easterlings because they came from the east, and this is the origin of the word sterling, which meant "of assured value."

They also ate a great deal of salted herring, though they seem to have preferred lightly salted and smoked red herring, perhaps because of their limited salt supply. When these early settlers hunted, they would leave red herring along their trail because the strong smell would confuse wolves, which is the origin of the expression red herring, meaning "a false trail."Perhaps you can see that I thought at least parts of this book are 5-stars. Unfortunately, there are also parts - though far fewer - that, for me, were a bit of a slog. Overall, I think this is 4-stars, perhaps a bit above the middle of that group.