Rating: 2/5

This was so not-annoyingly written in terms of prose and clever selection of stories (more on that later) that I almost gave it four stars. Sadly, one glaring problem stuck out like a sore thumb: the author.

Getting real tired of your shit, Eleanor Herman.

Again, the prose in "Sex with Kings" is not at all bad. The selection of anecdotes and the manner in which they're presented is witty and most definitely worth a trip to the library. Yes: definitely pick this one up at the library! However, before attempting to talk about the book, please do take it with a grain of salt.

You see--I won't pretend to know everything there is about history, though women's history does tend to be my stronger suit. I don't know that much about the details of certain women's lives. As long as I didn't know what Herman was talking about, I was okay. Then she started dipping into what I'm familiar with. Ooooookay.

A lot of her details rang as apocryphal or poorly-researched, even when I was unfamiliar with the subject. Herman also has this bit wherein she yammers on and on about how royal bastards were worth so much more than legitimate children, and I almost choked on my popcorn. Does she even get that some kings had so many bastards that they didn't see the point of acknowledging the last few? Bastards were a dime a dozen. Legitimate sons--heirs--were worth so much more. Herman was just trying to make up a good story.

Then she went on about the Affaire des Poisons as if the details were undisputed facts, when in fact much of it is in dispute. She didn't even bother to raise a questioning eyebrow at Montespan's many enemies, the absurdity of their claims. Yes, I get that she's not a scholar. But hey, her peers at least allow for speculation in books like "Scandalous Women" and "A Treasury of Royal Scandals".

Another major issue was Herman's tone. She labeled complex women like Barbara Palmer, Athenais de Montespan, and Lola Montez as "shrews" and referred to them as such for the rest of the book. Knowing that all of these women were very layered, this made me uncomfortable. She also tended towards siding with men like Ludwig I, who, while not a monster, was genuinely creepy. It reeked of slut-shaming.

Her favoritism was also extremely present in her presentation of the Diana-Charles-Camilla triangle. Charles was a weepy, victimized young boy. Diana threw "trantrums" and "spat venom"... at the woman who was sleeping with her husband? I don't get how this isn't human nature? It seemed like both Camilla and Diana were at fault--Diana was the worst though--while Charles was a victim of outdated tradition. She also acted as if Camilla was simply eternally devoted to Charles; she never had affairs, never threw "tantrums". Sure, Herman. Sure.

I'll read "Sex with the Queen". I won't pay for it, but I'll read it. I'm interested in researching a lot of ladies that Herman featured. But the author herself? Ugh. Don't give her money. She's just a decent writer with a knack for a good story. This book was published eight years ago. Maybe she's just outdated.

EDIT:

Yeah, never mind, this thing sucked. Two stars it is.