Rating: 5/5

I forgot how much fun these books are. I'm glad I have the whole series and hope they are all as quick, fun and engaging as the first three have been.
Our hero Jaine gets a call from a wealthy socialite to ghostwrite a book on entertaining for her and instantly regrets it. SueEllen is spoiled and downright nasty. She spends her life in the bathtub, Jaine is forced to perch on the closed toilet seat and take notes as SueEllen rambles on about her Aunt Melanie and her fancy recipes that she basically stole from Julia Child. While at work poor Jaine is barely fed, and has to put up sharp unkind cracks about her weight. SueEllen is also extremely mean to her stepdaughter Heidi who is a bit overweight. Heidi and Jaine become instant friends and their friendship is really sweet. 
Everything comes to a head at Heidi's sixteenth birthday when she and her stepmother fight as the cake is rolled out. There Heidi announces that her wish is that SueEllen would die.
Literally the next day Jaine finds her face down in the tub with a plugged in hairdryer in the water. Heidi is the prime suspect but Jaine knows it isn't her. She saw a blonde lady heading to the bathroom.
The suspects are many, a husband planning to file for a very expensive divorce, a stepson who's pissed he won't get a Ferrari, the stepson's girlfriend a pretty blonde cheerleader, an old childhood friend of SueEllen who was dating SueEllen's husband before she swept in and stole him away, a masseuse who's having an affair with the husband and his nurse who might also be sleeping with him. There's also SueEllen's lover cause of course she has to have one.
Throughout the book we encounter a transvestite, a physic hooker, a cheap skate actor who carries cockroaches around to get free restaurant meals, a young man with a weird kink, a homeless man who hates dairy and Kandi and Lance's love lives picking up only to come crashing down in hilarious fashion. All the while Jaine worries about her weight, but like most of us can't stop eating and so is unable to lose anything, Prozac being a typical cat and Jaine's parents antics causing havoc in two states all because of a toupee. The email exchanges were just as amusing and engaging as the main plot and I hope they continue. I also got to like the maid Conchi and could only picture the Family Guy character whenever she appeared clutching her windex.
An excellent mystery I had no real clue who the killer was until just before Jaine figured it out, and I'm so excited to get into the next one cause these are just too good.