Rating: 4/5

Jesus is a figure often taken for granted, both by Christians and non-Christians. On one side often only seen as the almighty Son of God, capable of doing the unthinkable and supernatural acts, while on one side seen only as a meek moral teacher asking people to do good. It is as if these two sides are "battling" to decide which Jesus is correct, then commodified their own version of Jesus for their agenda.

In this book, Albert Nolan, a Dominican priest, challenged all those assumptions, stripped Jesus off our modern world perceptions that are often so distorted, in order to try to see, albeit in an imperfect way, who Jesus really was as a human being: a male, Palestinian Jew, who ministered in the area of Galilee, with the desire to bring the Kingdom of God as a stamp that times are changing: the oppressed are free, and the oppressors are captured, through endless compassion and faith activated through his words and deeds.

This book is divided into four parts:
1. Catastrophe, a short layout of what our world has become, also what the Jewish world has become at the context of Jesus' arrival, along with John the Baptist's preparation of his arrival. Also a peak at Jesus' already political act by allowing John to baptize him.
2. Praxis, on how the signs of arrival of the Kingdom of God oozes through Jesus' works and miracles, empathy towards the poor and oppressed, healings, and forgiveness
3. The Good News, how the Kingdom of God in Jesus' mind interacts with what was considered important in Jewish society and Roman imperium at that time: money, prestige, selfish group solidarity, and power. The "kairos" (time as quality) timing of Kingdom of God signals the stripping of all those features society considered important, to be replaced with kingdom of compassion and faith
4. Confrontation, how until the death of Jesus, there were always confrontations with the powers that be, with the world dominated by Evil, with the oppression of the marginalized. Jesus' strong compassion and desire for the Kingdom of God somehow tempts him to act further: to either interrupt through force or act on the desire to show power, just as he was tempted in the desert. In the end, Jesus triumphs over all those tempations through his death. Those are the strengths for our works as followers of Jesus today, in the midst of trip to catastrophe. 

We can vividly see Nolan's worldview and struggle in his fight against apartheid with the fellow freedom fighters through this book: oppression must be ended, and it can only be done through the Kingdom come. 

Seeing Jesus as an exceptional, perfect truthful human that he was, help us to see both his humanity and his divinity not fpr granted: he deserves our fullest attention and deepest desire to follow him. 

An exceptional book built on historical-critical method studies that humanize and also divinize Jesus as he is, without trying to force faith in organized religion. A book for any people of faith, or lack of, wanting to see historical Jesus as he was: that exceptional Palestinian Jew that signals the arrival of Kingdom of God.