Rating: 3/5

I was considering not finishing Ice Palace until I got about halfway through. It was very slow-paced and aimless, and I kept getting side characters mixed up. It was clearly written to give a voice to proponents of Alaska statehood, and therefore felt too much like a travelogue. But eventually something changed, and I was actually looking forward to the next time I could sit down and read more. Something about Edna Ferber's writing has a way of getting under my skin(in a good way) and making me feel for the characters. It took much longer than usual here, but I did end up liking it enough to add a star to my original rating. The way Chris was almost a personification of Alaska was interesting, especially in the way her relationship to her two grandfathers parallels the men's differing views on Alaska. As "Grampa Czar" mainly sees how the region's resources can create wealth and status, he wants Christine to marry someone with wealth and power, and move about in high society. While Grampa Thor really loves the land and people of Alaska, and lets Chris be herself and respects her choices instead of trying to make her fit a "civilized" mold. 

 I did wish that the first had cut down on all the Alaska fun facts and not jumped around so much. When Ferber went back to focusing on the characters and their interactions it became much more engaging. Though the last half still should have wrapped things up more. Dave Husack's outbursts towards Chris after the boat sinks and at the D.C. Senate debacle are not mentioned again and Chris's relationship to him barely seems affected(oddly, this reminds me a lot of the unresolved banquet conflict in Giant). I would expect that a protagonist biting her possible future-father-in-law's hand right down to the bone and then getting slapped by him would have a more notable impact on the story. 

 In any case, Dave Husack is rather awful and his son Bayard is a supercilious freeloader, so at least Chris didn't definitively end up joining their family, though it never says whether she ended up with Ross either. This is a pity, since Ross is obviously the better option. I would have liked more of these loose ends taken care of, but I found the characters and prose enough to make it worth three stars for me. I'd recommend it to other fans of Edna Ferber, but if you decide to try it don't feel bad about skimming the first 45% or so. The second half sums up the same conflicts with much greater clarity and insight. And for Ferber first-timers, read a couple of her other works before trying this one, since it's not one of her best or most accessible books. Try So Big or Show Boat to get a sense of her style before trekking into her portrayal of the Arctic.