Rating: 3/5

I do not remember reading any Joan Lowery Nixon in my youth. Not in elementary school, middle school or even high school. I'm sure the libraries had copies be it in the school building or a public one.

Book fairs might have had these but probably not with these covers because they certainly would have grabbed my attention with the pulpy attraction and facial detail like the Fear Streets and Point Horrors I gravitated towards.

Being my first time reading Nixon, I did like it. Again, first person narration takes me some time to fall into a groove where I don't think the protagonist sounds so braggy or snobby or annoying and stuck-up as well as a bunch of other adjectives where they get on my nerves.

As the title implies, Christina Lattimore gets kidnapped.

She goes to an all-girl school because her family is big in the oil business because hey this is Texas.

Christina is named after her oil baroness grandmother, Cristabel, but never calls her that g-word except maybe in slip ups of emotion. Her mother is one of those charity socialites with luncheons and whatnot who goes along with whatever her husband says.

Her husband in turn does what his mother tells him and he is the vice president of the company but knows almost nothing about the business. Christina's father would rather be a lay preacher than a businessman but the oodles of money probably doesn't hurt.

The money is nice but Christina likes going to a burger dive than some fancy tea room restaurant like her bestie Lorna...cheeseburgers drippy with mustard and some worn jeans when the school day is done. The place they have been coming to is owned by a man named Zack and Christina doesn't like how he has been looking at her lately...

His wife Loretta sits at the table where Christina is waiting for Lorna and the woman doesn't say anything before Zack comes to drag her away after a few words between them.

It creeps Christina out but she doesn't mention that to Lorna when she finally gets there because there are more important things on the mind of a teenage girl about to start her senior year of school soon.

Her junior class is going to France to study art and museums all over the country and Christina can't go because of her father's religious beliefs. Her mother won't go against her father and "Cristabel"won't let her touch any of the money in her trust to go on the trip.

She even has it planned out of the types of colleges or universities Christina will go to when done with her all-girl education. It's also hinted at that Christina go out with the brothers of her female schoolmates because only the most influential and prominent families send their daughters to that academy.

All of that goes out the window when Christina is kidnapped. It isn't hard to figure out who took her but it is clear that someone else is also in on this plan to get their hands on the Lattimore family's money underneath the matriarchal thumb of her grandmother.

A note sent with Christina's signature (purposely misspelled on her part) asking for a ransom and she won't be hurt. Soon, they receive the money and her kidnappers let Christina get cleaned up to head home. Seems cut and dry but the plan has been worked where it seems Christina was the other person in on the scheme to extort money from her own grandmother when the police arrive!

It seems that no one believes Christina in her own family or the school she attends or even in the people who work for her family, hired help or lawyers or secretaries closely tied. The only people on her side are one of the detectives, while his partner thinks Christina is guilty, and the college-aged cameraman she sees outside the police station when Christina is released.

Two strangers who believe her over her own flesh and blood? Christina can't fathom it but that's not the only hard pill to swallow. When it seems that someone she knows was behind the plan to frame her along with her dim-witted kidnappers is when Christina truly learns to stand up for herself...

The beginning of the book was sort of slow but once we get to more of the kidnapping it picks up my interest and the story moves along at a pretty steady pace. Christina is a pretty strong character and out of all the people in her family, the only one you kind of actually care about.

The mother is the lesser of two evils or in this case three. The father and the grandmother, I just can't get over how self-absorbed they are. It might be some tough love but to think she is that much of a spoiled rich kid they think she would steal money from her family to go on a trip to France?

I'd just run away because once we get toward the end of the book, Christina is more than capable of standing up for herself. Getting far away from the family money and making your own way? Don't some people actually do that than rely on being trust fund babies?

Characters can be complex and Nixon writes it so that character we think we should hate are actually good ones and making others appear to be the ones we should trust but in the end are just out for their own wants and needs. 

The reveal as to who is the third person involved in the kidnapping is actually quite a twist and it was not anyone I suspected the way things were written. Trying to throw you off the scent so to speak and a complete aversion as to how I thought the book would end.

I would say I am impressed and eager to read some more of Nixon's work to see if it is just as good as this one. Written in 1979, there is a slight bit of non-political and maybe even some religious correctness of today but not to slap you in the face.

If you haven't read any Joan Lowery Nixon before, just like myself, I would recommend The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore. It's a start on my journey it could be the start of your own as well...