Rating: 3/5

Number of pages: 228

Genre: Fiction/Romance

Series: N/A

Age recommendation: High school (15+)

Summary: Evelyn Rutherford has been sent from the city to visit her aunt for the summer. Upon her arrival, she discovers that her aunt is ill and she is to stay with the Greys. The Greys are so different from her though: quieter, better, happier. Will Evelyn ever learn the secret of the Grey’s contentment and joy?

My thoughts: This was a pretty interesting book. I love Mr. Morris and Evelyn, Allison and Richard. They all have their moments of being annoying, but there’s just something about them that’s so real and fun; they’re just great. I love the part when Evelyn thinks Mr. Morris is going to propose and then he just asks her if she’s a Christian. It was totally unexpected for her and it was just funny because it’s written so the reader can see both characters thoughts. You see Mr. Morris thinking “I’m such a bad Christian I’m so scared and weak and don’t know how to be a witness,” while Evelyn is thinking, “oh no, what do I say if he likes me and wants to court or marry me?” It just really goes to show how a different upbringing shapes your personality.
Not to brag or anything but I totally called who was going to marry whom.  Evelyn and Maurice’s names are on the back of the book together so that didn’t take much deduction, but from the beginning I thought that Allison would marry Evelyn’s brother. I don’t know why I thought that, but I just had this feeling it would happen. Bert confused me for a little bit, but he and Allison getting married would have just been too weird. 
There were quite a few elements of the story that were predictable, but if you’re just looking for a clean, Christian romance that’s easy to read, this is perfect.
There was a lot of Christian content, which was amazing. I loved how much prayer was emphasized, and also letting people know where you stand. The people you interact with should know that you’re a Christian. Whether you tell them outright, or simply portray it through your actions you should have a testimony. Loving one’s enemies was also a big theme in this book (because sometimes your ‘enemy’ can become your friend). I didn’t find that the gospel message was super clear, but I still think the book is good for people who want encouragement in their faith.
All in all, I think that it was a great book with some funny parts, some serious parts and some very predictable parts.

My personal rating: 3.5/5 stars.

Link to blog: https://karinaschristianreads.wordpre...