Rating: 5/5

For any golfer, there are certain irrefutable truths. Integrity is a truth. Respect, competitiveness, focus, peace, and countless others are all integral pieces to golf's puzzle. I have had the very real privilege of knowing the game of golf- not how to play it, or the rules, but to KNOW it. I have seen what it does to me. When I am on the secluded fairway with a club in hand, the green grass speaks to me, sharing life's lessons. This is when I pray. This is when I see the world as it should be- in complete harmony, purity, honesty. My faith in mankind is restored, because all I can see around me is the most perfect game on earth.

For any golfer, there are certain movies that you will have seen. At the forefront of those is The Legend of Bagger Vance. Being one of my favorite movies of all time, it surprised me that I hadn't read the book on which it was based. Pulling out my trusty Nook, I pressed the "shop" button, and entered those amazing combination of words into the search bar. Success! The Legend of Bagger Vance, by Steven Pressfield. Excited as I was to dive into it, I thought back and remembered that the best time to watch the film is at night. Golf becomes somewhat angelic at night. There is a peace knowing that the courses come alive when nobody is there, so, I immerse myself in the movie when there is no possibility of driving out and diluting that hallowed ground. I decided to practice that same discipline when it came to reading the novel. So, several impatient hours later, I clicked on the first page. I was hooked. The words jumped out at me, fading every aspect of life around me into sheer blankness. I was at a golf course. I could see it, I could feel it. The Nook in my hand was not an ereader, it was a golf club. More specifically, my Titleist putter that served me for many years, that I aptly named Discipline. It has recently been retired, and in trying to learn my new putters existence, I have named it after one of the course holes listed in the book. A little off topic, I know, but as you read this book, golf transcends a game, a sport, an activity. It is living, breathing, and utterly you. It changes itself to understand you, to bring out the absolute best and absolute worst. This book explains those truths in almost panoramic detail. Narrated from the aging lips of a man who was there in 1931, there to witness a one day event, a golf match, between the two heroes of the day, Walter Hagen and Bobby Jones, and a local hero, tormented by his past and after a several year sabbatical from the game, agrees to test his talents against those gods of golf in order to help revive a dying post-Depression Savannah, Georgia. The moral of the story isn't the match itself, which was brilliant, not even of Bagger Vance, the local hero's caddie, the namesake of the book. Rather it is the self discovery of generations of people, of battles past and future, literally retold through the divine lips of a mysterious mentor, Vance, and the absolute truths that can only be reached through a club in the hand, a ball on the grass, and a pin in the distance.

One does not have to be a golf aficionado to enjoy this novel, and although I cannot guarantee that you will immediately fall in love with the game after reading it, I will promise you that you will appreciate the life lessons that is has to offer. Read it, visualize it, and golf will no longer be just a game. The Legend of Bagger Vance: Golf and the Game of Life.