Rating: 2/5

Writer’s style is not engaging or entertaining for me. He’s probably good for military technical buffs.

This guy is a popular best selling author. But not for me. I assume his fans are those who love to think and talk about military technical stuff - with a story to go along with it. The author is regularly welcomed aboard jets, submarines, and destroyers. Admirals and generals give him access, Pentagon officials debrief him, and many of his books are required reading at military colleges. So I assume he is accurate about these things.

MY PROBLEMS:
There were too many characters to keep track of. And for each character, I only knew them through their work. There was no emotional development of characters, no seeing their feelings. I felt like this was “bring your daughter to work day,” and I was going along with my dad (and many other dads) listening and watching as they did their work and attended meetings. I wasn’t excited about anything. Parts were boring. I listened to the sonar guy for a while, then I listened to the captain of a ship for a while, then I listened to the Russian leaders meet and talk about what to do, then I listened to the CIA meet and talk about what to do, then a guy calls another guy talking about what to do. Throughout the book the reader is jumping around among different groups of military and political people.

I want interesting characters to watch, characters that pull me in emotionally. I want witty, interesting, or enlightening dialogue. I want interesting events that move the plot along. There were two interesting major climactic resolutions, but it took way too long to get to them, with nothing else good along the way. It was just watch the guys work. My mind wandered too often, and I wished it would be over.

I saw the movie many years ago and loved it. The movie had a very different feel, and it ended sooner than the book. I think the movie was one of those “inspired by” movies rather than “based on” the book. In the BOOK Jack and other U.S. leaders all believe Marco (the captain of the RO) wants to defect, and they have a plan and prepare for it. In the MOVIE, Jack believes Marco wants to defect but another US commander doesn’t. The commander plans to blow up the RO, and Jack has to convince him not to. At one point Jack lies to the US commander saying I know Marco so well that I know he will turn left at the next something. Jack was bluffing. But when Marco coincidentally turned left, the US commander cancels the order to attack. That scene was so intense that I still remember it all these years later. Nothing like that was in the book.

Anyway I wanted to try Tom Clancy, which is why I read this, but I won’t be reading any more.

STORY BRIEF:
The book is set around 1983, during the days of the “Cold War” between the U.S. and the USSR. It illustrates some of the thinking back then with nuclear threats on both sides. This is one of many books in the Jack Ryan series. Jack is an analyst for the CIA. The Red October is the name of a Russian submarine. The captain of the RO does not follow orders and is on the run from other USSR subs and ships. Jack is the first one to suggest the captain might want to defect. The U.S. navy and the Russian fleet are all trying to find the RO.

NARRATOR:
The narrator J. Charles spoke too quickly. It was jarring to concentrate on his speed of talking. Even between scenes and chapters there were almost no pauses.

DATA:
Unabridged audiobook reading time: 16 hrs and 47 mins. Swearing language: strong, including religious swear words. Sexual content: none. Setting: Around 1983 U.S., USSR (Russia), and the Atlantic Ocean. Book copyright: 1984. Genre: military historical fiction. Ending: happy for the good guys.