Rating: 5/5

My introduction to the fiction of James M. Cain is Mildred Pierce and against expectations of reading another hard-boiled tale of two-bit losers and deadly dames on the make from the author of Double Indemnity and The Postman Always Rings Twice, I was knocked out by how plot-resistant and psychologically compelling this novel is. Published in 1941, the degree which I connected to the title character and her circumstances were a surprise and I'm reluctant to discuss the story for danger of spoiling its allure. I recommend everyone skip my hooptedoodle and read this novel.

In Glendale, California, a suburb of Los Angeles that in the spring of 1931 is considered provincial by those with money or power, Herbert "Bert" Pierce finishes pruning the trees and mowing the lawn of his Spanish bungalow. His wife Mildred is busy designing one of the pies she sells to make ends meet, with her real estate investor husband (of Pierce Homes) gutted and left jobless by the stock market crash in the autumn of 1929. Telling his wife that he's going for a walk, Bert is notified by Mildred that if he's going to see Maggie Biederhof again, he needn't bother coming back. Making sure that their daughters Veda and Moire (Ray) aren't home, Bert packs a suitcase and leaves his wife.

Mildred levels with her eleven-year-old Veda, musically gifted but full of airs and ashamed of her mother's low social status, and the seven-year-old Ray. Mildred confides to her neighbor Mrs. Gessler and initially, subsists on the illusion that her pie orders will pay the utility bills and put food on the table. But when business stalls, suddenly single Mildred agrees to a date with Wally Burgan, a business associate of her husband's who works for the receivers appointed to take over Pierce Homes. Managing to stay friends after their fling, Mildred faces the reality of a mortgage payment coming due and meets with an employment agent named Miss Turner who reads Mildred the riot act.

Miss Turner pulled out a lot of drawers, set them in a row on her desk. They were filled with cards of different colors. Looking intently at Mildred, she said: "I told you you're not qualified. O.K., you can take a look here and see what I mean. These three drawers are employers, people that call me when they want somebody. And they call me, too. They call me because I'm on the level with them and save them the trouble of talking to nitwits like you. You see those pink ones? That means 'No Jews.' See the blues? 'No Gentiles'--not many of them, but a few. That's got nothing to do with you, but it gives you an idea. People are sold over this desk just like cattle in the Chicago yards, and for exactly the same reason: they've got the points the buyer wants. All right, now take a look at something that does concern you. See those greens? That means 'No Married Women.'"

"Why, may I ask?"

"Because right in the middle of rush hour you wonderful little homemakers have a habit of getting a call that Willie's got the croup, and out you run, and maybe you come back next day, and maybe you come back next week."

"Somebody has to look after Willie."

"These people, these employers on the greens, they're not much interested in Willie. And another habit you wonderful homemakers have got is running up a lot of bills you thought friend husband would pay, and then when he wouldn't you had to get a job. And then the first paycheck you draw, there's eighteen attachments on it--and life's too short."

"Do you call that fair?"

"I call them green. I go by the cards."

"I don't owe a cent."

"Not one?"

Mildred thought guiltily of the interest that would be due July 1, and Miss Turner, seeing the flicker in her eye, said: "I thought so...Now take a look at these other drawers. They're all applicants. These are stenographers--a dime a dozen, but at least they can do something. These are qualified secretaries--a dime a dozen too, but they rate a different file. These are stenographers with scientific experience, nurses, laboratory assistants, chemists all able to take charge of a clinic, or run an office for three or four doctors, or do hospital work. Why would I recommend you ahead of any of them? Some of those girls are Ph.D's and Sc.D's from U.C.L.A. and other places. Here's a whole file of stenographers that are expert bookkeepers. Any one of them could take charge of all the office work for a small firm, and still have time for a little sleeping. Here are sales people, men and women, every one of them with an A-1 reference--they can really move goods. They're all laid off, there's no goods moving, but I don't see how I could put you ahead of them. And here's the preferred list. Look at it, a whole drawerful, men and women, every one of them a real executive, or auditor, or manager of some business, and when I recommend one, I know somebody is getting something for his money. They're all home, sitting by their phones, hoping I'll call. I won't call. I've got nothing to tell them. What I'm trying to get through your head is: You haven't got a chance. Those people, it hurts me, it makes me lie awake nights, that I've got nothing for them. They deserve something, and there's not a thing I can do. But there's not a chance I'd slip you ahead of any one of them. You're not qualified. There's not a thing on earth you can do, and I hate people that can't do anything."

"How do I qualify?"

Mildred's lips were fluttering again, the way they had in Miss Boole's office. Miss Turner looked quickly away, then said: "Can I make a suggestion?"

Mildred's tenacity and luck crossing paths with women sympathetic to her plight snare her a job interview for a housekeeper in Beverly. Convinced that Veda would disown her if she accepted such a socially inferior position, Mildred turns the job down. Stopping at a restaurant in Hollywood, she witnesses two waitresses fired. With nothing left to lose, she asks the head waitress Ida for the job. Earning twenty-five cents an hour plus tips, Mildred is handed an apron and given a crash course in serving tables. Unable to carry more than two plates at a time, her job is spared by the cook, who recognizes that Mildred knows how to prepare food.

In addition to easing her financial woes, Mildred quickly becomes the best waitress in the restaurant. Noting how bad the pies she's forced to serve are, she gains the confidence of Ida, who's locked in a battle with the owner Mr. Chris over the pie situation. When Ida discovers how masterful Mildred's pies are, she conspires to get Mildred the contract at thirty-five cents a pie. Mildred uses the income to hire a housekeeper. Though Veda discovers that her mother has taken lowly work as a waitress, Mildred no longer regards her employer as a dead end and through observation, begins to learn how to run a successful restaurant.

In an effort to retain the respect of her daughter, Mildred announces her intention to open her own restaurant, a chicken and waffles place. Wally Burgan offers Mildred a model home for the price of four thousand dollars that the receivers are taking a loss on that he feels would be perfect. He advises Mildred that she'll need Bert to agree to a divorce before she goes into business and employing still more political finesse, Mildred gets Bert to agree to this, accepting his gift of the house so her ex-husband can feel he's providing for his children. Drawing on her skills with food, hospitality and people, Mildred Pierce seems to be on her way to becoming someone Veda is proud of.

It was a hot morning in October, her last at the restaurant. The previous two weeks had been a mad scramble in which it had seemed she would never find time for all she had to do. There had been visits to Los Angeles Street, to order the equipment her precious credit entitled her to; calls on restaurant proprietors, to get her pie orders to the point where they would really help on expenses; endless scurrying to the model home, where painters were transforming it; hard, secret figuring about money; work and worry that sent her to bed at night almost too exhausted to sleep. But now that was over. The equipment was in, particularly a gigantic range that made her heart thump when she looked at it; the painters were done, almost; three new pie contracts were safely past the sample stage. The load of debt she would have to carry, the interest, taxes, and installments involved, frightened her, and at the same time excited her. If she could ever struggle through the first year or two, she told herself, then she would "have something."

As much as I enjoy hard-boiled noir with its murder plots and double crosses, Mildred Pierce resists every opportunity to be pigeonholed into that genre. As a vibrant and searing story of the Great Depression and the prewar years in Los Angeles, the novel would be great simply for the world it opens its readers to, a world of economic collapse and women surviving without the social safety nets, legal protections or technology I'm using to write this review. The reason this is one of my favorite novels ever is James M. Cain's savvy when it comes to politics, the mechanisms that people use to exert their will and get what they want, maneuvers which often remain covert.

So far as Monty was concerned, Mildred knew this was the end, but she didn't do anything about it at once. She received him as usual when he dropped in at the restaurant that night, and the next two or three nights. She even submitted to his embraces, deriving a curious satisfaction from the knowledge that his access to the very best legs was rapidly drawing to a close. Stoppage of the spending money brought Veda to her milk, as no beating had ever done, and when it did, Mildred forgave her quite honestly, in a teary little scene two or three days after Christmas. It was almost automatic with her by now to acquit Veda of wrongdoing, no matter how flagrant the offense. In her mind, the blame was all Monty's, and presently she knew exactly how she would deal with him, and when.

Like Mildred Pierce, I live on the outskirts of Los Angeles and am currently looking for a job, hoping to start my own business but have no spouse or family who can even offer a strong drink to help me along. I identified with this character, who has integrity, creativity, strength and one immeasurable weakness that threatens to destroy everything she's built. The psychological warfare in Cain's novel is far more thrilling that if guns or knives were involved and kept me invested throughout, with prose and dialogue that are jeweled. Filmmakers may have agreed, with two film adaptations, one in 1945 for Warner Bros. starring Joan Crawford and one in 2011 for HBO starring Kate Winslet.

Length: 89,164 words