Rating: 3/5

I often have to remind myself, when I'm reading these older romance novels, that the author is portraying the types of values and belief systems that differ a lot from what we're accustomed to in our present era. This novel is a perfect example of how people's ideals and moral standards sometimes led them to make such drastic and painful choices that end up destroying not only themselves, but also those closest to them. In this novel, the heroine Valerie had been a teenager having an affair with the H Judd who was her wealthy, playboy neighbour. Judd had also been about 10 years older than the 18 yr old heroine. Valerie's only relative was her grandfather and the old man had very inflexible standards when it came to the way young ladies were expected to behave. As usually happens whenever there's a stark generational conflict between obstinate close relatives, the situation is never resolved with warm communication. 

Valerie had been a spoilt, attention seeking teenager who often tested her grandfather's patience. She would steal his liquor, smoke cigarettes, take his best horses for midnight rides without his permission and eventually she started having a clandestine affair with Judd. Valerie developed a somewhat obsessive fixation with Judd and in her lonely teenage mind, he was the ultimate in male perfection. Poor Valerie's childish infatuation soon developed into love but Judd refused to have a public relationship that was outwardly respectable. Valerie was Judd's dirty little secret. I didn't like this at all because he's 10 years older and should not have been meeting an 18 yr old delinquent girl for midnight sex out in the lush, green pastures. I place the major portion of the blame for Valerie's terrible predicament on Judd, because he was the mature person in their "relationship". An 18 yr old girl who's been sheltered all her life might have the physical appearance of a woman but her heart will still contain certain childish yearnings and dreams. My heart broke for Valerie, in the flashback scenes, where she kept yearning for the day when Judd would ask her to be his date or escort her to one of the many social functions held at his own mansion. 

Judd had never cheated on Valerie while they were having their clandestine sexual relationship, yet he never asked her out on public dates. He also often partnered women closer to his age and from his social class, whenever he had to attend functions in the area. This was terribly humiliating for Valerie and the dumb teenager would have continued to accept that situation if she had not ended up pregnant. Her grandfather responded to the pregnancy in a predictable manner for a man of his beliefs: he kicked her out. After he kicked her out, he started spinning a web of lies around the community about how Valerie had met a guy, eloped and was now settling down to happy wedded bliss. In the meantime, Valerie was actually suffering through a life of poverty while simultaneously trying to take night courses to improve her education and expand her employment horizons. The only lucky strike that she had was her encounter with a kindly older lady called Clara who shared her accommodation and helped babysit her son Tadd.

Judd, on the other hand, soon realized what a fool he had been to not tell Valerie how he felt about her. Apparently, and according to Judd himself, he had been sexually obsessed with her but had also been in love with her. Nonetheless, he had not wanted to share her with the rest of the world. Wtf ???? I am not even going to explore my feelings about the inner workings of Judd's F up mind. His justification just didn't make much logical sense to me personally. Didn't he realize that by stifling the love he felt and by hiding their relationship, he would only be ensuring that it withered and died ? Whatever... Judd's inner psyche doesn't deserve any further speculation. The novel focuses on Valerie's return to her home after her grandfather dies. In a strange gesture of goodwill, the old man had left his property to Valerie. It wasn't worth much but at least she would gain a little nest egg to set aside for her child's future.

Judd is drawn to her as soon as he sees her but he still thinks she is married and so he keeps his distance. All of this changes when he discovers she's never been married. His pursuit of her intensifies and the shit storm worsens after her son's paternity is revealed. I felt that Judd's feelings for Valerie were mainly a very strong and obsessive sexual addiction rather than love. Maybe it's because of the way he acted with her. There wasn't much sex but they shared a heated chemistry in the scenes together. I wished Judd could have bonded more with his son Tadd but I can understand the author's inability to include all of that when one considers the word limit constraints of a HP novel. I didn't hate Judd as a H. I was more disappointed in his failure to act like an adult. I even felt sorry for him a bit because he kept visiting Valerie's grandfather after she had left. He said he had done this in an effort to know all that was happening in her new life. When I think of all the stupid lies her grandfather had told Judd over the years, I want to scream. It must have been hell for Judd to keep hearing that the girl he loved and lost was now happily married with a son. I didn't hate Judd for not being celibate during the separation years because as far as he was concerned, Valerie was married. 

It was a nice and interesting novel and I enjoyed reading a lot about the horses. It was also endearing to see how Valerie took responsibility for her mistakes and matured into a productive and responsible woman. It was a lovely second chance and secret baby romance.