Rating: 4/5

It is hard to assess the quality of D H Lawrence’s poetry. The Introduction to this selection informs me that Lawrence’s collected poems were received poorly, and that this book contains his only good poetry. So for that reason Lawrence will remain famous primarily as a novelist.

The poems do contain a good range of Lawrence’s opinions and concerns. Lawrence was a highly-opinionated man and had strong views on everything, so the reader is unlikely to agree with all that he says. Still we are not required to do this – only to consider what he says, and how he says it.

As might be expected, love and sex feature largely in many of the poems. Keith Sagar (who compiled this selection) has chosen Lawrence’s original drafts, rather than the later versions where the sexually mature Lawrence imposes his experience onto his juvenilia. Nonetheless expect much sensuality here.

Lawrence’s attitude to love and sex always seems mysterious to me. I often feel that the man who presented himself as a high priest for a more liberated concept of love and sex did not always have a high opinion of love, sex or even women. He clearly had an ideal in his head, but his love poetry often has a streak of violence and even hatred in it. 

There are brief hints of Lawrence’s upbringing here – poems written in dialect, poems about miners, and a poem about domestic abuse that hints at Lawrence’s parents. Being a miner’s son gave Lawrence a good deal of suspiciousness about technology. He feared that the workplace would reduce man to the status of a machine.

Some of the poems here criticise the notion of the human or animal body working like a machine, as Lawrence prefers something more mystical. He is unenthusiastic about science. The idea that a scientist might suggest that snow is really black actually outrages Lawrence. He is not fascinated by science challenging human perceptions – he positively hates it.

Curiously Lawrence writes many poems that talk about God here. This streak of religiosity is largely absent in his most famous novels, or at least it is not directly discussed. The poems seem to bring out a latent piety in Lawrence, though his viewpoint about the Christian god is as skittish as his opinions about everything else.

My favourite poems here are Lawrence’s verses about animals, including the justly famous ‘Snake’ in which Lawrence describes his fascination with the beauty of a snake that his civilised mind tells him he ought to kill. 

This conflict between nature and human nature lies at the root of most of Lawrence’s nature poems. He has some peculiar views – well this is Lawrence – even suggesting that he likes to stamp on snowdrops and crocuses because they are not spring flowers.

As with ‘Snake’, Lawrence is drawn towards the less human of animals, or at least the ones that seem least identifiable. ‘Man and Bat’ has Lawrence pitched against an invading creature in his house. He wants to drive the bat out, but comes to realise that the bat wants to stay in his house because it is frightened of the daylight. Nonetheless his repugnance cannot allow him to leave the bat alone to stay inside his house until nightfall.

Other creatures that fascinate Lawrence are snapping tortoises, another reptilian presence, aggressive goats and a turkey-cock, malignant-looking elephants (I am uncertain why Lawrence is not keen on them), a mosquito, and fish (who live such loveless lives). Even a loveable dog is not truly loving, but gives her love to anyone who will treat her well.

This account of the animal kingdom reminds us that humans have become alienated from nature, but not always in bad ways. We at least can feel love for one another, and even for animals but the animals do not approach us in affection. 

This is something that we need to remember as a species before we start hating foreigners, immigrants, Muslims, transgender people, or any other section of society that has never harmed us. When we love and respect others, we are human. When we engage in tribal hatreds, we are no better than the fish or the reptiles or any other creature that kills by instinct. It is also a good reason for us to treat animals well.

On the whole I rather enjoyed this selection, though some of the poems did not make much impression on me, especially the more abstract ones. At his best, Lawrence can be a tender, imaginative and even humorous poet. As with his novels, I feel like his best work here achieves true greatness but at other times I am out of sympathy with Lawrence.