Rating: 2/5

I read Teleny for my Finnish assignment for controversial literature. I had been intrigued to read it before, and this was a good chance to kill two birds, even if it meant I had to read the translated version. I read some of the original on the side as well but I have to say that this was one of the rare occasions where the narrative actually benefittd from the translation – albeit it made the dialogue a little corny, but I don't count that because it's mainly due to cultural differences and occurs with pretty much any translated dialogue. That's just not how you converse in Finnish! Overall, the poetic yet grotesque atmosphere appeared masterful both in the original version and in the translation.

The first half of Teleny seemed like it had a potential for a good book. Yes, it was very graphic, even kind of weird from the very beginning, but I loved the thought of Camille blowing his load over a piece of music and a set of vivid hallucinations, and the spiritual bond thereof. I also liked they way the story explored different taboos without seeming forced. It all seemed reasonable and I was expecting it all to intertwine into one great and complex plot. 

I guess that's what you get from reading too much Diana Wynne Jones. You start expecting similar brilliance from everything. Which is bound to get you severely disappointed.

So, of course, my expectations were never met. The second half of the story seemed cheap and hurried and reminded me of badly written slash fanfiction. It was so bad I started making faces at the book and calling it names just to easen the frustration such bad writing left me with, and felt relieved after finishing this utter waste of my time. 

I refuse to believe this was written by Wilde, at least Wilde alone. That's how bad the ending was. It was the cheapest attempt at tragedy I've seen in my life. But there's always a silver lining – for once in my life I get to call something surprisingly a worse love story than Twilight.