Rating: 5/5

(1)

• telltale signs of information anxiety: a checklist p 35

Perhaps the three principles closest to my heart - and the most radical - are : 1. Learning to accept your ignorance 2. Paying more attention to the question than the answer 3. Never being afraid to go in an opposite direction to find a solution. P 47 

We need understanding businesses devoted to making information accessible and comprehensible; we need new ways of interpreting the data that increasingly directs our lives and new models for making it usable and unserstandable, for transforming it into information. We need to re-educate the people who generate information to improve it's performance, and we, as consumers, must become more adroit as receivers if we are ever to recover from information anxiety. P 50 

(2) 

But the most essential prerequisite to understanding is to be able to admit when you don't understand something. Being able to admit that you don't know is liberating. Giving yourself permission not to know everything will make you relax, which is the ideal frame of the mind to receive new information. You must be comfortable to really listen, to really hear new information. 

When you can admit to ignorance, you will realize that is ignorance isn't exactly bliss, it is an ideal state from which to learn. The fewer preconceptions you have about not knowing, the more you will increase your ability to understand and learn. 

...

When you admit that you don't know, you are more likely to ask the questions that will enable you to learn. When you don't have to filter your inquisitiveness through a smokescreen of intellectual posturing, you can genuinely receive or listen to new information. If you are always trying to disguise your ignorance of a subject, you will be distracted from understanding it. 

By giving yourself permission not to know, you can overcome the fear that your ignorance will be discovered. The inquisitiveness essential to learning thrives on transcending fear. 

Yes this essential prerequisite to learning is a radical concept in our society. As there are few rewards and abundant punishments for admitting ignorance on a personal or professional level in out culture, we go to great lengths to make a lack of understanding. P 54

The focus on bravado and competition in our society has helped breed into us the idea that it is impolitic, or at least impolite, to say "I don't understand" p 54 

While numerous fields are involved with the storage and transmission of information, virtually none is devoted to translating it into understandable forms for the general public. As the only means we have of comprehending information are through words, numbers, and pictures, the two professions that primarily determine how we receive it are writing and graphic design. Yet the orientation and training in both fields are more preoccupied with stylistic and aesthetic concerns. P 55

Even if the needle is all that you need, it will behoove you to know how the hay is organized. P 59 

The ways of organizing information are finite. It can only be organized by 1 category 2 time 3 location 4 alphabet 5 continuum. ... Your choice will be determined by the story you want to tell. Each way will permit a different understanding of the information. P 59 

*** Charles Eames created and exhibit on Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin that was done as a timeline where the viewers could see who was doing what when . P 60 

Each way I arrange these dogs tells you something different about them; each mode of organization provides additional information. The creative organization of information creates new information. P 70 

I see things in terms of opposites. * I rather worship the space between things, the silence between good friends, the time between the notes of music, the break during a conference, the space between buildings, negative space. * I love the space on my desk better than the objects themselves. It makes me see clearer. That is the yin/yang. The opposites of things are just so much more fascinating than the things themselves. ... I look for a solution which has a valid oppositeness. Not a "different way" of looking at things, but an opposite way. P 72

...a way of finding solutions via the hegelian formula of thesis versus antithesis yelds synthesis. P 73 

Originality is in the origins. P 81 

There are many how's but only one what. What drives the how's. You must always ask the question "what is" before you ask the question "how to" ... Desert drinking water example. Hands cup spoon straw. P 81 

(3)

The art of listening - allow a pause after the person has finished speaking before leaping with your response. Don't be afraid of silence; people often reveal the essence of what they're trying to say after a pause. P 86 

The whole apprenticeship system of education, sadly nearing extinction today, us based in the beauty of conversation, of the wise and experience imparting wisdom to the young through the medium of an extended conversation that unfolds in the workplace. // I think we don't use conversation as a model because it is so obvious and so natural that we don't see it's perfection of form. It doesn't seem pure, or elegant, since it is always adjusting; it is changing it's emphasis, it's level of detail. It is not consistent, it is not the way you are taught to write, but it is exactly the way you think. P 93 

(4) 

[contn'd on physical copy]