Rating: 4/5

I have read two books by Jon McGahern previous to this, The Barracks (1963) and in 2002, That They May Face the Rising Sun (US version of that book called ‘By The Lake’). I liked them a great deal. McGahern is a highly-respected Irish author (in its obituary the Guardian described him as 'arguably the most important Irish novelist since Samuel Beckett'). This book was well-written. It was somber – it was about a father and husband, Michael Moran, who was so angry about things that he took things out on his second wife (there was no mention as far as I could tell about his first wife other than she had died) and his four children. There was always an air of crisp tension throughout the book – you knew if he were in a good mood it would not last and you wondered when it would break or what would break it. Who he would verbally attack next? Early on in his second marriage he seemed to on purpose push the envelope with his second wife Rose so as to humiliate her and then to draw back when he knew he went too far (but he didn’t seem to be necessarily sorry that he went too far), and then he would say “I’m sorry” and would dial it back. He never hit her and I would hesitate to call it blatant verbal abuse, or that she was terrified of him. I think she loved him quite a bit, and was walking on eggshells around him, but I guess she derived something from their marriage. It might have been his 3 girls who she liked a lot as well as his younger son. His older son Luke had left the house after Michael Moran had given him a humiliating beating never to return.

Several quotes that resonated with me from the book:

He had not been able to go out and be at ease with people. What she did not know was that Moran, with his good looks and military fame, had once been king of these barn dances and now that he had neither youth nor fame would not take a lesser place. He would not take part at all. 

About Rose… “Now most of her pleasure and all of her pain flowed through him. For her there was always a strange excitement in his presence of something about to happen. Nothing was ever still. She felt inordinately grateful when he behaved normally.”

After he humiliated Rose in front of his girls she quietly left the room. He went to her hours later… “I never heard such nonsense, he blustered ‘Are you taking everything up as serious as some of the other people in this house? Does every move have to be Judgment Day?” Rose: ‘I was told I was no use in the house. I couldn’t go on living in a place where I was no use,’ she spoke with the quietness and desperate authority of someone who had discovered they could give up no more ground and live. (JimZ: After this bullying episode by him, he never said such a harsh thing to her again…she had stood her ground. Incidentally I loved the way McGahern finished that sentence.)

The tension of being around him… “As looking down from great heights brings the urge to fall and end the terror of falling, so his very watching put pressure on them to make a slip as they dried and stacked the plates and cups.”