Title: The Children of Lir 
Author: Sheila MacGill-Callahan
Illustrator: Gennedy Sparin
Genre: Legend
Theme(s): swans, mountains, legend
Opening line/sentence: 
Long, long ago in Ireland lived a happy king called Lir. 
Brief Book Summary: After being turned into swans by the stepmother of Lir, the four children are not able to be turned back until the two mountains are connected. The Man of the North and the Woman of the South are representing the conflicting tribes that must be connected in order to turn back the children. 
Professional Recommendation/Review #1: Kirkus (Kirkus Reviews, 1993) 
In a tale "loosely based on an Irish myth," Lir's four children are turned into swans by jealous stepmother Aiofe, who grants them just one day a year in their true form--but "on that day your feet may not touch the earth or you will surely die." They find refuge on a whale's back; still, she pursues them relentlessly until the spell is broken by friendly birds who form an arch to join two mountains--the "Man from the North" and the "Woman from the South." In the original, these are a man and woman, from warring tribes, who marry; 900 years have elapsed; and the aged children join Lit in heaven--this isn't for purists, but it makes a dramatic story in a folkloric style. The Russian-born Spirin uses watercolors to create lush formal paintings in his nco-Renaissance style, with romantic landscapes and ornately clad figures; best are his sinuous, beautifully painted swans and sea mammals. A bit pretentious, but undeniably handsome.
Professional Review/Recommendation #2: Publishers Weekly (Publishers Weekly) 
The craggy coast of Ireland provides a brooding backdrop for this stirring folktale, reputed to be the genesis of Shakespeare's Lear. After the death of his wife, Aobh, King Lir marries her sister Aiofe, whose beauty ``hid an evil heart.'' Jealous of her husband's love for his four children, Aiofe casts a spell on the youths, turning them into swans ``for three times three hundred years,'' or until the twin mountains bordering the kingdom should come together. In her second book, MacGill-Callahan ( And Still the Turtle Watched ) exhibits an admirable sense of classical fairy-tale style: her prose, studded with poetic imagery and elegant turns of phrase, escalates the story's dramatic impact. Spirin's ( Snow White and Rose Red ) characteristically sumptuous, gilt-flecked paintings accentuate both the material opulence of royalty and the strength and natural beauty of the varied animals who assist the swans and provide the book's joyful conclusion. Lavish double-page spreads are balanced by smaller watercolors set among the text--though the painstaking detail is occasionally difficult to discern in the individual illustrations. A lyrical and compelling narrative, coupled with another triumph of artistry and exquisite design for a consummate craftsman
Response to Two Professional Reviews: 
Both of these reviews focus mainly on the summary of the book, but note on the watercolor that is used throughout the book. I agree with the reviewers that the illustrations are what makes the book and adds a beautiful touch to the book. However, I would have mentioned the fact this plot is one that children would be able to follow and would want to follow. 
Evaluation of Literary Elements: 
The plot is a complex plot in the way that students need to understand the symbolism and what each character truly means. However, the most amazing part of this book includes the illustrations and how detailed the watercolors are in the book. 
Consideration of Instructional Application:
When considering instructional application, students could talk about emotions such as jealousy and why it is okay to feel jealous. However, role play could be used to act out how they should act when they do feel jealous.