Rating: 3/5

MYTH INC and Me

A million years back, my older brother picked up a fantasy comedy novel, one that he heard was pretty good, and in typical fashion right after he finished it, I picked it up, and then our younger brother.  Our parents loved when we did this, and then discussed and debated the books endlessly.  This kept on with this one series until years later, when the writer kinda went into more depressing territory and the books became less fun, more of a chore. 

So I stopped reading them, while my brothers kept going, and I had no clue how many books were coming out.  But a year or so back I grabbed most of the rest of the series from them and plunged back in. 

Now this was an experience. 

So what I am babbling about is The Myth Inc Series by the late author Robert Asprin, a fantasy comedy which starts off a medieval place called Klahd, which is pronounced Clod, and a young man named Skeeve who is being trained as a magician.  His master pulls a trick, and is then promptly assassinated, and suddenly Skeeve is left to deal with a green scaly demon man his master conjured up.  Turns out, he is an old friend of the wizard, and has been left powerless by the trick.  Aahz, which is pronounced Oz and is no relation, agrees to team up as Master and Apprentice with Skeeve. 

Thus begins an interesting partnership, as Skeeve and Aahz get a pet dragon, fight a war for a kingdom, join the mob but do no moblike stuff, hop from dimension to dimension, meet vampires, play dragon poker, and meet a ton of new allies who fast become friends.  We get the sexy Tanda the assassin, her brother Chumley the troll, Guido and Nunzio Skeeve’s mob bodyguards, and even more and more as the series progresses.  And we get pun filled titles like Myth Conceptions and Little Myth Marker.  By the time we reach M.Y.T.H. Inc Link, Asprin decides to switch the narrator from Skeeve to all sorts of the rest of the cast.  It is a nice switch up for the series, but could not stop the mountains of subplots spinning everywhere and how stuff had become depressing in some places. 

However one thread that was a bright spot all along was the occasional cartoon, showing scenes from the story, in the trade paperbacks by Phil Foglio, who also did the comics adaptation of the first book. 

Where I exactly left off from decades ago was my first challenge, and a reread of M.Y.T.H. Inc In Action reveals I left this one two chapters short of finishing.  The re-invasion of the kingdom has been settled, largely thanks to Guido and Nunzio joining the army and sabotaging it from the inside. 

With a whole bunch of subplots resolved, we move into my first completely new read of the series this century, Sweet Myth-tery of Life, where Skeeve has brought Aahz back from his dimension of Perv after they had a big falling out.  Now Skeeve has received a marriage proposal from Queen Hemlock and goes back to wondering about love.  Oh, and he needs to fix the kingdoms finances.  And more subplots get resolved.  But it is also gets kinda repetitive. 

Which leads to Something M.Y.T.H. Inc, where the multiple narrator shtick is back as the kingdom is in rebellion against the tyrant who raised taxes, that evil one time Court Magician Skeeve!  The Myth gang set out to quell the insurrections, who are remarkedly like Zorro and Robin Hood, and not let Skeeve know what is going on.  This one takes place at the same time as the last one.  And this one starts off really really good, then falls apart.  And all the subplots get figured out and Skeeve moves into a new place in life, so that the series can rebuild, which leads to….

Myth-Ion Improbable, a flashback tale to Skeeve and Aahz and Tanda going on a treasure hunt in a far off dimension.  It is cute at best.  And the big relaunch happens with…. 

Myth-Told Tales.  Or not.  Asprin gets an official co-writer here with Jody Lynn Nye, and the many narrators idea is back, but it is really just short stories.  It is a mixed bag, like any collection, and still like treading water until whatever the new reality is.  Methinks Asprin and Nye may not have hit it off right away, and this format was a compromise just to keep the Myth series going.  Nye has a track record as a writer before this book, and I believe a real affection for these characters, so I kinda wish Asprin would just hand the series over to her, since he seems not so into it. 

Myth Alliances is a Skeeve without Aahz book, where Skeeve and Bunny, his sexy and super smart assistant, have to free the dimension of Wuhses from a group of Perv business women who have become dictators.  Or have they?  This one starts very promising, then keeps going on and on, but still gives a pretty spectacular ending. 

This leads to the Aahz centered book Myth-Taken Identity, where he finds out someone has stolen Skeeve’s id and is wrecking his good name in the mall dimension.  No one does that to his former apprentice and good friend!  This one is just like the last one, starts off well, meanders quite abit, then finishes strong. 

It feels like Nye takes over more with Class Dis-Mythed, where Skeeve is asked by various people to teach a whole bunch of apprentices in magic.  It is a learning curve for Skeeve, and one for the students, and we get a whole bunch of cameos from other characters from the series, some being very very surprising.  Their is a secret the students are keeping through, which leads to the surprise ending chapters.  I really dig the new characters and hope they make reappearances in future books. 

So it seems like whatever Asprin and Nye got working, is really working, and Myth-Gotten Gains is proof of that.  Aahz finds a magic talking sword in a bazaar and is promised money AND getting his powers back if he helps find his family of magical objects.  Turns out they are The Golden Hoard, an ancient and all powerful group who don’t really get along.  Aahz and Tanda travel all over, find the Flute and the Purse and the Book and the Crystal Ball.  And Aahz and Tanda are completely driven crazy by the Hoard’s constant bickering and insults and attitude.  I loved these new additions and their banter read in my head like a Monty Python skit. 

This new groove moves us into Myth-Chief, where Skeeve comes back to adventuring and his Myth Inc aren’t all happy.  So eventually Skeeve and Aahz have a contest with two competing but not so competing goals, to save a kingdom from financial ruin.  Unfortunately, this one backslides to being too long, unfocused, and only one part of the ending making sense.  Their is hope, since the new dynamic of Myth n Inc is finally in place here. 

This is also the last one my brothers got, but Asprin and Nye gave us one more with Myth-Fortunes, and then suddenly Asprin passed away.  Nye continued on with Myth-Quoted and Myth-Fits.  I have no idea what happens in these volumes, or how these go generally with Nye fully in charge. 

Even with the mixed results of this catchup, I am still glad I did it.  It was nice to see how these old friends were doing, and seeing that they were in good hands with Nye.  I think Asprin would be happy.  And my brothers and I can debate this endlessly as well. 

Scoopriches