Rating: 5/5

There's a reason Jerry Pournelle is considered to be one of the best SF authors of the last half of the 20th Century.

In the milieu of his future history, America and the Soviet Union got past their differences and formed a world government, the CoDominium, and went on to found an interstellar Empire of Man. After about a thousand years, though, the empire collapsed in a series of civil wars, and many worlds lost contact with the mainstream of human civilization and slid backwards into barbarism, or at least lost much of the technological knowledge they had had.

One such world was Prince Samual's World, which was eventually contacted by technologically advanced scouts from the re-formed Second Empire--at which point the planet had regained a tech level about equivalent to 19th Century Europe. The Imperials put a stop to the many internecine wars between the balkanized countries and city-states of Prince Samual's World and began the process of deciding how to reintegrate the planet into the Empire.

One major consideration was whether the world had achieved manned space travel of any kind. Of course, Prince Samual's World had not--they were only beginning to learn about electricity. But the leaders of the planet learned that with space travel, they could be admitted as a world among peers in the higher echelons of planets, and with attendant freedoms and privileges; but without it, they would be considered no better than a slave world to be colonized and exploited.

In order to avoid that fate, the leaders of Prince Samual's World--all from the country of Haven, which became the world government thanks to the Imperial intervention--came up with a desperate scheme to build a spaceship by hook or by crook before time came for the Empire to make its decision. Problem was, the best man to lead the operation was a leading officer from the defeated army of a rival nation, whose fiancée had been killed in the Imperial-aided attack that had ended the war and unified the planet.

This fantastic (in the sense of terrific) plot, and the three-dimensional characters and their quirks and motivations, combine to make this a first-class story. Not surprising for a Pournelle book, there is some great military action described in vivid detail. The plot only lags briefly in a couple of places, and the sense of tension and time running out remains palpable throughout. I particularly like how Pournelle explains the situation through the eyes of all the major characters. None is a villain; all have very good reasons for doing what they do, and believe unapologetically in their causes. This is a brilliant story with first class writing.