Rating: 5/5

Varjak Paw is the eponymous hero of S F Said’s children’s book about a young cat with heavy responsibilities on his little furry shoulders. As pedigree Mesopotamian Blues, Varjak Paw and his family live a privileged life, sharing the home of a wealthy Countess who has kept them in style since their ancestor, Jalal Paw, made his way to her home from far off Mesopotamia. Grandfather Elder Paw is the family patriarch but his influence is declining. When young Varjak Paw discovers that all is not well in the Countess’s house and finds that a ‘Gentleman’ with two big black cats has moved in, Elder Paw takes his grandson’s reports seriously. Elder Paw understands that the Countess has gone and that nothing can be the same again and he urges the family to fight back against this danger but the family are spoiled and complacent. Their china dishes are filled with delicious foods, their litter trays are emptied, they have no reason to rebel. Ridiculed and deposed by a younger family member, Elder Paw tells his grandson Varjak Paw that the only thing which can save the family is a dog because humans are scared of dogs. He tells Varjak Paw that he must go ‘Outside’ and find a dog to help the Paw family to overcome the danger.

This book is the story of what happens when a brave and inquisitive little cat with a big heart and an eagerness to know the ways of his forefathers leaves the safety of his comfortable home to take on the dangers of the outside world.

I wouldn’t normally read children’s books. I do occasionally make an exception and dabble in the ‘Young Adult’ genre, but usually more by accident than design. I certainly don’t go looking for illustrated children’s books. When my husband returned from a visit to my sister with a copy of ‘Varjak Paw’ I was baffled as to why I’d been sent such a book to read. I knew I couldn’t just say ‘Thank you’ and hide it on the shelf since the book came with instructions to send it back because she hadn’t read it yet. I took the bull by the horns, ran a hot bath and started reading. My expectations were not very high.

Much to my surprise I loved this book and despite the illustrations, I didn’t feel at all as if I were reading a children’s story. In fact, Dave McKean’s illustrations were beautiful and added enormously to the enjoyment of the book. In no way did I feel patronised or talked down to by the writer.

The book follows a structure in which the young cat learns step by step to understand and implement the seven secrets of ‘The Way’ from his long-dead ancestor, Jalal, via a series of dreams in which the older cat explains to him how to be a proper cat. Varjak Paw’s family have been indoor cats for so many generations that they have lost their feline knowledge of how to hunt, how to fight and – in effect – how to be proper cats. If Varjak Paw is to help his family, he has to learn the old ways and he has to learn them quickly since he’s a kitty with no street smarts and no experience of how to look after himself. He’s also a lonely little chap, ostracised by his litter mates and his cousins for having the ‘wrong’ colour eyes, taunted for not being a real Mesopotamian Blue.

With the help of two street cats, Molly and Tam, and with the dream advice of Jalal, Varjak Paw learns the old ways and puts them into practice, learning to fight and to hunt for food, taking on the power of the gangs and discovering the secret of the frightening ‘Vanishings’ that the street cats all fear. He also learns about the power of friendship and the empowerment of being self-reliant. As the readers realise what’s really going on, why the street cats are vanishing, I couldn’t help thinking that this was a pretty upsetting story for young readers. 

When our hero eventually returns to his family home with the help of his new friends, he’s shocked to find that the Mesopotamian Blues want nothing to do with Holly because she’s not a pure bred cat of their own breed. Readers will quickly realise that this kitty racism and classism is not acceptable. Varjak Paw’s family know that evil is happening in their house but its happening to ‘other’ cats and so it’s not their concern. Bad things happen to the common cats, not to the pure pedigree cats like them. I was reminded of the multiple times throughout history when people have turned a blind eye to the abuse of others who belong to groups that are not their own. How many people decided not to concern themselves with history’s episodes of ‘ethnic cleansing’ just because it was safer to keep their heads down and not make a fuss about something that was happening to another group? I have no idea, of course, whether this is what SF Said intended to convey through his story, but it was the message that I took away. 

I had never heard of S F Said but I checked out his background on Wikipedia learned that he was born in Beirut, spent time in Jordan and then grew up in a community of Iraqis in exile in London. Perhaps my assumptions about the persecution of outsiders and the acceptance of turning a blind eye to evil are rooted in his family history. 

Younger readers can take this story at face value, whilst older can be prompted to think of more heavy issues around responsibility, turning a blind eye and respecting the ways of the past. I don’t have children so I can only review this from an adult point of view although I know this would have been a book I’d have loved when I was a child. For most of the time I was reading, I was thinking that if my little cat Bagheera could read, this is exactly the sort of kitty adventure story he’d want to read or have read to him. Not that he needs ANY training in how to kill or fight or how to be a cat but every little kitty needs a hero.