Rating: 3/5

(This review is based on my reread of this book. I'd originally read it back in 2005 in paperback.)

Wow, this book. Talk abt dark. 

It begins on an intensely sad note and never really moves past that. As the longest book in the series, the angst can become a little too much to endure in one sitting. I'd forgotten several key details from the first time I'd read this novel. And yet, I knew there wasn't going to be any respite from the pain and the horror within its pages.

In some ways, this book is a slight continuation of the events that happened at the end of The Death of Friends. It's now six months later and Henry is grieving with every cell of his body. The grip that grief has on Henry's heart and soul adds a kind of claustrophobic element to the story. Which makes sense since grief is not something ppl can turn on and off.

Adding to that, there's the larger storyline (or the A Plot, if you will)--which involves a lot of seediness, murder, and rot. Henry gets involved by force (he has to clear his name when accused of being a murderer) and does the best he can with a slippery murderer and a huge web of corruption.

On top of that, this book is dripping with cynicism to the point that you might want to do something nice for yourself after finishing reading it. There's a harsh judgement not only against the justice system, but also against Hollywood, and (even more intensely) a closer look at gay men. 

Other than the hopelessness that permeates the novel (the v. few moments of happiness or, at the v. least, peace happen in some of Henry's dreams), my biggest gripe with the novel has to do with the last 35% of the book. For some reason, the author includes a smaller storyarc featuring a new character that Henry tries to protect. Instead, we're taken into a hell where people are hurt or abused. My heart dropped at the last telephone conversation because it went even deeper into a self-hating hell that I was not ready for. 

Also, although some measure of justice is served, I finished the book feeling out of sorts and unsatisfied. 

All of the content and trigger warnings: Suicide (mentions of past attempts, also characters committing suicide off-page); Sexual and emotional abuse (mentions of past occurrences and current); Mentions of sexual harassment and coercion; Frank discussions of rape (both in the past and present time--there are no on-page rape scenes); Substance abuse (past and current including hard drugs); Character is tortured; Animal death (no on-page killing of animals is shown. The aftermath is, however); Parental emotional and psychological abuse on a child; Police brutality (from harassment to physical abuse--including murder)

TL;DR: A book that is extremely bittersweet (with the sweetness showing up v. sparingly). I understood Henry's choices, hated the villain, and haaaaated the storyline that popped up in the last third of the novel. Although it is well-written and the mystery is juicy enough, between the sourness in the book and its length (it's almost 400 pgs), I highly doubt I'll ever reread it again.