Rating: 5/5

Embodiment is often violent and incomprehensible, and the writings of Artaud map onto this reality nicely. Trying to make meaning in a meaningless world, in the extreme moments of the text Artaud resorts to glossolalia - words that seem incomprehensible even to him (I am not speaking them, it is not *I* that is speaking them, he professes in one poem). But Artaud is not religious in any typical sense of the word, so his incantations are for a more base and immanent being rather than a transcendent one, although it is a being he hates and denies all the same. It is hard for me to say that his work is life-affirming. In his early works, maybe, as he takes a quasi-Cioranian approach to suicide (if I'm reading it correctly it's roughly something like "We always commit suicide too late", it can't be an answer if we don't know the question, etc.) but later on, post-asylum stays, in the throes of madness, he seems ready to die. I'm intimating a potential reading of Artaud as a radicalization of someone like Bataille, a demystification of the immanent embodied experience that renders it truly atheistic and nihilist - Bataille talks of sacrifice, inner experience, eroticism, laughter, chance, expenditure; Artaud of turds and farts, drugs (specifically opium and peyote), suicide, catastrophes both bodily and natural, anti-religious/spiritual attitude (a mistheism... despite his anti-Semitic rants against Kafka and Kabbala, he does indulge in astrology and horoscope). Although both talk of madness, only Artaud has actually lived it. Bataille's work is characterized by frustration, missteps, blocked passages, impossibility, in other words a prose of constipation - Artaud seems to be an overflowing exuberance, a performative deployment and living exemplar of what Bataille only writes about, an avant-garde logorrhea. Bataille is frustrated and constantly trying to evoke and live on the margins from the safety of his bourgeois brothel, Artaud, to me, seems to be living in the margins and is in total disarray and confusion as to where he is exactly, a prime characteristic of that unanchored linguistic-being of psychotic embodiment.