Rating: 5/5

"Together day by day, they live as much apart as if an ocean rolled between them; united by a hundred bonds, they want the subtle link that would have made them one; and, at the best, are only two separate creatures chained together. Year after year they drag the chain, and are good to each other, and esteem each other, and are patient, and wonder why they are not happy."

Mary Elizabeth Braddon is one of my favorite authors. I've loved everything that I've read by her, which has admittedly all been Victorian Sensational novels (Lady Audley's Secret, Aurora Floyd, Henry Dunbar, and a collection of short stories). In 1864, after she had become successful as a sensation author, Braddon wanted to branch out and prove that she could write more literary fiction. The Doctor's Wife is her first published novel in this genre. She was inspired by Flaubert's Madame Bovary. (Unfortunately, I haven't read it yet to see how heavy the inspiration was, but it's up next and I may come back to edit this review.) Anyway, Braddon and her early novels were often maligned by reviewers and even by some other authors in England at the time, because her novels bridged the gap between classes and were beloved by the poor as well as the rich. You know class separation was still a big thing in Victorian England and how dare a writer appeal to both the rich and the poor.

With the publication of The Doctor's Wife, we see Braddon spreading her authorial wings. She had already proved herself a master of Sensation novels and now, she proves that she is a master of literary fiction, as well. Readers can't help but love our misguided young heroine, Isabel Sleaford. She consumes novels and poetry like most of us drink water. She spends her life with her head in the clouds, dreaming of her dashing knight in shining armor. However, life isn't like a novel and Isabel's life doesn't follow the course she's always dreamed of. Her dashing knight doesn't show up until after she's already married to the well meaning, but rather dull country doctor.

One of my favorite characters was Sigismund Smith, the rather tongue-in-cheek sensational writer, who seems to be Braddon's alter-ego. He's a relatively ordinary young man, who is constantly creating fantastic stories to thrill the masses. I loved the description of how his ideas came to him, how he spent his days on thrilling adventures one after another without leaving the dingy little room where he wrote, and how he plotted out the stories he was weaving. I wondered how much of it was drawn from Braddon's own experiences and inspiration. I think I'm going to have to research this more.

"Every thing that was beautiful gave her a thrill of happiness; every thing that was ugly gave her a shudder of pain; and she had not yet learned that life was never meant to be all happiness, and that the soul must struggle towards the upper light out of a region of pain and darkness and confusion, as the blossoming plant pushes its way to the sunshine from amongst the dull clods of earth."

The Doctor's Wife was a different direction for Braddon's writing, but, let me tell you, I'm here for the ride. Her writing was at times beautiful, humorous, and insightful. Like all of the books I've read by her, I highly recommend this one. It's one of my favorite books that I've read this year. I do think reading an edition with notes is helpful with this one just because of the sheer amount of literary references contained within the pages. While I love reading classics, there are many I haven't gotten to yet and the the notes in the back kept me from feeling like I was missing out on some of the references.