Rating: 4/5

The first few chapters of The Rabbit Factory introduce us to characters who are on the verge: on the verge of something very bad happening, on the verge of finding or losing love, on the verge of losing something very valuable. The tension between the sets of characters starts early: Helen's (maybe) dalliances press hard on Arthur to fix just that. Anjalee casts a spell on Wayne Stubbuck after, in a fit of do-what's-right, she risks what little she has.

And so it goes as the cast of characters grows, each with their own problems, or perhaps each being their own problem. But the interconnections between characters bind this together as a novel rather than a collection of vignettes: Arthur sees Frankie, Frankie knows Anjalee, Frankie gets on the bad side of Mr. Hamburger, Mr. Hamburger employs Domino, Domino runs amok while seeking his venison steaks, and so it goes. 

Brown is a master of putting the reader smack-dab in the middle of the characters' thought processes. It is eerie how well he does this. We find ourselves mulling over choices and looking for a shred of hope through the eyes of one of the characters, even while part of us stays enough within ourselves and views the scene from afar. 

The violence in this book sprouts up suddenly and surprised me with its swiftness and fierceness; for instance, didn't see the the scene in Merlot's house coming.

This is the work of a talented writer, and talented listener. I've read some reviews of this book by people from the Memphis/Mississippi region, and Brown's works seem to resonate especially loud with them. I am a native of Upstate New York, and for years I thought that one day I would write the story of the large characters in washed-up small towns in that region. I then stumbled onto the works of Richard Russo and discovered that not only had it already been done, but it had been done better than I could have ever imagined. And so it seems to be for Brown and his beloved Mississippi. He knows the people, knows how they act, knows how they think. A wonderful read!