Rating: 2/5

23 pages

I was supposed to pick out a Golden Book for a baby shower, the one with the oldest publication date wins a prize, so I stumbled across this book and I was so flustered by the title I put it down to think about. I was also turned off by the owl and “pussy” cat marriage I said to my sister how perverted that was and it put an image in my head that wasn’t pleasant. I always find interspecies mating to be perverse, no matter that these two only got married, it still put an image of the two of them together in my head and might give kids the wrong idea that different animals can mate together, or just put kids to thinking about what the babies would be like and just create all kinds of problems. But the copyright date was 82, the oldest, so I ended up buying it days later. The beautiful pictures with all the different colors is what attracted me to the book because they were pretty to look at.

Upon reading the book I’m even more convinced I should’ve stayed away from it. One page in particular had me feeling really weird about it. The one where the owl is singing “O lovely Pussy, O Pussy, my love, What a beautiful Pussy you are, You are, You are! What a beautiful Pussy you are!” Talk about awkward. Even saying it in my head was embarrassing, saying it out loud to my sister, because I just had to share it with her, even more so! I would never read this aloud to anyone else and I certainly can’t give this to a baby. I wish I hadn’t bought it; the pictures do not make up for these terrible word choices. I don’t know what was going on in the 80’s but today we have a different connotation with the word “pussy” and I for one have never and will never call a real cat a pussycat. Oh, this p word I will not use! Then there “to the land where the bong-tree grows.” There again, a bong is not something I want to read about because that’s drug paraphernalia and I wonder if it was back then too. It might be a type of tree but that doesn’t mean it’s a good idea to use it in a children’s book. Bongs and pussies, just what you want kids repeating! I can’t give this to a baby because I doubt parents would appreciate their kids repeating these words that in today’s world reference drugs and the female body. Then were words that kids just don't know. I never understand when authors use these big words that they know in their adult lives and expect young children to know. Like "They dined on mince and slices of quince, which they ate with a runcible spoon." I can't even follow that! I did like some of the lines, like: “They sailed away, for a year and a day” and “they danced by the light of the moon.” All in all, I think this book was for another time but today just brings up awkward subjects.