"Ne m'oublie pas," he whispered. "You are all I have in this world."

Don't forget me. From Paris to Greenwich Village and Harlem, love traverses boundaries, inflames souls, manipulates the vulnerable, and burns each person who comes near its flames. Turbulent love is what Baldwin transcribes, the kind of love that is ignited by passion until it knows no name, has no form, except for the triangle it forms among friends. By now, my close GoodReads friends know about my reading love affair with Baldwin, so I'll try to encapsulate the elation I feel when I savor his words. 

James Baldwin. Photograph: Ralph Gatti/AFP/Getty Images

This is my sixth Baldwin read. In Giovanni's Room, I described, in that review, how he hypnotized me with simple lyricism that entrapped. Our rendezvous usually unfolds this way. In my review of Go Tell It on the Mountain, I wrote how he gave me music in words, and I fell for each note. In If Beale Street Could Talk he rendered pain vivid; in The Fire Next Time, he warmed me, and in Notes of a Native Son, which I plan to read again soon, he gave me perspective.

In Another Country, he makes me ponder the profundity of love's role in self-angst, self-loathe. What happens in a person's life to make him hate himself, his skin, his people, his lover, his friend? What makes a woman use her beauty not only as a method of survival, but also as a tool for delivering hatred? What drives a secured and married mother into the hands of another? What happens when hopelessness drowns the conscious mind and sends it into self-pitying stupor? Each chapter is laced with these questions. 

Harlem

"The light seemed to fall with an increased hardness, examining and inciting the city with an unsparing violence, like the violence of love, and striking from the city's grays and blacks a splendor as of steel on steel. In the windows of tall buildings flame wavered, alive, in ice."

One thing's for sure: Baldwin knows how to write about sex and angst. He elucidates despair in a way uniquely his and highlights biracial and homosexual love in a way only someone from his unique vantage point could. Here, despair lives on the streets of Harlem and Greenwich village, in the hearts of bohemians, in struggling artists and writers. 

Greenwich Village, 1960s

"We're all unpredictable, he finally said, "one way or another. I wouldn't like you to think that you're special.
"It's very hard to live with that," said Eric. "I mean, with the sense that one is never what one seems-never-and yet, what one seems to be is probably, in some sense, almost exactly what one is." He turned his half-smiling face to Vivaldo. "Do you know what I mean?"
"I wish I didn't," said Vivaldo, slowly,"but I'm afraid I do."

The first eighty-eight pages of this book could have been a novella. No one could read this first part and love Rufus, for even Rufus didn't love Rufus. Pained as he was, he took it out on Leona, a young white woman who escaped a painful past from the South, only to find herself in a tumultuous relationship with him. The first part is a novella cold and hostile, laced with self-hatred, but it exists to make lucid the gritty world of racism and segregation, a world wherein each character connected to Rufus resides within some self-revelatory cocoon he or she must be released from. There is Cass, wife of the writer, Richard; Eric, the American actor who has returned from Paris; Ida, Rufus' sister who becomes his friend's lover, and Vivaldo, Rufus' best friend and the white man whose perspective Baldwin uses to inspect race relations. Vivaldo was my favorite character. 

Don't forget me, it's as if the phrase is embedded within each sentence spoken, within each unforgivable gesture. Love, lust, and angst engulf these pages and turn thunderous. Relationships are mangled and mutilated, and one wonders if anything is what it seems. As the sections progress, erotic savagery culminates into hungry lovemaking and misguided lust turns into uncertain love that is
buried beneath the impossible language of the time, lived underground where nearly all of the time's true feeling spitefully and incessantly fermented.