Rating: 2/5

I chose this to complete the "Read a book about a religion not your own" in the Book Challenge. So, all right, Amish is still Christian as I am. But like my religion, the two live in such ways that distinctly separate us from other Christian religions. In my religion's case, that's only one thing that separates us, though! And from this book, I really didn't get too many details on specific beliefs of the Amish. Just that they believe in the Bible, and prayer, and the Holy Ghost. Nothing foreign to me. Now I knew when picking a book, I should have gone with one that was much more different than my own. Yet I've been needing to read something in the Christian Lit genre for some time, and having lived near Amish communities throughout my life I had always been intrigued to see how they were portrayed in literature. I really didn't gain much more from this book than I already knew.

Well, after deciding a religion that I wouldn't mind reading about during this reading rush that I've been in--plus I wanted it to be an audio book since I didn't have any at the time--I then went about choosing from one of Beverly Lewis' books, knowing that I'd be safe with a clean book. But I didn't want to get involved in any series or trilogies. And then I saw the title of the book which movie adaptation I had seen within the last year. The movie hadn't been bad, so I figured I'd give the book a try.

I have to say--I enjoyed the movie more. And the two were very, very different. I think I preferred the movie because it was more realistic in some ways. But then I preferred the book because you got to know the children so much better. It was a seesaw of which I preferred as I listened. Yet I never really got into the book. Especially as confused as I was that it wasn't going anywhere close to where the movie had gone. Plus, everything was too neat and cheesy. And the minute romance parts were still enough to make me roll my eyes.

Of course, while listening to it, I was reminded of all the LDS Lit I'd read growing up, and how there were definite similarities in some things. So probably I would have enjoyed this book when I was 11. But now, not so much. Definitely one I would have stopped reading if I were not so lazy to not want to have to pick a different book. I also did not enjoy the narrator. While she didn't detract from the story, she didn't add to it either. And some of the ways she pronounced words--especially charaters' names. 

And one last little beef about the book--considering what I've been going through in my life lately, there was one thing that made this book especially hard to bear. I'm glad it's over with. When my reading rush dies down, perhaps I'll take up Meredith's recommendation of "Confessions of a Closet Catholic" to "replace" this one.