Rating: 3/5

Not bad, but probably not everyone's cup of tea. It has ostriches so that's unique. 

Summary: MMC (MMC's friend from The Earl's Revenge) has been in charge of his family since he was 15 and has an inflated sense of responsibility and self-importance. He's wealthy and titled. FMC has been in charge of HER family partly since she was 12, entirely since she was 15-16. She is poor and not titled although of good birth. FMC's neighbors, the Averys, have been harassing and tormenting her and trying to take over her brother's home/property, the Winter House, for several years for unknown reasons. 

After the man of the house dudeface Avery dies, MMC, head of family, comes to take charge and sort things out for the Averys; he has a negative view of women, especially red-headed women, and is prejudiced against FMC by that and rumors from the widow of dudeface Avery who hates her. She is naturally not too fond of him because he's an ass to her every single time they meet, when he's not outright sexually assaulting her. Don't worry, he gets attacked by ostriches so it evens out. 

Pros: the way some characters do have character growth, how FMC &amp; fam handle their financial and life struggles with dignity, the satisfying way the MMC finally comes around and starts getting his head on straight in general about women, etc. 

Cons: A LOT to be honest. The portrayal of MMC's lust especially is WAAAAAAY over the top and unbelievable. And his lapses where he kisses, grabs, and fantasizes about grabbing, kissing, groping, and sexing her (with or without her approval) are inexcusable. No grown adult is that far gone over someone they don't even particularly like that much. It's kind of insulting toward men imo. 

Both FMC and MMC really come across as rage-spewing, ID-controlled, impulsive, violent idjits when around each other at first. And while they do learn to begin apologizing after they hurl insults and personal attacks at each other, they're still just... deeply flawed, esp. the MMC. 

On the other hand, the ostriches are awesome, and so are the younger characters w/ the exception of Millicent, but she gets some growth so that's good. 

Hmm I think I talked myself down to 3 stars lol.