Rating: 2/5

If you believe that the United States has the absolute right to impose hegemonic domination over the rest of the world - and you bought into the CIA lies about the Soviet bogeyman and our impending destruction at their hands at any moment - and the only thing keeping us safe at night were a few maverick, renegade Americans "doing the right thing" then this book is for you....

However, if you are a thinking, rational, reasonable person who likes to actually learn how the world works and doesn't swallow propaganda hook, line, and sinker, you should probably steer clear of this ridiculous "techno-thriller"...

Let me begin: it's the late 1980s and the Soviet Union has developed a super-laser that can destroy satellites, airplanes, missiles, etc., in eastern Siberia (a laser not even capable of being produced in 2022, let alone 1988). And, of course, they use this laser to defend their territorial integrity, by which I mean that they actually built this laser so that they can launch all their nukes at the USA ASAP - if you are the first kind of person I described. So, in the book, they use the laser to destroy the American spy satellite that is parked in a geo-synchronous orbit directly over Siberia. Then, use it to shoot down an American spy plane only 30 miles off the coast of the USSR. Then, use it to shoot down a new ICBM that the US is testing over the Pacific - a smaller, more capable version of the Minuteman. So, arguably, the Soviets are only using it to defend themselves and/or protect their own little sphere of influence. In the book, the President of the USA himself says that he'd be mad if the Soviets were flying recon planes that close to the US coast, too.

By the way, how did the Soviets build this laser. Well, according to the author, speaking through American Generals, the Soviets just have to cut down their bread and/or meat imports by 1/3 or so for a year and they'd have enough money to build anything they want, and they don't care about public opinion. I mean, in real life, economic hardship and public opinion is what brought down the USSR...but again, if you're that first type of person, I'm sure you know that it was actually the God-President Reagan who single-handedly dismantled the Soviet Union.

Oh, the USA also apparently has an unmanned orbiting military station, called Ice Fortress, that we threaten to re-man if the Soviets don't unbuild their laser, but promise not to rearm it...yet. So, then the next scene is the USA immediately re-arming the station, which is then also destroyed by the mystical Soviet laser.

So, then, of course, the US launches it's super-secret Stealth B-52...yes, that's a thing...to go destroy the laser in the Soviet Union...which, of course succeeds...'cause 'Merica. And then, both sides promise each other that they will not rebuild their laser and/or space station. I should mention that the whole reason both sides are so antagonistic in this story is because neither side trusts each other and are always blaming each other for never living up to their promises...so, um...okay?

The funniest part of the book, to me, is that the author talks about how the B-52 will be undoubtedly retired by the year 2000, since the B-1 and the FB-111 are "far superior". Fast forward to 2022, and the FB-111 was retired in 1991 (like 3 years after this book was published), and the B-1 is on the chopping block as soon as the B-21 hits the shelves. Meanwhile, the B-52 is planned to still be in operation until the mid-2040s.