Rating: 3/5

I wanted to love this book. In fact, I did love it, except for the ending. There are so many things about it that are just fantastic. The music, for instance. Even though you can't actually hear it, you can. You know what it would sound like it if it were real. The Nazgul themselves, sort of Black Sabbath, Led Zeppelin, and the Beatles are wrapped up into one super group. The Tolkien influences. The hints of darkness and the imagery of the end and even the Yeats stuff.

But it just didn't come together for me. This book lacks a proper climax. It sort of fizzles. The big climactic moment culminates with the main character choosing not to act, and this inaction takes all the larger-than-life characters and situations and recasts them as something mundane. The effect on the reader is sort of that we had decided to believe something bad could happen, and then, when it didn't, we feel stupid for having expected it.

I've given this a lot of thought, and I think the only way this novel could have ended was if it were like an Ira Levin novel, or like the ending of the 70s version of Invasion of the Body Snatchers (yes, the one with Donald Sutherland.) That's the ending this book needed--a blood-dimmed tide loosed on the world, swallowing everything up, and the last sentence only an evil chuckle from Pat Hobbins. 

George R. R. Martin wussed out.

And actually, this is beginning to worry me, because I'm afraid that perhaps Martin is not particularly good with climaxes or ending stories properly. I mean, wasn't A Song of Ice and Fire supposed to be three books long? Now, it's stretching out, further and further... Maybe he's not pumping those books out so quickly these days because he doesn't know how to end them. (And so help me, if the battle between the dragons and the Others comes down to a big non-battle like this did, I'm going to be pointing to this review and saying, "I told you so!")

Anyway, lack of a good climax or not, I enjoyed this book, and I'd say it's worth a look.