Rating: 5/5

After too long an interval, Dashiell Hammett is back to being one of the flavors of the month, with not just his novels and pulp stories back in print, but also his early work (even vignettes written for humor and satire magazines) and his slim corpus of work for magazines less rough than the pulps. A case in point is "Woman in the Dark," a short novel or novelette serialized in three issues of the weekly Liberty Magazine in 1933. The high-circulation magazine was a better venue than the garish pulps; not only was he reaching a better class of people, he was reaching an audience who, if they had heard of him at all it was through his novels...at this time, only "The Maltese Falcon" had been made into a film (1931) and it did not do well at all. A better class of magazine, a better breed of readers...both may explain why this story seems (to me at least) like a well-written pastiche of Hammett.

An accident on a lonely country road, a dazed woman running through the whipping wind, losing the heel of her shoe and twisting her ankle in the darkness, stumbling up a path till she comes to the curtained window-door of a house. Such is the opening for "Woman in the Dark." The woman is Luise Fischer. The man behind the door is Brazil, just out of prison for manslaughter and is now mildly claustrophobic because of the experience. She's on the run from Kane Robson, a monied sociopath who always gets what he wants, and he wants her. The story is the conflict between the malevolent Robson and the emotionally scarred and ambiguous Brazil over Luise Fischer, a conflict that forces the woman to choose between two worlds.

If this story had been written for the pulps, there might have been more violence in it and more sexual overtones, but I think it would have been much less morally ambiguous. Brazil would have been much more a wronged man and the choice for Fischer would have been not just more clear but more costly. It is as if Hammett were walking a tightrope between the writing he knew and the respect he needed. The violence has been replaced by fisticuffs (though Robson does callously shoot a dog to demonstrate his moral orientation) and sexuality has been replaced by romantic suspense.

"Woman in the Dark" was his penultimate long work of fiction, his last before "The Thin Man," and published a couple years after "The Glass Key," another novel of corruption and romance. Hammett could easily have developed the magazine story into a true novel length, but he chose not to. Instead, he wrote "The Thin Man," and nothing else. For the Hammett completist, this thin book is a must read, but I think it would also help a reader trying to understand the moral universe through which Hammett moved and in which he wrote. For those readers who need a setting for this story, a very perceptive and enlightening introduction is provided by Robert B Parker.