Rating: 4/5

This was quite an intense book which examined not just the war in Bosnia, but how humans are led to do horrible things to one another by circumstances and evil people. When I am reading I usually sit and read while I eat. This book could not be read while eating. As a Jewish person, the description of the genocide made me ill. Here are some particularly powerful quotes from the book:

"I never thought that one day I would talk to a skeleton. That's what I did at Trnopollje. I walked through the gates and couldn't quite believe what I saw. There, right in front of me, were men who looked like survivors of Auschwitz. I remember thinking that they walked surprisingly well for people without muscle or flesh. I was surprised at the mere fact that they could still talk. Imagine, talking skeletons! As I spoke to one of them, I looked at his arm and realized that I could grab hold of it and snap it into two pieces like a brittle twig. I could do the same with his legs. I saw dozens of other walking skeletons of that sort. I could break all of their arms, all of their legs. Snap. Snap. Snap."

"As evil as this place was, it had an endearing slapstick side to it. At times, the Serbs seemed to be the gang that couldn't shoot straight; a colleague who wrote a book about Bosnia called them the 'Keystone Gestapo.'"

"It was too much. Old people are the saddest ones of all because they re helpless and without hope. It is worse to talk with them than to look at a corpse. Dead bodies don't talk, they can't tell you of their woes, of their losses and the terror they have faced, and still face. But old people can talk. They can break into sobs as you ask them about the purse hanging from their neck. They can look at the corpses at the side of the road and whimper, 'Oh, God, I wish I were dead. I wish I were dead.' It's true, they envy the corpses. Their past has been obliterated, their future consists of a grim spell in a refugee camp, where they will die in poverty, among strangers, in a strange land. They know it. The misery has ended for the corpses. It goes on for the living."

"The difference between dreams and nightmares is the difference between night and day. The dreams come at night, when eyes are closed. The nightmares come during the day, when eyes are open, and what they see are the hollow faces of refugees, or the different shades of blood on display in Bosnia (the three main categories are fresh, dried, and frozen). When you start working in a war zone, you might look forward to the dreams. They are an escape, an entertainment."

"Tragedy and absurdity were moons circling the Bosnian war."

"...an unusual death notice appeared in the New York Times...
IN MEMORIAM
OUR COMMITMENTS,
PRINCIPLES, AND MORAL VALUES
DIED: BOSNIA, 1994
ON THE OCCASION OF THE 1,000TH DAY 
OF THE SIEGE OF SARAJEVO"

"Bosnia can teach us about the wild, beast, and there about ourselves, and our destinies. What happened in Bosnia was not a Balkan freak show but a violent process of national breakdown at the hands of political manipulators.