Rating: 4/5

This is a professional read to further my knowledge of Jungian thought. According to the reviews and recommendations this is ‘the classic introduction to Jung and practice of Jung’s psychology’. I have not written many longer University assignments (3600+ words). I am enamoured by Jungian thought. He leaves room for God and the Spirit. I am convinced what I do has its roots in theological mysticism, not medical textbooks. At least we are paid much better than pre Nietzschean priests. God refuses to die, but has just gone underground.

“It takes only a little insight to recognize that the goals of many of today’s decision makers in the health care field are to restore mentally disturbed people to a level of functioning in the world that will enable them to stay out of hospitals and to manage their lives with a minimum of outpatient therapy, if that is absolutely necessary” (p 18). After working in the public sector for my entire career the conclusion I have come to is that the tax payer will only fund enough treatment to keep people out of hospital and to maintain people to be well enough not to need inpatient treatment. Not much has changed in the past 40 years since Singer wrote this book. It is not likely to change in the next 40 years. It is a superficial and short sighted strategy that creates the revolving door in and out of inpatient units with dependence and disappointment created for people with few other options and no long term healing. In Australia we have a culture of expecting the tax payer to pay for our healthcare. I am contemplating moving into Private Practice and applying depth psychology aimed at helping people reach their potential in ways the tax payer is not interested in funding.

“when analyst and patient meet face to face for the first time, exposed to each other in as near a condition of psychic nakedness as is possible” (p 19). In my work in the crisis mental health team I am struck at how willingly people metaphorically strip themselves naked in front of me. I do my best to respect it and take seriously their vulnerability. There is great intimacy in this relationship and I am committed towards moving people towards ‘better’, whatever that is for them.

“My training analyst had gently tried to restrain me, but when that failed she shocked me one day by saying, ‘You are not supposed to want the patient to get well’” (p 31). “At first I could not quite believe this, for I surely did not understand her meaning. But gradually as it sank in I was able to see that if I acted out of my desire to heal the patient, I was setting myself up as a miracle worker. I would be doing it for my own satisfaction, for the joy of success, and possibly for the approval of my training analyst” (p 31). “My task is to use myself as a vehicle for clarifying the patient’s dilemmas and for helping her learn to interpret her unconscious production. My task is not to contaminate the analysis with my own problems. And it is for this reason that I constantly need to be aware of my own needs and my own biases” (p 31). The assumption here is that the analyst knows what ‘well’ is. The analysand must move themselves in the direction they want, towards their own aim. The analyst assumption that they know what ‘well’ is, is a form of counter transference. The role of the analyst is to help the analysand come to a conception of ‘well’.

“He had no early experience of body contact or sex play with other children. It seemed to him that wherever he went his mother was watching him, that he was never out of her sight. He grew extremely shy and not surprisingly failed to form any close attachments outside of the family” (p 34). How many children could this describe in a context where any sexualised behaviour by children if pathologized? The assumption is that all pre-pubescent children are innocents. What damage is this doing to the outer adults they become? I think our society is doing something wrong in how we develop our children, which has become worse over the past generation. Time will tell how our children will turn out, but I see sexual repression on a Victorian. It will find a way to express itself in unexpected ways.

“It is that he has looked at himself and does not like the person he has become, and that he believes that somewhere in him is rising the possibility of being another sort of person, the one he was meant to be” (p 38). This is process of individuation which is the goal of Jungian thought.

“Today, there are many self-proclaimed wise ones, from the Pied Pipers of instant intimacy to the purveyors of instant salvation. Yet how many are willing to involve themselves with one suffering individual for as long as it takes to help that person come together again, and to reunite the splintered fragments?” (p 39). The work of Jungian psychotherapy takes a long time and cannot be done over a weekend or doing a retreat. The work is more analogous to a gymnasium and working to make yourself strong. You never arrive and the work of balance is never complete.

“it is not only primitive man whose psychology is archaic. It is the psychology also of modern civilised man” (p 80). We are not that far evolved and I trust the Evolutionary Psychologists much more than any other field. We have a powerful Id that escapes the control of the Ego and Super Ego. To borrow from Nassim Talib the goal should be to domestic our emotions, not to extinguish them.

“Convergent thinking conceives of life processes as being susceptible to being broken down into ‘problems’ which then have to be solved” (p 124). This is the aim of CBT, but a lot of problems are a lot deeper, in our soul even. We can never be solved, only worked with.

“Invariable, convergent thinking is permeated by the idea that there is a right way, which has only permeated by the idea that there is a right way, which has only to be found and instituted. In an era of ‘managed competition’ in health care where the emphasis is towards ‘efficiency’ and cost cutting, pressure mounts toward achieving the ‘quick fix’” (p 124). This leads to funding for the Ambulance at the bottom of the cliff. The biggest crisis gets the most funding leading to the revolving door so many clinicians see. Running as fast as you can and barely staying where you are, not allowing people to go with the flow and see where it takes them.

“The study of mythology and fairy tales, and of literary forms and comparative religions, helps us to understand and recognize the power of the archetypal elements within all people, and then to put our personal experiences into the larger perspective” (p 126). Our experiences are not new. The ancestors have been here before and can help us find meaning. 

Discussing Jung “From his background as the son of a parson in a small town in Switzerland, he found his personal identity by taking a strong stand against the collective attitudes. He regarded those collective attitudes as prefabricated rules for an ordinary society in which most people would like to live. For himself, he found them stifling and offered instead the individuation process whereby people could find their own direction and live according to their own sense of purpose” (p135). B

“As I worked with Dale I had to consider that the ‘garbage man’ did not only exist in him, but that his character also lived in me. Isn’t the analyst also a sort of garbage handler? Isn’t it my job to pick out and sort the detritus of years in the lives of analysands, and try to remove what is no longer needed? But, lest I become caught up in the image of the ‘do gooder,’ I am sharply reminded that I have to deal with my own garbage as well. The training analysis that analysts go through is supposed to teach us how to clear out the trash and refuse of our own lives so as to open up space for the new and the growing. But this does not end with the termination of the training analysis. I have not only to take out my own garbage but to be very careful not to take in the garbage of other people” (p 142). I am full of garbage and to deny this would only blind me. Once I remove my own Garbage, I replace it with newer Garbage.

“An Indian guru once told his disciple, “You have to gather your own manure and put it on your own plants Some very foolish people carefully gather up their own manure and throw it away and then they go out and buy somebody else’s manure to put on their plants” (p 174). Seeking someone who knows that answers… There is a humility in Jungian thought that I do not have all the answers. I am no Guru. I can help you discover you own manure so you can use it for your own growth. I like this analogy.

“We have certain qualities which have been unknown to an individual are recognised as hostile and evil when they are bought to consciousness. Because the ego is not prepared to assimilate them as its own, they are projected onto other people and onto destructive events, which are sometimes termed ‘accidents’” (p 176). The shadow? If we cannot recognise our self sabotaging acts we are doomed to repeat them. What are the secondary gains that are part of our behaviours where the shadow is expressing itself.

“The psychology of war has clearly brought this condition to light: everything which our own nations does is good, everything which the other nations do is wicked” (p 176). Solzhenitsyn ‘The battleline between good and evil runs through the heart of every man’ and it turns out nation according to Jungian thought. 

“’Self’ as Jung uses it has a special meaning; it is that center of being which the ego circumambulates; at the same time it is the superordinate factor in a system in which the ego is subordinate” (p 210). There is a lot of woo thought to contemplate with the sense of Schrodinger’s Cat. Our self is both at our centre and surrounds our ego. Both encapsulates and grounds. It is this mystical quality that attracts me to Jungian thought.

“One way to confront the self is through analysis. One way to approach God is through prayerful contemplation. I am not so sure that in their essentials these two ways are so fundamentally different” (p 211). I have long thought the basis of what I do is not in the medical profession, but in the clergy. Or at least what was the clergy before Nietzsche declared God dead. I am better compensated than a priest. They are the ancestors of psychotherapy.

“In my own experience, and in that of certain of my analysands, as analysis progressed beyond the elementary stages, the common thread of the two apparently different kinds of goal directed movement gradually became visible. The variation comes mostly in the language of metaphor, which is demanded when we speak of the unknowable” (p 211). This speaks to the mystical quality of what I try to do. It is not ‘knowable’ in the rationale sense.

“The alchemical ‘opus’ was at once an attempt to transform base matter into something of great value and an attempt to transform the animalistic aspect of a person into the spiritual aspect” (p 212). My role is that of an Alchemist. To help something reach its potential (whatever that is for them).

“The task in the early stages if analysis is to recognize the non ego forces operating in us. These include, as we have seen, the persona and shadow, and the anima and animus, in all their many forms and guises” (p 215). I see the shadow a lot in society. We live in such a repressed era. The shadow always will find a way. I see society as being out of balance at the moment, releasing the shadow. My concepts is that there is no ‘authentic self’, but that we are a collection or personas. We can work to nurture some and repress others. What repressed, get expressed in the form of the shadow.

“The first half of life is spent mainly in finding out who we are, through seeing ourselves in our interaction with others” (p 216). This is the theme of a lot of James Hollis’s work/ The first half of life is necessarily wasted. We can only become integrated in the second half of life. I think he is correct.

“While the first part is directed towards achievement, the second part is directed towards integration. Where the first part is directed towards emergence as an individual, earning a living, rearing a family, establishing a home, the second part is directed toward achieving harmony with the totality of being. In the beginning the ego arises out of the depths of the unconscious. In the end, the ego surrenders to those depths” (p 216). Tranquillity is the aim of Stoicism, domesticating the ego. You still have the emotions, but you make use of them in ways that work for you. I see parallels. 

“the self embraces the whole of psychic totality, incorporating both consciousness and the unconscious; it is also the center of the totality. The ego belongs to it and is part of it, the ego being whole of consciousness at any given moment and also the organ that is capable of becoming conscious” (p 218). Woo-woo, more Schrodinger’s Cat with the ago being both in the centre and potentially surrounding and embracing it at the same time.

“The unconscious material determines the character of the process, and it is the analyst’s task to follow where it leads, along with the analysand who produces it” (p 221). Following the unconscious where it leads.

“As our children are, to a certain extent, extensions of our own egos, so the ‘divine child’ may be thought of as an extension of the collective consciousness. As we pin our hopes and dreams on our children, wishing for them the fulfillment of our unfinished tasks, the realization of what we were never able to realize – so the ‘divine child’ represents the ideals of a culture which is not able, in reality, to fulfill. Often the ‘savior’ becomes the scapegoat for the sins of his society, and by reason of his suffering and his sacrifice the society in enabled to continue, to have another chance” (p 224). Daniel is my ‘divine child’, the child that reminds me most of myself, but better. He did not have a lot of the ‘Garbage’ I grew with. I wonder how good I could have been had I had a more supportive environment. If I project to much on to him I will provide him with plenty of unique ‘Garbage’ of his own. This is the balance I must find and allow him to be his own person and grow beyond me.

“Suffering human beings come into analysis. They have lost the sense of primordial wholeness that represents the paradise of innocence. They are troubled, feeling separated from the world or from the mystery which they intuitively know as their real selves” (p 240). Suffering is important, but the question I ask is ‘what am I suffering for?’ I suspect we have evolved to be inclined towards being dissatisfied and restless (or at least I am). It there a ‘real self’?

“The whole point of dream analysis is to teach people eventually to become independent of their therapist, by acquiring the ability to carry on the dialogue with their inner aspect which has a therapeutic quality, that is, with ‘the therapist within’” (p 253). The whole point of therapy is to become independent of the therapist and develop ‘the therapist within’.

“In his time, and especially during the First and Second World Wars, he learned to eschew groups of all kinds, and to prefer to trust the individual or dyad as the freest and most productive kind of association” (p 261). I am coming to the same conclusion and move my association away from ‘groups’. I happen to be a lot of stuff, but no one thing defines me. I suspect being part of a minority defines one to strongly and causes imbalance. Pride is the deadliest sin.

“The crowd of people represented to her just ‘they’ everyone outside herself. In other words, ‘they’ referred to the terror of the unconscious” (p 280). ‘They’, I always asked who specifically are ‘they’. Identifying ‘they’ troubles a lot of people. What they identify is likely themselves.

“Analytical psychology does not seek to achieve a race of happy, productive sheep. People are troubled in a troubled world: they do not cry ‘Peace’ where there is no peace. Nor does this psychological view suggest that individuals submit to any external authority which is given the power to determine what kind of activity or behaviour is acceptable and what is not. Analytical psychology casts its lot with the champions of individual freedom and offers another source of guidance that that of the political or psychological despot, however ‘benevolent’ that person may be. That other source is the inner mystery, the unconscious, which has its own individual way if manifesting itself to every man and woman who is open to see it. Active imagination is one of the many ways in the analytical process which teach an individual to develop the capacity for relating to the interlocking worlds of soul and society” (p 302). Development of the self as an individual is the goal of this work.

“Culture is ‘a process of domestication which cannot be accomplished without rebellion on the part of the animal nature that thirsts for freedom’” (p 320). Submitting ones self to ones culture or the dominant view. So many sheep want to escape the freedom of being an individual. Much more certainty and one does not have to confront ones self. One does not know where the process of individuation will lead, as you release yourself from the Super Ego. Plenty have described me as aloof.

“How is it possible… for man’s instinctual nature to drive him into separation from his kind, into absolute isolation from humanity, into an aloofness from the heard upheld by loathing? We think of instinct as uniting man, causing him to mate, to beget, to seek pleasure and good living, the satisfaction of all sensuous desires” (p 322). The individual risks the scorn of the herd. 

Longest review ever - So long I could not save it on the one review.