Rating: 4/5

This was my absolute favourite book when I was about 8 years old. The story follows the birth and growth of Laura’s baby brother George, who from appearances couldn’t look more normal for a 4 week old baby but who in reality, was anything but normal!

This discovery came at 4 weeks old when Laura, his older sister, remarks that she thinks he looks like a pig. Of course, Laura was not expecting a reply from her baby brother and was confounded when George retorted ‘Pig yourself!’. Indeed, as it transpires, George had been waiting for an opportunity to speak in private with Laura ever since he was born but despite Laura’s amazement and desire to share the marvellous news, George swears Laura to secrecy as it would be too much for his parents to handle.

As the story progresses we see how the two work together in a number of humorous situations to slowly break their parents into the reality of their super intelligent son who eats solid food at	2 months old, is potty trained and who reads newspapers! 

This story culminates with the celebration of George’s first birthday which he has meticulously planned with his now never-surprised parents. Instead of inviting other children, he wants to invite the older family members as they would be more capable of intellectually stimulating conversation. When it came to George’s speech, the relatives laughed at the thought of a 1 year old giving a speech, but they were utterly gobsmacked when on cue George opened his mouth and produced a speech with the vocabulary and good etiquette of a middle-aged man.

The clever and rather humorous twist at the end of the book however bridges the gap between fiction and reality as the reader is forced to question whether George himself wrote the story.

This plot is fascinating for the younger reader, especially for those who have younger siblings and encourages pursuit of a good relationship with those younger siblings. Dick King-Smith’s master plot line never reveals everything about the reason why George is the way he is, or even the full extent of his intelligence which consequently stimulates the reader’s imagination to fill in the blanks. 

The writing is in a larger font and is accompanied with small black and white illustrations. Nevertheless, there is still a considerable amount of writing to read including some much more advanced vocabulary and minimal understanding can be drawn from the illustrations. As a result of this I would recommend this fun story for those who have a developed reading fluency, namely 7-10 year olds.