i did skim the back half more than not, and some of the erotica too. But! a VERY cool, clarifying piece of history, of the discourses around "the sex wars" -- anti porn / anti bdsm in the feminism community and its battle lines specifically in the lesbian community. there's also a v cool gayle rubin essay in this. i think what becomes trans-exclusionary radfeminism is already here, and the seeds of it are the fear of masculinity and patriarchy -- there's even an essay where a woman discusses working through her shame around being into using dildos (and fantasizing about her partner having a bio-dick that could make her pregnant). apparently dildo usage was super shameful and taboo for some lesbians at the time, because why would you crave the phallus? nowadays lesbians are always about the concept of slinging "strap" so idk, wild how things change. and wild how things stay the same, too. the fear around bdsm in lesbian communities is the fear of patriarchy, of woman battering as a patriarchical practice, of reproducing patriarchy. i was very taken with how, in Pat Califia's final essay on the history of SAMOIS / the SF lesbian kink scene, she discusses how as women's book stores and spaces shut the door on women's kink groups, the gay men's scenes and spaces were very welcoming. anti-bdsm is framed throughout this book as a woman's issue, a woman's neuroticism, a neuroticism around masculinity and patriarchy and therefore power dynamics. i guess more charitably, a traumatic response, a knee-jerk misapplied cultural suspicion (firework vs gunshot). 

theory and politics aside, i was also inspired/taken with these v personal missives on what bdsm does; the classic stuff, though very submissive/bottom-minded; about the practice of pushing past and through boundaries, of becoming a sharp point of sensation, of accessing nonverbal forms of knowledge. inspires me to bottom again lol, or to want to push bottoms harder in the pain department. or something. i like this religionisation /therapeutization of the practice, it defo feels like Something is there, about types of personhood or animalhood or nonpersonhood you can reach through kink. fun stuff!