Rating: 4/5

Revisiting classics almost always provides a worthy read, and such is the case with reading Benedict's Patterns of Culture. More well-known for developing culture and personality school of thought, in this book we could actually see Benedict's wider influences on anthropology. 

Benedict begins the book with three solid chapters on theoretical discussion of the way we should see and understand culture. Being a student of Franz Boas, Benedict takes a particularistic view on culture, seeing it is developed as an unique, local response to a problems encountered commonly by mankind. Though we can still see the universalist tendencies as a writer of her age, in this book Benedict clearly sets out her goal to "differentiate between those responses that are specific to local cultural tyes and those that are general to mankind."

Pointing out the permanence of culture in individual lives, Benedict explains in her often quoted words, that "No man ever looks at the world with pristine eyes." That "life-history of the individual is first and foremost an accommodation to the patterns and standards traditionally handed down in his community."

This reminds us of Durkheim's way of approaching of society as sui generis--something independent of its own--but with an agentive bent. Here Benedict already established that it is individual actions and thoughts that make up culture; a random set of unconscious, unintended action that leads to, in Sahlin's terms, "events". Some of these "events" are discarded, some are sedimented, that in turn it becomes the "patterning of culture". In this work already we can see the very prototype of action theory, 50 years before its mainstreaming by Ortner.

At the same time, Benedict emphasizes the importance of understanding culture as its whole. Attacking earlier anthropologists who take bits of cultural elements (traits) to construct a "Frankenstein monster" composed of different, unrelated traits, Benedict pushes a way of thinking in seeing culture in terms of gestalt. "The only way in which we can know the significance of the selected detail of behaviour," writes Benedict, "is against the background of the motives and emotions and values that are institutionalized in that culture" And here, again revolutionary, we can see the traces of interpretetive anthropology, later developed by Geertz in the 1960s.

The parts which later developed to her culture and personality school is not that interesting, but tracing her ideas that would later develop to something we all know is refreshing.