Rating: 3/5

To Tell the Truth, Book 37 in the Americana series, was about Tell Stafford and Andrea "Andy" Grant.
Tell and Andrea met at a ski resort in Tahoe where they fell in love. Unfortunately, before Andrea could explain her situation to him, Tell answered her hotel room phone...and heard her husband on the other end. Angry and disgusted, he threw several hurtful and damning remarks her way and left. Andy's marriage was a unique situation, but Tell refused to listen to her. Heartbroken, Andrea returned to her home in Oregon.
Six months later, still reeling from the pain inflicted by Tell's harsh treatment, Andy and her husband, John, were expecting company...a Mrs. Rosemary Collins and her daughter, Nancy...as well as Rosemary's son...Tell Stafford. To say that Tell was angry would have been putting it mildly. He was absolutely livid, for he now believed that Andrea was nothing but a fortune hunter because her husband John was old enough to be her father...and in a wheelchair.
The more time that Tell and his family spent with Andrea and her husband, the more strained the atmosphere became between her and Tell, especially that he never wasted an opportunity to take a dig at her marriage and make her feel like something not worthy to be mentioned. Nothing Andrea said, or even tried to say, would convince Tell of her innocence in not having been unfaithful to her husband. He would never give her the opportunity to tell him the truth about her marriage to John. He was way too hostile and closed off to listen.
With this being such a short novel, a great deal of information was rushed through and was nearly too easy to overlook. The angst and drama were OTT and out of proportion. There was no humor at all in this book, so there was no relief for the tension that just kept building until it exploded when John finally sat everyone down and explained the events that led to his and Andrea getting married. By the time he was done, everyone just sat in stunned silence.
Andrea's character was such a strong one that it was hard to find fault with her...except for her inability to get Tell to listen to her. The things she had to endure would have broken most women, let alone someone who had been battered around from a young age.
Tell's character was a little difficult to like, but just as hard to dislike. He felt betrayed by Andrea and he had every right to be upset, but he did not have the right to be so angry as to not give Andrea the opportunity to tell him about her marriage. On the other hand, Andrea knew that, once she was certain of their love, she should have told him the facts. Both were at fault.
While the premise for this book was a bit unusual, it...well...no it didn't make any sense whatsoever for, infidelity is...infidelity no matter how you slice it. One could explain the facts of this book till they were blue in the face...one could debate the differences between church marriages and civil marriages for the same length of time, but the facts remain the same. Infidelity IS infidelity. While one may be considered to be performed in the eyes of God while the other is performed in the eyes of the law, they are both STILL performed in the eyes of God. Only the wording is slightly different. But even church weddings can have the words altered to...supposedly...leave out God.
This was a good book. Not a five-star book...just a decent one.