Rating: 4/5

My 1993 rating was 2 stars!
Regardless, Andreas's 5-star convinced me to give it a second chance:
"Ringworld and The Ringworld Engineers are arguably Niven’s best solo novels, as well as the ultimate BDO (Big Dumb Object) story. Great adventure in an incredible setting with trademark Niven “quirky characters”. They’re not perfect but the sense of wonder created is second to none."
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

So his is the one to read first. Why I rated it at 2 stars back then, who knows? 1979 book, and I'm guessing I read it ca. 1980. Long before I was posting reviews, let alone keeping notes! Anyway, the criticisms you can read nearby are valid, at least for those readers. But I had a TON of fun with it! Unlike with the original RINGWORLD, I remembered so little about this one that it was virtually a first read! As for those objecting to Louis Wu being oversexed, I refer you to the author's famous quote:
"There is a technical literary term for those who mistake the opinions and beliefs of characters in a novel for those of the author. The term is 'idiot'."

Anyway. If you liked the original, and like Niven's stuff, I predict you will like this one, too. But I could be wrong! I'm an old fart, with old-fart SF fan tastes! So be it.
For me a strong 4-star book. Recommended reading. Even if it's not quite up to the first. My (dim) recollection is that the series went downhill from here, and some of the later novels were pretty dire.

The Ringworld books are set in Niven's "Known Space" universe, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Known_S... -- arguably Niven's finest fictional achievement. Niven was particularly good with creating novel aliens, and giving them catchy names: the Bandersnatchi. The Tnuctipun. The Kzinti: "Scream and Leap!"

Fans who missed it (or if it's been awhile) will likely enjoy his 2009 interview at Locus:
https://locusmag.com/2009/09/larry-ni...
-- in which he claims, tongue firmly in cheek, that "the Soviet Union was taken down by a science fiction story written at Larry Niven’s house! Which was wonderful.” Whee!