Rating: 4/5

Drawing is a skill that feels like magic to some. It involves creating something out of nothing, after all. With simple strokes on paper, we can trick our brains into believing there is something more than just lines. It's truly powerful stuff when you think about it, but then why is it so hard to just copy what you see?

Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain is a guide aimed at those who think they will never be able to master this particular craft. Through practical exercises and insights, Betty Edwards teaches readers to enhance their drawing skills by tapping into the brain's right hemisphere, which is responsible for creativity and visual perception.

It's all about seeing the world differently. One of the things that makes drawing from life so difficult is that our brain likes to play tricks on us. In most circumstances, this makes life much easier: our mind basically fills in the blanks, and we perceive things more wholly than we actually do. When it comes to drawing, logic and rationality can suddenly become a hinderance: we simply won't believe that one chair leg appears shorter than the other because we know that they are all the same. What this book teaches is how to overcome those blockades.

As someone who draws a tremendous amount, this was still insightful and an interesting way to look at the subject. As an illustrator, drawing is literally my job, so I might not be the target audience for this, yet I had great fun exploring this very conscious way of approaching something that has long become second nature to me. I did all the exercises and was surprised by the results. By changing up little things, recreating what's in front of you suddenly becomes easy and accessible. I also enjoyed how Edwards conveyed the idea of drawing being more than just creating art, but instead being a fundamental way of understanding our world. By engaging with it in this way, we perceive reality more accurately and foster creative thinking.

I think this is a great read for anyone who has stopped drawing as an adult, thinking that they are just no good at it. It's an unintimidating and approachable introduction to the subject!