Rating: 3/5

"And she looked back through the other pages of the calendar, and thought as she did so of her own January (when she had had chickenpox) and March (her birthday...) and June (containing her first train journey alone, to visit her godmother). Those months seemed like the filled and labelled jam-jars in the larder at home: the rest, September and October... stood empty and unpredictable."

This book is not a time-slip novel like I anticipated, yes there are moments with echoes of the past, which culminate near the end, but it's not the same as The Children Of Green Knowe which I recently read (and loved). This is story about class the movement of time and concept of age and aging.

One good thing about this book is it was written in the 70s and if you are teaching students about that period in history, there are some interesting things here, such as 20p pocket money being enough to purchase a multitude of things, parents being known by their last names e.g. Mr &amp; Mrs Foster, and BBQs referred to as picnics. It did make me laugh though how the visiting neighbour Martin is presented as a lower class child with less etiquette and compared to children now, he's fairly posh, I would say!

One disappointing thing about the book is how slow it is at times, but what it lacks in pace in parts it makes up for in memorable moments, like when Maria sees a catastrophic accident almost happen and how impactful that is for her to know that, "it nearly ended up as quite a different sort of day."

I also enjoyed the ending when all the echoes of time were beginning to come together (though Maria is very melodramatic!)

Also the nature references to the fossils, trees and lichen etc. we're lovely. Again, very useful as a class read as you could bring fossils in for students to view and label so they are connected with the world and understand the links to the past and the importance of this, just as Maria learns in the book.

Overall, it's not my favourite read (perhaps because I was expected a different, more ghostly, tone to the book), but I'm glad I read it and I can see a lot of use for this book as a class read, or for young people to stumble across themselves and become philosophical about their place in the world and time itself.