Rating: 5/5

David Leavitt's "Equal Affections" is a masterful book, one that you might be surprised he wrote so early in his career. I don't know how I missed reading it when it was published because I, equally young, read everything "gay" back then (who can keep up now?) and was a huge fan of Leavitt's. Have you read "The Long Language of Cranes?" If not, rush and get a copy.

"EA" concerns the dynamics of the Cooper family: Louise, Nat, April and Danny. The only other character of consequence is Walter, Danny's partner. Leavitt structures his book around how Louise's recurring cancer diagnosis impacts the various relationships in the family. Both children are gay, and Louise and Nat mainly ignore this aspect of their children's lives. Leavitt's book might be controversial today at his suggestion that April's sexuality is as much as the result of choice as innateness. 

What sets "EA" apart is the quality of the writing, even when the book is about universal themes. Consider when Walter muses about the appeal about gay online relationships? "And wasn't love always an [act of faith], in the end, a mere gesture made across unknowable miles?" Walter's immersion into both gay pornography and gay chat rooms mirrors the other characters' searches for either ways to understand the choices they have made in their lives or the possibilities of other richer lives, those with more freedom, whether it be spiritual, artistic or sexual. 

Among the five pivotal characters, all complex, perhaps the richest is Louise. At one point, she believes that her horrible skin rashes are the result of her trying to keep her marriage to Nat intact. Nat has been having a long affair, and he is only attentive to Louise when she is ill. They both resent the parts of the others' lives that don't involve each other, and their resentment manifests in their imaginings of the others' histories and inner worlds. 

By the end of the novel, April sees her mother as a victim of Nat's infidelities, while Danny wonders if this is true. In a coda, Leavitt makes clear that Louise's life was both stranger and more conventional than her family imagines, and happiness, like any large concept, is never a stationary point as much as it is a state one enters and leaves throughout life. The last chapter, as Louise strives to understand her suffering, leaves the reader with more questions than answers, the hallmark of a great novel.