Rating: 2/5

I know now why this collection of 13 short stories is called “The Return..” In the last story of “Memoirs” entitled The Final Problem, Watson says that Holmes has retired and will no longer publish new stories. Now in real life, between that story which was published in 1893 and 1903, the period called by Sherlock fans as “The Great Hiatus,” Sir Arthur Conan Doyle only wrote his third novel, The Hound of the Baskervilles (said to be his greatest novel). So, while writing the first story of the collection, Doyle was in full hope that the interest in his characters, Holmes and Watson, would be revived. I actually rested for few days in between reading the two collections and I would say that on the 6th day, I felt that I was missing Sherlock Holmes so I returned to my daily reading and finished this book in 4 days including two heavy weekend reading days: 

The Adventure of the Empty House tells that Holmes has survived the fall from the Reinchenbach Falls with his archenemy Professor Mortiary. However, one of Mortiary’s confederates, Moran, knows about this so Holmes hides for three years and comes back in disguise. Watson, now a widower, recognizes him and so they are both back to resolving crimes in London. Their first assignment is the murder of Ronald Adair in Park Lane and the culprit is no other than his card playmate, who is but Moran. Very enjoyable after almost a week of not reading Sherlock Holmes. My friend is correct in advising me of not reading this canon without letup. Holmes almost convinced me went abroad to see the Dalai Lama! – 4 STARS

The Adventure of the Norwood Builder is about Oldacre who wants to start a new life so he fakes his murder and sets up the son of the woman who has ditched him. Holmes does the unorthodox solution: fakes a fire and let the 3 cohorts to shout “Fire!” Oldacre comes out from the hiding. Also enjoyable but I could not believe that Oldacre did not know that the fire was staged.  - 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Dancing Men is about the death of a couple, American lady called Elsie and the British guy called Cubitt. Prior to their deaths, the images of the 15 Dancing Men mysteriously appear in their house. Although I loved the idea, I just can’t imagine how the ditched American lover was able to draw them on the wall without being caught. Oh, also what happened to the fingerprints on the guns used? - 2 STARS

The Adventure of the Solitary Cyclist Violet is seeing a man on a bicycle following her. It seems to have something to do with the uncle who contacts Carruthers and Woodley to ensure the well-being of Violet and her mother. Quite ordinary. I thought it would have been more interesting if the love story is highlighted more. But then this is Sherlock Holmes and not Nicholas Sparks.  - 2 STARS
 
The Adventure of the Priory School Lord Saltire is missing from Priory School. Apparently, he leaves the school and is chased by Heidegger, the school’s master. The boy is reported to be unhappy at home and it is assumed to be the reason. Holmes and Watson deduced by first looking at the cow’s tracks and noticing that one of the bicycles has a patch. I liked this one because it has a second set of characters that come out during the deduction part that I did not expect coming. - 3 STARS
 
The Adventure of Black Peter A whaler father is found dead, murdered in his store. His family is happy because he, abusive to them, is finally out of their lives. Investigator Hopkins asks for help from Holmes and Watson. Holmes sees the initial on the cover of the diary in the crime scene and it leads him to the culprit. Seems ordinary to me. - 2 STARS

The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton The character of Charles Augustus Milverton is based on the life of Charles Augustus Howell (1840-1890) who persuaded the poet Dante Gabriel Rossetti to dig the up the poems he buried with his wife Elizabeth Siddal. He was said to have used those letters to bribe well-known personalities. Sir Conan Doyle used this true-to-life situation as a backdrop of this story. Here, Holmes is hired by a debutante Lady Eva Blackwell to retrieve compromising letters from a blackmailer, Milverton. Holmes disguises as a plumber, applies in the Blackwell mansion and get engaged with one of the maids. Conan Doyle has limitless imagination and can make Holmes do everything especially all these almost unbelievable disguises. - 4 STARS

The Adventure of the Six Napoleons The busts of Napoleon are being shattered night after night by an unknown person. Through the power of Holmes’ deduction he found out why. Direct storytelling. I thought it had something to do with British hating Napoleon, a French military commander and conquerer. Until the revelation.  - 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Three Students Three students are suspected to have “prototype” of the exams that would qualify them for a big scholarship. The incident happens when the professor is out from his office. Holmes is consulted to do a mini-mini-minimo. I liked this because it is simple and brought back memories of classmates who were caught cheating during exams in school. Not that I did not think of committing similar acts!  - 4 STARS

The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez The Golden Pince-Nez is a pair of eyeglasses that gets lost during an accident killing of Willoughby Smith, secretary to Professor Coram. Check the back of the bookcase. This story is short and quite uncomplicated compared to the other stories but I enjoyed it! - 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Missing Three-Quarter Very sad discovery where Staunton is. I thought that this story is sport-related until the ending.  Quite surprisingly, I am liking the Holmes stories with light straightforward resolutions. - 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Abbey Grange An abusive husband, Sir Eustace Brackenstall is murdered while his wife for 18 months, Lady Brackenstall is tied on a post. The lady and her maid say that the culprit is a group of 3 burglars. The answer is obvious.  I knew it! I was able to predict this one! - 2 STARS

The Adventure of the Second Stain A missing document from the dispatch box of the Secretary of State, Lord Bellinger. He believes that no one knows the importance of that document even his wife, Lady Bellinger. Then one of the spies hired by Holmes is killed. Tight plot. I did not see the ending coming but I again anticipated the marital problem.  - 3 STARS

Now my reading of the short stories about Sherlock Holmes is becoming interesting. There is a formula: crime  initial investigation  seems lame/untrue  investigate  first clues  deduction  new characters/setting/real events  conclusion. So, while reading, I can tell where I am. Then if I can predict what happens in the last two stages, it makes me happy. The only thing that I should improve on is how to do deductions! I have not been able to think the way Holmes does! He is just too smart!