Rating: 3/5

V.S. Pritchett was a British master of the short story form, gifted in turning the surface of social interactions into sudden depths of insight. His characters chatter at one another, bleating revealingly, and his storylines can move across days, month and even years in the span of a sentence. Often he focuses on isolated souls--widowers, spinsters, hard-luck salesmen, black sheep--in search of companionship or just a little contact, and he has a gift for placing them in very routine environments, let's say a kitchen where all the glasses are perfectly lined up or on a seaside walk where a former acquaintance toddles along and threatens to spoil one's holiday.

In contrast to Chekhov or Kafka, Pritchett's characters have the peculiar feel of being very specific individuals, limited, not susceptible to generalization. (In Chekhov or Kafka one has the feeling a character is a bit of an emblem, a type, a larger suggestion.)

A volume of Pritchett's stories entitled, A Careless Widow, contains three excellent stories and three so-so stories. The difference isn't so much in the execution, Pritchett's sure-footed way of perfectly expressing the way a woman yelps when surprised or a man pulls at his nose when he's fibbing, but in the scope and ambition of the story and, to a certain degree, the weight of the irony.

The three excellent stories here are "Cocky Olly," "A Trip to the Seaside," and "A Change of Policy." In "Cocky Olly" a girl finally breaks into a neighboring family's circle, which is more fun than her own family's circle. The characterization of why one family is fun and the other isn't is perfect; in fact, the tacit premise that some families are more fun than others is something we all know but might feel constrained to keep to ourselves, for fear of offending someone. In a "Trip to the Seaside," a widower realizes he should have seized his chance with a woman before he became a widower. But he was too faithful. In "A Change of Policy," a man pursues a former client when his own wife lies in an apparently permanent coma, and she says no...she doesn't and wouldn't do such a thing...but then she says yes, the change in policy, and is amazingly unconstrained in enjoying herself...and then then the wife wakes up from the coma.

The ironies in Pritchett's work don't involve murders, ghastly betrayals, wars, or earthquakes. They are matters of sentiment, self-regard, convention, and manageable passion. He's a writer engaged in contemporary social reality, but he makes the humdrum dance, and in his best stories, he is acutely good.