Rating: 3/5

Objective Summary

Hirsch argues for American educators to return to a focus on cultural literacy, meaning a common body of knowledge that literate citizens within a nation possess. Mere literacy, the ability to sound out or read individual words, is not coterminous with cultural literacy, which is a deeper familiarity with a body of concepts shared by one’s compatriots. Cultural literacy is essential to efficient and effective communication. It is a prerequisite for general readers to grasp material written in newspapers, magazines, and literature. For example, community college students struggled with a short article describing the surrender of Lee to Grant at Appomattox. The description of this event assumed familiarity that the students did not have with the Civil War, the Union, the Confederacy, General Ulysses S. Grant, and General Robert E. Lee. Exhaustive understanding of each term is not required. But a basic sketch, or schemata, of who the relevant players, issues, and events were, and how they fit together, was required to understand that particular article and nearly all others. If every term had to be defined in every piece of writing, all writing would be unwieldy. Writers assume a general level of understanding from readers. When readers lack the assumed level of understanding, they are either less likely to read at all, or each undertaking will be a tedious struggle with much information lost in the process. Short term memory fails after about seven seconds or seven items. Precise forms are lost quickly, but the gist of an idea can be retained much longer. When basic facts are converted to long-term memory, they can be called upon to inform reading.

The precise terms that comprise cultural literacy will vary between nations and change over time. Some terms will succumb to obsolescence (Harold Ickes) and others will impose themselves through technology (google, Amazon) and world events (9/11). Core terms endure. Terms culturally literate Americans know include: 1492, Shakespeare, Declaration of Independence, George Washington, Bill of Rights, Abraham Lincoln, Gettysburg Address, Emancipation Proclamation, Civil War, World Wars I and II, Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and Brown v. Board of Education. There are, of course, many others. Hirsch provides a list of 5,000 “essential names, phrases, dates, and concepts.” He recognizes that the terms will and should change over time, but he insists that a core list like his needs to exist for the benefit of all citizens.

Hirsch argues that public education in the U.S. took the significance of cultural literacy for granted from 1790 through 1900. Students across the nation were inculcated with nearly identical information and values. The theories of education shifted around 1918. The theories and idealism of Dewey, Rousseau, and Wordsworth pushed an individual growth model and formalism for fundamental processing like “linguistic skills” without regard to content. The theory was it didn’t matter what students read because they all had different abilities, talents, and interests. Moreover, with a rapidly changing economy, it was silly to train all children identically. All that mattered is that they read something. Traditional curricula were under further assault from multiculturalism and progressives who objected to the focus on white, European, male ideas and events. Such focus disadvantaged minorities and excluded other, valuable insights and histories.

Hirsch calls for a return to cultural literacy. A lack of cultural literacy hobbles an individual and a society. It leads to inefficiency and confusion at best, and balkanization and antagonism at worst. An individual may be excluded from a job or an entire field. A society may be thrust into war. Young children are sponges of knowledge. The process of conveying basic facts of their culture is both enjoyable for most kids and comes easily. These building blocks of knowledge pay huge dividends over the course of the child’s life because he is then able to use his cultural literacy to more ably grapple with future readings. The positive snowball effect inures to the benefit of all. Cultural literacy, though it has traditional facts and elements, is progressive and democratic in that everyone has access to it. It is much easier for an impoverished child or new immigrant to learn information in several hundred pages of material than try to equalize generations of wealth, connections, and schooling. If the curricula across schools vary widely, those in poor districts are more disadvantaged than if there is a common curriculum and all students learn the same fundamental facts. Cultural literacy is simply the shared language through which new ideas can arise and spread. Martin Luther King, Jr., for example, explicitly drew upon his cultural literacy from the Bible and founding documents to make his case and convince America of the justice of civil rights. And nothing stops minorities from contributing to the list of cultural literacy themselves, as King, Jackie Robinson, Hank Aaron, and jazz demonstrate.

Hirsch suggests that education in the U.S. should have both extensive and intensive curricula. All students would be exposed to the extensive curriculum that would inculcate cultural literacy. They could also choose to study fewer topics of their choice in more depth. This system would give students the best of both worlds: general knowledge and specialization. 

Subjective Thoughts

Hirsch’s arguments convince me. A shared language and cultural would naturally increase efficiency. A move away from significant facts and history seems self-evidently detrimental the functioning and unity of a society. Though Hirsch provides only an index of terms here, he stated he will publish a dictionary of cultural literacy at a later date. I would like to possess such a book, or the New York Times Guide to Essential Knowledge. Works like that contain interesting information and grant me entry into the priesthood of the cultural literate. All things considered, it’s actually a pretty low price of admission.

Revealing Quotes

“Cultural literacy is the oxygen of social intercourse.”

“Our traditional social goals were unforgettably renewed for us by Martin Luther King, Jr., in his “I Have a Dream” speech. King envisioned a country where the children of former slaves sit down at the table of equality with the children of former slave owners, where men and women deal with each other as equals and judge each other on their characters and achievements rather than their origins. Like Thomas Jefferson, he had a dream of a society founded not on race or class but on personal merit.”

“The civic importance of cultural literacy lies in the fact that true enfranchisement depends upon knowledge, knowledge upon literacy, and literacy upon cultural literacy. To be truly literate, citizens must be able to grasp the meaning of any piece of writing addressed to the general reader.”

“[A] mastery of national culture is essential to mastery of the standard language in every modern nation.”

“[Multiculturalism] should not be the primary focus of national education. It should not be allowed to supplant or interfere with our schools’ responsibility to ensure our children’s mastery of American literate culture. The acculturative responsibility of the schools is primary and fundamental. To teach the ways of one’s own community has always been and still remains the essence of the education of our children, who enter neither a narrow tribal culture nor a transcendent world culture but a national literate culture.”

“Many items of literate culture are arbitrary, but that does not make them dispensable. Facts are essential components of the basic skills that a child entering a culture must have.”

“AI research shows that experts perform better than novices not because they have more powerful and better oiled intellectual machinery but because they have more relevant and quickly available information. What distinguishes good readers from poor ones is simply the possession of a lot of diverse, task-specific information.”

“How large is the ‘large number of schemata’ that skilled persons have acquired? It has been estimated that a chess master can recognize about 50,000 positions patterns. Interestingly, that is the approximate number of words and idioms in the vocabulary of a literate person.”

“In a study of American school materials of the nineteenth century, Ruth Miller Elson found an almost complete unanimity of values and emphases in our schoolbooks from 1790 to 1900. They consistently contrasted virtuous and natural Americans with corrupt and decadent Europeans; they unanimously stressed love of country, love of God, obedience to parents, thrift, honesty, and hard work; and they continually insisted upon the perfection of the United States, the guardian of liberty and the destined redeemer of a sinful Europe.”

“George [Washington], said his father, do you know who killed that beautiful little cherry-tree yonder in the garden? This was a tough question; and George staggered under it for a moment; but quickly recovered himself: and looking at his father, with the sweet face of youth brightened with the inexpressible charm of all-conquering truth, he bravely cried out, I can’t tell a lie, Pa; you know I can’t tell a lie. I did cut it with my hatchet.” – apocryphal cherry-tree story from Mason Weems’s biography of George Washington

“Abraham Lincoln relates in his Autobiography how he educated himself by carefully reading and rereading a few books . . . Weems’s Life of Washington, the Bible, Robinson Crusoe, Pilgrim’s Progress, the Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin . . . Paine’s Age of Reason, and Volney’s Ruins.”

“Linguistic pluralism would make sense for us only on the questionable assumption that our civil peace and national effectiveness could survive multilingualism. But in fact, multilingualism enormously increases cultural fragmentation, civil antagonism, illiteracy, and economic-technological ineffectualness. These are the very disabilities the Chinese are attempting to overcome.”

“The poorest man may in his cottage
bid defiance to all the force of the Crown.
It may be frail;
its roof may shake;
the wind may blow through it;
the storms may enter,
the rain may enter,—
but the King of England cannot enter.” – William Pitt the Elder

“How such fragmentation [of American education] arose can be grasped in broad terms by looking at two decisive moments in American education represented by two historic documents, one published in 1893, the other in 1918. The earlier one is the Report of the Committee of Ten on Secondary School Studies; the later report is Cardinal Principles of Secondary Education. The contrasts between them bring into clear relief the change in educational theory that occurred in the first quarter of this century.”

“[T]he information that literate people dependably share is extensive but limited.”

“One can think of the school curriculum as consisting of two complementary parts, which might be called the extensive curriculum and the intensive curriculum. The content of the extensive curriculum is traditional literate knowledge, the information, the attitudes, and assumptions that literate Americans share—cultural literacy. . . . The intensive curriculum, though different, is equally essential. Intensive study encourages a fully developed understanding of a subject, making one’s knowledge of it integrated and coherent.”

“Many a proverb has its opposite in the national vocabulary, so that often one discovers dueling platitudes. Too many cooks may spoil the broth, but many hands make light work. Absence makes the heart grow fonder, but out of sight, out of mind. You’re never too old to learn, unless you happen to be an old dog trying to learn new tricks.”

“What practical measures could be taken to create useful school materials? The single most effective step would be to shift the reading materials used in kindergarten through eighth grade to a much stronger base in factual information and traditional lore.”