Rating: 4/5

For this picture book analysis I choose Always Room for One More by Sorche Nic Leodhas. This book was published in 1965 and won the Caldecott Medal in 1966. As it is a scottish folk song, it includes a lot of vocabulary that is foreign to us, therefore there is a glossary in the back that makes the reading of the book much easier, otherwise the reader is forced to infer the meaning of many of words. With the correct understanding, the book is a very cute read and a fun read. 
 General Description 
	This book, adapted from a popular Scottish folk song, won the Caldecott Medal in 1966. It tells the story Lachie MacLachlan and his family of twelve, they live in a tiny house but he always invites strangers and travelers to come stay, because there is always room for one more. But as he continues to invite more and more people into the house they seem to be running out of room. Eventually they get so squished in the house that it explodes and they all fall everywhere. Then everyone comes together and builds the family a huge new house so that there actually is always room for one more. Because the story is originally a folk song, the words are laid out very much like a poem or so that they need to be read with a rhythm, The illustrations are done so that they frame the words without the words being in the way, it is almost like the words are a part of the picture.

2. Text/Author Elements
Theme- The overall theme of this story is similar to the idea of Karma and that by doing good things, it will all come back to you in the end. The MacLaughlan family is always doing things to help others, even though it is, in a way, hurting them, but when, in the end, all the people they have helped come together to help them, they get what they deserved for all their kind action earlier. “And then the whole lot of them stood at the door, and merrily shouted, ‘there’s room galore.’” (pg 19).
Repetition- There are a few phrases, or stanzas that are repeated in order to better inforce the ideas, mostly those about how much of a habit it was for Lachie to invite strangers into the house and how full the house was getting. They repeat bow small the house is, how big the family is, and most of all how every passerby should “come awa’ in! There’s room for one more, always room for one more.” (pg 3).
Rhyme- This story uses some rhyme, it is not always exactly consistent or perfect rhyme, probably because it needs to be spoken, or sung, with a Scottish accent in order for the words to properly rhyme. The rhyme gives good rhythm when reading the book out loud; it makes sense that there is a lot of rhyme because the book was originally a song. “There was a wee house in the heather— ’Twas a bit o’ a but and a ben— and in it there lived all together Lachie Maclachlan…” (pg 2). 
Traditional Language-The language, even though it complicates the understanding of the book, serves to convey the tradition behind the story. Even without a background knowledge, because of this language the reader is able to make a connection with history and the tradition that is behind the story. One example of this language is bairns, which refers to children of a middle age; “And his bairns to the number of ten” (Pg 2).
Character Development- There is very strong character development of Lachie Maclaughlan, mostly through his dialogue. We are able to get a real sense of the kind of generous man that Lachie is, mostly through his constant offering of their house, no matter how full it got. He values what he has and thinks that sharing and helping others is important, and it ends up helping him in the end as well. “So me and my wife, and our ten bairns, will be sharing whatever we’ve got.” (pg 2).
Tone-The overall tone in this story is very approving. Even though the actions in the book could be seen as crazy, or unrealistic, the author approaches it as if it makes complete sense, helping to implement the tradition behind the story. The tone helps to convey that, though unrealistic, the story is still logical and makes sense, which strengthens the tradition because, as a folk song, the actions wouldn't be questionable, and the tone helps to further this understanding for younger audiences. 
Exaggeration-The events that happen are exaggerated and somewhat unrealistic, the most prominent example of that is that the house explodes so they all fly everywhere. It is understandable that when to many people are inside a house would never explode in the way it doe. But, these ideas help to make the story funnier and more exciting; “With its but and its ben and its walls and its roof dinged down!” (pg 14)
Sentence Structure-The sentences are set up similar to a peom due to the fact that it is an old song. There are loose stanzas and they help create the rhythm and reinforce the rhyme as the story is effectively read aloud. The stanzas and sentences are not exactly the same as in the song, but in the long run, they serve a similar service to the story as if it were the song. 
Mood- The mood is very lighthearted. The reader feels happy and carefree while reading it, aside from the occasional difficulty with the Scottish vocabulary. The mood encourages Lachie to do what he does best, and continue to invite people into his house, the mood also is very lighthearted when it comes to the overall story, it is very uplifting as he get help from all the people he has helped, and there is so much joy behind the story which is very enjoyable as the audience. “Now there will always be room for one more, Always room for one more!” (pg 19)
Setting Description- The description of the setting is imperative to the understanding of the story because it describes how small their house is, and they continue to let more and more in, so this detail about the size of the house is very important to understand the problem that arises when their is finally to many people. “’Twas a bit o’ a but and a ben—“ (pg 2)

Authors Craft- Sorche Nic Leodhas is an American author, this name was a pseudonym for her real name was LeClaire Gowans Alger. She was born in Youngstown, Ohio and worked as a Librarian and a storyteller under the pseudonym; she wrote traditional Scottish tales that had previously only been passed down in stories and songs. She won the Caldecott for this book, and the Newbery Honor for her other book Thistle and Thyme: Tales and Legends From Scotland. Most all of her books are written versions of these traditional Scottish Folk Stories. She finds effective ways of conveying these stories that can be difficult to understand, her writing combined with the illustrations works in perfect harmony to help the reader understand the folklore.
	“The poetic language keeps the reader engaged in the accelerating tempo of growing excitement as more and more people join in the merriment inside the “wee house in the heather”.”- Goodreads 
	“The text is very lyrical and begs to be read aloud. I found out why at the end. It is actually the text to a traditional Scottish song.” -Goodreads 
*Because this is an older, more uncommon book I was unable to find actual editorial reviews, so I took these excerpts from some of the better reviews on Goodreads.

3. Design/Illustrator Elements
Drawing- While the illustrations as a whole are done mixing media, the black ink drawing is the most detailed part of the pictures is drawn in black ink. The actual details and things in the pictures are done in this drawing technique; for example in the first page the house and the family, the most important parts, are drawn, while the rest of the picture is done in other techniques. 
Painting- The parts of the illustrations that are not drawn appear to be done with a very light and sweeping technique of watercolors. These watercolors create the texture, light, and feel of the setting. So in the first page where the house and people were drawn, the hill and land in the picture are done in this unique painting technique. 
Line- Within the drawn parts of the pictures, a technique of cross-hatching is used for the less detailed, or farther away parts of the pictures. The ones that are closer up like on pages 11 and 12 are still done using this cross hatching technique that gives it a unique feel, but detail is added to the faces and the hair of the people, making them much more realistic than in the zoomed out pictures.
Color- The use of color is very limited in these illustrations. Aside from the black, the colors are limited to varying shades of pink and yellow. This use of only the two colors gives much more value to the colors that are used. The pink and yellow just add deeper value and shading to the black shades that are already there. In some of the pictures, such as page 13, the color is so faint that it almost just seems like a different shade of grey, but the yellow just adds more interest and depth to the picture. 
Space- The pictures embrace empty space in their portrayal of the story, the pure ideas behind the techniques used require the embracing of empty space as a vessel in illustration. The cross-hatching technique is simply the difference between space and darkness, and the painting technique is only interesting because it does not fill the page and there is an emptiness left, that adds to the illustration rather than being actually empty.
Texture- the texture created in the painted sections of the illustrations is fascinating. For example, on the first page, the painting is the hill and landscape, and there is a texture behind it that, even in three simple colors the hill stands out and seems so realistic, the texture of the land is beautifully and simplistically created.
Folk Art- The style of art is very unique, and I believe it wold be unique to the time period. The simplicity and abstract qualities combine with more realistic qualities, to create a perfect balance to accompany this story. The illustrations represent an aspect of tradition, similarly to how the story reflects traditional folk song.
Darkness- there is a lot of shadow and darkness used in these illustrations, especially in the sky, like on page 4, there is darkness in the sky that would seem very bad and ominous, but in the context of the picture’s overall style this does not convey that. The darkness is used in ways that simply help shape the overall landscape and setting. 
Angles- The illustrator used very sharp angles in her abstract and more realistic portrayal of the people. For example, on page 4, the people, carriage, and house are all overly angular, while the landscape does not portray any angles at all. I think that this angular nature of the drawings comes from how the technique of cross-hatching is used, it is difficult to portray very fluid shapes and line with this harsh ink based practice.
Shades-The use of shading and the many shades within the only three colors involved in the illustrations makes it so that the illustrations don't even seem like they could possibly be missing some other colors. The illustrator skillfully used the wide variety of shades within each of the colors to portray the feeling of any color that could possibly be needed otherwise. In my opinion, this use of shading and limited color is actually more effective in companion to the story.

Illustrator’s Craft- Nonny Hogrogian is an Armenian-American author and illustrator who is best known for her children’s books. She grew up in New York City in a very artistic family; both of her parents were painters and her sister an interior designer. She works in a wide variety of mediums for her illustrations. She won the Caldecott medal twice, and was a runner up for it one other time. Aside from Always Room for One More her book One Fine Day also won while her book The Contest was a runner up. She both wrote and illustrated but, in this book she worked with Soche Nic Leodhas to create the book.
	 “The illustrations contributed very well to the story. They almost have a smeared and imperfect look to them. When I imagine all of these people crammed in one house, a feeling of a cramped room with a lot of hustle and bustle crosses my mind, and this is exactly the illusion that the pictures give off.” -Goodreads
	“The images in this book are flat out amazing. The land is water colored black and white with a tint of pink on every page. The figures (houses, people, and animals) are made up completely of lines… With the way the pictures are depicted, I am sure this book interests young children as well as adults because of the method used by the illustrator in his pictures.” -Goodreads

4. Read Along 
	This is a difficult book for young children. The Scottish words make it hard to understand, I found myself having to stop and explain the different words as we went along, which interrupts the rhythm and flow of the book. I tried to explain all the words before we read, with the glossary in the back but that was to boring and she did not pay attention. I tried to just read the words and hope that she could understand the story without understanding the words, but she kept asking as I read. Even though it is hard for young readers and the flow of the book is compromised, she still really liked the story behind it all. I think that my audience was to young for this book. Even though it is a pictuebook, I think that it has an older audience due to the complicated comprehension that is necessary. I rely enjoy and like the book, it is just not an ideal one to try to read to a very young audience. 
	In conclusion, Always Room For One More is a really great read even though it may be a little outdated. The story is very cute and has a lot of great ideas and themes behind it. This book is also very important because it functions to carry on another culture to today’s youth; even if it is not in the traditional folk song passed down through generations, the story and tradition is still being passed on and continued. It is very important that we find ways to interest children n historical culture and tradition so that it does not die out, and this adaptation of the traditional folk song into a children’s picture book functions as a very effective method of passing on and continuing tradition.