Rating: 4/5

Was there ever a novelist with a bigger heart than Charles Dickens? 

This is the sixth Dickens book I’ve read (including the novella 
  A Christmas Carol
). And, like most of his other works, it’s expansive, bursting with all manner of incident and life. Some of that life, mind you, goes ON AND ON. And a few scenes about social graces/manners might need explaining to a contemporary reader. But the overall effect, if you ignore the repetition, is absorbing and very satisfying. 

Just as we binge-watch the latest Netflix or Hulu series, I can imagine Victorian readers binge-reading the installments of this novel as they were published in the late 1830s.

After his father dies, Nicholas, his sister Kate and their mother are left penniless and at the mercy of the father’s brother, Ralph, a miserly moneylender who’s clearly possibly an early model for Ebenezer Scrooge.

Ralph, who hated his brother, promptly separates the family and does the absolute minimum for his poor relations; he sends Nicholas off to work in Yorkshire as an assistant to the loathsome Wackford Squeers, who runs an abusive sham of a school for boys; he sends Kate and her mother to live in a slum, and arranges for Kate to work for a milliner, Madame Mantalini, and her no-good, hanger-on husband. 

Soon Nicholas and Ralph have a huge falling out, and the family is cut off from any financial aid. How will they survive? 

What follows is an episodic narrative that includes forays into the theatre world (no doubt drawing on Dickens’s own experiences as an actor), several businesses and shadowy corners of London lowlife. This being a Dickens novel, there are lots of coincidences, some broad caricatures and a heavy social conscience, especially around the plight of the poor and helpless. 

Oddly enough, while Nicholas and Kate Nickleby are thinly drawn goody-goody characters, their chattering mother leaps off the page with her humorous conjectures and genteel pronouncements; Ralph and Squeers make fascinating contrasting villains.

Other memorable characters include Ralph’s clerk, Newman Noggs, who takes a shine to the Nicklebys; Lord Frederick Verisopht (say the surname aloud) and Sir Mulberry Hawk, two of Ralph’s slimy business associates; Miss La Creevy, a miniature portrait painter; all of the lively actors involved in the travelling theatre troupe run by Vincent Crummles; John Browdie, a simple but warm-hearted Yorkshireman who might bring to mind Great Expectations’ Joe Gargery. 

And then there’s the pathetic, friendless, sad-sack Smike, whom Nicholas meets and befriends at Squeers’ school. He’s one of those idealized, sentimentalized characters found only in Dickens novels.
 
It’s a little unfair to judge an early Dickens novel (his third, written when he was in his 20s) against his later works, particularly masterpieces like David Copperfield and 
  Great Expectations
. These later books were more carefully structured, and I don’t recall sighing and wanting to get through any passages the way I did with this book. (There’s one story-within-a-story set in a tavern that practically stops the novel in its tracks.)

But even though I pretty much knew where the novel was going (I’d seen the two-part stage adaptation years ago), Dickens still made me laugh, cry and gasp at certain passages. 

More than most major English novelists except perhaps D.H. Lawrence, Dickens was familiar with poverty and the lower classes, and that gave him lots of knowledge about the human condition, the vanity fair that makes up life, now and nearly 200 years ago.