Rating: 3/5

Hundreds of informative, beautiful, and awe-inspiring photographs from the NASA Apollo program (bringing back many fond memories) paired with the effusive, overworked and at times pungent writing of Norman Mailer. I give the photos five stars, but Mailer only one or, perhaps, two. Unlike a fine wine, his style of writing with nearly unhinged drama and emotion, at least in this case, did not age well. 

Only an egotist like Norman Mailer could write (in real time reportage) about the first men to walk on the moon—the pre-eminent historical event of his time—and end up talking mostly about himself (and in the third person, using a pseudonym)! He spews his guts and manliness all over the pages as he insults not only small town America (Armstrong’s talk is “too dull”, he has “a small town smile”), Wasps, mechanics, Southerners, Blacks and his own family and friends. He tells us about his breakfasts, his sleep patterns, his drinking or lack thereof. He expresses his boredom for the moonwalk, channeling, I imagine, the cultural ennui of the postwar boomers (Woodstock isn’t until next month). We get to hear about his terrible wife (look in the mirror, Norm), his awful drunken friend making a scene at a restaurant, and how dumb Black people are. 

His sad, jaded, and sometimes hateful, thoughts break apart what could have been an inspiring report. 

There are a few moments of quiet reflection, which almost amount to a realization of something larger than himself, that rise above his kvetching, as when he quotes Werner von Braun in his pre-launch speech  [von Braun’s speech included these lines: “Every man achieves his own greatness by reaching out beyond himself, and so it is with nations. …. Only when a nation means something to itself can it mean something to others…”] , or makes an observation about all the engineers at the launch site  [Mailer: “In NASA-land, the only thing open was the technology—the participants were so overcome by the magnitude of their venture they seemed to consider personal motivation as somewhat obscene.”] , or quotes Neil Armstrong, somewhat more fairly this time, as Neil confirms the moon landing  [“’Houston, Tranquility Base here. The Eagle has landed.’ It was Armstrong’s voice, the quiet voice of the best boy in town, the one who pulls you drowning from the sea and walks off before you can offer a reward.”] (My mother knew the Armstrong boys when they lived in Upper Sandusky, Ohio. The older I get, the more I feel like Neil is practically from my hometown.) 

But instead of finding encouragement or hope from Apollo, Mailer finds only emptiness and loss of direction. He moans about all the bad things that have happened over the decade, complains about designed obsolescence, kvetches about how self-interested and insular Americans are, about how all of this technology is just going to make us even more spoiled and empty. And, given what transpired in America over the next 40 years, perhaps he was right, in way, but that does not make all his ranting (his word) any more palatable. 

Frankly, however, I could not care less about the writing. 

Because the photos, merely the photos, those beautiful, wonderful photos, delivered to me and my young sons all the excitement, all the achievement and all the wonder of the entire man-walks-on-the-moon saga that one could hope to communicate to the next generation. One of them asked me whether any of the original astronauts (Collins, Armstrong and Aldrin) were still alive, because he wanted to talk to them! 

Sometimes it is okay to be enthusiastic. Sometimes it is okay to hope. I am sure my children will (or at least I hope they will) be looking at this book for years to come. Just don’t scroll down to the comments, kids! 

(Also, be warned, some of Mailer’s topics, as you would expect, are not for adolescents).