Rating: 5/5

"We're a u-fucking-nique bunch here in St. Louis." 

 This one was a re-read for me. I had forgotten how many of my favorite scenes were in this book. Anita and Nathaniel in her office (the neck biting and animal instincts were very hot), a savage Damian reinstating his blood oath to Anita, her laughing in Primo's face when he tried to best her in magic, the introduction of Wicked and Truth.... *sigh*...... so many wonderful things happen. I really enjoy Nathaniel's character and the first half of the book focuses mainly on him. This is actually where his relationship with Anita began. If Micah is the queen to Anita's king (because we all know she's the man in her pard relationships), then Nathaniel makes the perfect mistress. I like that he's the sweet kid that finally starts to show a bit of a dominant side. But there were some things that weirded me out that I had to try to overlook, like the aprons and tea sets and high pony tails and mascara . . . that was a little much for me, but hey, whatever works I guess. 

Now on to the two things that really disappointed me.
First - Anita's job. Her relationships dominated for the majority of this story so much that by the time that she got back to a crime scene I had forgotten that crimes were even occurring. Her work has become a side note and the magical powers that she is trying to control and the new ones that are developing, along with her personal relationships is what this book is really about. Honestly, a lot of the problems with Anita's loss of control with her power is her own fault and it frustrates me. How many times did they have to tell her that she has to feed ALL of her needs fairly regularly? She's smart, but apparently stubborn trumps that. Damian had near death experiences and she still doesn't fix the problem. Ridiculous.
Second - The threesome that I've wanted to read about for so very long. I was too excited when I thought Anita and Jean-Claude and Richard were going to get it on! I mean, I knew Richard wasn't going to start exploring the other team, but the idea of the two of them even cooperating while being in bed with Anita *fans self* is something that I always hoped would happen. . . . . So why did they have to talk it to death!?! I don't think I've ever been so frustrated with two people in my life! I don't know who I was more upset with, Anita or Richard. They argued and complained about it so much that it took most of the excitement away by the time they got down to it. =(

Overall, this is one of my favorite Anita books. It's a very long 722 pages, but it's a lot of kinky, bloody, fun. 

"Then what were you doing inside this place?" A look of near evil joy crossed his face. "Oh, I get it. You like to look at other people's beans and wienies."