Rating: 5/5

”The woman’s face lit up with a malignant anger. ‘That is the house of Shaw!’ she cried. ‘Blood built it; blood stopped the building of it; blood shall bring it down. See here!’ she cried again---’I spit upon the ground, and crack my thumb at it! Black be its fall!’”

David Balfour’s father has died, and he is on his way to his Uncle Ebenezer’s house when he meets the local peasant woman who gives him a taste of how the local people feel about his uncle. I love that line, “crack my thumb at it.” This is an obscure reference of displeasure that some feel RLS may have just made up, but with all the regionalisms across Scotland, I lean towards believing it is something he heard once and kept it tucked into his mind until he had a chance to use it. It becomes very obvious that his uncle is not well liked, and once David meets him, he knows why. Even his appearance seems to support his degenerate intentions.”He was a mean, stooping, narrow-shouldered, clay-faced creature; and his age might have been anything between fifty and seventy.”

The one scene that really stuck with me from first reading this story as a child was when his uncle convinces him to go up in the tower on the stairs without a bannister. David is torchless, and thinking about him ascending in the dark with nothing but open space before him and the cold stone of the wall behind him sent a shiver down my spine. I won’t tell you more, but needless to say, there is nefarious intent involved. 

David is betrayed and finds himself on a ship called Covenant bound for the colonies. There, through a mishap at sea, he makes the acquaintance of Alan Breck Stewart. They become allies against the ship's crew, and there is this rousing description of the Battle of the Roundhouse. It reminds me of the scene from Treasure Island when Jim Hawkin’s and the brave few are in the stockade trying to hold off the murderous pirates. Stevenson is at his best when he is describing these desperate, hopeless circumstances. 

Alan Breck Stewart was a real person. He was an exiled Jacobite, but was on his way back to Scotland to collect the dues owed to the cause by the clans when he had an unfortunate encounter with the Covenant. His head was worth a pretty penny to the English. The nickname Breck means spotted and refers to the smallpox scars on his face. He was accused of murdering the royal agent Colin Campbell, and though he was never apprehended for the crime, he was sentenced to death in absentia. The Appin Murder, as it was called, is part of the backdrop of this story, as David finds himself in the middle of it. The Campbells and the Stewarts have long been enemies, and the murder of Colin was the spark that set off another round of feuding between the families. I would say a Stewart might have murdered Colin, but there really wasn’t any evidence that put Alan Breck in the frame. I believe he was just a convenient scapegoat for the crime, given that the English already desired his head in a noose. 

Alan Breck is a fierce fighter, certainly the right man for David to know in a tight spot, but the fact that he is a much wanted man puts David at more risk than if he were traveling across country by himself. Alan Breck has some faults as well. He likes to gamble at cards and dice and doesn’t seem to be very good at either, which frequently leads to the duo having to rely on the kindness of Alan Breck’s extended family for food and shelter. 

David knows the House of Shaw is his birthright. His father was the eldest, and by primogentry rules, his uncle is a usurper. The whole time I’m reading the book, I’m waiting with anticipation for when Alan Breck’s steel meets Ebenezer’s blunderbuss. ”’Powder and your auld hands are but as the snail to the swallow against the bright steel in the hands of Alan.’ said the other. ‘Before your jottering finger could find the trigger, the hilt would dirl on your breast-bone.’” Jottering finger is just precious, isn’t it? I’m not really sure it was a word until Stevenson made it one, but it certainly paints a different picture than using trembling or shaking. Dirl means vibrate, but dirl certainly fits better with hilt. 

There is a statue of Alan Breck Stewart and David Balfour in Edinburgh. They are much beloved characters by Stevenson fans, certainly as well loved as Jim Hawkins. I recently read the Stevenson/Barrie letters, and in one of the letters, Barrie mentions how much he thinks about Alan Breck Stewart and he does hope that Stevenson has left him alive and well. Stevenson wrote a second book called Catriona that picks up right where Kidnapped ends. The book was later published with the title David Balfour which probably helped induce further sales. I will be rereading that one as well very soon. Certainly readers wanted more of these characters, and who knows, maybe Stevenson would have written another book about them if he’d lived longer. He had several unfinished projects and many things percolating in his brain when he passed away at 44. 

This book has been lauded by Henry James, Jorge Luis Borges, and Hilary Mantel. Those are very diverse writers who all found something to admire in this book intended for young readers. The edition I decided to read was the Charles Scribner’s and Sons publication from 1946. There is a fold out map and fourteen color plates from N.C. Wyeth. It has a paste down color print on the cover. I also have David Balfour and Black Arrow in these editions. I have Treasure Island as well, but a later edition with a dust jacket. They are readily available for a reasonable price on eBay and Abebooks and certainly make the reading experience more enjoyable. 

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten and an Instagram account https://www.instagram.com/jeffreykeeten/