Rating: 5/5

Reads: 2Oct25, 10Jan26

5 stars. a delicious sumptuous read. deservedly a BN fave. how lovely were the Prof and Sarah in this one! he was stuck in his ways, refusing to believe he had fallen for her, but desperately trying to find her and save her from hard times, and so miserable when he didn't know where she was. and she was determined to be self sufficient while secretly heartbroken because she had fallen for him but she no signs he'd fallen for her. and this was the funniest BN book I have read so far, with such amusing scenes while they are determinedly being star crossed lovers. aha. I usually love an angsty read and this was lowish angst and yet it was absolutely divine, I tell you! plus this had some scenes from his pov which showed his thoughts and revealed his angst, something we rarely see in a BN book and I absolutely lapped it up because Betty NEVER gives us that delicious male angst we all crave. ugh. this was so good it almost hurts and I want to devour it again. ALSO, the bit when he BRAIDS HER HAIR. weeep! so yummy

-----------------

Gosh, I love this one. It was just as good on the second rea aand left me with a big huge smile on my face and such a warm cozy glow. I actually said "Aah, that was so good" out loud. lol. The ending was particularly delightful. I adored both characters and was so happy for them to get their HEA after all that. 

This is the one where Sarah (28) is all alone in the world after her father died and her cruel stepmother threw her out. All she has to love is her cat Charles. She works as a secretary/admin in hospital for Dr Radolf Nauta (36?) who is a prof obsessed with his work and barely notices her existence. She thinks of him as her demanding and stern-faced boss, but she works hard, often doing extra hours because her two married colleagues leave all the extra work to her, being a single lonely girl with no family. 

One day, the prof's mom pops in to see him at work and meets Sarah and thinks Sarah would make the perfect companion for the doc's grandmother who is ill and will die shortly, and so his mum persuades the prof to ask Sarah to take on this extra job during her leave from work. 

Thus Sarah finds herself going to Holland to care for the prof's grandmother, keeping the lady company in her last days, playing the piano for her and tending to all her cares. When the prof visits, he finds Sarah up late at night passionately playing the piano for his snoozing grandmother. he is angry to find her up so late and tells her to go rest while he sits with his gran. During this visit he notices Sarah as a person for the first time, notices the care she takes of his gran, he spends some time with her, he even braids her hair to keep it off her face while she is playing the piano. When the gran dies, he insists she must stay some extra days for the funeral. Knowing he is grieving, she agrees. 

After the funeral, the doc becomes distant with Sarah again and he leaves suddenly without saying goodbye. His mom tells sarah he had to leave for work reasons in europe. Sarah returns to her hospital job in england, but because of her delay she had written a letter to her supervisor to explain the delay. However, when she arrives back she is told the letter never arrived (postal strike) and her nasty supervisor fires her. 

SPOILERS AHEAD

Because the supervisor gives her a bad reference, she is unable to find any other decent work, especially as she needs a live-in position that will accept her cat, so after weeks out of work, Sarah ends up working as a lowly housemaid for a rich old lady in the countryside. 

The doc returns from europe and finds he had been wanting to see her again even if the idea of doing so disturbs him. And when he is told she was fired, he is furious. He knows it's his fault. He remembers he told her to keep the temp job a secret (to prevent hospital grapevine gossip) and thus realises she kept it secret at the cost to herself, because they would never have fired his secretary had they known why she was back late. 

So anyway, he goes out of his way to track her down, searching for days/weeks and it's impossible. He talks her her colleagues, her former landlady, and even tracks down her nasty stepmother and drives out there to speak to her. No one knows where she is. He is frustrated and a bit frantic, but in the end tries to distract himself by going out on a date and then accepting an invitation to visit his godmother. 

When he arrives at his godmother's house, the first thing he sees is the housemaid-and it is Sarah! He is absolutely furious. He confronts her about skivvying for a position too low for her. But she angrily tells him to mind his own business because she is happy enough there. She has a small cottage to herself for her and her cat and the other servants treat her well and working in the big house is almost like being at home other than the fact she is a servant. She feels at home in the environment and doesnt want to go back to admin work in the city. 

He is angry about it - angry she never came to him for help - but his godmother persuades him to leave her as she is since she is happy there. He tells himself he is glad that he at least knows where she is, but every time her sees her working as a servant during his visits, it grates immensely on his nerves. It is wonderful to see him lose it sometimes because he just cant handle seeing her skivvying. He always overreacts and has to clamp down on his anger. And yet he tells himself she is not his business anymore. 

And yet at the soonest opportunity, he persuades his mother to come for a month-long visit and he hires Sarah as his mother's companion and brings her to stay in his country home. He plans on visiting at the weekends and hopes to see enough of sarah to get her out of his system so that he can stop thinking about her. Sarah on the other hand goes out of her way to avoid him (I think by this point she had realises she was in love with him and that he is extremely far out of her reach) -- she takes a day off on the sunday he is due to visit and lies and says she was invited to dinner by the parson and instead ends up walking and realising she has no money in her purse and ends up falling asleep on the roadside. She awakes to find him furiously sitting next to her. when she explains she lied because she wanted to avoid him, he kindly takes her to tea because she is so hungry. but after that, he leaves early and he doesnt come back for the next two weekends either and she is sad to not even get a glimpse of him. 

So anyway, she must go back to being a servant again at his godmother's house after this, and it drives him ever more crazy to see her fetching and carrying and cleaning stuff. 

For the rest of the story the tension comes from the fact that she thinks he doesnt like her at all and does her best to stay out of his way, even when he cant help but track her down and take her out for tea etc. And from him resisting (and being hugely confused) about his feelings. The man is literally losing his rag and losing his mind and he doesnt even know why. At one point, he thinks that she has fallen for an old male friend she bumped into and he thinks that he better step in to help the couple to get married so that he can finally be glad that Sarah is cared for and happy. He is so confused at this point he doesn't even know what he is doing. My gosh, it was sweet to see him so muddled up by his emotions and his refusal to admit to himself he was in love, but still being determined to help her.

Sarah also gets the wrong end of the stick, thinking that he is engaged to some woman, and becomes even more determined to avoid him and lets him believe that she and her old friend are engaged so that Radolf stops feeling obliged to look after her. 

ENDING SPOILERS

In the end, Radolf manages to untangle the truth. And Sarah gets herself trapped in a snare overnight when she goes to rescue her missing beloved cat, and Radolf hunts half the night to find her. It was a beautiful poignant scene--after he found her, it was too dark to try to find their way to a path, so he ended up holding her in his arms the rest of the night and watching over her and finally feeling perfectly happy even though he was exhausted and hungry even before he started searching for her. 

I love how he cares for her injuries and her cat afterwards, and how excited all the servants are to realise that these two might secretly be in love, and when he finally comes to take her home to his house, saying he should have taken her home months ago, and he confesses he loves her and had been fighting it, and she tells him off for not telling her sooner, and it is just so wonderfully romantic. AARGH. I absolutely loved the ending. it was so perfect after all the deliciously sweet gentle angst undercurrent of the whole book. Angst on both sides in this case. It was an absolutely delicious re-read and the story just felt so rich in terms of emotion and all the cast of side characters. 

CONCLUSION

The couple have such strong chemistry and such a beautiful tug towards each other in this one that it was a beautiful read. I love that he was both fighting his feelings but also completely baffled by his own feelings and didnt understand what the hell was going on and why he had such and overprotective need to watch over her. It was so sweet to see his mom realising that his snappishness and annoyance over her being a servant was because his feelings were so strong that he had lost his usual iron control over them. And Sarah was a wonderful character who was determined to overcome all odds and simply carry on and never let anything get her down despite her terrible inner loneliness in life. And it was so sweet how much she doted on Charles, he cat, because she had no one else, and how much all the servants and even Radolf understood that and also took care of Charles for her. Sob! Even with no OW drama, the sense of drama and depth of story was deep with this one. Chef's kiss. A strong 5 stars.