Rating: 5/5

Well I did it. I did it just under the wire, but I did it. I found my first five star read for 2019. This was not at all what I was expecting and I loved it for that. It hit that sweet spot of storytelling that’s both out of left field and so well drawn from the ingredients presented that you go along with every word. King is the best memoirist I’ve read next to Patrick Leigh Fermor and his Time
Of Gifts. And although they are working with entirely different materials, in entirely different worlds and with diametrically opposed tones, I saw the same kind of artistry and the same mischievous, sharp minds behind each of their stories. King is by far the more honest of the two though. Fermor paints a fantasy made of allusion and half-memory and wishing, King is brutal and never spares using a word right in your face, even when you wish she would. But it’s all in the service of finding just a few truths she’s been trying all her life to say in just the right way. And also it is *hilarious* in just the dry, speak for itself way that I Iike on almost every page. She spent some time spinning these yarns to get them to roll out as smooth as this and man was it worth it. And in between all of that there are moments of shocking sadness and sweetness that arise seemingly out of nowhere, out of the most unlikely people, ones she’s deconstructed and made fun of and yet still manages to reach with human eyes in spite of that. She lived when she lived and of course *where* she lived and had to make the best of what she found- which often wasn’t much (just like Fermor also, come to think of it, except with racist Southerners instead of brutal schoolmasters and Nazis). The problem I have with so many memoirs is that I think they pull their punches and soften moments that should be the sharpest, they pull away the mirror when it needs to be there the most. Fermor did it so artfully I loved him anyway. Others, not so much. Even Jia Tolentino’s collection, which I adored some pieces of, did this in the personal stuff. And I get it. It’s hard. But King stared it down pretty unflinchingly, and never made me feel like she dodged the hardballs she flung at herself. And for that, I’ll never forget her.