Rating: 4/5

This is about a biographer, his wife and his mistress. Also about marriage, mid-life crises, family relationships and love ties. William Dubin, has chosen to become a biographer because by writing biographies he reasons he will be able to grasp another person’s life. Maybe through understanding others he would come to understand himself. He has written biographies on Robert Frost, Henry Thoreau, Abraham Lincoln and Mark Twain. Now he is writing about D. H. Lawrence whose complicated love relationships have him analyzing his own. The book has quotes and interesting personal tidbits about the above named and others such as Montaigne, Carlyle, Mahler and Schubert. I like the peppering of quotes. I like how Dubin sought to understand himself by understanding how others have thought. He personalizes others’ life philosophies.

 What drew me most to the book is its perfect mirroring of how New Englanders in the late 60s and early 70s viewed the world. Nixon, Watergate, and the Vietnam War set the background, as well as free love, flower power, Zen and an innocence and naivety in the belief that with a little protest problems will be solved and all will get better. Reading the book now, four decades after its publication in 1977, one is struck by both what has changed and what remains the same.

The writing mirrors East Coast mannerisms and dialog. Dubin lives with his wife in a rural community in upper New York State near the Vermont border. With his lover, who by the way is half his age, there are frequent trips to the Big City and occasionally abroad too. The son, a Vietnam deserter, is off to Sweden and Russia. The daughter is in Los Angeles and into Zen.

In its ability to so well capture a past time and place, one can today classify this as a book of historical fiction. Of course, when Malamud wrote it he was writing of contemporary times. I felt at home, but for others of later generations, it provides a learning experience.

Malamud describes nature—flowers, birds. seasons and storms--beautifully and accurately. He quite simply writes well. He captures guilt, through characters’ hearing of voices and steps-- here the writing borders on the Gothic. He draws sex in ways some may view as too erotic, but not to one of the Hippie generation. Thinking through the why of people’s behavior is much of what this book is about.

The book should have been better edited and thus shorter. Despite this, I liked it a lot.

If you are looking for a book that draws people who learn their lessons and improve, the book is probably not for you. If you are born in the forties or fifties or are curious about the Hippie generation, appreciate good writing and can deal with people who fumble, seek understanding but still fail, give the book a try.

I listened to an audiobook narrated by Victor Bevine. I felt the narration started off stilted. By the end I liked it a lot. I have given the narration four stars. 

****************
The Assistant 4 stars
Dubin's Lives 4 stars
The Fixer 4 stars
A New Life 3 stars
My Father Is a Book 2 stars
The Tenants TBR
Bernard Malamud: A Writer's Life TBR