Rating: 4/5

A Home at the End of the World seems to enjoy a healthy following on Goodreads. Total strangers repeatedly came out of the woodwork to like my status updates day after day as I progressed through this book, handfuls of them – thanks, friendly strangers! It didn’t take long for me to see why the novel would have such a draw or why it would inspire such a welcoming bunch to cheer on new readers.

As it explores the personal growth of a motley cast of broken souls, A Home at the End of the World successfully develops into a poetic and soft-spoken tale of acceptance. This is a book that celebrates human differences in their utter banality, making them part of an everyday experience while casting conformity to the wind. There’s room for fun in this story and a constant preoccupation with dignity, with Cunningham giving a voice not to monsters, not to radical eccentrics, but to approachable outcasts and dreamers instead. In this novel, we’re one drag queen away from an Almodóvar movie. Figure the feel? 

At its very core, this modern-day fable explores leaving the nest and preparing one of your own. In step with the growth of its main characters, the novel itself evolves, its actual writing mutates, reflecting first the boisterousness of youth, then the novelty of chasing opportunities in a big city, and finally the more pensive and atmospheric reality of settled adulthood. As childhood friends Bobby and Jonathan both leave their Cleveland homes and eventually reunite in New York, the tone changes; it will change again when they end up sharing a house in the middle of nowhere – a home at the end of the world – with Jonathan’s friend Clare.

Even though she would eventually get demoted to a secondary role of little interest, when Jonathan’s mother Alice first got her own voice to air her doubts and regrets in seeing her son grow up, she made everything click for me in this story; only then would she recede into the background again, leaving a lasting impression. But that woman had changed my appreciation of the novel from that point on. She had ripped my heart open then left it there and walked away, her job properly done. I stood defenseless.

I expect to carry inside me for a long time to come the memory of a delicate, haunting mood that Michael Cunningham nurtured with intuitive talent and no shortage of beautiful words, in this first novel of his.