Rating: 2/5

The two stars are for the other couple: I really liked Casimir and Bonnie and would have preferred them as the MC, instead. Their story alone would have made a great book!

I couldn't stand the h; Carrie, she was a selfish bitch! There's nothing wrong with wanting to devote yourself to your dance career, but even her mentor told her not to exclude everything else, especially love, but she didn't listen of course, treating the H, Alex, like crap! She lied to him about being pregnant with his baby (let him think it was the OM who knocked her up), and that was bad enough, but then accusing him of not giving a damn when the baby died was just awful!!! And she had no qualms about using Casimir (when she thought the H, Alex, was involved with Bonnie), so I'm glad he was also using her as well. After pushing Alex away so many times, she had no business being jealous!

Her biggest thing against him (besides the fact that he was the only guy that could dampen the tights beneath her tutu) was that she claimed he didn't care about the lost baby (born prematurely). Well, DUH!!!! You told him the baby wasn't his, so you could hardy expect him to be the grieving father, for crying out loud! He DID care when he found out the truth, but for some reason that only her lame brain knows, she didn't believe him! Even worse, she blames him for the baby's loss, because she was stressed out over an argument that they had prior to that. And what was that argument about? She told him the baby wasn't his!!! And he actually got angry??? The NERVE of him!!!! 

 She even choreographs a dorky ballet where the leading man dancer murders a baby and the leading lady (herself, of course) is consumed with bitter hatred!!! Gee, where did that come from????

While it's true that grief can make a person temporarily unbalanced, this was NOT the case with her, as she admitted to herself that then pain from the baby's loss was slowly fading. In other words, it was okay for her to get over the loss of the baby she carried inside her, but it was NOT okay for the H to not be a grieving wreck over a baby that he didn't even know was his until it was too late! Makes perfect sense, in her DeLuLu Land!

She obviously had serious mental issues and was in need of a good psychiatrist, but of course, that doesn't happen.

Alex was a real jerk (as well as a simp) to be in love with her. I was hoping she'd fall and injure herself so badly it was the end of her career, and she winds up with nothing and no one, and he wised up and found a woman who really loved him, doesn't play "you are NOT the father" games and is not suffering from psychosis!

DNF; I didn't want this h to have the HEA she did NOT deserve!