Rating: 4/5

This is a non-fiction book about the Battle of Britain, and the first half beats anything else I have read. The book is written by Len Deighton who is most known for his thrillers but despite that, it is a proper historical non-fiction book. It is well researched, and it is written with the skepticism of a proper historian. There is a lot of information, about technology, people, organizations and events, but experienced author Deighton makes it all very readable.

I would say that there are three themes in the book:

1. The technology building up to the clash. This is the book's strong area and it covers details that other books do not cover as well. I wish there was more of it.

2. A day by day narrative of the fighting, almost always concluding that the kill numbers given at the time were intentionally misleading. British pilots often double counted or worse, and the war ministry was happy to report the exaggerated numbers to the public, knowing very well they were not accurate. This part is rather terse and other books are better at retelling the battle day by day.

3. The internal politics on both the British and German side. On the British side Trafford Leigh-Mallory out-maneuvered Hugh Dowding and Keith Park, the people that, according the author, made sure that Britain won the air war. On the German side, old WW1 aces and newer bureaucrats clamored for power, with Göring as the one holding all the strings. Some of this was new information to me, and it was clear the author was upset on others behalf.

Some of the main conclusions by the author:

The Battle for Britain was never as important for the Germans as it was for the British. It intended to soften up the British in advance for a landing, but there was never any realistic chance at landing at the British shore, despite what the British thought at the time. For the Germans it was more of a failed prestige project, or failed proof-of-concept for Göring. 

The author also notice that the British started terror bombings of civilians before the Germans followed suit. (My comment: Good for the British that they won the war or Bomber Harris might not have survived the aftermath). The book mentions a theory that the British prime minister did it intentionally to relieve the pressure on the fighter airbases but if so, everyone who knew about it took that knowledge to their graves.

Finally, the main conclusion by the author is that Britain treated Dowding and Park dishonourable and Leigh-Mallory should never have been given the promotions he got. This might very well be true, but I miss concrete information about how and why the war ministry choose to dismiss Dowding and Park. It's hard to say they made a mistake when you don't know what their reasoning was.