The Shadow Club is about Jared and Cherl made a club for "the second best kids" . The story is taken place at Stone Henge . The problem is all the second best kids want revengeon the first best kids , so they start pulling pranks on there enemies. The main characters were , Jared and Cherl were the antagonists. The protagonist were Austin L Space and Rebecca . Austin was always best at running and would tease Jared and call him a "goufer" he started calling him that because the coach put Jared as the water boy . Jared started getting mad at Austin because he put " goufer " on his track team jersey , so Jared got in Austins face wich made the coach very mad. Cherl's problem with Rebecca is Rebbeca was always first best in the singing competitions, she always won them because she was the sweet inocent girly type , when Cherl was the complete oppisite she was outgoing. Rebecca always tried to beat Cherl because in conclusion their " jealous cousins " . Then Tyson Mcgraw comes into the story, he was the bully of the school the crazy outragious type. Tyson was always really nosey, so when the shadow clubs meetings take place out in the woods at stone henge Tyson would sneak around and eavsdrop on their converstations. Jared heard something in the woods so him and a few other members of the club chased after something or someone they heard . Jared noticed that it was Tyson Mcgraw and started forcing him to tell him what he heard, Jared and the members started walking toward Tyson into the ocean they were waiste deep , Tyson didnt know how to swim . He starting yelling saying he couldnt swim but they kept pushing him on and on , then a huge wave came and took Tyson pumbling under. The next day Tyson told Mr.Greene the teacher. Mr.Greene called the members of the shadow club down to his office but they ran out of school to stone henge . Jared was furious so he went to Tysons house but when he got there it was to late , Tyson started a house fire . Jared ran in to save him so he climbed up the stairs of the light house and Tyson kept saying " get away ! " the fire finally retch the top of the light house . The only thing they could do was jump over the rails. Once they retch the bottom they were in water Jared had to grab Tyson and bring to shore. Jared promised to end the shadow club so he went back with Tyson and they burnt all the proof of the club . In my opinion this book was AMAZING !