Rating: 5/5

A "A Dance to the Music of Time" may well be one of the great literary works about the everyday life of the upper class in England and those attempting to break into it or rise within its social ranks. The writing is excellent, of course, but I rarely found myself transported by this work of meta-fiction about social climbing and high society, for example, in the same way in which Proust does. Powell is often considered an English Proust as the focus of the writing has to do with life and striving among the English upper crust. However, Proust strikes me as the far superior writer insofar as Proust is able to build a rhythm and cadence in the pure narrative beauty of his elegant syntax. Powell seems to want us to be amused by rather silly even juvenile plot points and I found it difficult to become immersed in or even to like an epic cast of characters of sycophants and a pretentious landed gentry so rapt in petty materialism and social score-keeping to extend beyond their own thin veneer of human artifice. That is also part of Powell's message but it's a theme which becomes laborious and redundant and boorish in its interminable length. Maybe it's because I'm American and am not compelled to engage in or to understand the complex nuances of the social class system of England. For me, life is too short to become further invested in reading another 2000 pages of more movements. I did very much appreciate Powell's uncommon use of the dance as a metaphor for life itself. Powell sees life as a dance during which we move over time in a series of movements. This idea intrigues me and the scenes of the novel often engage music and dance in the story line. I also became sensitive to and appreciative of the transitions or specific movements as the characters navigated among each other and their society. It is an important aspect of this novel to enable the reader to step back and view life this way. The novel begs the question: how well do you manage to navigate through the movements of your life over time in your business, family and society? Life can be measured in a sense by one's existential agility in moving attuned to the music of time. The ethereal concept of recognizing the partnership of music and time also proved interesting insofar as the constructs of music entail so many existential qualities in measures, stresses, beats, points-counterpoints, orchestration, creativity, individual talent, volume, scale, instrumental ability, discipline, improvisation, listening, expression, nuance, subtlety and grace all of which accompany one's personal dance throughout a lifetime. I became attuned to Powell's transitions among the many scenes he depicts and the vast number of characters who served as dance partners in the music of the narrative. So this is definitely a great literary read and even if in my view Powell may fall short of Proust, so what? They're both great literary novelists, not mutually exclusive, and one can over a long life read both if one starts at a sufficiently early age on the task. Given the choice, I would recommend reading all of Proust first: I'm glad I read this movement in time in order to become more attuned to my own danse macabre.