Rating: 4/5

Despite the risqué title, this book is less about adultery and more about the mystery surrounding Zipporah Ransome’s family. Has there ever been a more gothic name? 🥰 Highly doubtful! Why are authors far better at naming people than mothers?! 
This is a gothic before it is a romance. There is unsettling atmosphere, a pervasive sense of dread, and a mystery. I really enjoyed this book overall, and I would read another Philippa Carr (or Victoria Holt or Jean Plaidy, if you’re savvy) in second!

Zipporah Ransome is pretty standard: beautiful, well-to-do, and happy. Over and over she repeats how happy she is in her marriage. It was always expected she would marry her husband, Jean-Louis. She’d known him since she was child, so she was comfortable with him. 
Carr wants us to know Zipporah is mistaken about her happiness with he husband. Zipporah sees comfort and happiness as synonymous. However, her marriage to Jean-Louis is nothing like the few weeks she spends with Gerard d'Aubigné. Zippporah falls in love with Gerard. The feelings come fast, and they run deep. With Gerard she is truly, definitionally happy. But she is married, so Zipporah leaves the otherworldly realm that is her ancestral home of Eversleigh estate and returns to her husband.

Poor Jean-Louis Ransome has it the worst in this story. He’s a loving and devoted husband, but Zipporah cuckholds him. His leg is broken and his spine is injured, causing him to need walking stick, right at the beginning of the story. And that’s not all he must endure! Zipporah falls pregnant by Gerard, and she passes the baby off as Jean-Louis’s. It seems they are happy again. Zipporah feels guilt over her affair, but surely their daughter is something good that came out of her indiscretion.
In the end, Jean-Louis falls from his horse, becomes paralyzed from the waist down, and can’t stand the pain anymore. I truly felt sorry for his character. From my perspective, his only sin was marrying into Zipporah’s family, and it brought him a lot of misery.

Dickon is the villain of the story: avaricious, ever-scheming, and evil to his core. His mother and aunt (Zipporah’s mother) are total enablers and he can do no wrong in their eyes. If you can’t imagine what kind of person is produced from that upbringing, Dickon’s character is illuminating.
From the outset, he causes life-altering accidents, seeks twisted revenge, and aims to take what he wants by any means. He even grooms Zipporah’s daughter! He is the stuff nightmares are made of!

Ultimately, it becomes pretty clear what is haunted isn’t an estate, but Zipporah’s family. It’s a family littered with sinners of all sorts, and their actions, or inactions, have severe consequences that rippled throughout generations. Of course, this is a romance, so Zipporah’s going to end up where she should be with the man she loves. With many twists and turns along the way, Zipporah realizes what she must give up in order to protect her daughter and get her happily ever after.