Rating: 4/5

Twist of Gold’ is yet another Morpurgo gem. It tells the story of Sean and Annie who have grown up in Ireland with their family. However, with the arrival of the English, the land that they love has become a plague ridden one where many starve during the Potato Famine and where there is little hope for the future. As the novel opens, they have already lost three young siblings, their father has gone away to America in order to seek their fortune (although they have not heard from him in months) and there mother is on her death bed. As the two children attempt to survive, there seems little hope that they will until they meet a captain from the dragoons. He befriends the children, giving them what little food he can and trying to keep them safe. However, when he hears that there is a terrible fever sweeping across Ireland, he knows that they will not survive and so he does the only thing he knows to help them. Leaving their dying mother behind, he puts them on a ship to America to find their father and so begins their epic voyage from the southern tip of Ireland across the Atlantic and the entire continent of America to California in a desperate hunt for their father. The individuals they encounter on the way, the excruciating circumstances of their journey as they attempt to survive, find the father and preserve the torc, their family heirloom and good luck charm, are both amazing and utterly engaging.

Unlike some Morpurgo novels, this is far longer (nearly 300 pages) and the plot is far more complex. However, it is no less brilliant. The characters Morpurgo creates are larger than life: Sean with his strong sense of morality and the way in which we watch him mature, Annie with her innocence and sense of justice and even the villainous individuals such as the slave selling bounty hunter or the ship’s captain are vividly drawn. We are really compelled by this story of survival in much the same way as we are in ‘Private Peaceful’ or ‘War Horse’.

This is quite a long novel and yet, after much reading around, I chose it as a group read with my bottom set (primarily boy) Year 9 group (aged 13-14) and they have absolutely loved it despite the fact it is, in terms of plot, quite complicated at times. Several of them have read ahead in desperation to know what happens next (and this is a group of boys who do not read) and there is a collective sigh and calls for can’t we read more after our 10-15 minutes of reading at the start of each lesson. This, to me, speaks volumes!

However, there was another reason I chose this novel (apart from the fact it fit nicely with the topic of travel writing that we have been studying). It also reveals something of the society and life in the 1850s in both Ireland and America. The journey across America was not only epic but had a real quality of realism – Morpurgo as always, does not shy away from disturbing detail. I wanted to give the students some background to the idea of the American Dream and the notions about slavery at this time before reading ‘Of Mice and Men’ and this novel provides the perfect opportunity for such discussion. As such, it is also challenging. It does force the reader to face uncomfortable historical truths (not least about the way in which the English treated the Irish, which seems to find a parallel in the treatment of black people in terms of slavery at this time in Southern America).

No this is not a great piece of literature and there were some moments that felt as if they dragged a little. However, there is so much here: famine, loss, gambling, slavery, the American dream, ideas about the treatment of children, maturation, family. It is a wonderfully engaging story and one I would highly recommend to a young audience. Morpurgo just has a knack of not merely capturing a world that would be otherwise entirely unfamiliar, but forcing us to engage with and love his characters and, particularly at the end, grabbing us emotionally and forcing us to shed a tear.