Rating: 3/5

Ooof, finally finished this trudge trudge trudge of a book, and it isn’t even that long. Maybe I’m getting feeble but Thomas Hardy’s manytentacled sentences and trillion 19th century rural slang words presented a north-face-of-the-Eiger challenge for my little brain – strange words like clane, felloe, furmety, gaberlunzie, twanking, diment, rantipole and comminatory and many many more, and sentences like this (deep breath) :

As the lively and sparkling emotions of her early married life cohered into an equable serenity, the finer movements of her nature found scope in discovering to the narrow-lived ones around her the secret (as she had once learnt it) of making limited opportunities endurable; by a species of microscopic treatment, of those minute forms of satisfaction that offer themselves to everybody not in positive pain; which, this handled, have much of the same inspiriting effect upon life as wider interests cursorily embraced. 

You like that one? Heck, I got another :

While life’s middle summer had set its hardening mark on the mother’s face, her former spring-like specialities were transferred so dexterously by Time to the second figure, her child, that the absence of certain facts within her mother’s knowledge from the girl’s mind would have seemed for the moment, to one reflecting on those facts, to be a curious imperfection in Nature’s powers of continuity.

Yeah……….. time to lie down for 20 minutes. 

I guess I got what I thought I was going to get with this book – an intricate tale of the playing out of the intertwined fates of four characters who marry each other, lie about their origins to each other, lie about each others’ origins to each other, don’t marry each other, have the hots for each other, love each other, hate each other, betray each other, turn the tables on each other and in general bamboozlerize each other until the poor reader’s head is spinning. The plot is as constricted and convoluted as a box of pythons; it’s like a Coen Brothers movie, like Blood Simple or Burn After Reading. It’s a lethal quadrille. 

The sexual politics of this unlikely tale are just weird. The young (around 21 I guess) Michael Henchard auctions off his wife in the first (famous) scene and then lives as a bachelor for the next 18 years. He explains:

Being something of a woman-hater, I have found it no hardship to keep mostly at a distance from the sex. 

The next big emotional entanglement he makes (after 18 years of celibacy) is with…. a man. An entrancing young Scotsman to be precise, we could be thinking maybe Ewan McGregor in Shallow Grave or David Tennant as Doctor Who. Henchard (by now hizzoner The Mayor of Casterbridge) practically falls in love with this guy. Then suddenly back comes the wife he sold with daughter in tow and the merry dance begins. Swing your partners, one two three. 

Reading this Hardy novel was like watching an old mournful elephant skilfully pick up three peas and juggle them expertly with his one enormous trunk and then turn round and plod massively back into the trackless jungle smashing bamboo plants and ripping creepers apart as he went, one large tear trickling down his cheek.