Rating: 1/5

I want to start off saying that I really like Richard Kadrey's other works. I'm a huge fan of his Sandman Slim and Coop series, as well as his other one-shots like Butcher Bird and Dead Set. That said, I didn't care for this book at ALL.

The characters are one dimensional and we learn almost nothing about them-- including our main character Johnny, whose personality seems to be entirely comprised of "cynical drug addict who hates everybody and is continually crapped on by the world"-- which COULD work if there was anything remotely interesting about him. Unfortunately, Johnny is as bland as toast. 

He's an ex Committee worker (dystopian regime killer-cop-enforcer type deal) but quit because dealing drugs with bad guys is easier on his conscience. He apparently knows everybody in town because everybody is buying, and his only friends seem to be his girlfriends (one of which has been MIA) and (revealed later) one of the smuggler/drug lords. This is basically all we learn about his past and his present relationships. We don't really learn anything about his personality even through the story, or if we do, it's contradictory. One second he says how he hates killing, the next he's killing people for no reason. He hates the current corruption in the system, but he scoffs at anyone trying to change it and at the first sign of trouble, he's ready to bail town. This is probably meant to make him look conflicted, but it just comes off wishy-washy. 

This is doubly irritating because everyone else in the narrative seems to think he is hot stuff and is trying to get their hands on him. It is not until the very end of the book (literally, like the last chapter) that its finally revealed why two of the parties involved think it important to keep him alive, but before that it made otherwise pragmatic and cut-throat characters look uncharacteristically empathetic or stupid. Characters crawl out of the woodwork to aid Johnny, but even taking out the aforementioned two who are In On The Secret, there are still too many who have no reason to care about this guy's well-being go to great lengths to help him (looking at you, Groucho). Like, this world is built up as being pitiless and cynical, but there's too many random people showing up to help this schmuck.

In an effort at worldbuilding, Kadrey has all kinds of strange, near-post-apocalyptic-dystopian cyberpunk aspects, but while some are used to great effect, others are like drive-by narrative. For example, there is a crazy cult of geriatric murderers that live in the city that nobody has really taken down because it would be bad form to kill a bunch of old people. This group plays some role in the early chapter, then vanishes for the rest of the book. What.

 Grand setups are introduced, but they never pay off. Plot elements are introduced, and you think, "ohey, maybe something will finally happen," but it never does. But then, on the exact opposite side of the spectrum, other plot elements are dropped in like 50 ton anvils out of nowhere.

At one point, a character gets a serious, debilitating injury and you think, "oh wow. This is serious business! How is the character going to adapt to this? How will it affect their conflict with the Bad Guys? Will this come into play later at a crucial moment-- either the character uses it to their advantage or suffers from it at a crucial moment? There's so much internal turmoil that can be mined from this!

. . Aaaaand it's cured in the next chapter with little to no impact on the plot. Hell, even the cyber tech they use to cure it winds up having a neat feature, and you think we'll maybe this will come in handy!" It doesn't.

This book basically takes all the weakest aspects of Kadrey's other work, magnifies them tenfold, and then takes out any redeeming features. There is darkness without light (or at least without the gallows humor found in his other books). There are tough characters with no chemistry or personality. There is the anti-authoritarian streak that shows up in his other works, but there's no true fight against it, and for much of the book the main character doesn't even try to fight against it, just complain about how bad it is, and he insults anyone who does try to fight. 

This book is joyless in a way I hadn't expected from Kadrey, and I am so very VERY glad that he moved away from this style and mindframe to bring us the better works I know him for.