Rating: 1/5

Though an improvement over "Pirates of Venus," two times zero is still zero. If one listens closely, they may still hear Burroughs' pen scraping the barrel's bottom.

"Lost" sees the forgettable Carson Napier and his belligerent romance with Duare spill over into a piecemeal, apathetic narrative. Leaving the Marxist stand-in Thorists behind, Carson is separated from Duare (and with them, any remaining vestiges of continuity) as he stumbles across a hodgepodge of ideas not good enough for Barsoom or even Pellucidar. A new side character is introduced and summarily forgotten by the end for no reason. One upside is that the books on Amtor are totally serialized, with no time-skips in sight, but to what end?

The setting of Amtor, it must be said, looks, sounds and reads like a bargain-bin combination of Pellucidar's barbaric simplicity and Barsoom's in-depth scientific travelogues. It lacks direction and theme, and with the scatterbrained plot it all feels totally aimless. 
The thrust of the book comes from a bad guy with what might be an early example of "zombies" (though not so named) in fiction, combined with a seemingly-utopian society governed by eugenics gone mad.

This city is simultaneously fascinating and dreadful. The populace essentially engineers a 'perfect' society by carefully controlling the child-rearing and class constructs, and its penal system curiously punishes entire lineages to eventually scrub them. An intriguing nightmare, one full of holes (if they don't need credit for things like cars, or laws to govern its intellectual people, why do they need commerce at all?), but an interesting thought experiment to contrast against the flawed humanism of pulp. But it's undermined by Carson Napier (and undoubtledly Burroughs himself) advocating it! The character only rallies against it through love, rather than some moral conflict within it (and a happy ending within said city comes off as beyond esoteric). To be totally frank, Carson being trapped in this place could have (and should have) been the book in itself. It's wasted here.

I would say this can be a 1.5-star book, but let's be honest here: this is Burroughs' sloppy seconds, a dumping ground for promising ideas that don't belong anywhere else. It will be a long, hard road for Burroughs to make the last couple books in this series click.