Rating: 5/5

Extremely interesting Y/A book about rape and attitudes toward the victim prevalent as late as the 1970's, and important issues we need to remember about women's rights. Although it's only 40 years old, perhaps it could be looked at as historical fiction. The book was written in 1976 and reissued in 2000. 

The story...Gail, a high school junior, is being stalked by an unknown person, presumably male. She gets multiple phone calls with no talking, although in at least one, her stalker says a filthy word. She gets notes left on her locker at school. Her best friend tells her to forget the whole thing; the guidance counselor can't handle the problem and refers it to the coach who is also Dean of Boys and he ignores it; and family problems make it impossible for her to talk with her parents (her dad has been let go of his job and her mother doesn't like to discuss unpleasant topics unless specifically of her own choosing). Gail gets more and more scared and finally she's attacked and raped by a boy from a very prominent family in town. The police are sure she's "asked for it" if she's not outright telling lies even though she was found unconscious from the attack and has to be hospitalized for several days. The lawyer her parents hire tells her that because she wasn't a virgin when she was attacked, she'll basically be crucified in court if she tries to bring the rapist to justice. It isn't until another girl is attacked and nearly killed that anything is done, and that only because there were identifiable tire tracks left on the side of the road where the girl was left. Even then, the boy's family is left to deal with their problem privately and it's not at all clear what they've done with him--various rumors say he's in a private clinic, he's in a private school where he's the star squash player, etc.

Anyone reading this book today would come up with obvious questions--why wasn't a DNA test done being foremost. Well, they didn't do DNA samples in 1976. Why wasn't Gail believed? There was a prevalent attitude that women/girls might think they didn't "want it" but clearly they really did and if it got a little rough, well, so be it. Women were still treated as chattel property well into the 70's and were frequently considered temptresses spinning their webs around unsuspecting men/boys who couldn't help themselves.