Rating: 5/5

The House of the Axe has fallen
Theseus returns to inherit the kingdom of Athens in this myth turned to life

The triumphant return to Athens
It was dolphin weather when I sailed into Piraeus with my comrades of the Cretan bull ring. Knossos had fallen, which time out of mind had ruled the seas. The smoke of the burning Labyrinth still clung to our clothes and hair.
I sprung ashore and grasped both hands full of Attic earth. It stuck to my palms as if it loved me. Then I saw the staring people, not greeting us, but calling each other to see the Cretan strangers.

No more Cretan overlords, no more Cretan taxes
“Look, we are back! Yes, every one of us; look, there is your son. No, the Cretans will not chase us, there is no Minos now. The House of the Ax has fallen! We fought a great battle there, after the earthquake. Theseus killed the heir, the Minotauros. We are free! And there is no Cretan tribute any more"

The King is dead - long live the King. 
The father of Theseus feeling that his time had come leapt to his death from the tower.
I buried my father richly, on the slope of the Hill of Ares with the other kings. His tomb was lined with dressed stone, the nailheads wrought with flowers and gilded. His offerings of food and drink stood in fine painted ware on stands inlaid with ivory. I had a high and splendid death-cart made, and wrapped him in a great hanging worked with lions. He had enamelled coffers, his richest dagger and sword, two great gold rings and his state necklace. When the mound was heaped above the dome, I offered eight bulls upon it, and a war-stallion for him to ride in the lands below. As the blood sank into the earth, the women keened his dirge and praised him.

As king Theseus must now protect his people from all dangers as he unites his growing kingdoms.
But as he also wants more adventures, 
he travels the world stealing gold, 
capturing an Amazon princess, 
fighting the Kentaurs, 
defeating the northern Scythian invaders, 
marrying the princess of Crete 
and sowing the seeds of his own destruction . . .

Reality turned to Myth, to Legends. 
We see the man who made the myth. 
His spirit later returned to the plains of Marathon where the Greeks defeated the invading Persians. 
While poets and writers still sing his praise Theseus lives on with all of us.

Enjoy!