Rating: 4/5

Here we go with the biscuits. I read Beloved before I started my DP project, so I recognized all the brothers' names from the biscuit-obsessed Hart family. I didn't realize I needed to read Christmas Cowboy before this one, so I'll go back and remedy that - but lordy - the biscuits. They are not that hard to make, people. 

Okay, back to the story. This is a May/December-be-mean-to- your-housekeeper story. Hero is mean because he hasn't had sex since his fiance told him he was too old for her. 

There is a 16 year gap in ages and hero is hiding behind that to obscure his wild attraction to the heroine. Heroine has lead a sheltered life on the rodeo circuit (how?) and now that her footloose and fancy-free father is dead, she wants to put down roots - literally. Her fondest hope is to study horticulture and grow roses. 

She is also attracted to the hero, but knows better than to push him. Their push/pull relationship was fun to read about once the hero got over his temper tantrum when the heroine baked him a birthday cake. 

He actually *explains* why he hates birthday cakes. (His abusive mother pushed his face in one and then beat him on his birthday then locked him in his room for his father to whip him again later in the day. ) He also makes it up to the heroine by giving her a sapphire pendant. 

He is a big softy and can I say DP's writing has improved since the early books? Her characterization is so much better - there is a logic/motivation to the hero's actions that she had a hard time showing in her earlier works. 

I won't belabor the plot, but just know the hero has a pet python that wraps itself around the heroine until the hero can coax him to release her. Then the hero kills a rattlesnake that is about to attack the heroine by throwing a knife and cutting it in half.

Paging Doctor Freud . . .

DP even gives a wink to this symbolism by having the hero describe how a "pretty neighbor" (sequel bait?) who studied psychology analyzed him. It's all tongue in check and surprisingly meta for DP. 

The brothers trick the hero into marrying the heroine after he gets drunk and finds himself in the heroine's bed the next morning. The heroine goes along with it - because the hero isn't getting any younger and those roses won't plant themselves - but it backfires for the black moment. The hero storms off after realizing she was still a virgin and he didn't take advantage of her. Heroine decides she's tired of waiting around for the hero and she leaves without a note.

She gets a job as a pastry chef in a St. Louis restaurant. She's doing well, but is lonely. Hero tracks her down for a grovel and a declaration of love. HEA.

Diana Palmer checklist: 

Hairy chest check
Breast Description small with freckles around the nipples. Hero has a scar that goes down his abdomen to his groin. These are their lover's secrets.
Cigarettes no
Alcohol whisky leads him to her bed
Town Descriptions  Jacobsville Community College with dormitories, two cab companies
Gardenia Scent  No. Hero's spicy after shave
LOL detail Heroine brings him two beers for hydration while he is haying
Cutesy detail Biscuits - dear Lord, the biscuits. 
 DP hobbyhorse On the Hart ranch, there were no hormone implants, no artificial insemination, no unnecessary antibiotics or pesticides. The brothers didn't even use pesticides on their crops