Rating: 4/5

If you’re going to read this, be prepared for a testosterone-fuelled ride that won’t let you take a breath until you read the very last line. You’d better be in the mood for guns and bullets and other techno military paraphernalia – not to mention killer beasts lurking below the surface of the ice-cold water. Oh, and bring some imagination along for the trip – some of what you’re about to read will stretch believability to the limit (and beyond). But do this, with a six-pack of your favourite beer and a large bag of salted peanuts at your side, and you’re sure to have some fun!

At a remote ice station in Antarctica, American scientists have discovered something extraordinary – something buried in a layer of ice hundreds of millions of years old. And it’s metal! Lieutenant Shane Schofield (AKA Scarecrow) and his team of elite US Marines are dispatched to secure the site, to ensure no other country gets a chance to gate-crash this particular party. But the airwaves have been busy and the news is out… others are on their way too.

It’s written in a style you’ll either love or you’ll hate, with a cliff-hanger at the end of virtually every paragraph. Sometimes this heralds a meaningful event, but often it doesn’t. I didn’t mind this, it just seemed to suit the book, but I can see it could become annoying. There are, though, other elements that didn’t quite gel for me: the glib language sometimes used by participants in a deathly encounter felt straight out of a Die Hard movie and Scarecrow is granted far in excess of the nine lives normally allotted to the nimble cat. 

But this is escapism and it’s not going to feel like real life. It’s manic, exciting and all set in a landscape that’s just ideal for an adventure of this kind. For fans of action adventure tales this will be right up your street. I went along for the ride and a very enjoyable one I found it to be. In the final analysis I’m not sure it’s quite my thing, but I’m glad I gave it a go.

And as a final point of clarification, don’t confuse this book with Ice Station Zebra the murder mystery written by Alistair MacLean. It’s a very different beast, though there was a moment I thought the two were going to follow similar paths.