Rating: 5/5

Usually I don't trust books that win awards. The Newbery in particular seems to slap stickers on any sort of kid's book that is at the very least slightly better than average - maybe that's because it's hard to find a really excellent kid's book, which this one definitely is. So I was happily surprised that, for once, the Newbery got something right. (Sorry for being horrendously bitter, heh heh heh.) 
I picked it up in grade five on the last day of school, and sat down in a quiet corner and read the crap out of it. I sat there for hours, completely absorbed, moving not one single inch until my teacher came over and told me I could have it. 
Whew. 
I took it home and finished it. I loved it. Something about it just completely blew my eleven-year-old brain upside-down - here was a book that was written with pure magic. The main character, Jerome, was unlike any other kid protagonist I'd ever read about - he felt real. His thoughts ran quick and adult, he saw the world in a very smart way and he seemed like the epitome of a human being. The narrative was probably my favorite part of the book, the way it danced in front of my eyes, bringing up the clearest, most vivid, most take-your-breath-away images - and the language was sophisticated, which I absolutely adored. Finally, here was a kid's book that didn't talk down to me. Jerome Foxworthy talked like a smart kid, a real smart kid, and that was something I could really appreciate. But not only that. The book was about basketball, too, and that's something I love.
The basketball part seems to me like just a way to get the story going. It was really more about Jerome and Bix, the strange messed-up white kid who becomes his friend - and that part of it was tough. There was your real-life part of the book. Bix is obviously not normal or very easy to figure out, but that's part of what made him so fascinating. This isn't really a story about basketball, it's a story about friends and love and craziness and big problems, with basketball as the hook.

So many good things about this book, though. That narrative, man. It's as effortless as effortless can be - most books, probably close to all of them, have moments where they're slightly uneven, or not as inspired; but The Moves Make the Man was as solid as stone all the way through. It's close to three hundred pages but doesn't feel like it's any at all. It's the type of book you read and get pulled into, and don't surface from until all those pages are behind you and you're miraculously already at the end. 
This book has magic in it.
And not to mention the humor of the thing. It's a sad book, sure, but it's also pretty darn entertaining - Jerome sees a lot of funny things in the world, and there's that whole "exasperation with the stupid adults" part of it that I got such a kick out of. Bruce Brooks sees right into the mind of a kid, and that's something authors can rarely do, and almost never with such skill. I would compare Bruce Brooks with Jerry Spinelli (who wrote the oddly similar book Maniac Magee) - they've both got that surreal, magical prose thing going on.

Five stars for The Moves Make the Man.