Rating: 4/5

“Love is a temporary madness. It erupts like an earthquake and then subsides… That is just being ‘in love’ which any of us can convince ourselves we are. Love itself is what is left over when being in love has burned away, and this is both an art and a fortunate accident” – Captain Corelli’s Mandolin, Louis de Bernieres

Take an idyllic Greek island that “smells of pines, warm earth, and the dark sea” where its hardworking inhabitants eke out a quiet living. Throw in a lonely mountain goatherd, a wise and kindly doctor, and his beautiful but willful daughter. Add a mandolin-playing Italian Captain (as suggested by the title) and the story promises music and romance. The stage seems set for a charming, bucolic story because Louis de Bernieres introduced Cephallonia as a place “where vicious emotions could not exist”. 

Wrong. Corelli's Mandolin tells a devastating WWII story of Cephallonia being pillaged and despoiled during the occupation by, first the Italian, then the German armies, and finally their own guerilla fighters. War stories are extremely painful to read and this one is equally horrific in its depiction of brutality and wartime atrocities. 

Yet this story shines in many ways. It is a moving insider perspective of war (a mix of first- and third-person narratives) as reported by the soldiers who are compelled by duty, against their will, to be party to the official conspiracies propagated by paranoid dictators. Soldiers, like Carlo Guercio, come to realize with deep shock and revulsion there is no reasonable excuse for the cause they are fighting. It is also remarkable how enemies become friends when they recognize the human impulses, motivation, and fears they share in common. It is marvelous to read about the islanders' grudging acceptance giving way to affection for the Italian invaders. 

De Bernieres created a cast of wonderful characters in this novel. Dr. Iannis is the sweet and kind doctor one would love to have as a father. Carlo Guercio, the gay thespian, deserves to be celebrated for the magnanimity of his love for his comrades in arms. Captain Corelli, more a musician than a soldier, has an irresistible and irreverent personality. He forms a latrine opera club among his men, which endeared him to me. Pelagia, the attractive village lass and apple of every soldier’s eye, is much more than just a pretty face. Evil befalls each of these characters and I kept reading and hoping they would be spared.

Of course, there is the romance between Captain Corelli and Pelagia. Ironically, it is the war that first installs Corelli in Dr. Iannis’s house as a billeted captain who eventually falls in love with Pelagia. It is also the war that eventually separates them. It is sweetly told (embarrassingly in part) but mostly delightful.

Read Corelli's Mandolin. It is a beautiful story where the horrors of war threaten but cannot deplete the wellspring of love, courage, and goodness that keeps us human.

Thank you, Kevin Ansbro, for the book recommendation. It has, as you rightly pointed out, "humour, pathos, and depth".