Rating: 3/5

A typical summer madness story that begins with a precocious wild teenager, an experienced player who should have known better (about contraceptives at least), rolls in hay or ‘bed of grass’, cruel brush-offs, secret pregnancy, long separation and then it’s back home for predatory asshat vs trembling doormat part 2, some flat fireworks and lo, we have a story.

Why are these asshat Hs forever ‘lazily mocking, taunting, jeering, stripping with eyes, pawing’ and getting away with it. The story is not bad per se but the H’s casually amused behavior doesn’t lend to believing in the depth of his love, forget ‘something deeper, spiritual since always’. I mean, if there is something quite so perpetually amusing why isn’t the h or me, the reader getting the joke? I wanted to smack him a few times and tell him to behave.

Like I said it is not a bad story and the H is okayish too. In fact, I liked the h a lot but I am generalizing such HPs here because there is this common thread through all of them. A teenage pregnant girl who has to run away/is thrown out by a moralistic family, is scared, hungry, homeless, jobless, friendless somewhere and she goes through literal hell to have and raise a child, and then on reuniting years later, she takes further insults, demeaning comments, groping, disbelief before she gets anywhere. Rarely does a guy truly appreciate the difficulties such hs go through.

Thankfully, no ow is mentioned or this would have taken train-wreck dimensions. 
For this book, my biggest grouse is the H’s behavior or really non-behavior towards his son. Even when he accepts that the boy is his, he is friendly but in an indifferent and casual way. Well, I guess I am thinking of the Greek/Italian Hs in the throes of newly discovered father-dom we get these days.

One ‘profound’ moment which was almost farcical was how their upset son gets lost and is found sleeping in the same patch of grass where he was...well, conceived. The h/H are really moved at this ‘miracle’ and the h thinks about stories of how the salmon go back to their spawning grounds. I was alternating between finding it really profound (or trying to) and silly in the extreme. Well, you can judge it for yourself if you read it. *grin*