Rating: 5/5

I've had this book on my shelf for quite awhile but had not gotten around to reading it. A couple of weekends ago I was scheduled to take a "personal retreat" which I try to do 3 or 4 times per year. As I perused my two shelves worth of Christian spirituality, formation, etc...the title caught my eye so I stuffed it in my bag with 2 or 3 other books for the weekend.

It only took a few pages to realize Nouwen was going to nail me. He identifies greed and anger as two critical sins which tend to plague people in ministry (professional/vocational/pastoral ministry). Basically, we are all faced with the decision to live out our false identity as we're victimized by the world"s compulsions or to discover our true selves...and live/lean into our identity in Christ.

In the same way which the ascetic 3rd and 4th century dessert fathers utilized solitude, silence, and prayer we must learn to incorporate these spiritual disciplines in our own contemporary culture and context of ministry. So not only was I challenged to be honest about some of the struggles in my heart, I was given some great tools by Nouwen to pursue a more contemplative life of prayer.

As I was headed out that weekend, someone commented "Oh, I could never do that" referring to my plan to spend a couple of days in complete solitude. Thankfully, we don't actually have to experience physical solitude in order to carve out time and space with God or learn the lessons Nouwen presents. But for many of us, the occasional ascetic experience of some sort of deprivation disrupts our system and routine just enough to realign our hearts and minds with Father, Son, &amp; Spirit.

If greed (materialism, coveting, money, etc) or anger (frustration, resentment, disillusionment, etc) are becoming part of your default posture I would recommend you spend some time with this text. Or if you're looking for a good read during a spiritual retreat of some sort, "The Way of the Heart" could be a great addition to your reading agenda.