Rating: 4/5

This book has been one of the most amazing reads. Warren Bennis connects with you by making you reflect upon yourself as a human being and a leader. He gives many examples of great leaders and explains in depth the reasons behind their successes. It is impossible to re-write the detailed reflections but I hope to provide enough insight to entice you all to read this book. In this review I will highlight some important traits that according to Warren Bennis are must to have in a leader. 

Vision, is a fundamental attribute a leader must have. A leader without a vision about where he wants to take is organization will suffer failures. According to Bennis, there are plenty of outstanding individuals out there, who have great passion and clear vision about what they want in the early stages of their career but as they progress they get sucked into a corporate culture that makes you follow rules not ideas. Proving yourself is more important than expressing your vision and ideas. Vision and Character building according to Bennis are extremely important to obtain.

 

The second important element of leadership is “passion”. A passionate leader loves what he or she does and gives hope and inspiration to everyone. Passion, enthusiasm, inspiration and hope are all the qualities that a leader needs to posses to gain the trust of its people. Leaders have to get people on their side to instill cultural changes in organizations. 

“Integrity” is another basic characteristic of a leader. Integrity has to be earned and cannot be attained. Bennis describes three parts of integrity: Self Knowledge, Candor and Maturity. 

Self Knowledge: .Until we truly realize our strengths and weaknesses, what we are doing, why we are doing it, we can never succeed as a leader. A good leader has to know what his weakness is, be true to oneself and only then can he start the journey of being a great leader.

Candor: According to Warren Bennis, Candor is established by having sincerity of belief, accomplishments and persistent dedication to “principle, and a fundamental soundness and wholeness”. A leader should never compromise on his principles to make others happy.

Maturity: It comes through years of experiences and knowledge, the ability to learn from mistakes and failures and be dedicated and truthful. Only after achieving these qualities, a leader can inspire others to do so.

Two more basic fundamentals of leadership are “curiosity” and “daring”. Leaders always want to learn, about anything and everything. They are always willing to take risks and not focused on failures. They learn from their failures, and reflect daily on things that work well and things that need change and then lead others to make those changes. Leaders don’t focus on their limitations but on possibilities. 

Leaders are not all born with these traits; these traits can be learned through experience, from mentors and self reflection and by finding your passion. 

Leaders should always be working on themselves, reflecting upon their actions and learning from them. They must trust their inner voice. Leaders are there own raw material, and can mold themselves into whatever they want. 

Through out his book, Warren Bennis uses wonderful quotes from famous people. I would like to mention a few that have had a lasting impression on me. 

“Good Leaders rise to the top in spite of their weakness, while bad leaders rise because of their weakness”. 

In explaining this, he compares Abraham Lincoln who suffered from serious fits of depression yet guided United States through its most sever crisis. Where as Hitler forced his obsession on the German people and lead them through visions of greatness into the most horrific acts the world has ever known. 

“Competence, or knowledge, without vision and virtue, breeds technocrats. Virtue, without vision and knowledge, breeds ideologues. Vision, without virtue and knowledge, breeds demagogues”.