Rating: 3/5

Bertha goes fishing and catches a client.

In this fifth book in the Cool &amp; Lam series, Bertha Cool has lost weight from a recent illness and is now down to 160 lbs of muscle and bad disposition. She's decided she needs to spend more time relaxing, so the opening finds her and Donald Lam on a deep sea fishing cruise. Another person seeking a brief rest cure is Dr Hilton Devarest, who shows immediate interest when he learns that Bertha is Mrs Bertha Cool of B. Cool Confidential Investigations. 

The good doctor is hesitant to discuss personal matters, so Bertha applies gentle encouragement. "If something's on your mind, for God's sake go ahead and spill it." Bertha's sledge-hammer personality sends some potential clients running, but Dr Devarest takes it as a sign of conpetence. Before the return to dry land, the agency's been hired to find out who stole Mrs Devarest's jewelry from the doctor's home safe.

The luxurious Devarest household consists of the doctor and his wife, an ageing coquette who dotes on her playboy nephew. The doctor prefers his wife's niece, a a wealthy young divorced woman with a small daughter. There's a handsome, womanizing chauffeur and a pretty, flirtatious maid. Mrs Devarest's secretary did live in, but she disappeared when the jewelry went missing. Does that mean she's the thief? 

Mrs Devarest thinks so and wants the girl arrested. Her husband wants Lam to find her so that the jewels can be returned and the whole matter dropped. Before Donald can figure out who wants what and why, there's a shocking accident. Or maybe it's a suicide. Or maybe it's a murder. Whichever it is, the agency suddenly has a new client - a widow who wants them to collect on her deceased husband's insurance policy. 

She's expecting a double payout since the death was (according to her) an accident, but the policy has fine print and it all hinges on whether or not the death was a result of "accidental means." There's a large amount of money involved and Bertha wants a piece of it, but the more Donald probes, the more complicated things get. 

One of the characters is a convicted thief operating under a false name. An "old friend" shows up at the funeral to repay a small loan, but how many funerals does this guy attend? And the niece is convinced that the thief's object wasn't the jewelry, but vital information about her dangerous ex-husband. How does all this play into the surprise found in Dr Devarest's glove compartment after his death? 

I think this one is almost TOO complicated and I don't think the author included clues that gave his readers a fair chance at guessing the murderer. But I love the fun of the abrasive, penny-pinching Bertha Cool bouncing off of Donald Lam's smooth superiority. She can't live with him and she can't live without him. A tough situation for a woman who prides herself on not depending on men.

I also like Bertha's secretary Elsie Brand, who plays a larger role in this book than usual. And I love Lieutenant Lisman, a smart cop who's willing to work with an honest private eye (as long as all the benefits of the relationship are headed in his direction.) As far as I know, this is his only appearance in the series, which is a shame.

It's action packed and the plot gives Donald Lam plenty of opportunites to demonstrate his intelligence and ingenuity. Plus, he gets a chance to quit, be made a partner, be a fugitive from justice, and be poisoned by a murderer who doesn't want to be caught. They never do, do they?

This series is good reading. I'm glad that Kindle editions are now becoming available.