Rating: 3/5

Although we know from the beginning that we will not see a simple solution to the puzzle, the book remains intriguing to the end. The title Weiser is a Jewish 11-year-old. He is a loner. Proteus. Raised by his grandfather in the suburbs of Gdansk. During hot summer holidays, he will interest a handful of schoolmates which will change their holidays and expand their experience. 

Huelle created an extremely suggestive image of hot summer days, children's games, dreams and desires. Children's purity and their sensitivity.

The book's action takes place in few different times: the summer months of the mid-1950s, which then led to the memories of later years and the present. Spreading the story over time plays an important role here: it encourages reflection on the process of memory and forgetfulness, and the different weight of the same event for its participants.

To tell the truth, I haven't learned the answer to all the questions bothering me since the beginning of reading "Weiser Dawidek". I can't even reasonably answer what happened on a hot summer vacation on the Baltic coast. The logic of this story sank deep into the cemetery crypt or disappeared into the darkness of the tunnel. Perhaps there were many details that, if combined, would give a true picture of the events in the suburbs of Gdańsk that a group of teenagers were so fascinated by. But why bother if it's not the most important thing. The most fascinating in this very interesting puzzle is observing the character of the title hero, alternately disappearing in the smoke curtains that he triggers.

Did I succumb to a collective psychosis that Paweł Huelle sprayed in his novel? It is only certain that when I read Huelle's novel, it smelled of a puzzle. It sparkled from billions of question marks stretching over the book. It swirled with less logical events, arranged by the author not quite in chronological order. Who was David really? Tracking his hidden abilities took me into unknown and imaginary stories. However, I will never be able to answer this question.