Rating: 3/5

The essays in this collection are meditations upon race and identity that arise from Redkal's travels abroad in Korea, Taiwan, Japan, and the Phillipines. As the child of a bi-racial marriage, the author sticks out whether in Asia or in the U.S. The author confronts stereotypes and biases amongst her agemates in Japan who insist on her "Americanness" despite having a Chinese mother who speaks Chinese - they are simply unable to conceive of a person as being both, or more than one thing. In Korea, she is referred to by her teaching peers as a "hermaphrodite" (tomboy), where she teaches Korean school girls English and learns of Korean beauty standards and perceptions of femininity. My favorite essays in this book are Rekdal's essay on going to the Phillipines to track down a fictional tribal group, which she weaves together with a war-time narrative about her grandfather's drycleaning business which he supposedly acquired from a Japanese-American neighbor who was to be interned. Rekdal's Gung Gung builds it into a successful business with multiple locations and when his neighbor returns to Seattle decades later, her grandfather turns the business back over in his generosity. Or so the story that Rekdal's mother goes. 

The last essay in this collection is an interesting foray into root-searching, which is closer to home (in locale certainly, but also in any investigation that actually yields information, vs. self-reflection) then the author's peregrinations to Asia. She travels to the American South in search of evidence of her great aunt's history and evidence of her presence in a tiny Mississippi town.

Some readers may find this essay collection self-indulgent and rife with navel-gazing, understandably so, however, the author does have moments of interesting and insightful observations on identity - even if they are within the limited context of her own experience and life. Her search feels authentic and her willingness to look critically at her own life, perceptions and behaviors (awful scene in a train station en route to Tibet where she plays out the Ugly American stereotype; her own misgivings about being in an interracial relationship where she may or may not be a fetishized object of affection) and flawed understandings compelled me enough to trust in her as a narrator and to follow her through her journeys.