Rating: 5/5

For one book on Morocco's colonialism and turbulent independence movement, this should be your only choice. I would recommend reading this over Walter Harris'  MOrocco as it was , since Maxwell obtained permission to quote from that book when required. The book starts with the events of that book, since it marks a sort of beginning of the end-a 19th Century harka that would end up killing a Sultan and placing a child on the throne, leading to instability and leaving the field open for colonisers already circling the country. Maxwell tells you the complicated story through the fortunes of one very powerful family who just as suddenly weren't. You get all the other colourful pretenders to the throne of Marrakech too, Bou Hamra, El Hiba, and their violent ends, and all the jockeying for power that the Glaoui family managed. It's incredible to think of just how firmly they backed the French, who used  Caids of tribes to control the Berber tribes of Morocco, who otherwise kept up a series of revolts. The Glaouis were completely confident that the French would triumph and did everything in their power to suppress Moroccans-operating a jail/torture chamber/oubliette from their palace in Marrakech, THami Al Glaoui even sending one of his sons expressing notions of overthrowing colonialism to a fortress oubliette. The French made one disastrous decision after another, firing on unarmed crowds of protesters multiple times, besieging Fez using Senegalese soldiers, and unleashing the FOreign Legion to torture and terrify. All the while touting all the modern amenities they had brought to Morocco-many of which weren't available to Moroccans, who even had to get off buses if white French people needed to use the bus. Maxwell maintains a tight control over the narrative, not losing sight of all the nuances of the situation, and showing you all the political complexities and the many moving parts. You start getting a feeling of dread at the violence the country's going to see, as the French threw what they had in a last ditch attempt, and ignored multiple warnings from people with their ear to the ground. WHen they made their abrupt departure, they did nothing to protect their Moroccan allies, who were rightly seen as traitors. Thami al Glaoui, the son of a slave who ruled Marrakech and as a result SOuthern Morocco for decades, found himself again bowing and scraping to the returned SUltan, who magnanimously forgave him. He died soon after, and his palace was broken into by angry mobs who vandalised it, dragged out THami el Glaoui's enforcers and lynched them in the streets. 
The Airbnb I stayed at in Marrakech was literally a 30 second walk from where this would have happened . THami el Glaoui's palace, Dar el Bacha, is now a museum and houses a hipster cafe, with 300 types of coffee and a 4 hour wait time on a lean day. And absolutely no mention of the GLaouis-no portraits, no possessions, nothing at all. 20th Century Ozymandias.