Rating: 4/5

Alfie Kohn is a man with a point of view, and he's not shy about sharing it. This book is a call to action, almost a call for revolution, and if you're not with him, you're against him, on the side of the bad guys, the killjoys.. You know... the *adults*.

Kohn is always, always on the kids' side, particularly with regard to education and discipline. I am sure any bright teenager who reads his books is cheering the whole time.

As a former kid turned adult, (a defector?) I find myself a little torn. Eliminate not only standardized tests, but all tests, and grading in general? Turn school into something that is a cross between children's museum and an apprenticeship? Nearly all work to be done in groups, nearly all instruction to be based on the Socratic method?

Sounds awesome to the the kid in me, but my adult brain is full of "buts"... Sure, the ideal education would be for all of us to have Merlyn turning us into hawks and ants and geese and sending us on adventures with Robin Wood (I've been re-reading The Sword In The Stone) but in the real world, efficiency, scalability, quantifiable metrics, these things have value. These are ways of getting a large number of people on roughly the same page about what needs to be done, and by whom, and when. I don't know that I believe Kohn's idealistic vision could be implemented as widely as he wants it to be without becoming, in some places, a parody of itself.

And yet... I agree with Kohn's starting premises, and mostly accept his arguments. How can I escape his conclusions?

Here are some of his premises, copied and pasted from the book:

"To take children seriously is to value them for who they are right now rather than seeing them as just adults-in-the-making."

[...]

"High achievement is a by-product. Now we're ready to ask: A by-product of what? And the answer is: Of interest [in the topic]."

[...]

And his (less radical) conclusions, with which I also agree:

"Virtually any topic in any discipline will benefit from raising questions about evidence (How do we know what we know?), point of view (Whose perspective does this represent?), connections (How is this related to that?), supposition (How might things have been otherwise?), and relevance (Why is this important?)"

"The sort of activities regarded as 'enrichments' (and typically reserved for the elite students) ought to constitute the bulk of the curriculum for everyone."

It is also absolutely true, I think, that much of what schools do is more about sorting kids than educating them.

I almost see this book more as an argument for home schooling than a prescription for reforming schools. I think what I'll mainly take away from it is a resolution not to pressure my kids too much about grades and test scores, a reconfirmed antipathy toward busy work (especially when assigned as homework), and a desire to read to my kids and talk about numbers and science and history and culture with them outside of school in a way that maybe shares with them some of the beauty I find in those subjects for their own sakes... Because I don't know that I believe, in my cynical adulthood, that this is really something schools can be expected to do.

I'll send my kids to school more so they can learn about their own present day culture, and how to interact with other people independent of me, than to become little scholars. I hope I can help them find a love of learning at home, which is where I think most people find it if they ever do. But if a school like Alfie Kohn imagines really existed, or if my kids were to get lucky enough to have a teacher who can make some small part of that magic happen in a real, tested and graded classroom, I agree with my teenage self that it would indeed be awesome.