Rating: 3/5

The sequel to a classic. An interesting exploration of how humanity might begin again on a new planet -- albeit one with a supportive environment -- after the Earth was destroyed. Worth reading as a very early science fiction best seller, and, of course, to see what happened next after the classic When Worlds Collide.

In the end, I rated the book 3 stars because, while it is an amazing work for 1933, I can't help reading it with modern sensibilities. I loved the exploration mysteries, the search for what happened to the race that had inhabited the planet a million years before, the exploration of a new world while worrying if it would enable the few survivors of earth to survive, and the recognition of the scientific uncertainties their plight reflected. I enjoyed the limited willingness to consider what rules and mores should apply when setting out on developing a new world, whether we should set aside old moralities and customs, any sense that the new settlers were just Americans, British, or German rather than just humans.

And there was a marvelous sense of wonder at new discoveries on Bronson Beta. I kept being reminded of Rendezvous with Rama, and realized that Arthur C. Clarke would have read this book in his youth and was likely influenced by it.

But some parts don't age well. Most of the science -- mainly biology, geology, and ecology in this book -- has aged pretty well, but the cultural perspectives haven't. Referring to "Japs" is very jarring, and stereotypes alive in the book are that Asiatics are inscrutable, while Russians and Germans (at least those that stayed in Germany) are brutes. It may be hard for me to put myself into 1933, and I'm pretty sure I don't want to. I found the portrayal of women much more disturbingly conventional that in the original When Worlds Collide, and could hardly recognize the scientist characters, who had been at most deists in the previous book, but now began to believe in the God of their fathers.

Perhaps it is as simple as that When Worlds Collide was "man against nature" and this book is more "man against man", but this is the weaker book. I might have to apologize for some of the stereotyping in When Worlds Collide, but the book does challenge the attitudes of its time, and it certainly was a thought-provoking classic. I'm glad I read this one (after re-reading the original book), just to see what the authors did with it. But When Worlds Collide will remain on my shelves as a classic, amazing for its time, and this one won't.