Rating: 4/5

Ali saeed
Q.6
block 2

I will definitely recommend this book not just to my friends, but to everyone I know. The book is a bibliography about Muhammad Ali who is known as the greatest boxer of all time. This book is full details and objective information about Ali’s life inside the boxing ring as well as outside. There is a lot of action inside the ring and a lot of drama outside it, which make this book very enjoyable even if the reader is not a fan of boxing. This book is full inspiration, motivation and surprises because most people know Muhammad Ali just as a great, but there is way more about Muhammad Ali than boxing because he was one of those few unique people who were able to change the world. The book talked about Ali’s struggles to get to top and how did he become the greatest of all time. Ali’s personality made people fall in love with him and his style “Flow like butterfly and sting like a bee” Ali’s famous quote.

The book shows the deep truth about Muhammad Ali and show another side of him. When people think of Ali, they just think of boxing ,but Ali is more than that, he is a sportsman and civil rights champion, received the medal at a ceremony honoring his life as part of a nationwide celebration of the US Constitution's 225th anniversary. Most people do not know that Muhammad Ali had a very strong friendship with Malcolm X ,he was able to convert Muhammad Ali from Christianity to Islam ,and there is even more information about Muhammad Ali fighting for civil right with Malcolm X .

 This book not just for people who likes boxing ,but for everyone who is interesting in reading about legend who changed the world .This book will make you realize how great was Muhammad Ali and how he changed the world through fearless attitude and very outgoing personality and that is why I recommend this because it is worth reading. Reading this great this book will teach honor ,pride ,dedication and most importantly individuality “ am a champion, but am not champion that you want me to be ,am the champion that I want to be” (Muhammad Ali pg76).

Ali believed that he can become that greatest of all time and change the world and so he worked for it until he made it, the book shows the reader Ali’s work ethic and motivates to work hard for your dreams and goals. . He believed in himself when everyone doubted him .Ali was not a follower , but he was an individual leader and of kind and because of that ,people loved him. One interesting fact that I learned from reading this book ,that Ali first started boxing at the age of twelve, when his bike got stolen ,and the a guy who stole his bike beat him up very badly ,and so he started boxing to learn how to fight and get his bike back.

This book should be recommended to those who likes excitement, drama and great morals like individuality and confidence “I know where I’m going and I know the truth ,and I don’t have to be what you want me to be because am free to be what I want”(Mohammed Ali pg102).Muhammad Ali is one of the greatest human being who lived in this world and people should know more about him.