Rating: 4/5

I picked up this book on my first ever trip to the Pacific Northwest at the Hoh Rain Forest Vistor Center in Olympic National Park. My goal was to find literature about the history and biology of the peninsula to familiarize myself with this beautiful place that mesmerized me. This read did exactly that, while introducing me to a clash between money and nature that happened decades prior to my own birth.

As someone who is in an industry that is frequently "disrupted" (Software Development/Engineering), it was very interesting to me seeing the different sides of the fight of the old-growth. Dietrich does a great job giving individual points of view, and made me think differently of what this sort of land means to people. My big takeaway reading through the bulk of it is, the same powerful folks in industry and government that pretend to care about the jobs and livelihoods of individuals are mostly profit driven and only care about their own bottom line. This is especially highlighted in the 2010 afterword, where industry simply picked up and moved to outsourcing to different countries when it was more convenient and profitable. I have seen this personally in my industry with years of off-shoring work, and a frenzy to "replace" software professionals with artificial intelligence with the current administration actively encouraging this loss of local jobs. 

 Just like how the Spotted Owl was a catalyst to bring environmental change, it was also a convenient excuse used by these powerful folks to cause anger and controversy pointed at environmentalism while modernization and mechanization were well on it's way to destroy this way of life in the first place. What I've come to learn through this book and my own experiences is that life is never guaranteed to be stable, and adapting is an unfortunate part of being a modern day human.

 Beyond that, giving the perspective of the folks living in harmony on the land and loving nature has completely changed my perspective on the workers in the timber industry. As a suburbanite myself living near the Rocky mountains, nature is my way of escaping the chaos of the modern world and these folks are more in-tune with it than I will ever be.