Rating: 3/5

The first half was pretty good, but the second half lost steam &amp; stagnated. It's unfortunate, because this could've been great. First there was an older heroine (28) that didn't bitch &amp; moan about her age (who was a widow to boot, so there was no angsting about sexual inexperience**). The setting was unusual -- 1870s Arkansas, centered around Hot Springs. I also liked the touches of paranormal woowoo &amp; didn't think they disrupted the flow.

Our heroine is Julia, the aforementioned widow. She's made a comfortable living by investing her late husband's money in a bathhouse for swanky rich clients; she also has a minor 'second sight' that has given her the nickname Lady of the Mists amongst the local population. She's totally unprepared when her old flame (David) walks into the hotel &amp; asks her to help his crippled wife -- but being what you'd call A Nice Person, Julia decides to set her feelings aside. She arrives with her employee/BFF Monteen, a Creole widow with a talent for tarot cards &amp; invalid massage (don't judge Monteen -- she was saucy &amp; cool), &amp; the two of them set to work on poor crippled Allyson. But Julia still has an overhanging sense of doom, &amp; she can't avoid feelz for her ex... especially when it's clear that he wants her just as much. And why is Allyson such a manipulative moo in her efforts to maneuver Julia into an adulterous liaison with David?

As I said, the first half was enjoyable. I guessed part of Allyson's secret early on, but the other revelation was mildly surprising. Alas, the second half went nowhere. It was an endless cycle of conversations &amp; Julia's vows to leave. And once she &amp; David have some heavy makeouts where they admit their feelings, that tension was gone. Julia also insists on dragging stuff out by thinking David physically abused his wife &amp; then killed her, but her worries are transparently ridiculous. Most of the second half felt like padding -- not what you want in a 288-page novel.

I guess it averaged out to a 3-star read. I've read worse, but it didn't have much spark. 

**I've got nothing against virgin heroines, but I hate when they use their virginity as a crutch for self-loathing or social embarrassment.