Rating: 5/5

This is a brilliant novel but this author's Goodread's page is in such a mess that I have to begin by trying to clarify certain things, if you only interested in my review of the novel skip down to where it says 'Review'.

First of all this novel is actually the first volume of a trilogy so 'The Incredible Brazilian' is the trilogy's title the individual volumes were titled 'The Native' (the one under review), 'The Beautiful Empire' and 'A Different World'. Although it is made clear that this is the first volume in the trilogy and that it's name is 'The Native' no one at Goodreads (as of September 2023) understands this (though I am trying to get things corrected) and overall the situation isn't helped because subsequent volumes in the trilogy were published under just their names 'The Beautiful Empire' and 'A Different World' and as 'The Incredible Brazilian: The Beautiful Empire' and 'The Incredible Brazilian: A Different World'.

This also means that the publishers blurb on Goodreads against all editions of this book, except for the Macmillan, UK edition I am reviewing, is the publishers blurb for the final volume in the trilogy 'A Different World'. All volumes can be read individually, the first edition, which I have read did not broadcast it was volume 1 on the cover only on the flyleaf,because the other volumes hadn't been written, and it might have affected sales.

So to recap, a trilogy under the banner 'The Incredible Brazilian' individual volumes 'The Native' (under review) 'The Beautiful Empire' and 'A Different World' (whose precise is erroneous attached to almost all the editions of 'The Native'.

Review:

I will repeat this is a brilliant novel and I will copy another intelligent reviewer, by pointing out that this novel had nothing to do with the waxing or styling of pubic hair on either women or men. It is the story of a 17th century boy from his 14th birthday on his fathers extensive sugar plantation and his first sexual experience to his death nearly half a century later in the course of his last when he suffers a heart attack during his conquest of another beautiful young women and finds himself grasping a very erect boys penis. It is picaresque and can easily be compared to such literary novels with a ribald and historical setting such as 'The Sot-Weed Factor' by John Barth, but it is so much more.

Knowledge of the Zulfikar Ghose's history* is essential to understanding this novel, the trilogy, his other Brazilian novels and his entire oeuvre. He was born in Sizalokot in Punjab which was part of British India in 1935. In 1942 his family moved to Bombay and thence in 1952 to the UK were he attended Keele University and after graduation worked as journalist, published novels, poetry and stories and was closely associated with UK avante garde writers like B.S. Johnson (who has nothing to do with the UK's idiot politician Boris Johnson). In 1969 he moved to Austin Texas to teach at the University there and remained in the USA, eventually taking out citizenship in 2004** and died in 2022.

He is described as, and described himself as a Pakistani and later a Pakistani American writer which is odd when you consider that at his birth in 1935 Pakistan was not a place, it was an idea, and would only come into existence in 1947. The place of his birth became part of Pakistan (though not all of Punjab did) but he never actually lived there. Although he lived the greatest part of his life in the USA he was already a fully formed and published author. Although one of the greatest post colonial writers in English he does not categorise easily so has never received the public attention he deserves. It is not true to say he never wrote about Pakistan or India but he wrote far more novels about Brazil - which doesn't mean that Brazil is a stand in for India, though I do think what happened to Punjab at independence is central to what Ghose did or didn't write.***

Ghose said 'The distinction between (different) countries of my early life has been the schizophrenic theme of much of my writing'. He thought of himself as 'A Native Alien' but didn't work within or like nationalist based appellations and would have been equally derisive with regards the insistence that he was a writer of 'magic realism' just because that had become that had become the default description of any writing about Mexico, Central and South America post Gabriel Garcia Marquez.

'The Native' part one of 'The Incredible Brazilian' (the novel under review least my prolixity has caused you to forget) is all about identity, as a Brazilian as opposed to a Portuguese about empire and colonialism, civilisation, slavery, the Indians and how to treat them all within the tale of Georgio the who we meet as the pampered prince on his father's estates who within barely two years is penniless and in prison the sodomised plaything of jailers and prisoners alike, is sold into slavery, becomes the leaders of a community of escaped slaves and on and on until his final exit clutching that unexpected male member - it is hugely funny, diverting, wise and brilliantly told. What is particlarly brilliant is that Georgio is completely of his time and his mental ideas about slavery or Indians or toward women, the poor, etc. while not fixed or constant are not those of a 20th century adolescent or man transposed into the past. It is easy to write a historical novel with a central character who echoes our views and prejudices; what is far more challenging is to create a hero true to his times and make us understand him without agreeing or sympathising with his views or habits.

I can't tell you the number of reviews I have read who don't understand that -

'The past is a foreign country, they do things differently there' (L.P. Hartley 'The Go-Between')

that this, almost a cliche, is either unknown or forgotten by so many amazes me. If you can only read novels which reflect back at you what you think you know and understand then don't read this or any novel by Ghose or any novel by any author that wasn't written in the last half-dozen years. But if you want to read someone as interesting as Ruhdie, Narayan or Naipul then try and lay your hands on this novel. I can't imagine you won't be as hooked as I am on this trilogy and this author. A really first rate discovery - I only hope more people discover him.

*I am sure at least one person may have read other reviews of mine were I state that the less we know about an author the better, I won't deny it, but my remarks were made in connection with discovering that an author may have said or done things in their personal life that our objectionable. For example the poet Philip Larkin in private said some very horribly racist things, but he did write poetry extolling racism, and that is what is important and why I said and still say the work is what matters.
**This is only guess work but I suspect that his acquisition of American citizenship at this late date had a great to do with being a Muslim who travelled to Pakistan and elsewhere facing up to the post 9/11 paranoia in the USA.
***If you have no idea of what happened in Punjab and other parts of India during partition in 1947 I can only recommend you google it. I would remark that one of the greatest acts of legerdemain and smoke and whistles misdirection was Britain's in avoiding accepting any responsibility for the collapse of their house of cards for Indian independence plan into a nightmare whirlwind of communal violence. For anyone who doubts that please read Narenda Singh Sarila 'The Shadow of the Great Game: The Untold Story of India's partition'.