Rating: 4/5

Helena wants Bertram, she’s hopelessly in love with him, but she’s only a doctor’s daughter, whereas Bertram is the son of the Countess. It all seems hopeless until she cures the ailing King who tells her she can choose any man for her husband, she chooses Bertram, and it would have had a happy ending if he could stand the sight of her. But Helena is not going to be swayed that easily, so he makes it clear that the only way she can have him is if she gets his ring, that never leaves his finger, and she has his child. He’s confident that this will never be possible as he never intends to sleep with her. And so, the action, that drives the rest of the play starts. 

Written in the late 1500s, this play seems ahead of its time in its role reversal, especially when Bertram is in a line for Helena to choose from to marry. What grabbed my interest with this read is how its story doesn’t gel, especially Helena’s motivation to marry Bertram. From his first line it’s pretty clear he is repulsed by her, but nothing he says puts her off, even when he goes off to fight a war to get away from her, she is determined to have him. 

Helena as a character, is less interesting for me than Diana, who came across as rounded. Maybe because when Bertram is chasing Diana her response is more complex. Shakespeare gives Helena a huge bucket of goodness, which makes her seem unhuman. To me, Helena was a character yet in the making. This is because every now and then there are glimpses that counteracted her goodness before slipping away again. It was in these very small moments that she showed how she was smart, clever, and intended to be a few steps ahead of Bertram. Mind you, she also showed glimpses of darkness in her character, revealing a calculating coolness about her, especially when she intended to ‘win’ Bertram. Bertram is not a nice person, but this didn’t stop me from cringing when she spoke of him like he was a sport to her. I’m not sure if this is what William Shakespeare intended when he wrote this play, because it’s dubbed as a comedy (back then comedy meant ending happily rather than being funny). I didn’t find much comedy or humour in this one, instead I found it gripping as I wondered right to the end how Helena would get Bertram back.

Their story ends on the penultimate scene, the final one is where I am reminded that this is a play and all these people are just characters played by actors, like I’ve taken on this magical ride :)