Rating: 4/5

This was my first experience with Farmer, and I was pleasantly surprised. The prose ranged from poetic to very humorous. It was a lot of fun overall. The last twenty or so pages are the weakest, but they aren't necessarily bad.

Some readers have expressed that they didn't understand the story, but it was pretty straightforward. Part of their confusion might have been all the different terminology thrown around. For example, the main species mentioned is the "Wiyr," also called "horstels" (horse tails), "cadmen," "dogeaters," etc. The males are called "satyrs," and the females, "sirens" (the cover artist for the Italian edition took this literally, which I thought was hilarious). The children speak one language, and the adults another. The dragons are called "Thrruk," but a certain place forbidden to humans is also called "Thrruk." Personally, I feel the vocabulary adds some convincing realism to the world.

The story follows Jack Cage, a descendant of the Lost Colony of Roanoke, Virginia. By some strange coincidence, I had never heard of the "lost colony" until just ten days before reading this novel (and I had no idea that it had anything to do with it going in).

Another coincidence is that this story takes place on a planet where all the iron has long since been destroyed by powerful beings (so it's an incredibly rare and valuable mineral). I read "Wyrms" by Orson Scott Card just last month, which featured the exact same scenario. Whether Card got the idea from Farmer or not is up in the air, but I find it fascinating.
...

There's a hate crime very early on, and the victim's name is Wuv. I couldn't take it seriously because of that name ("I wuv you."). I'm not sure if it was intended to be funny or not because this is a partly satirical work.

For whatever reason, this book isn't broken up into chapters at all (no line breaks, either!). Each page is crammed from top to bottom with text, so it's nearly impossible to find a passage if you need it for reference after the fact.

I'm almost positive that at some point, a character says that Polly was seen riding with a masked man, but I couldn't find it again in the sea of text. And unless I missed something, he isn't explained or identified. Jack has a dog named Samson and owns a priceless (because it's iron-based) scimitar. After a while, they stopped being present in the story. Somehow, I missed what happened to them (if it's mentioned). I don't recall any "werewolves" actually showing up, even though they are referred to several times.
...

Typos:
There were a few words with missing (or extra) letters.
...

159 pages.

8/10