Rating: 4/5

Jan 21, 945am ~~ Review asap.

230pm ~~ The third of the Max Brand books about Dan Barry, this one was a pretty wild ride. And a little bit weird. The action begins six years after the end of The Night Horseman and for the first few chapters I admit to wondering where Dan Barry was, because we are introduced first to Vic Gregg, who is out working a mining claim, trying to strike it rich enough to propose marriage to Betty Dean the schoolmarm. 

But one lovely Spring day Vic decides he has been in his self-imposed solitary confinement long enough and heads to town after months and months away. To his complete surprise Betty is planning to go to a dance that night. With someone else!

There is a lover's quarrel and Vic rides off to get himself drunk. The Someone Else arrives in the saloon and one thing leads to another (as it so often does) and pretty soon Vic is riding lickety split out of town while the Someone Else lies dead on the saloon floor.

The sheriff and five men ride out on his trail, and by chapter six Vic meets Dan Barry, who offers to help and this is where the story begins to get weird. 

I understand why Dan decided to get involved, the whole thing was a big game to him, and gave him a chance to match wits with a posse as well as help a man in trouble. And I suppose he was just being true to his wild nature when he lost the thin veneer of civilization that developed during his six years with Kate and their five year old daughter Joan. What surprised me was the reason for shedding that veneer. Perhaps Dan's thinking made sense to him, but it seemed kind of foolish to me. And to Kate, come to think of it. 

Dan set in motion a long sequence of events revolving around Vic, the sheriff, and the five man posse. Which of those was the seventh man of the title? Or would there be a different man stepping into that role?!

Part of me wonders just how much Brand intended for the character of Dan Barry to represent, and another part of me figures he was just an interesting creation that captured the author's imagination enough to write a cluster of books about him. Either way, these three books about Dan Barry have been intriguing, and now I am reading number four, Dan Barry's Daughter. How much of his untamed nature was passed on to her?