Rating: 5/5

Lawrence Miller wrote Barbarians to Bureaucrats in 1989, and a friend gave it to me in 1997, three years after I had started my career in investing in fast growing small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) in the emerging markets (EM). I regret I have only now—almost 30 years later—read it.
Miller applies a life cycle of businesses which borrows heavily from historical rise and fall of empires—sprinkled, of course, with many anecdotes of the big businesses of the 19802—from ITT to IBM. Seeking to categorize the life cycle all businesses in 230 pages with a business consultant’s understanding of history might sound dangerous and crudely simple, let alone 30 years distant. However, I found it fascinating and still very relevant.

Miller sketches out 7 possible stages of business—each with challenges and opportunities, and each where the leadership of the company at that stage is associated with a certain type of leader:

1.	The Prophet: Inspiration and Innovation
2.	The Barbarian: Crisis and Conquest
3.	The Builder/Explorer: Specialization and Expansion
4.	The Administrator: Systems, Structure and Security
5.	The Bureaucrat: The Tight Grip of Control
6.	The Aristocrat: Alienation and Revolution
7.	The Synergist Prescription

Simply, for start ups, a prophet is needed to start with, and a barbarian to achieve commercial success. If the company is to grow from the narrow submarket where the barbarian has been able to achieve success, it will require both building up the company’s capabilities (benefitting from specialization) and expanding to new geographic or product markets. 
With further success comes both the need to establish structure and systems, but also the danger of bureaucratic control—where the business leadership has lost touch with the customer base or with the key creative and productive people who create the product/services which are accepted in the market(s). An overly tight level of control can and will kill the creativity and risk taking which can achieve growth. Worse yet, it can usher in the “aristocrat”—who has inherited or in-fought to achieve leadership, and who thereafter treats business success as a “right” with all upstarts as riff-raff. Only the “synergist” at the end has a chance of continuing the business’s success by recognizing and balancing the disparate skills and inclinations of his or her managers—with the odds of surviving and thriving frankly small. This explains the almost constant change in the Fortune 100 companies, decade by decade. 

Miller proscribes at each stage what the leadership needs to do—and what it should NOT do. Some gems from the book:

“Creative response is the essential function of leaders. The moment leaders relax and rely on yesterday’s successful response in the presence of today’s challenge, the decline begins…And it is the behavior of leaders that explains the dynamic energy, the heroic creation of jobs and wealth created in small, growing businesses, as well as the mess of bureaucracy, the disillusionment and waste of human and capital resources in the uncreative hulk of large corporations and government.”

“Bureaucracy is the institutionalized structure, systems, and behavior that attempts to effect conformity. By definition, bureaucracy is oppressive and a challenge to the creative individual.” Miller notes that it is non-conformists that effect change and growth—hence bureaucracy can never be allowed full ascendency.

“Every successful enterprise requires three men—a dreamer, a businessman, and son-of-a-bitch.” =&gt; the Barbarian. But by “barbarian”, Miller cites Alexander the Great—who will tough on his enemies was a “soldier’s soldier”. Stress, challenge and yet excitement and mission characterize this stage of the business—and extraordinary things can be achieved.

If Steve Jobs could be considered a “barbarian” (and possibly also a prophet), Tim Cook could be considered a successful builder/explorer. Specialization, optimization and yet bringing diverse specialists together in a coordinated way not losing the plot—keeping the culture focused on serving customers/achieving success. This phase may not be just about short term goals, but would also include longer term investment and objectives. But with specialization comes internal rivalry and disputes about who has been the more valuable. The management of disparate specialists and maintenance of some sort of common purpose is complicated and often difficult to achieve. Sometimes it may involve pruning businesses—selling some businesses off that are no longer capable of being internally consistent or integrable. This is the time of a business when “A” managers hire “A+” people, instead of the more easy to manage “B” and “C” types. If they do, there will be wide-spread feeling of confidence in the future. If they don’t, power will shift away from the business of providing value to customers to the business of control and providing value to the top management at the possible expense of the rest of the company.

Hiring more pliable and less creative sorts will characterize an Administrative or—even worse--Bureaucratic phase. To an extent, with size, a company should benefit from moving to an ”administrative” structure. There is a fundamental difference between “leadership” and “management”. Miller examines how both can co-exist. But if the “administrative” side of the business seeks to defend what has been gained—in effect to claim victory and leadership in an industry, there is a very real danger of decline following. If more time is spent on reports and measurement than on the future growth and needs of customers, it is time to sell the stock.
Miller goes through the downward loop—where personal financial success results in a misalignment between creative talent and management, and between management and shareholders. “Vision and determination create the performance of the future, not trend analysis and projection of past results. To follow trends is not to lead, but to follow—and to follow a mindless and untrustworthy ally at that.” MBAs tend to miss this point, says Miller and with some justification.

Cutting costs should not, according to Miller, take precedence over improving quality or service to the customer. Focus on internal processes should not supplant a focus on customers and competition.

If it is possible for the balance to be retained in the Administrative phase, it is moving to internal dissent among the managers and the creative forces which characterize the bureaucratic phase, and at its worst manifestation, the Aristocratic phase. 

More generally, Miller calls effective leaders to maintain the sense of mission that can unite a team and give it a common culture. Once management sees its own interests as individuals as more important than that mission, things get ugly. In history, too, excesses of the elites are associated with the end of economic growth, whether the Russia of Brezhnev, Rome of the Games and Bread, or the Ottoman empire of the Janissaries. Writing in 1989 Miller notes that the “constipation of commerce, so firmly cemented by the systems and structure of the Soviet Union, are the strongest weapons against its own expansion and prosperity.

In business, it is Harold Geneen of the once mighty ITT who demonstrates how sudden the fall can be for out of touch systems fanatics. Rather than seek efficiency in reducing line management, as Geneen did, Miller advocates defining efficiency “as with the fewest possible [administrative] staff, requiring the least time of the managers.”

It is however the Aristocratic class in business which harvests Miller’s especial opprobrium. He cites Louis XIV: “Has God forgotten all I have done for him?” as a great touchstone for the mind set of the “Aristocrat”. Writes Miller, the “heart of business is producing and selling, not financial management or strategic planning.”

Miller ends up the book by discussing the “synergist”—and using Honda of America as an example—a company I had the privilege of working with on some trade issues for two years. Both Honda’s culture of team work and respect for all employee comments as well as its “going to the spot” in terms of examining difficulties is unique and yet sensible. In three slogans, Honda summarizes its business approach:
1)	Proceed always with ambition and youthfulness
2)	Respect sound theory, develop fresh ideas, and make the most effective use of time
3)	Enjoy your work, and always brighten your working atmosphere 

I have gone on too long, but there is a lifetime of experience and wisdom in this little book. I recommend all who deal with multiple businesses especially to read it.