Rating: 3/5

I read this book some months ago, and i can't stop thinking about it. It's a book about a very tough subject, genocide.

This book tells the story of a kid and his journey during the Armenian genocide that occurred in Turkey approximately in 1915, if I'm not mistaken. He came from a good and established family, his father worked for the Turkish government, they thought that because of this, they could have special privileges and not suffer through everything that was about to happen, but no. As Armenians their fate was the same.

It was a nightmare, a terrible, terrible nightmare that happened. I just can't take some of the scenes off my head, even now... perhaps I, for personal reasons, am too sensitive, maybe you people hard-core, extreme-goring, sadistic, tragic readers, could say this is very light, and don't understand why I say these things about this book. But I'm truly shocked.

I have the images in my head, the hopelessness, the sadness. And it's just so horrible to think that situations like this actually happen, just because some people don't stand a different race, or skin color, or way of thinking, or even for money... This is just so unbearable.

I feel very uneasy with this matter, I'd say i feel more shocked with this because I am or was living, around this kind of nightmare on a regular basis. I lived in Juarez, Mexico, my whole life, and then all these horrible murders started to happen everyday, and they happened even to innocent people. For people who don't know, there's been going on a war between the Mexican army and the drug dealers supposedly to make the country a "secure" place to live... Now Juarez is like the most dangerous city in the world. And with all the economic issues, unemployment, you can start to imagine the social problems there are. Once there was a massacre of students who were at a party, and many other terrible things. I don't really watch the news to find out, for mental health. I pray to God for this situation to change.

That's the most powerful reason why this book was so hard for me, because i just couldn't stop relating the events in there with the events occurring in Juarez. And it all makes me shudder and makes me want to cry. I don't think I will read a book about these subjects again, or at least not a book so "graphic", like this one.

Probably this event of the Armenian genocide doesn't sound familiar to you. It is because, not many people know about it, and don't talk about it like with the Jews' genocide in the Nazi Germany for example. And it has become gradually an event that's been "forgotten" in a certain way. Hence the title "Forgotten Fire".