Rating: 4/5

No surprises here: a solid thriller set in the world of horseracing. Read it in one sitting, on a beautiful summer morning, lazing in the sun of my backyard.
The two sides of the conflict are clear right from the start line. On one side is Steven Scott, young and wealthy, an enthusiastic newcomer to the racetrack, with money to burn but with little practical knowledge about buying, training and racing the horses he owns. On the other side an ambitious trainer and a shady bookmaker that are apparently taking advantage of his good nature and friendly demeanour.
As a long time reader of Dick Francis novels, I know it doesn't pay to underestimate his tall, quiet, competent but self effacing protagonists. They hide a mulish perseverence and an unshakeable sense of justice. Steven may have been fooled once, but he's not going to take it laying down.

What I liked better in  High Stakes  than in other Francis books is the way he sets up Steven as a team player, rather than the usual Lone Ranger hero. He quickly gathers around him a few loyal friends and sets up a really smart heist to outwit the bad guys. I won't go into details, other than to say this book is a bit above average in Francis portofolio when it comes to actual plot. I also enjoyed the romantic angle in Steven life, one that is integral to the story rather than a cookie cutter sideline.

The conclusion is a bit too predictable and too much  the signature attempt by the bad guy to solve his problems by dealing in physical violence against the hero .

Dick Francis is not really such a quotable author, but I picked one of my favorite passages in this book, highlighting his passion for horses and racing that permeates every one of his novels:
 We watched him from the balcony of the private box with hearts thumping like jungle drums. It was for this that we had gone to so much trouble, this few minutes ahead. For the incredible pleasure of seeing a superb creature do what he was bred,trained, endowed, and eager for. For speed, for fun, for exhilaration, for love.