Rating: 5/5

This book is excellent. I had some clue what to expect from a brief previewing, but I didn't know what I was really in for. I was reluctant to bring this book to work today to finish it because I didn't want to cry in the office. I had to hold back tears so often through reading this novel, and upon reading the last few pages, I had tears streaming down my cheeks (I was alone by then!). I think more pages are dog-eared than not, actually. 

I'm a Christian, but I feel like I would become one after reading this if I wasn't one already. I learned so much about the continuing persecution of Christians in China and about the history of Chinese Christianity along with China's general history. I also learned more about God and the Bible reading the verses that Alcorn includes. I read the Bible every day, but seeing verses out of context without their references, along with the translation Alcorn uses, gave me a different perspective. I love seeing Christianity and faith through Li Chuan, an amazing example of fortitude, courage, and perseverance. I loved reading about the two main characters' platonic love story--Ben Fielding and Li Chuan have a strong bond that transcends not only physical hardship but also many arguments and sometimes bitter (on Ben's end) disagreements. Through it all, Ben and Chuan remain friends and provide us with an example of two people who can disagree but still love each other.

The characters in this novel are all well-developed, and the plot is straightforward and unfolds really well. The ending is fairly obvious from the beginning, especially because Alcorn includes a frame story that takes place in heaven, and the observations of the angels, the King, and the martyrs of the Li family let us know what to expect, for the most part. Still, reading the story and watching it build towards the climax is emotionally impactful. I also love a good redemption story, and that's what this is, among many other things. 

I enjoyed the fact that Alcorn's narrator's commentaries are true to the Bible and don't take a denominational standpoint but stick 100% to the Word of God, nothing doctrinal or dogmatic. That's a feat in itself! The only agenda Alcorn seems to have is informing people about the truth of what happens in China and accurately conveying the message of Biblical Christianity. A lot of Chuan's explanations helped me understand the Bible more clearly but also the relationship between Christianity and the world. It was great to see explanations of concepts I've thought about but never fully fleshed out. 

My favorite part of the book, by far, is the Epilogue. It's beautifully written, including passages directly from Revelation but also interpreting some of the "vaguer" parts of the Biblical book and putting them more clearly in chronological order. 

I highly recommend this book, whether you're a follower of Christ or not. If you are, you'll see amazing examples of faith, and you'll be encouraged to pray for your brothers and sisters, not only in China but all around the world, who are punished for refusing to deny Jesus. If you're not a follower of Christ, you'll learn about Chinese Christianity, you'll see some interesting parallels between modern American culture and Chinese culture regarding the suppression of religious ideals, and you'll also get some insight into why people who believe in Jesus refuse to stop believing even when people ridicule us or tell us there can't be a loving God when so many bad things happen. You might not convert exactly, but the book offers a true perspective on Christianity, not the hypocrisy, negativity, and lies spread by people who claim to believe but propagate the complete opposite message that Jesus came to give us.