Rating: 4/5

This book is unlikely to find many readers today, it is a document of a bygone era. I still believe, however, that this book can serve as a helpful tool to gain a deeper insight into the mysterious Russian soul. The writing is masterful, although it is more journalistic in comparison to what I am used to seeing in du Plessix' other books. The authoress gives us a picture of a late Soviet lifestyle from a woman's perspective. This was a society at crossroads. She captured a crucial final chord of Soviet life and the final breath of the Soviet myth. I don't know how many other books on this topic can we find today in English. Some of the intellectuals who appear in this book are still very active today, it is interesting in some cases to take a note of the fact how their thinking evolved between the perestroika and now. For example, in a conversation with du Plessix, the great thinker and writer (whose writings I adore) Tatyana Tolstaya praises poverty as a virtue of Soviet and Russian life, a trait that, according to her, automatically makes Russia morally superior to the West. I wonder what would she say to the all-consuming materialism of Russia today, and the worship of the oligarchs - just watch any Russian movie and you will see the worship of money and power. It is obvious that at that time Ms. Tolstaya has not yet visited or (lived in) the West, her thinking was a reflection of Soviet propaganda. 
One good thing about du Plexis' book is that she ventures outside Moscow and Petersburg, visits other parts of the country. And the perspective there differs much from the urban perspective. She also talked to women from different social backgrounds. Du Plessix' own family roots were also a helpful tool in crafting this book, allowing her to see continuity of certain traits, as well as the emergence of things new.
A side note - among the many names of respected and distinguished Russian and Soviet women I missed the name of Vera Gedroyts, the first Soviet female surgeon (who was also a lesbian). I think though that these were pre-internet years - the Iron Curtain was still there.