Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars

This was my first trial in reading Mrs Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's novel due to my disappointment with Ms Arundhati Roy's latest one entitled "The Ministry of Utmost Happiness" (Knopf 2017) in which I could not go on around page 30 even though I had immensely enjoyed reading her "The God of Small Things" (Fourth Estate 2009). 

For our better understanding, we should start with its brief synopsis:
The beautiful, spoilt and bored Olivia, married to a civil servant, outrages society in the tiny, suffocating town of Satipur by eloping with an Indian prince. Fifty years later, her step-granddaughter goes back to the heat, the dust and the squalor of the bazaars to solve the enigma of Olivia's scandal. (back cover)
However, when we read the four-line Goodreads one (https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1...), there is a key word denoting her writing technique, that is 'interwoven'. As we can see from the first page with an anonymous narrator, Olivia's step-granddaughter, called herself 'I' who set the scene in nearly two pages and started her journal entries fifty years later (that is in 1973) on 2, 16, 20, 24 February (11+ pages) then flashbacked (interwoven) to the year 1923 (6 pages) depicting Olivia's story. Having an intermission by an asterisk, the journal resumed writing on 28 February (4+ pages), then the year 1923 again [I scribbled ? nearby]. If you understand her technique, you could guess that after reading some 23 pages after this 1923 you would read another series of the entries with recorded dates and months. This writing cycle goes on like this till the end, neither chapter nor topic is available.

One of the difficulties is that some Indian terms seemingly unfamiliar to its readers have occasionally been used, for example, the Nawab, the Begum, the Baba, etc.; therefore, they simply stare in the face with vague understanding or in the dark. As for me, I guessed from the context and thought the Nawab should be an honorable title [an independent ruler (p. 78)], the Begum his mother, the Baba a holy man. 

As for its plot, I think, we can keep going and arguably enjoy her narrations and dialogs; however, there is something related to the step-granddaughter whose unnecessarily absurd and precarious indulgence is so dramatic that it is unimaginably stunning and I just wonder why and if what she has done is morally right since what she has committed reveals her carnal relations with Chid, a vagrant Hindu sadhu with his flat Midlands accent so I console myself that everyone can be capable of doing anything fictitious as part of fiction imagined by its author. 

In conclusion, what I would say about this novel as her debut to me is that I was a bit disappointed for some reason; therefore, I think I should try reading hers more as an exploratory means like how I have satisfactorily done with the fictions and nonfictions by Mr Graham Greene.