Rating: 3/5

In other words, I distrust both the structuralist idea that knowing more about ‘textual mechanisms’ is essential for literary criticism and the post-structuralist idea that detecting the presence, or the subversion, of metaphysical hierarchies is essential. Knowing about mechanisms of textual production or about metaphysics can, to be sure, sometimes be useful. Having read Eco, or having read Derrida, will often give you something interesting to say about a text which you could not otherwise have said. But it brings you no closer to what is really going on in the text than having read Marx, Freud, Matthew Arnold or F.R. Leavis. Each of these supplementary readings simply gives you one more context in which you can place the text – one more grid you can place on top of it or one more paradigm to which to juxtapose it. Neither piece of knowledge tells you anything about the nature of texts or the nature of reading. For neither has a nature.

I absolutely adored the way these lectures were spaced out. We start with Eco and Rorty (quotation above), the two "pragmatics" if you will, and then get a rebuttal from Culler and Brooke-Rose (the two that I myself am much more lenient towards). As a fellow pragmatism hater, it was interesting to see the defense of the movement and the criticisms of "overinterperation," something that I'm very much guilty of. I did find points that I agree with in the first half, which only proves that you should always seek out different opinions in literature, even if you do not necessarily side with them. I think the best section was definitely Culler's though (quotation below), and having read The Satanic Verses, Brooke-Rose's section was especially interesting to me. Those two really did a good job in highlighting the deficient parts of the pragmatism argument. The argument-reply style really reinvigorated my love for literary theory, and it reminded me how interesting it can be. Only thing I'd criticize is that I did find Eco's final reply a bit lacking, but that may be because I find the argument as a whole a bit disagreeable. Overall, it was a very enlightening and well written debate.

What is confusing in literary studies is that many people are in fact attempting to analyse aspects of the language, the system, the subroutines of literature if you will, while presenting what they are doing as an interpretation of the literary works. It may therefore seem that, as Rorty might put it, they are just using literary works to tell stories about the myriad problems of human existence. Such uses of literary works may, on occasion, involve little concern with or investigation of how these works function, but most of the time such concern and such investigation is in fact crucial to the project, even if it is not stressed in the interpretive narrative. But the point is that the attempt to understand how literature works is a valid intellectual pursuit, though not of interest to everyone, like the attempt to understand the structure of natural languages or the properties of computer programs. And the idea of literary study as a discipline is precisely the attempt to develop a systematic understanding of the semiotic mechanisms of literature, the various strategies of its forms.

What is missing from Rorty’s response, therefore, is any sense that literary studies might consist of more than loving and responding to characters and themes in literary works.