Rating: 5/5

I read from this book daily while recovering from a major panic attack--my first and I pray my last. I was able to sleep only by taking a tranquilizer. I never knew such fear existed nor imagined I would experience it, nor the suicidal ideation that came with it in waves over the following weeks. The first chapter gave me immediate relief, enabling better sleep. I kicked the tranquilizer, a dangerously addictive drug, a couple of months later. Four months later I was sleeping well, taking only St. John's Wort, melatonin and 5-HTP. 

(Understand that it takes TIME to heal your nerves after a major panic episode.)

I simply can't say enough about this book. The more severe your illness, the more you will get out of it. People with only a mild condition may not find it very useful.

The most important concept Dr. Weekes stresses is "second fear," the background fear that the initial fear will return. She provides tools for dealing with second fear, such as imagining yourself "floating" in stressful settings and "letting time pass"--knowing that time spent in peaceful surroundings, will heal your hypersensitized nerves. The mere knowledge of this "time heals" aspect brings a measure of relief.

Dr. Weeks gives a string of simple illustrating examples in a variety of settings that give the reader confidence that relief is not only possible but assured.

There are more modern books about recovering from "nervous illness," but I doubt any of them can measure up to the standard set by Claire Weeks in terms of the self-confidence that is essential to chipping away the fear that must be overcome to enable recovery.

Dr. Weekes writes in a conversational style, as if you were a patient. No technical jargon. No stilted academic complications. She writes plainly and succinctly, with compassion for the suffering patient not to impress her peers with how much she knows about the topic.

(Look also for her recordings, which seem even more powerful than the book, judging from the sample I heard.)