Rating: 4/5

Waldo and Magic,Inc are two separate short stories. Albeit not lacking in similarities, these two stories are independent and could be read separately. I believe they were originally published separately. Moreover, they do feature a completely different set of characters, so it is not as one can be read as a sequel to another. However, I do see why they are published together. Besides the common theme of magic, these stories share a common protagonist- an independent self-made man who has to struggle his way to keep his business at its peak. Although, Waldo is rich to start with, he still has to work to stay on top. I'm sensing a bit of an ode to an entrepreneur and an independent business owner in these stories. I actually was not surprised to see it get mixed up with magic. Perhaps to achieve any kind of true independence in this world, one must to either rely on magic or believe in it. ;)

Waldo 3/5
Considering that Waldo has been published in 1942, the story has aged considerably well and for most part didn't feel dated at all. Waldo, its principal character,is a genius misanthrope, a man who suffers from a severe muscular atrophy but it didn't let it stop him from becoming wealthy and powerful. However, it seems that humanity (and one company in particular) needs his help, and Waldo is willing to help- as long as the price is right. 

To be frank I enjoyed this story mostly for Heinlein's ideas and his excellent grasp of politics, science, human nature and business. As for character development, I found it a bit lacking. The character of Waldo changed too quickly for my liking. I didn't find the ending that plausible. I suppose the whole ugly duckling ending seemed a bit implausible to me. Nevertheless, I quite enjoyed Waldo's initial discovery of magic. The old doctor was a great character as well. One more thing I liked about this novel is that it made me think- how much do we know about how technology affects our health? Sure, testings are done but how many long term ones? It's odd how little has changed since 194o. I can't believe that we still don't have quality long term testing that could evaluate how the various devices we use could affect our health. We have a long way to go.

Magic, Inc 4/5
Originally published in 1940 under an interesting title 'The Devil Makes the Law', this is a splendid little tale of magic and adventure. It's protagonist is Archie, a business owner who won't be intimated by crooks but will find that fighting them might be harder than he ever imagined- because the corruption sometimes go all the way to the top- especially if the underworld has a hand at things. There are several things I liked about this story. First, it is well written and planned. The world in which Archie lives is one where magic is a common thing, but only certain limited uses of it. To solve his problems, Archie will have to dig deeper and join forces with several interesting character, one of them being a kick ass old lady (a witch) and other a black British professor with African roots. I do like how Heinlein always tried to introduce different races in his character cast. The black guy, for instance, is an absolutely positive character, an educated fellow who has also preserved his African roots and can help Archie get out of his predicament. Mind you, that was quite progressive for 194o-ties.