Rating: 1/5

I am not sure where to start. This book was one colossal dichotomy. If Fisher had presented her evidence in a responsible manner, this would have been a 5 star book all the way. So many things to love! But, even though it had some of the most exciting neuroscience research on love that I have read about to date, the overreaching conclusions at which Helen Fisher arrives has rendered it a pseudoscientific book. What a shame. There was so much here to work with. 

Reading this book is a lot like reading books by the likes of Michael Behe. There is an awful lot of cool science (and boy is it beautiful) but the conclusion the researcher draws show a lack of understanding of that beautiful science, a lack of logic when constructing an argument, and the compulsion to make unwarranted assumptions to fit extremely outdated notions. 

******What was good about this book:

Unlike Richard Dawkins, Helen Fisher at least attempted to update her understanding of evolution. When Dick Dawkins wrote the 30th anniversary edition of The Selfish Gene, he basically said something like, "Yeah, it's been 30 years since I wrote my book. Despite all the evidence that has been gathered since then (umm like epigenetics), I am so brilliant that what I said 30 years ago still stands, and I have found that I don't need to change anything (what a fossil). Furthermore, I would like to humble brag about how tough it is that my book has sold so many copies. It's hard to sign so many books you know!" 

Helen Fisher, on the other hand, said of writing her book many years later, something to the effect of, "I found that since so many new studies had been conducted and so much new evidence filtered in since I came up with my theories on love and attachment, I had to basically rewrite the entire book."

She certainly delivered when it came to writing about new evidence but not when it came to interpreting what that evidence meant. Here are some of the findings turned up by her stellar work (her methods were great, her sample sizes were huge, and her data are just fantastic!!!). Through questionnaire, interview, and brain imaging, Fisher found the following:

- Dating and sex

 Republicans report having less sex but more orgasms.

​ 56% of male and 48% of female respondents said they imagine a future together with the person on a first date. 
​More than one out of three report falling in love at first sight.

​ 35% say they fell in love with someone whom they didn't initially find
​attractive. 

​ 92% of men are in favor of women asking them out

 65% of men report that at least one woman has been the one to ask them out

​-Romantic love
​ Helen Fisher and colleagues found that on average, the smitten phase lasted about 12-18 months according to brain imaging and blood tests (aimed at detecting higher levels of hormones associated with love) and 2-5 years according to questionnaires.
What about those married for 20 years or more. Less than 10% are "madly in love." Those who reported being madly in love were put in scanners and, surprisingly, their brains looked like the brains of new lovers..... with one exception. There was no activation in regions associated with anxiety, like there is with almost all new lovers. This lucky subset of long married people had all the crazy hormone activation of falling in love (for 20 plus years) but without the angst. Instead, pain suppression regions lit up. Congrats to anyone who falls in this category.

 The rest of those married for that long felt love for their partner but did not feel the intense falling in love feelings that they had early on. Most people seem to fall in love and then after 5 or 10 years, settle into a calmer love that is not fueled with as much passion. 

​- Divorce

​ Far more young women divorce​ ​​than older women. 
 10% of American women have had three or more husbands before the age of 40. 
 Most women divorce in their late 20s and early 30s. 

 80% of women who divorced before the age of 25 remarried before turning 35. 

 After their breeding years were over​,​ only ​1​ in 3 of today's American​ ​women divorced. 

 43%​ ​of ​​ ​divorced couples have no children. 
 29% have one child.
 18%​ ​​have two children. 
​ Only 5% of couples with three children will divorce​. 
 Couples with four or more children rarely ever get divorced

 Marriage tends to get stronger during​ ​the birth of children, but divorce peaks when kids r 5 yrs old. 

​-​The first kiss is extremely important. 

 59% of men and 66% of women said they ended a relationship after being disappointed with the first kiss. 

 If it's not good, it seems the majority of people will cut and run. 

The above is just a sampling of the data collected by Fisher and colleagues when they surveyed people on Match.com and Chemistry.com. 

Fisher also discussed some of the older findings such as:

 -Vasopressin and monogamy

 Monogamy almost always involves cheating. While some individuals in monogamous relationships can remain faithful, there is not one species who hasn't been caught cheating.
Birds were thought to be monogamous because they mate for life. How cute, right? While one poor sap sits on the egg (doesn't matter if it's male or female), the other bird flies out to find food. "Don't worry honey, I am just running to grab us a bite to eat." They stop for a little "extra pair copulation"along the way. They get back to the nest, and the parent who has been caring for the kids the whole time is none the wiser.
During genetic testing, it was found that 56% of a bird's offspring were fathered by a different bird than the one the female made a home with.

 Some humans are very trustworthy and faithful, but as a species, humans cannot be called a monogamous species because so many "monogamous" people cheat. Also, most humans have more than one sexual partner over a lifetime. Thus, even if those individuals remain faithful in each relationship, they can only be said to be serial monogamists.
Genetic testing has found that men who more inclined to cheat have a different version of the vasopressin gene (different in length/repeats) than men who are not as inclined to cheat.

​- Men paying for dinner on the first date (and usually many dates thereafter)

 Fisher lists the many male insects and other male animals who produce a meal ​in order to entice a female to spend time with them so they can copulate. (Really witty/funny). 

​****** What was not good about this book:

- The evidence did not support her outdated, conservative, biological essentialist view of males and females. Fisher REALLY loves her gender roles and works very hard to shape the data to fit her biases. For example, She discussed some solid evidence about the various systems that are activated in different groups of people when talking about a potential love. Some people's serotonin systems activate while others have more active dopamine systems. ​(I mean, how great is that!? What a super research question. This is an example of what could have made this a 5 star book.) But, sadly Fisher quickly, and often!, departs from science and spouts nonsense. She pretended that she was in possession of studies showing causal (or even a correlation!!!) effects of estrogen on "feminine" traits such as being talkative, emotional, blah, blah, blah. She went through a list of people who she thinks might have more estrogen or testosterone and made up stupid, unscientific stories about what that meant about them as lovers. It was absolutely absurd and should be a huge red flag to everyone. She should not be called a scientist and definitely not an "expert." 

In my opinion, there is no worse scientist than the type who takes solid, well-replicated, beautiful findings and concocts some stupid story that is in no way scientifically studied or supported​.

​Studies (good ones) have shown that if a false story is sold to the public using neuroscience (dubbed "sexy science because it's so alluring), the public will believe that story more than they will believe a true story that is supported by facts from a less sexy science​. 

​Helen Fisher has conducted research that is some of the most awesome neuroscience research I have seen to date. The data she presents about love and the brain is crazy good. Instead of writing a book about what she knows (from solid evidence gained from good methodology), she makes wild assumptions about our evolutionary past and our behaviors today that are not supported by the evidence she has gathered.

Why do so many evolutionary psych people reach way beyond what the data tell them? They give science a bad name. Worse yet, it's the evolutionary psych people who "help" scientists fight against absurd creationist attacks. Please, don't "help" us anymore. In reality, when you compromise science in this way, you help the creationists, not the scientists. 

If a researcher concocts what Stephen Jay Gould calls a "just so story" and another researcher can concoct an equally plausible just so story as well, then they are likely missing something at best and completely wrong at worst. It's irresponsible and serves as a prescription to society. If Helen Fisher the 'expert" states that her sexy neuroscience proves that women are emotional, not good at math (yes she said that! Guess she missed the cross culture studies), and all the other oppressive bullshit women have been fed over the years, then society will keep these ridiculous notions around longer. And not one bit of her evidence supports her claims. She had so much data to work with. Why overreach? It was good enough to just present her findings. 

In Sex at Dawn, Chris Ryan overreached at times as well. However, it was not nearly to the degree that Helen Fisher did. She tried to argue against many of his claims. She never named him, probably in some lame attempt to keep attention away from his much better book. She failed so miserably. At least Ryan was logically consistent when he overreached. The reader could stop and say, "Hmmmm, that seems like quite a stretch." But the could not really say, "He just argued *for* this point 2 chapters ago and is now arguing *against* this point now." She seemed wholly unaware of her lack of logic (what I have now dubbed "Fisher Logic"). What an embarrassment to science.