Rating: 1/5

set in Syracuse NY

***

My attitude towards cozies can best be described as ... skeptical. I like to read mysteries, so I've read a few cozies in my time, even enjoyed some of them, but for the most part they seem to be contrived and clunky, and far too cutesy. (Be proud of me for thinking of all "c" words, in the spirit of the 
  c
ozy.) But I needed a "local author book for the 2018 Popsugar challenge, and I struck out badly with attempt #1. "Local" means "Syracuse area" for me, so here I am with Challenge read Take 2, a Robin Light mystery!

So .... I didn't like this book. I would've DNF'ed this, but I really wanted to just finish a local author book and check off that category. 

Now I'm going to complain a lot, and there will probably be spoilers. 

This passage kind of sums up the entire book:

  Then I thought about how I hadn’t handled things too well over the last couple of days and about how, if I knew what was good for me, I’d better get a grip on myself.

That's it, right there. That's the book. Robin smokes too much, talks too much, and just generally does a series of idiotic things.

She's innocent, and if she had only told the police everything she knew, there would have been no book! But no, she doesn't trust the police (I guess? for no apparent reason?), despite having a good friend on the force. So she ends up poking and prying and breaking and entering and pestering and just generally pissing people off and getting herself into more trouble. Block's version of Syracuse has a large Hispanic population, most of whom seem to be involved in Santeria/Santerfa. 

So much for the story. The details sucked, too.
 
The fun of books by local authors set in the local town is that you recognize some place names. There's always a smattering of fake names, I guess to avoid legal issues or for plot reasons. Robin takes John to "St Ann's" hospital, which doesn't exist. So let's assume she's going to St Joseph's. She is very specific about the route she takes, which confused me, because I didn't know where some of these streets were. I googled.
We were only ten blocks away from St. Ann’s. ... I made a right onto Gifford, squealed around the corner onto West Street, and went through the intersection without stopping for the light.
Okay, so far so good. If her pet shop is south of Armory Square, this is the route she would take towards St Joe's.
As we passed the All Souls Pentecostal Church, I asked him if he knew who had sent him the package. ... Then as I was rounding the corner at Townsend and Clark I must have hit a patch of black ice because the car skidded out and I sideswiped a Jeep ... As I made a sharp turn onto Ash, John fell against my arm. ... I said a prayer, put my foot down to the floor, my hand on the horn, and went up West Street at eighty miles an hour. I careened into the hospital parking lot, tromped on the brakes and ran hollering into reception.
So. Yes you would get on Townsend, but there is no "Townsend &amp; Clark," at least not near any of those other streets. There is a Townsen &amp; Ash, but why does she end up back on West St after all that? Why be so oddly specific, and make up a street name, and then get the directions garbled? Even if St Ann's is in a made-up location and not where an actual hospital is, these directions don't make sense.

She does it again and again:
I backed my car out of the driveway and took a right on Crawford, a left on Scot, then another left onto Genesee. For some reason I caught every red light. I was waiting for the one at the corner of Cherry and Olmstead to turn when ...
There is no Cherry and Olmstead!!! Why? Why is she so specific, and then makes something up???

 If you can't get it right, leave it out! 

And why make up a hospital, where no one does anything wrong, but use the actual name of the zoo, where a zookeeper threatens Robin with a King cobra??

Also, I've lived in Syracuse for 28 years now, I've yet to hit a patch of "black ice" - I don't know what this "black ice" is that people always talk about.

Robin eats an awful lot of chocolate bars. I felt a little ill just reading it. Who lives like this??
Then I watered my jade tree, made myself a cup of coffee, ate a couple of chocolate bars out of the fridge, swallowed a handful of vitamins, grabbed the day’s newspaper, and listened to the messages on my answering machine.

*****

I got dressed, brewed myself some coffee, ate two chocolate bars, swallowed a handful of vitamin pills, and called the PSB ...

*****

I made myself a pot of coffee, got a couple of chocolate bars out of the fridge, sat down at the kitchen table, and began doing what I should have done in the first place ...

*****

so I got up, shrugged on my jeans and an old sweatshirt, got the paper from the mailbox, made myself some coffee, and ate two chocolate bars.

*****

I threw on jeans and another black turtleneck, put my hair up, went down to the kitchen, and made myself a big pot of coffee. Three cups of French roast, a chocolate bar, a handful of vitamins, and two cigarettes later, I was ready to roll.

*****

I collected the morning newspaper off the front porch and went inside. James was waiting for me in the kitchen. I fed him, refilled Elsie’s dog food bowl, then made myself a big steaming mug of caf6 au lait. I cradled the cup in my hands, savoring its warmth, as I took it over to the kitchen table. While I sipped the sweet, milky brew, I ate a chocolate bar, a couple of slices of French bread, and scanned the local paper, after which I lit a cigarette ...

And I have more complaints about locations. She takes 81 to the airport - fine - but then she says:
The road was even worse than I thought it would be. At the Liverpool intersection, a tractor trailer leaned into a ditch. Five miles further up another car was off the road,

There are several "Liverpool intersections" from the highway, but even from the first one, if you drive another FIVE MILES, you'll have passed the airport! But oh no she drives another five miles after that. She's well past the airport!

On her way back she details her route and clearly the pet store is not over by Armory Square, it's near Westcott:
I got off 81, took 690 East, and then exited at the Teall Avenue exit. As I was driving up toward Genesee Street, my stomach started rumbling and I realized that with everything that had been going on I’d forgotten to eat. At the next light I made a left on Teall, drove two blocks, parked in front of the 7-Eleven on the corner of Erie and Taylor, and went in.
Which means all her racing around up and down West and Townsend to the hospital in chapter one .... made NO sense. No wonder the guy died! She was taking him on a tour of the city!

And she just doesn't stop driving me crazy with this.
I wanted to take a run down to the Shining Crystal Bookstore. I knew they had books on tarot and magic. ... The drive over to the bookstore took twenty minutes. The place was sandwiched between a supermarket and a pizza store on the corner of Dell and Cherry.
Anyone who knows Syracuse will recognize this as the old Seven Rays bookstore (now defunct). That's cool and all, but the bookstore was on Westcott. Dell St and Cherry St are both real streets, but they do not intersect. They are in the same neighborhood, but several blocks apart. There is no "corner of Dell and Cherry"!!!!

And don't walk into somebody's house uninvited and then light a fucking cigarette while you walk around inside.

  I turned and rang the bell. No one answered. I tried again. When no one answered this time, I tried the door handle. It turned. The door was open. I walked in. At that point it never occurred to me not to. That’s how obsessed I’d become. The hallway light was on. ... Maybe he was upstairs. I realized as I started down the corridor that in the five years I’d known Sam, I’d never been in his house. ... Piles of books stood alongside the chairs and sofa. I lit a cigarette before I glanced at their titles.

WHO DOES THAT??!!??

It's at this point that I realized I really hate the protagonist, this book is never going to get any better, and I might as well fast forward to the end just to find out whodunnit. The resolution was ridiculous. At least I read enough for me to decide it qualifies for my reading challenge.

And, this story ended up being so violent, with so many people (and animals!) dying, that I don't think it qualifies as a "cozy."