Rating: 1/5

This book sucked I really cannot begin to describe how horrible the plot,the characters,and the flow of the story was to read. It felt like a skim read and I didn't skip at all. The author glossed over so much.

So much happens in this book and none of it good. The Heroine is working for her Aunt at a hat shop but before she arrives from the street she is rescued by the Hero who she falls for on the spot.

Later on the Evil duchess hires her( whom the Hero is the lover)for her talents with clothes. First day on the job nearly gets raped by the Duke. The Hero saves her and The Duchess learns that the Heroine is a virgin(dum,dum,dum). 

The Duchess talks Fiona into pretending to be a lady to help her get a good husband. Well yada yada yada Black Mass happens. Turns out the duchess planed for Fiona to be the virgin gang raped. She was given a drugs to make her horny and after the third or fourth man takes her the drugs start wearing off and she fights the man taking her and rips his masks off and its *Gasps* the Hero that she is in love with.

Hero and her date Thor(the dude who took her to the black mass) does not get that she was drugged.

The Duchess and Duke turns her out, when she goes back to work for her Aunt and tells her what happened to her. The Aunt doesn't quiet seem to believe her but takes her back anyway. Well the Duchess threatens to ruin the Aunts shop if she doesn't turn Fiona out as well.

Now Fiona goes to another shop to work,but the Duchess ruins that as well.

During this Thor is sniffing around her bemoaning the fact that he didn't get to take her that night and now that she has nowhere to go he talks her into becoming his mistress.

She agrees, and now she gets to be raped on a regular basis. Thor is an asshole to the ninth degree. During this time she is planning revenge on the Hero.

Thor takes her back to the Abbey where she was raped for the after parties which are orgies sells her in a auction to the Hero who treats her like trash but doesn't have sex with her. There is a another man she likes and is sweet to her and she finds him and has sex with him and enjoys it. Thor discovers this and kicks her out.

Fiona then goes to live with this man and when his wife passes on marries him.

Fiona meets the hero's sister.

Fiona still attends the Abbey with her husband and becomes one of the "nuns" who prepare the virgins for Black mass the other nun is the Duchess. That night the Hero is to be abbot who gets to take the virgin first. Fiona is shocked that the virgin is Nell the hero's sister. *Oh no*

Fiona gets Nell away and hides her, finds the Hero who is still treating her like dirt. Tells him what happened with his sister being drugged and her being chosen as that night's virgin. He still doesn't believe her until he sees his sister. This finally wakes him up about what is really going on there. He thought all the virgins came willingly and he thought that Fiona was just like the others.

They escape, They make love but she is married to a good man.

Good man and hero has a duel,but the duke kills the good man frames hero.

Hero turns out ran an underground newspaper has a following and a friend who helps get word to king. Hero gets out of jail back to Fiona. Then it is all lovely dovey sunshine and rainbows. The Hero write a expose on the Abby and Black Mass, names all involved. The Hero and Heroine is laughter and smiles while leading a mob into the Abbey to see what is going on.

The Hell fire club is shut down, but not for long as the hero says they will find a way again.

Fiona and Hero are having Christmas together and then she gives birth to twins, and it's a perfect happy family.

This closing. Heroine is a stupid twit, the Hero is a boorish Dick.