Rating: 3/5

My dog Tulip, published in 1965, was written by J.R. Ackerly (1897 to 1976) who was the literary editor of The Listener, the B.B.C. Magazine from 1935 until 1959. If you like ‘literary’ books you may enjoy the book more than I. 

The book starts with talking about Tulips sweet nature but difficulty in finding a vet that would work with his dog:

‘Her sweetness and gentleness to myself were such that it was almost impossible for me to believe that these were not the prevailing characteristics of her nature; but the language she used to others certainly sounded pretty strong, and bad language, as is well known, does not always stop at that.’

Previous reviews mentioned that they didn’t like the topics of dog poop and his efforts at trying to breed Tulip. 

First, I would like to address the topic of dog poop. If you have a dog you must deal with the stuff. I find conversations about the stuff to often be ripe with humor. My most memorable personal experience with it is when my young newfoundland woke me up in the middle of the night and I told her to go back to sleep and leave me alone. When I got up the next morning and stepped in something squishy, I learned a valuable lesson regarding dog stuff.

I do enjoy books written by British authors as they seem to have a better command of the English language. Here is some examples of him encouraging Tulip to get it over with:

‘Come on, Tulip,’ I say, “get you does done, there’s a good girl.’

‘Come on, Tulip, be a sport. Shitsy-witsy, you know,’ 

This isn’t the first book where a chapter was devoted to dog feces. I really enjoyed a chapter in Off the Leash: A Year at the Dog Park by Matthew Gilbert. I enjoyed the chapter on this in Tulip as well. The book was written during a time when everyone didn’t have little doggie bags with them. Here are a few of excerpts I would like to share. The first two on training your dog to go in the gutter and the last on Tulip doing his business in a graveyard:

‘So, I had already come to my own independent conclusion that the alternative to Tulip fouling the sidewalk was that she ran the risk of being killed, and that however strongly certain pedestrians and shopkeepers might hold the view that the latter would be preferable, she should never receive instructions from me to go into the street for any purpose whatever.’

‘The incident occurred at the north end of Sloane Street, and I observed it comfortably from the top of a stationary bus. It was late in the morning, there were plenty of people about, and the lady was walking below me with her Poodle, which was on the lead. As they were passing a cleaners the dog was taken short. Quickly arranging his posterior against the wall of the shop, he began. With a sharp cry of dismay his mistress hauled him across the broad sidewalk to the gutter. It cannot be very pleasant to be dragged about by one’s neck at such a moment; in any case the lady’s interference could hardly have been more ill timed, and she was now convicted of earlier errors, she had been feeding her dog unwisely and too well. By the time he was safely in the gutter he had finished, and the sidewalk was impassable. If only she had left the good, intelligent creature to his own modest devices, all would have been, if not well, at any rate considerably better.’

‘And are not its ghosts gladdened that so beautiful a young creature as Tulip should come here for her needs, whatever they may be? Here, springing from their long-forgotten bones, rankly grow her medicinal grasses, the coarse quitch grass which she searches out to pluck and eat when she wishes to make herself sick, and that other sort of grass she uses to bind and cleanse her bowels; and here too, I hope—it is our last chance—she will unburden herself beside the mortal remains of Caroline, Dowager Countess of Kingston (d. 1823) or of Mr. Stephen Robinson (d. 1827).‘

I personally enjoy a good conversation about dog poop told in an elegant way. As far as the rest of the book, maybe I could have been ok with a little conversation on him trying to breed Tulip, including details of trying to help in the process, but sorry, chapters of that were just not enjoyable to me. And that includes conversations of dogs in season. A little maybe written about eloquently like this next passage I will add here, maybe, but not too much more on a topic I find awkward. (And there was more than enough written on the awkwardness that can be had viewing a male dog when it is excited.)

‘But Nature will not be cheated, tooled, bribed, fobbed off, shuffled out of the way. I still have to return in the evening, and, dodge it as I may, I know what I shall find, a burning creature burning with desire. ‘Heat’ is the apt word; one can feel against one’s hand without touching her the feverous radiations from her womb. A fire has been kindled in it, and no substitute pleasure can distract, no palliative soothe, no exertion tire, no cooling stream slake, for long the all-consuming need of her body. She is enslaved. She is possessed. Indeed, especially towards the peak—it is the strangest, the most pitiful thing—her very character is altered. This independent, unapproachable, dignified and single-hearted creature, my devoted bitch, becomes the meekest of beggars.’

One or more breeding did lead to puppies, and there some said about that, mostly about the inconvenience of it, but he did realize the responsibility of finding good homes, although it sounds like his success at that was inconsistent. (Some mentions here could use Kleenex, but Kleenex is not needed at the end of the book other than a notation of an end.)

‘To ‘find them homes,’ as I had phrased it to myself, began to seem a totally inadequate description of my duty. I perceived that their whole future, their health and happiness, depended entirely upon me. Their lives were in my hands‘

Here he is speculating on the happiness of one of Tulips puppies he had found a home for:

‘Was she happy? I suppose she was happy. She had, after all, fulfilled a dog’s most urgent need, she had managed to bestow her heart, and upon steady people whose dull, uneventful lives required the consolation of what she had to give.‘

So much of the book was taken up with finding a compatible dog to breed with Tulip, and aspects of breeding that I didn’t find so interesting or enjoyable and thus my lower rating. 

There were however other randomly placed passages that I found interesting, and I finish by including them. I will also post the quotes against the book for people who come at quotes from a path not directly related to the book.

‘I realized clearly, perhaps for the first time, what strained and anxious lives dogs must lead, so emotionally involved in the world of men, whose affections they strive endlessly to secure, whose authority they are expected unquestioningly to obey, and whose mind they never can do more than imperfectly reach and comprehend. Stupidly loved, stupidly hated, acquired without thought, reared and ruled without understanding, passed on or ‘put to sleep’ without care, did they, I wondered, these descendants of the creatures who, thousands of years ago in the primeval forests, laid siege to the heart of man, took him under their protection, tried to tame him, and failed—did they suffer from headaches? Infinite pains I now took to reassure them, and sometimes succeeded. They perceived, after all, that, surprisingly enough, I did not mean to bully them or interfere; they saw too what a comradely relationship existed between myself and Tulip, whom I was always stooping down to caress and praise; in the end they would come confidently to meet me and put their cold noses against my hand.’

I think you should now have a feel for the book. Well written, but unfortunately covering awkward topics.