Rating: 5/5

'Arabian Sands' has an iconic status in travel literature. And very rightly so. Skeptical as one is of adventurous accounts of European explorations of the east - contribute as they prominently did to the consolidation and expansion of Empires through cartography, intelligence gathering and espionage (with prominent names such as T.E.Lawrence), as well as through the instrumentality of self-serving categorizations, stereo-typing, othering and even demeaning of several cultures and people - Thesiger stands distinct and disparate in his account. " I shall always remember how often I was humbled by those illiterate herdsmen who possessed, in so much greater measure than I, generosity and courage, endurance, patience, and light-hearted gallantry. Among no other people have I felt the same sense of personal inferiority." These are telling words that he shares towards the end of the book and they denote both a deep admiration for the bedu as well as a certain humility that was rather rare in the ruling race of the time. But this is not the exception. Time and again in his travelogue he gushes over the free spirited bedouin way of life, its hospitality and simplicity, its ruggedness and fearlessness and its sense of community and loyalty. The book is dedicated to bin Kabina and bin Ghabaisha whose character sketches he draws with loving precision and who were to remain his closest companions and friends in his Arabian journeys. The Sands it is evident is where he was truly happiest and his wanderlust found its pinnacle of happiness as he embarked on another, largely impulsive journey across a new sandy wilderness, with some trusted companions and barely enough provisions for survival.

The book focuses on two crossings of the Rub-ul-Khali or the Empty Quarter - an enormous, desolate desert within an even larger desert, named as such for its aridity, remoteness and difficulty of passage. However, it also narrates other journeys, either in preparation of these crossings, after them or earlier, in Abyssinia, The Sudan, Oman, the Trucial Coast (the Trucial States later became UAE), Yemen and Arabia. The places and locations have such evocative names - Sands of Ghanim; the Quicksands of Umm-al-Samim; the Sand dunes of Uruq-al-Shaiba; the Wahiba Sands; and the various individually names wells. Indeed, as do the tribes - Bait Kathir, Rashid, Saar, Manahil, Awamir, Mahra, Junuba, Wahiba, Duru, and so many more. Thesiger's knowledge of local flora and fauna was as impressive as his ability to describe geographical formations, geological features and the local habitats, at a larger scale as well as in minutest details. Also, his book has all that you could ever wish to know about camels. Their habits, types, temperaments and attributes, which is quite natural considering how integral they were to his adventures. 

What can drive someone to go again and again into the desert on journeys rife with uncertainty? Is it a death-wish or escape from something or a certain inclination towards masochism? Sandstorms; far-flung wells with often undrinkable water; largely trackless sands over unimaginably vast distances with hardly any nourishment for man or camel; the barest of meals, constant hunger and risk of starvation and illness; hostile tribes, brigands and outlaws; towering and seemingly untraversable dunes and treacherous quicksands; wild animals; extreme temperatures, risk of exposure and acute discomfort; and hour upon hour of slow and uncomfortable progress accompanied by those with a very different outlook, culture and manner of living. However, it comes across very clearly that it was not just the thrill of discovering places where no non-native and very few natives had gone before but also the very cumbersomeness of the process, its precariousness, the hardship involved, and the company of a very different people from one's own. The very freedom and flexibility of it, the remoteness of the locations from modernity, and the joy of pushing the limits are what galvanized Thesiger to undertake journey after remarkable journey. 

Hs escapades would have definitely been noteworthy but perhaps not memorable were it not for his minuteness of observation and his spectacular and often lyrical power of description that make even ordinary and mundane happenings turn into high prose. I read the book pencil in hand for I love how he writes. The book is rich in topographical description, painstaking capturing of landscapes and people, social and anthropological observations, and even the political economy of the time. The last is quite interesting as Dubai, Sharjah, Abu Dhabi etc., were at that time minor settlements with rulers whose influence didn't extend far beyond their habitats and who were only just observing, with alarm as well as avarice, international oil companies sniffing around for the eventual bonanzas. Thesiger's book is a veritable encyclopedia of the different tribes in the region, their characters and personalities, their alliances and feuds and has many an interesting episode to narrate about his encounters with them. While the Rashid were his constant guides, companions and friends, he met many more who displayed varied levels of friendliness and hostility. The Duru, for instance, were a constant menace and the following local saying that he quotes subtly conveys why so: “You cannot trust the Duru. Too many people who travel with them die of snake-bite.” 

However, the antipathy on part of many towards his travels in the land is completely understandable. The encounters with Europeans had been disastrous for many in Asian and African lands and the greedy oil companies were also looked upon with great suspicion. While disappointed at times to have his progress thwarted, Thesiger fully appreciates these reasons and is even otherwise highly apprehensive of and averse to the wiping out of traditional ways of living and their normative frameworks due to the juggernaut of the progress and modernity that he saw advancing with great resentment. At the same time, he often voices admiration for Arab Muslim culture and civilization and its deep and lasting contributions to humankind.

I share here some of the passages that convey the sense of wonder and awe that Thesiger describes so well during his journeys across the sands: 

"Hour after hour, day after day, we moved forward and nothing changed; the desert met the empty sky always the same distance ahead of us. Time and space were one. Round us was a silence in which only the winds played and a cleanliness which was infinitely remote from the world of men." 

"It was a place where men live close together. Here, to be alone was to feel at once the weight of fear, for the nakedness of this land was more terrifying than the darkest forest at dead of night. In the pitiless light of day we were as insignificant as the beetles I watched laboring across the sand. Only in the kindly darkness could we borrow a few square feet of desert and find homeliness within the radius of the firelight, while overhead the familiar pattern of the stars screened the awful mystery of space."

" The deserts in which I had traveled had been blanks in time as well as space. They had no intelligible history, the nomads who inhabited them had no known past. Some bushmen paintings, a few disputed references in Herodotus and Ptolemy, and tribal legends of the recent past were all that had come down to us."

"We encamped on a floor of hard sand in the shelter of a small dune. Two twisted abal bushes, one of them with a broken branch drooping to the ground, three clumps of qassis, beside which I had placed my saddle-bags, a pile of camel-droppings, and a low bank of sand, marked with a tracery of lizards tracks, combined with our scattered possessions to become our home."

" The valleys when I woke at dawn were filled with eddying mist, above which the silhouettes of the dunes ran eastwards, like fantastic mountains towards the rising sun. The sky glowed softly with the colors of the opal. The world was very still, held in a fragile bowl of silence. Standing at last on this far threshold of the Sands I looked back, almost regretfully, the way we had come."

Thesiger's iconic book of travels across the sandy wastelands of Arabia is a memorable chronicle of an age and a place that has irrevocably altered; a heartfelt tribute to a people and a culture that he got to intimately know and deeply admire; and a sterling example of the human spirit of adventure and exploration and search for meaning that persuades us to collectively experience, respect and appreciate other and diverse ways of living.