Rating: 4/5

This book explores the culture, politics, views on the Vietnam Nam war, changes in music, sexual freedom, racism, and drugs in late 1960's and early 1970's. The Drifters was published in 1972. 
The narrator is a 61 year old man, Fairbanks, who feels close to six young people who travel through Spain, Portugal, Morocco and Mozambique during the Vietnam Nam era. There are three female 'drifters': one an American university student who worked on Eugene McCarthy's presidential campaign and then supported Bobby Kennedy, another from a Central African Republic where her father had been a British government official, and a girl from northern Norway craving summer climes. 
The three men were an American draft dodger, a young black American man, and a 17 year man of dual Israel/American citizenship who fought in the Israel war against Egypt. All were wandering for different reasons explained in the first part of the book. They are disillusioned with government and rebelling against parents and are in search of truth, drugs and pleasure.
Fairbanks,age 61, frequently drops in on the six young people, often accompanied by another older man, Hunt. Their conversation and arguments from both sides of the generation gap. Is a plot device which gives us some insight into the ideas of the time. The older men give advice, mostly ignored or ridiculed. They try to understand the youths' morality, music, drug taking and their individual beliefs. This plot device gives us much insight while they argue into much which was going on in the counter culture of the late 1960's and early 1970's. This seems like a relic of a time very long ago. 
My greatest enjoyment was realizing how much the world has changed for better and worse, and not in the ways
predicted by the characters in the book.. 
The young black American expresses that change and power will only come for his people through their conversion to Islam and armed rebellion with the help of the Jews. A South African Boer official plans to make apartheid even more stringent and to work to keep South Africans of British descent out of any political power. South African blacks discuss the need for armed revolt. A Rhodesian couple predict that the white settlers will control the country for at least a hundred more years. In a world before El Qaida and ISIS it seemed the greatest danger in Arab countries was death by heroin overdose, or a drug addled young girl going off with several native men for sex and being sold into white slavery. 
I was aware of these ideas, events and philosophy at the time, but had only a minimal part in that era. I probably envied my contemporaries who could travel the world so freely until I read about these experiences and the futility for most, as expressed by Fairbanks. As the saying goes, "those who remember the 60's were never a part of it."
This is a long 720 page book, but very readable. (less)