Rating: 5/5

No one can like Hagar Shipley, mainly because the moment you begin to she offers up another one of her crusty, unreasonable tirades and you think better of it. But, despite her self-sabotaging lack of compassion and understanding, you want to like her because you cannot help feeling sorry for her. If only…

The stone angel is a crumbling edifice erected to the memory of Hagar’s mother, who died as Hagar was born. It is, perhaps, a symbol for all that could have been, or a symbol for how useless memorials are if they are replacements for lives joyfully led.

Into the white Wachakwa valley, then past the dump grounds and the cemetery on the hill. Peering, I could see on the hill brow the marble angel, sightlessly guarding the gardens of snow, the empty places and the deep-lying dead.

Margaret Laurence seems to me to sum up Hagar with one sentence somewhere deep into this character study.

When did I ever speak the heart’s truth?

And the answer, of course, is “never”. Hagar never speaks her heart to others and she never allows herself to hear from her heart either. When it wants to send her in a direction that would ease both her life and that of those close to her, she refuses an interview, she pushes it down. She is never content with what she has, nor does she ever know what she pursues. Her luck is bad, but it is mostly of her own making.

When we meet Hagar, it is already too late. She is old. She cannot change much. But, she is beyond stubborn in persisting that she will change nothing.

I can’t change what’s happened to me in my life, or make what’s not occurred take place. But I can’t say I like it, or accept it, or believe it’s for the best. I don’t and never shall, not even if I’m damned for it.

I initially read this book when I was in my thirties. I remember that I liked it, but I suspect I could not relate to it on the level that I did this time. After all, I am not so young and time is a factor for me now, just as it is for Hagar. I have not done everything right, but I am very glad I do not have the weight of Hagar’s burden to carry. I wish her peace. I wish us all peace, for we are all afflicted with at least one of Hagar’s thoughts.

Hard to imagine a world and I not in it. Will everything stop when I do? Stupid old baggage, who do you think you are? Hagar. There’s no one like me in this world.