Rating: 4/5

Two Households, both alike in dignity...

Romeo and Juliet is a classic tale of forbidden love, and what you would do to stay with your 'one true love'. Our story starts in fair Verona, an italian town where an old grudge has resurfaced, making many a hand unclean. The Capulets and Montagues have been at each other's throats for who knows how long, their hatred so fierce that authority figures have to step in. The daughter of the Capulets, Juliet, is just thirteen, but her father dreams of marrying her off to the County Paris in hopes of raising his family's status. So sheltered by the customs of the time, Juliet is just an innocent girl hoping to find true love. Enter Romeo, son of Lord Montague and a helpless romantic. So hung up on over a girl named Rosaline, he shuts himself up in his rooms like a moody teenager. But when his cousin Benvolio coaxes him into crashing a Capulet fiesta, Romeo has no idea that his life will be changed by this party, for better or for worse. With the party in full swing, Romeo catches a glimpse of a girl across the room. When they meet, they fall madly in love with each other, unknowing of the other's family name. When Romeo runs off after the party, Benvolio and his best friend Mercutio try to call him back, but to no avail. The pair meet at Juliet's balcony, where they propose the idea of getting married the next day. At Friar Lawrence's church, the pair are wed in secret, hiding their forbidden love from their parents. Tybalt, Juliet's cousin, spotted Romeo at the party, and is hungry for revenge. But, after brief conversation with Benvolio and Mercutio, Romeo walks right into Tybalt's hands. But instead of a fight. Romeo falls to his knees, submitting to Tybalt, who is now his cousin because of his marrige to Juliet. Mercutio, enraged by Romeo's 'vile submission' begins a fight with Tybalt that results in his death. In anger, Romeo kills Tybalt. When the Prince finds out, Romeo is banished to Mantua! He goes to Friar Lawrence, saying that death is better than banishment because he must live without Juliet. The Friar says that Romeo needs to wait awhile until things die down, then he can come back and they will announce their marriage from the rooftops. Meanwhile, Capulet is arranging Juliet's marriage to Paris, which is to happen in a few days. Romeo goes to say goodbye to Juliet, which causes the young capulet to break into a new wave of tears as her love departs. When Lady Capulet tells Juliet of her arranged marriage to Paris in a hope to cheer her up (she thinks Juliet is crying over tybalt's death.), Juliet says no. Her father threatens to kick her off the streets if she does not oblige, so Juliet goes to the Friar in need of a solution. If he doesn't find one, she will kill herself rather than marry Paris. The friar offers her a potion that will make her appear dead for 42 hours. He will send word to Romeo, so he doesn't think that she is actually dead. When she awakens, she will be with Romeo who can whisk her away to Mantua. She agrees, and goes home to her father. She tells him that she will agree to the marriage, which causes Lord Capulet to move it to Wednesday, which would be tomorrow. Juliet takes the potion, causing the entire Capulet family to be distraught over her death. Romeo does not receive the Friar's letter, so he goes to the apothecary asking for a poison to kill him. He goes to the charnel house and drinks the poison with Juliet, after killing Paris who was at the entrance. When Juliet awakes, she sees Romeo and stabs herself with his dagger. In their memory, the capulets and montagues erect a large gold statue of the pair and end the feud. This was a terrific story which I would reccomdend to anyone who is interested in Shakespeare!! Go to this link for my review on the other half of the book, west side story! https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...