Rating: 2/5

I'm not sure what I think of this book.

I don't usually like biography as a genre: the author is under too much pressure to include everything, simply because it happened. The span of a life is not always the most interesting story. Jong avoids that problem here. She offers an abbreviated biography of Henry Miller, based on published material and her own interactions with him. The brevity serves her well, and she is able to distill Miller's essence nicely. As is the wont in current scholarship--and correct, I think--she sees him primarily as a religious writer, using sex and obscenity to shock the reader and push him or or her to consider the presence of divinity. It's not such a remarkable claim, given that Miller himself said the same thing again and again. But, as Jong notes, his claims about himself were usually ignored, overwhelmed by the salaciousness of his writing.

The rest of the book is an attempt to rescue Miller from obscurity--obscurity caused by those who censored him because of his obscenities, and, later, by feminist critics who saw him as a misogynist, and anti-Semite. Jong does good job resuscitating Miller's reputation on these fronts, in part by admitting that, yes, he was patriarchal, yes he used and (emotionally) abused women. No, he was not a role model. But that his writing, nonetheless, has some wisdom, a way of engaging the world that is open--liberated. That while he embraced obscenity asa necessary technical device in his writing, he was wholly uninterested in vulgarity. Indeed, he tried his hand writing pornography and failed--because his writerly concerns were other than sex; they just used sex.

Jong offers a personal, though defensible, hierarchy of Miller's best works, valuing his earliest two Tropic books and Black Spring (Miller's own favorite) above the Rosy Crucifix, which, she says, reads as self-parody. She attributes the unevenness of his work to his outsider status: he never found a sympathetic editor who could get him to differentiate the shit from the good stuff. There's a certain truth to this, but even edited authors often produce bad or overwritten stuff (I'm looking at you, Thomas Wolfe). In a sense, the mixture is what you are destined to get from Miller, as Miller: he couldn't tell the good from the bad--and wouldn't have let anyone make the distinction for him--because to him it was all good. The mark of the true artist was not technical virtuosity but revelation.
 
The paratext that rounds out the book is not especially useful. Jong provides an annotated bibliography, which really only hits the most obvious of Miller's work, and repeats the some judgments she offered in the main section of the book, often word for word. I'm not sure of the point of the imaginary dialogue, as we have real dialogue between them--in the form of letters, which are also printed here--and I recognize some of Miller's responses simply as condensations of his writings elsewhere.

The book also has two other aims. Part of it is a memoir, recounting Jong's experience being thrust into the limelight with the publication of her "Fear of Flying," which was first almost lost to obscurity before being salvaged by John Updike (talk about male chauvinists!) and Miller. She then became a lightning rod for discussion about sex and the sexual revolution in the 1970s. Miller helped her navigate this terrain, having been a similar figure for years.

The other part of the book is an attempt to discuss the meaning of sex in public, in light of the rise of feminism in the 1970s and AIDS in the 1980s. These are interesting, I suppose, but also date the book horribly, which is why I have yet to make up my mind about it. The theme she is addressing--the meaning of sex in being a human--is a transcendent one, but it is set against parochial--if also important, life-and-death--concerns. The issues today are different--not distant, just different--but the problem remains. I guess I'd maybe even like to read an update on the book, twenty years later now, and see how Jong thinks the problems evolved.