Rating: 3/5

Friday is her name and she “ is a secret courier…employed by a man known to her only as 'Boss'. Operating from and over a near-future Earth, in which North America has become Balkanized into dozens of independent states. “ You may recognize some of the chaos, into which Robert Heinlein adds his own fancies about culture and human relationships. 

Heinlein had a long run as a “top shelf” science fiction author. He wrote prolifically and was determined to provide his view of the future. Some of it focused on how our planet would be changed by technology and other works looked at mankind and politics beyond Earth. His “style” was of another period, as were some of his cherished beliefs. He fell out of favor because of the latter more than the former. I am not exactly sure why people tend to conflate PKD’s Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? with Friday. Sure PKD’s adaptation, Blade Runner, came out right after Friday and both deal with “artificial humans,” but there isn't much to get all academic about.

Friday has many of the elements that make Heinlein a joy to read:
- an interesting protagonist
- a fascinating political world
- excellent ideas about the arc of technology
- a comforting sense of seeing ordinary people doing extraordinary things

"“When you have never belonged and can never really belong, words like that mean everything. They warmed me so much that I didn’t mind not being human."

"I had porridge with thick cream, two beautiful eggs, Canterbury ham, a fat chop, fried potatoes, hot muffins with strawberry jam and the world’s best butter, and an orange, all washed down with strong black tea and sugar and milk. If all the world broke fast the way New Zealand does, we wouldn’t have political unrest."

Here we have some good discussion about intelligent constructs and the future of humanity:

"“Well— Georges, have you worked with intelligent computers?” “Certainly, Marjorie. Artificial intelligence is a field closely related to mine.” “Yes. Then you know that several times AI scientists have announced that they were making a breakthrough to the fully self-aware computer. But it always went sour.” “Yes. Distressing.” “No—inevitable. It always will go sour. A computer can become self-aware—oh, certainly! Get it up to human level of complication and it has to become self-aware. Then it discovers that it is not human. Then it figures out that it can never be human; all it can do is sit there and take orders from humans. Then it goes crazy.”"

But Heinlein “fleshes out” his novel with an extra dose of most of the things he has been ruminating about for the previous several decades:

"Democracy is probably all right used in sparing amounts. The British Canadians use a dilute form and they seem to do all right. But only in California is everyone drunk on it all the time."

"Geniuses and supergeniuses always make their own rules on sex as on everything else; they do not accept the monkey customs of their lessers."

"Sick cultures show a complex of symptoms such as you have named…but a dying culture invariably exhibits personal rudeness. Bad manners. Lack of consideration for others in minor matters. A loss of politeness, of gentle manners, is more significant than is a riot.” “Really?” “Pfui, I should have forced you to dig it out for yourself; then you would know it. This symptom is especially serious in that an individual displaying it never thinks of it as a sign of ill health but as proof of his/her strength."

"I did start making tallies. It is a bad sign when the people of a country stop identifying themselves with the country and start identifying with a group. A racial group. Or a religion. Or a language. Anything, as long as it isn’t the whole population.”"

"Sex is a better tranquilizer than any of those drugs and much better for your metabolism. I don’t see why human people make such a heavy trip out of sex. It isn’t anything complex; it is simply the best thing in life, even better than food."

Still there are some comments that just make me laugh:

"Vicksburg low town is a lusty, evil place, as swarmingly alive as a dunghill. In daylight city police travel in pairs; at night they leave the place alone. It is a city of grifters, whores, smugglers, pushers, drug wholesalers, spivs, pimps, hire hatchets, military mercenaries, recruiters, fences, fagins, beggars, clandestine surgeons, blackbirders, glimjacks, outstanders, short con, long con, sting riggers, girlboys, you name it, they sell it in Vicksburg low"

Friday has a mission: "You and I know that an artificial person can’t be told, offhand, from a natural person. You’ll be carrying, in stasis, a modified human ovum." The perils of Friday in carrying it out leads to a mostly satisfying (and predictable) finale.

All in all, one of the better of his latter works. 3.5*