Rating: 5/5

Home was something besides so much lumber and plaster. You built your thoughts into the frame work. You planted a little of your heart with the trees and the shrubbery.

I love pioneer stories, and this one certainly was exceptional. It tells the story of Abbie Deal and her family who settle what becomes the state of Nebraska. As a young wife and mother who endures hardship and sacrifices much in order to make a life, a family, and a home in the barren plains where civilization had not come, Abbie Deal’s dreams of making something of herself in the world were put on hold. She loved painting, singing, writing, and beautiful things. Armed with the confidence that one day she would be wealthy like her aristocratic great grandmother from the Old Country in Scotland, Abbie Deal does what all great women of the pioneering era did. She put everything she had into her children’s upbringing, into her marriage, and into the land that they coaxed into growth each year. Throughout her life, hardships abounded, and Abbie’s dreams kept getting swept away. Time was ever present in Abbie Deal’s mind as the years ticked away. Yet, Abbie remained content.

Abbie was outwardly calm and confident, while all the time there was that queer sensation of a wind rushing by,—a wind she could not stop,—Time going by which she could not stay. Oh, stop the clock hand! Stop Time for a minute…

Abbie Deal watches as the farm she and her husband built becomes unimportant to her children as they have their own dreams and desires for their own lives, families, and homes. This is a bittersweet story which touches all of your heartstrings especially if you are a mother who has sacrificed for her children and experienced the generational moving on from the old ways because children want to make their own ways in the world. The ending was perfect and left me tearing up for the past, for the Deals of the world, and for any of us who have dreamed and invested in the dreams of our children and family and are content in all things.

 Abbie Deal went happily about her work, one baby in her arms and the other at her skirts, courage her lode-star and love her guide,—a song upon her lips and a lantern in her hand.