Rating: 3/5

Lord Hong, the Grand Vizier of the Agatean Empire is busy hatching his plans of (Disc)world domination. With the old emperor's ailing health and the Revolutionary Army's inexperience, it looks like nothing is standing in his way... except for the so-called Great Wizzard featured in a travel log of dubious origins. Not prone to flights of fancy, Lord Hong nevertheless decides to take precautionary measures.

... which is how Rincewind, whose hat proudly proclaims him as a Wizzard, finds himself teleported to the Counterweight Continent, and reluctantly teaching the Revolutionary Army the wise ways of We-- erm Ankh-Morporkan rebellion.

After the numerous references in previous books, I was looking forward to a trip to the Aurient (a.k.a. the Counterweight Continent): i.e medieval China with a pinch of communism thrown in. A sizeable pinch that is.

Things start out well-enough with Lord Hong being the quintessential evil pretty boy genius; you know, as opposed to the cackling ones. Then there were Rincewind's language skills, that often reach their limit, and cause him to go through several iterations of a phrase, before finding the right tonality and intonation.

Agatean was a language of few basic syllables. It was really all in the tone, inflection and context. Otherwise, the word for military leader was also the word for long-tailed marmot, male sexual organ and ancient chicken coop.

[Rincewind] said, 'Just give me all your food and... unwilling dogs, will you?'
They watched him impassively.
'Damn. I mean... arranged beetles? ... variety of waterfall? ... Oh, yes... money.'

Unfortunately, that's where this book's charms made a screeching halt. The parodying of corrupt government officials, supposedly chosen based on their proficiency in poetry, felt like a rather tiresome trope. Har-dee-har-har. Communist/Totalitarian regimes are crumbling because they employ ass-kissers. Unlike say a certain democratic high school facing parental backlash due to teaching 6th graders about supposedly pornographic Renaissance art. 

... aaaaanyway, somewhere along the line, I was waiting for Rincewind to get humbled by the Agatean culture, and see that it's not just his Western Ankh-Morpokan ways that can save the world. Only, this never quite happens, and he accidentally wins the uprising with minimal casualties. OK, so The Horde storyline was funny and illuminating, but I really didn't like all the belittling of the revolutionaries.

Score: 3/5 stars

 I'm probably a big hypocrite, seeing as I totally enjoy when other people's culture, language and traditions get ridiculed. When it comes to the whole corrupt officials who know nothing about their job and can only recite random memorised phrases... that hits a bit too close to what our parliamentary debates sound like. I'm now feeling singled out.

So... let's just move along quickly, before the butt-hurt intensifies too much.

===================

Other stories featuring Rincewind the Wizard:
book 1: The Colour of Magic
book 2: The Light Fantastic
book 3: Sourcery
book 4: Eric
book 6: The Last Continent
book 7: The Last Hero
book 8: Unseen Academicals