Rating: 5/5

Oh what a lovely book!!! I loved every minute I spent reading it.

The romance was delightful! Caitlin Campbell is a pleasant, determined and somewhat outspoken country girl, who goes to London for her first season with her shy, sweet sister Emily. There, Caitlin befriends Lady Serena Kilverton, a very lively and amiable young lady, and the two begin a friendship that will surely last a lifetime. Serena doesn't allow others to dictate how she should live her life and whom she should or shouldn't associate with. Caitlin may be considered a nobody amongst the ton, but Serena doesn't care, and apparently neither does her brother, Viscount Kilverton...

I would honestly marry that guy in a heartbeat. He was so sweet, kind, teasing, loyal, honest, respectable, elegant, tall, handsome, in short he was perfect!

The tension and electricity levels were very high whenever he and Caitlin met. She seemed drawn to him, he seemed drawn to her, ok she was a little bit beneath his station but no one of his family really cared, so they can just hit it off and get married, right?? 

Oh no, wait.

Lord Kilverton is already engaged. 

  Engaged
. To a monstrosity bearing the name of Lady Elizabeth. Honestly, how the heck Kilverton came to chose her as his future bride is beyond me. I understand that he needed to marry quickly to have an heir as soon as possible, and that he had tried to fall in love but hadn't, so he had finally proposed to Lady Elizabeth because...because what, actually? We never really know. Or at least, I don't remember. But all I say is that it is impossible to mistake someone's character as Kilverton mistook Elizabeth's.
She is horrible. She's like Caroline Bingley from Pride and Prejudice, but worse, because she doesn't even bother to pretend to like people she detests, she just strait up hates everyone and everything and doesn't hesitate in letting anybody know it. She spent the whole book complaining. 

Oh, pray, excuse me while I go change my morning dress to a more suitable one for dinner, because even though I've been trying to solve a murder intrigue all day long and I'm clearly worn out and fatigued, Miss-Lady-Elizabeth-Daughter-of-a-Duke will be offended and possibly cast away from the beau monde if I'm not presentable for dinner.

I'm not even kidding, she drove everyone nuts. Poor Kilverton badly regrets his hasty decision of asking her to marry him, but he sees no way out of it. Because, if a lady backs out of a proposal, no one bats an eyelid, but if the gentleman gently seeks to break it, everybody loses their minds. Seriously?! Why?! It seems too unfair :/

Meanwhile, our poor Caitie is desperately trying to fight her attraction to Lord Kilverton, which is pretty hard, considering the perfection of that man. I admired Caitlin a lot. She didn't have a big part in the story, mainly because she has absolutely nothing to do with the murder plot!!! I thought that was very odd. The heroine, not present to help solving the mystery. Hmm. I think that's the only thing which dissatisfied me: the whole resolution of the intrigue is extremely rushed, and the heroine never knows who was the culprit. Very odd. But as romance is the main subject of The Nobody, and since it was so well done (with charming secondary romances as well), one can easily make amends for the hasty mystery resolve.

This novel was very fun and loveable, and I strongly recommend to all my fellow Regency readers! :)