Rating: 5/5

Judge Dee, magistrate of Poo-yang, eagerly heads home after an unpleasant hearing in the capital surrounding some chicanery and illicit sex at a Buddhist monastery in the earlier The Chinese Bell Murders. Dee finds himself unexpectedly thrust into the role of investigator into an alleged suicide in the pleasure district of Paradise Island in the neighboring district. Paradise Island served as the Las Vegas of its day, with plenty of gambling, drinking and prostitution. The contrast between the “anything-goes” attitude of the denizens of Paradise Island and the moralizing, strait-laced Judge Dee sets up quite a few amusing scenes. 

Judge Lo Kwan-Choong, the magistrate of the neighboring district of Chin-hwa, returns to add comic spice to The Red Pavilion. He also provides the reason for Dee’s need to investigate in the first place. The womanizing sybarite Magistrate Lo first appeared in The Chinese Bell Murders, the second Judge Dee novel released in the United States (although not the second chronologically). As befits the irresponsible and careless Lo, he dashes off from Pleasure Island to the city of Chin-hwa to avoid some unpleasantness, and Lo asks Judge Dee to finish off the investigation into the suicide of a brilliant young scholar named Lee Lien, who had just been appointed a member of the Imperial Academy and had everything to live for. Author Robert van Gulik crafts The Red Pavilion as a locked-door mystery, which, at first, throws Judge Dee off the scent. It’s only after yet another murder that Dee realizes that Lee’s death was no suicide.

Although resentful at Lo’s fecklessness, the long-suffering, meticulous Dee ignores Lo’s suggestion that he just sign off on the suicide and looks into that matter. During the several days that Judge Dee and his trusty lieutenant Ma Joong investigate, they not only learn the truth about Lee’s death but also resolve the murder of the beautiful but cruel courtesan Autumn Moon and yet another murder committed 30 years earlier. In those two cases, the victims, like Lee, died behind locked doors inside the self-same Red Pavilion. Readers won’t guess the murderer until the penultimate chapter. 

The Red Pavilion also shows a sweet side to the normally devil-may-care Ma Joong. To say anything more would spoil the novel.

For those new to the series, author Robert van Gulik, a Dutch diplomat, linguist and Asian scholar, relied on a real-life Chinese magistrate during the T'ang Dynasty named Ti Jen-chieh for his Judge Dee novels. Simplifying the magistrate's name to Judge Dee Jen-djieh, van Gulik first introduced the West to Judge Dee in Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee, first published in 1949 (although not translated into English until 1976).