Rating: 5/5

*** NOTE: Lesson number 4 above was inspired by Ceridwen’s legendary review of Ulysses and the even more legendary comment section following it....The Guest Speaker doesn't know it but the real goal of lesson #4 is to help the instructors spot and weed out incurable ASSHATS.

5.0 stars. This was my first in depth experience with Robert E. Howard’s Conan and IT…….WAS…….PULPTASTICALLY ……DELICIOUS. However, not only was it more fun than a dungeon full of giant snakes, but it was also very instructive. I learned an awful lot about both myself and the imaginary world around me. In fact, throughout the process of reading these wonderful stories, I continued to grow as a mythical figure within my own head until now I believe I am truly ready to sack my first city. 

Now since I live in Las Vegas, my plan is to start with a smaller nearby city that has strategic resources around which I can consolidate my power base. I have decided on Pahrump, Nevada which is only about 20 minutes away and has both a Wal-Mart and legal brothels. Definitely a two birds/one stone thing. Anyway, from there, I should be able to lay siege to several of the outlying casinos that maintain 24 Hr buffets and from there, by Crom, it is only a matter of time.....Sorry about that, my med dosages are all out of whack and I have a tendancy to wax maniacal before they kick in.....better now... 

Anyway, when I first started reading these stories, I didn't have really high expectation, despite the glowing reviews from others. I assumed the stories would be dated and loaded with several different kinds of cheese. However, given the significant influence Robert E. Howard and Conan on the fantasy genre, I thought it was appropriate to read at least a few for historical purposes. 

Well, so much for my expectations because I absolutely loved these stories. Robert E. Howard’s writing is lush and descriptive and filled with scrumptious helpings of phasmatastic melodrama. The stories are like violently psychotic poetry. Add to the wonderfully fun prose world-building smoking enough to set your naughty bits on fire and a main character so badass that he picks chunks of guys tougher than Frank Sinatra out of his stool (....obscure reference to Phil Hartman on SNL for those of you following along at home). 

Bottom-line, these stories are just a blast. My only caveat would be that the tone of the stories are similar enough that I found I enjoyed them more when I only read two or three at a time before going on to something else. The following is a brief description of the stories and how I would rate them (along with a few notable quotes and some cool pics).

THE PHOENIX ON THE SWORD: First appearance of Conan in print. 
  "Hither came Conan, the Cimmerian, black-haired, sullen-eyed, sword in hand, a thief, a reaver, a slayer, with gigantic melancholies and gigantic mirth, to tread the jeweled thrones of the Earth under his sandaled feet."
 Taking place at a time when Conan was King of Aquilonia, plot concerns a group of four conspirators plotting to assassinate Conan and take the crown. Notable as the first appearance of the dark wizard Thoth-Amon. 5.0 STARS 

THE FROST GIANT'S DAUGHTER: Arguably the earliest Conan story from a chronological standpoint, the story begin shortly after Conan is the lone survivor of a brutal attack in which over 80 men died. As Howard describes the scene:
  The clangor of the swords had died away, the shouting of the slaughter was hushed; silence lay on the red-stained snow. The bleak pale sun that glittered so blindingly from the ice-fields and the snow-covered plains struck sheens of silver from rent corselet and broken blade, where the dead lay as they had fallen. The nerveless hand yet gripped the broken hilt; helmeted heads back-drawn in the death-throes, tilted red beards and golden beards grimly upward, as if in last invocation to Ymir the frost-giant, god of a warrior-race. 
 Conan meets a mysterious woman who takes him to the far North into the legendary realm of the Frost Giants. 4.5 to 5.0 STARS. 

THE GOD IN THE BOWL: 

  

This superb story is a true highlight. It is a kind of murder mystery in which Conan has broken into a museum to steal a priceless treasure. The story does a create job of expanding on the mythologies of Conan’s world and invoking images and possible connections to H.P Lovecraft’s Cthulhu mythos. It is that "connection" that I think makes the Conan "world building" so incredible. 5.0 TO 6.0 STARS 

THE TOWER OF THE ELEPHANT: 

  

Widely considered one of the single BEST Conan stories, I would certainly agree. This story is unique in that the mythology of Conan is expanded to include some significant science fiction elements (similar to what HP Lovecraft’s “At the Mountain of Madness” did for the Cthulhu mythos). Absolutely sensational story. 6.0 STARS. 

THE SCARLETT CITADEL: 

  

Another superb Conan story. In this famous tale, "King" Conan goes to the aid of a neighboring ruler who tells Conan that a rival King is threatening his border. In fact, the two kings have set a trap for Conan with the aid of Conan's archenemy, the wizard Tsotha-lanti. Conan is imprisoned Tsotha-lanti's dungeon, a place where “evil experiments are conducted on prisoners” and the real meat of the plot is a tour of the dungeon and Conan's attempt to escape. Outstanding story. 5.5 Stars. A notable quote from the story has Conan explaining why his rule is more legitimate than the rule of someone inheriting the throne: 

  You sit on satin and guzzle wine that the people sweat for, and talk of divine rights of sovereignty — BAH! I climbed out of the abyss of naked barbarism to the throne and in that climb I spilt my blood as freely as I spilt that of others. If either of us has the right to rule men, by Crom, it is I.

QUEEN OF THE BLACK COAST: 

  

Conan takes to the seas as a pirate alongside "Belit" the Queen of the Black Coast. A great story and one in which Conan has a true love interest. 4.0 STARS. 

BLACK COLOSSUS: Conan battles another nasty demon-wizard, this one named Thugra Khotan in another superb Conan story. 5.0 STARS.

IRON SHADOWS OF THE MOON: Conan finds himself on a dark island surrounded by cursed soldiers made of iron and has to do a little Barbarian welding on their metal asses. A great Conan story. 4.5 to 5.0 STARS. 

XUTHAL OF THE DUSK: One of the weaker stories in the collection has Conan fleeing with a princess across a desert after surviving a battle and encountering a legendary city and its other-worldly inhabitants. 3.0 STARS. 

THE POOL OF THE BLACK ONE: Another personal favorite of mine. We again see Conan playing pirate and he finds himself along for the ride as crew for a ship heading for a mysterious island that is supposed to contain a legendary treasure. Unfortunately, it also contains some real nasties or as Howard describes it:

  Conan glared frozen with repulsion and shaken with nausea. Himself as cleanly elemental as a timber wolf, he was yet not ignorant of the perverse secrets of rotting civilizations. He had roamed the cities of Zamora, and known the women of Shadizar the Wicked. But he sensed here a cosmic vileness transcending mere human degeneracy--a perverse branch on the tree of Life, developed along lines outside human comprehension. 
 Yeah….those kind of nasties. 5.0 to 5.5 STARS. 

ROGUES IN THE HOUSE: A good story in which Conan is once again caught in the middle of the scheming of two rival princes. One of my least favorite from the collection. 3.5 to 4.0 STARS.

THE VALEOF LOST WOMEN: All I am going to say about this one is that if you take the racism, sexism and homophobia and laugh at it because of its absurdity then you might get some real chuckles out of this one. Otherwise, good ole REH kinda went off the deep end on this one. 2.0 STARS

THE DEVIL IN IRON: Conan finds himself sidewise again with a nasty demon named Khosatral Khel. Khel having recently been awakened recreates his old fortress complete with giant snakes and zombies. Time for a little Conan smack-down. An excellent way to end the collection. 4.5 to 5.0 STARS.