Rating: 3/5

This is a notably dated book.

I refer not to how often overpopulation is mentioned as the world's greatest crisis, nor that there is only one woman, (which is addressed in the text, and the answer is insufficient), nor any writers of color, and not that the fortunes of some of the authors herein have varied greatly in the forty years since this was written.

Instead, what dates it for me is the intense sense of New Journalism about it. The book is clearly collapsible into the parts of the world in which it was written, because the author is going to describe the act of getting to everyone's house and the feelings that he has about wherever it is they live, with each of the writers grouped geographically. The Los Angeles section is the worst, even outside of Vogt going all Scientologist, even with some of the more interesting names, and I have to wonder if, as compared to the paeans to urbanism that the author addresses NYC with, there sort of LA carscape refused him connection. 

It means that the interviews are not interviews, or even character studies, but a sort of series of the way that the author is thinking about his talking to whomever he talked to in context. It is the sort of thing that I dread that people view my own review style as being.

At its best, it allows interesting things, like being able to counterpoint two authors with different views (notably for this Feminism and women in general) and dares to include shit-talk between them, or at least times when two authors are critical of one another. And I do think that it is interesting on some points of fans and fan culture how things are quite similar these days.

But I think that the variation in style, from standard interview to block text to the author more focusing on is own perception of what is going on to whatever that was with Ballard is distracting. It makes the read less accessible rather than more fun, and it means that what you get in each of the passages varies so much as to make each chapter a sort of gamble. It holds to the 3 stars by the merest of fingernails, but even if most of it is not worth the effort there is enough anecdote and personal perspective here of interesting writers to make it justifiable for people interested in these people.