Rating: 3/5

This was a reread for me. The book came up in a conversation recently, and the person I was talking to had not liked it at all. I found myself defending my memory of it, asking, "But didn't you think it was funny? Didn't the narrator strike you as outrageous?"
Those had been my main takeaways from decades ago. This time through, I can see why those aspects of the book stuck--because it does have its humorous moments, and our narrator, history professor Alfred L. Clayton, is in his way outrageous, for sure.
The whole book is his response to the Northern New England Association of American Historians request for his memories/impressions of Gerald Ford's tenure as president, supposedly for inclusion in the association's academic journal, Retrospect. The outrageous part is, given that simple request, the fundamental content he sends back--hundreds of pages of it, very little of which has anything to do with Ford. His "memories" go so far afield in every way, delving into his extramarital affairs in granular/body-fluid detail and spending much, much more time and space on the 15th U.S. President James Buchanan's life and administration than on anything having to do specifically with Ford's.
I do think I must have had more patience when I first read this in the late '80s because this time the Buchanan parts definitely seemed to go on too long, bogging down progressively, especially toward the end, when Clayton's recounting of history comes closer to Lincoln's presidency and the Civil War. And while Clayton's bracketed asides to the Retrospect editors are amusing ("If I've misjudged my assignment, please trim this response to suit your editorial requirements") and even absurdist, they also reveal how misguided and sort of sad our narrator is.
In the end, I don't agree with my friend about the novel's lack of merit, but I do feel I should downgrade my rating a bit simply because it does require a lot of patience with only marginal payoff. If you have a healthy appreciation for absurdity, then there's something here for you, but if you're actually somehow expecting or hoping for actual memories pertaining to the Ford administration, here you're mostly out of luck.

First lines:
"I remember I was sitting among my abandoned children watching television when Nixon resigned. My wife was out on a date, and had asked me to babysit."