Rating: 3/5

Finished this book with mixed feelings. This is certainly a wonderful depiction of the period just prior to partition and people's constantly changing fears and motivations during that time. On the other hand it falls a bit short as a novel. I liked it a lot in many places, but by the time I got to the end, it felt somehow incomplete.

First about the translation - this is Bhisham Sahni's own translation and it is quite good, even if it is unlikely to match the original Hindi version. 

The first half of the book is excellent, particularly in the characterization of the motley collection of characters. That is quite a feat actually, given there are several characters and not enough space can be allocated to anyone in specific. Still, even in just a few pages, he manages to do this and you get a wonderful sense of the person and his/her motivations. He also brings out the distinctions and segregation in class, caste, religion and political opinions beautifully. It gives you a sense of being in that time and place. 

Unfortunately, two things detract from making this book a classic. Firstly, the number of characters make it problematic to close the narrative arc on many of the characters. The author, in fact, does not even try to do that, probably because it is not possible to do so without making the novel meander around for another 100 odd pages. That would have been fine if only he had not built up the characters in the first half of the book. Their sudden disappearance or negligent wrap-up of their narrative arcs leave you feeling shortchanged. 

The second issue is with the structure of the book itself. It suddenly flips from being a keenly observed characterization of individual behaviours and motivations to the happenings and happenstances of a riot. The problem is this shift in structure doesn't happen organically, it seems almost forced making the book read like two distinct halves loosely connected. New characters are suddenly introduced and the old characters disappear only to make their entry again for a footnote like closure. 

That said, Bhisham Sahni is as proficient in his description of events during the riots and post the riots as he is in the characterization in the first half. For instance, the way he brings to life the grotesque mixture of relief, distress, macabre humour and political machinations in the relief camp is searingly heartbreaking. So too, the experience of specific individuals victimized by the rioting itself. The detached way in which he describes these events makes it even more compelling. 

All said, a book worth reading for its honesty, keenly observed understanding of individual failings, fears and ambitions, and its detached birds eye view of how a riot actually unfolds and ends. It is, you could say, two books in one, and could well have been written that way.