Rating: 3/5

Chicago is my city so I loved all the markers of place scattered throughout this collection of newspaper columns from 1921 and 1922. In "Nirvana" a prostitute Hecht meets at Sheridan and Wilson tells him about picking up a john outside the Edgewater Beach Hotel. (According to Wiki, "The hotel served many famous guests, including Marilyn Monroe, Frank Sinatra, Judy Garland, Charlie Chaplin, Bette Davis, Lena Horne, Tallulah Bankhead, Nat King Cole, and U.S. Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Dwight D. Eisenhower. The hotel was known for hosting big bands such as those of Benny Goodman, Tommy Dorsey, Glenn Miller, Artie Shaw, Xavier Cugat, Dan Russo, Ted Fiorito, and Wayne King, which were also broadcast on the hotel's own radio station, a precursor to WGN, with the call letters WEBH. In January 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr. spoke at the hotel at the Conference on Religion and Race.") The hotel was built so perfectly it took three years (1969-1971) to tear it down. ("only the Edgewater Beach Apartments and its gardens survive as a vestige of the resort's elegance.") As I type this I am inside the aforementioned apartments, built as an exact replica of the hotel, but in sunrise pink rather than sunrise yellow. This sense of the past deepens the way we value the present. We situate ourselves in history and feel ourselves part of it, part of the passing parade. 

In my life I've edited several books as I read them to deepen my connection to the material and simplify my rereading when I decide to revisit. I've done this with Roberto Bolano's Antwerp, Raymond Chandler's The Big Sleep, Harold Bloom's Best Poems of the English Language from Chaucer to Frost, Melville's Moby Dick, and Tolstoy's War and Peace. I did it again with 1001 Afternoons in Chicago, because sometimes Ben Hecht's pomposity interfered with my pleasure and because sometimes his judgmental qualities alienated my more modern sensibility. 

This book is still a major achievement. Ben Hecht's snapshots take us all over the city. It's a pleasure to travel with him. And the assistance of the gorgeous illustrations by Herman Rosse helps us situate ourselves even more clearly in Roaring Twenties Chicago.