Rating: 3/5

I had previously finished reading Mike Tyson's autobiography and saw that it was co-written by Larry "Ratso" Sloman who had also co-written two other books I enjoyed by Howard Stern. So I went to Amazon to see what else Sloman had written, or co-written and I found this book by David Blaine as a $2.99 e-book. I didn't really know what to expect when I first started reading it but must say I was pleasantly surprised by this book.

At first I thought this book was going to be the history of magic according to David Blaine, but he also shared how to do a few easy card tricks. He discusses some of the influential magicians and their signature illusion. On some of the illusions he shares how the it is done other ones he does not either because he doesn't want to share or doesn't know.

Once he gets through sharing the history or illusion and side shows Blaine starts sharing his story. The stories surrounding him getting his start in magic by working as a waiter in New York City and doing parties. He discusses just walking up to people at clubs and on the streets to perform tricks. Blaine would constantly practice his card tricks to be solid. His story of getting on television, being offered a show on MTV and turning it down to signing with ABC, is an interesting one. 
 
The book really picks up pace when Blaine shares the behind the scenes information on his television specials including getting ready for both the buried alive and frozen stunts.

I would recommend this book for anyone that is interested in magic and/or illusion. I think with some of the card tricks, that are clearly explained in writing along with illustrations, could be good for a shy child to learn maybe to make friends. There is also a chapter dealing with confidence and shares how some of the great showman have built up their confidence that could help encourage a shy child. 

If your a huge David Blaine fan and are hoping to learn more about the Mysterious Stranger through this book that will not happen. Blaine plays it pretty close to the vest concerning information about his private life. He does share his mother's story of fighting cancer, briefly winning and then ultimately losing the battle. The story never gets to personal beyond that.