Rating: 5/5

“People do not give it credence that a fourteen-year-old girl could leave home and go off in the wintertime to avenge her father’s blood but it did not seem so strange then, although I will say it did not happen every day. I was just fourteen years of age when a coward going by the name of Tom Chaney shot my father down in Fort Smith, Arkansas, and robbed him of his life and his horse and $150 in cash money plus two California gold pieces that he carried in his trouser band…” 
-	Charles Portis, True Grit: A Novel 

There is nothing unfamiliar about the setup to Charles Portis’s True Grit. It is a revenge story, and a simple one. As succinctly set forth in the opening paragraph – quoted above – it is narrated in the first-person by Mattie Ross, whose father is killed by an itinerant worker named Tom Chaney. 

Mattie goes to Fort Smith to settle her father’s affairs, and to hire a U.S. Marshal to follow Chaney into the Indian Territory. Among the many marshals of Judge Isaac Parker’s court, Mattie chooses Reuben “Rooster” Cogburn, an overweight, one-eyed man in his forties, picked solely for his meanness, and the fact that he has “true grit.” 

Learning that Chaney has fallen in with Lucky Ned Pepper and his gang of outlaws, Mattie and Rooster – along with a vain and pompous Texas Ranger called La Boeuf – set out to bring Chaney to justice, or justice to Chaney. 

Literary history brims with vengeance. Some tales – such as The Count of Monte Cristo – can be rather elaborate, even complicated. Not True Grit. This book is resolutely streamlined, unfolding linearly and episodically. 

What sets True Grit apart – what allows it to rise to the top of those titles concerned with balancing the scales – is the idiom in which it is written. This is a novel with a voice, one that is authentic without feeling forced; that is deadpan, while packing an emotional punch; that is funny without resorting solely to slapstick; and that is profound without straining for meaning.

It is a book in which every word is rightly chosen, where every sentence lands square. It is a book – in other words – that perfectly executes what it sets out to do. 

*** 

Everything starts with Mattie Ross. 

The marvel of Portis’s achievement is not merely that he inhabits the mind of a young girl in the late 19th century. It’s that he is able to inhabit the mind of a very particular old woman in the early 20th century, looking back at her experiences as a young girl in the late 19th century. 

To read True Grit is to believe Mattie’s account to be a contemporaneous document. Though decidedly not historical fiction – despite the presence of real-life personages, such as Judge Parker – there is a natural verisimilitude that gives this a ring of truth. Mattie has an easy grasp of contemporary manners, customs, technology, weaponry, and even negotiable instruments. True Grit could almost have been a series of colorful diary entries. 

As a protagonist, Portis’s Mattie is an absolute hoot, a sharp tongued minor force of nature. This is critical, because we spend every single page with her. 

True Grit is not a character study or a psychological excavation. While Mattie is determined to avenge her father’s death, her motivation is not plumbed at length. For instance, there is never a maudlin scene in which she dwells at length upon the relationship sundered by Tom Chaney. 

Driven not by emotion, Mattie views the world through a stark prism that is heavily informed by her Presbyterianism. She believes in rules, in ethics, and in laws. As Chaney broke the law, he must be punished. In a long-running gag that also serves as a character tell, Mattie refers often to J. Noble Daggett, her family’s attorney, sometimes appealing to his authority, while elsewhere offering his services to the corrupt men she meets. 

Early in the novel, Mattie watches three men hanged in Fort Smith. The grotesqueness of the executions clearly trouble her, yet she accepts it as the inevitable consequences of the choices they made: “You must pay for everything in this world one way or another. There is nothing free except the Grace of God.” 

*** 

Like Mattie, her companions are memorable. 

Rooster is a fascinating figure, a cold-hearted killer with a reprehensible past who comes to us in the guise of a drunken old fat man bordering on the buffoonish. 

When Mattie first meets him, it is at a trial in which Rooster is being cross-examined as to his reputation for failing to bring his quarry back alive. Later, in talking with Mattie, we will learn that Rooster rode with William Quantrill during the Civil War, participating in the infamous sack of Lawrence, Kansas. In keeping with Mattie’s just-the-facts presentation – “Here is what happened” is an oft-repeated phrase – we are left on our own to decide what to make of Cogburn, and his checkered background. 

The third member of the triumvirate, La Boeuf, is not as fully-realized as Mattie and Rooster, but is nonetheless unforgettable. He exists mainly as a foil for Rooster, his vanity, pride, and Texan-ness proving an excellent counterpoint to the dissolute U.S. Marshal. Still, by the end, La Boeuf has proven that he belongs, while also demonstrating the fundamental soundness of character triangles in drama. 

*** 

True Grit is not what I would classify as an epic. Unlike Alan LeMay’s The Searchers – another American West-set revenger – it does not unfold over the course of years, but within a much more limited span. Instead of a long, drawn-out chase, events occur rather quickly once Mattie, Rooster, and La Boeuf get out of Fort Smith.

Keeping with Mattie’s nature, she focuses on the big moments, so that True Grit coheres around a handful of major set pieces, each one delivered with precision. There are gunfights, obviously, and Mattie’s infamous encounter with a pit in the mountains. But there are also quirkier scenes, including a hilariously drawn-out sequence in which Mattie negotiates for the resale of a string of ponies purchased by her late father. 

*** 

True Grit has been turned into two well-received films, and a sequel. The reason, of course, is that Portis’s classic is inherently cinematic. The three leads play off each other beautifully, the supporting actors (including the benighted, pathetic Tom Chaney) are colorful, the plot mechanics are seamless, and the dialogue sings. 

Putting True Grit on the screen is a no-brainer. It is also – regardless of these films’ qualities – unnecessary, because the book comes alive in your mind as you read it. 

*** 

The American West has had an outsized effect on American identity, especially with regard to notions of individuality, personal freedoms, and the role of government. In reality, the “winning” of the West was an exceedingly rough and brutal period marked by violence, betrayal, and greed. The moral ambiguities of this conquest are difficult to rationalize. Seemingly in response, writers and filmmakers have coated “the Old West” in a lacquer of myth and legend. 

In the approximately 130 years since the United States Census Bureau announced the closing of the American frontier, popular culture has been in a dialogue with itself over what it meant to secure the continent. The original penny westerns told of a grand adventure. The simple, dichotomous westerns of the 1940s and 1950s gave us good guys and bad guys, though often with a head-scratching definition of what constituted good and bad. Post-Vietnam we got the ultra-violent revisionist western. Today, we are seeing revisions to the revisionists. 

The funny thing about True Grit is that it does not really seem part of this conversation at all. Unlike Blood Meridian or Lonesome Dove, Portis makes no effort to comment on the dispossession of the Indian tribes, the governmental giveaways to corrupt corporations, or the land wars between farmers and ranchers. Mattie is not interested in these things. For her, it is all personal. 

But this narrowness of scope is a feature, not a bug. Portis is content to deliver a damn good yarn. Though this has arguably kept True Grit from being considered a contender for the elusive crown of the “Great American Novel,” it is more than enough.