Rating: 2/5

I wanted to love this novel so much and thus I set myself up for failure. I’ll try to adequately summarize my thoughts, however I feel a little scatterbrained. It’s taken me a long time to get through this novel and thus not everything is fresh in my mind. I won’t be tagging any spoilers so if you still haven’t read this, haven’t watched the movie or live under rock then I advise you to stay clear of my review. 

2.5ish/5

  Part One
 
If I had to rate the first part of this novel I would have given it no higher than one star. It’s so dreadful to read through multiple “moral lessons” from a woman that often time teaches her daughters to humble themselves for men. I understand that this is a classic and thus the values and morals have changed, however this is a novel that is still praised for the lessons it is teaching; these lessons are mostly boring and arise out of natural circumstances. 

I don’t know about you but my upbringing did not result in a lecture after everything I did. I learned things on my own and it felt that the little women were often time coddled. It’s no wonder I severely despise the woman Meg and Jo had grown into.

Additionally, Mr. March might be the second worst character. Both the Marches are incredibly one dimensional. His only importance to the story was when he was away at war and once he returned he served no purpose. 

Meg’s love story with Brooke makes my blood boil. Within five minutes Meg goes from declining his proposal to declaring her love for him to defy Aunt March. There exists no romance or chemistry between them and she’s still the same immature child she was five minutes ago. This concludes the first part and leads us to 

  Part Two
 
I’m not a particular fan of the style of writing and some chapters read more easily than others. There are the select few chapters that were phenomenally written. I wish I could pluck these out bind them in their own novel and reread this instead. The chapters are: Literary Lessons, Heartache, Beth’s Secret, Lazy Laurence, and The Valley of the Shadow.

First and foremost, the Jo/Laurie/Amy debate shouldn’t exist in my opinion. Laurie proposed at the wrong time, had he waited until both him and Jo were older I think she would have said yes, regardless of whether he got his life together like Amy demanded him to. Both Laurie and Jo were still childish and despite her young age Amy was able to put Laurie in shape to be the respectable gentleman his grandfather wanted him to be. 

What we should all be focusing on is Beth’s death. I don’t think it was avoidable and it plays a pivotal part in the story. It certainly made me sad but the strongest emotion this chapter evoked from me was anger. 

Why would Beth doom Jo by making her promise to stay with their parents upon her death?

From page one Jo has been waiting for an opportunity to travel and gain experiences and instead Jo is forced to take Beth's place. Had Beth lived, I believe she would have married a simple man like Mr. March and continued taking care of her parents and family nearby. Because of her death, Beth needed someone to fill that place and thus came in Jo. This PISSED ME THE FUCK OFF. As soon as Jo makes that promise any life she had planned vanished and with that she met crusty ass fucking Professor Bhaer and crossed herself off my list of characters I love. 

I don’t think I will ever hate a character as much as Bhaer This man is so condescending and self centered. He’s as one dimensional as Mr. March (we’re going full circle here). HE LITERALLY READ A POEM ABOUT THE LITTLE WOMEN, let me repeat that, THE LITTLE WOMEN, and pulled out a sentence about love and said “diz here iz about me professorine” LIKE SHUT THE FUCK UP!!!!

Which brings me to the fucking end. Of course Amy is doomed with a sick child because she named her kid after Beth. Jo I couldn’t give a fuck about after she gave a second thought to a crusty old man. Meg I hated from the first page. Doesn’t even matter if they mention Beth because Jo took her place.

The more I think about this novel, the more I think about how much I hate it and how it doesn’t make up for the 5 chapters I enjoyed out of 47. Had I read this novel as a child and grown up with it, maybe I would have liked it (very weak maybe), but I think a piece of literature should be judged despite what age you read it at and this just didn’t do it for me. 

Thank god for Greta Gerwig and being able to make a phenomenal movie out of such a mediocre novel. 

---
Yes I just watched the 2019 film adaptation for the first time and I am emotional. 

No, I will not be taking questions at this time. Thank you.