Rating: 5/5

The tempest of this Shakespeare play’s title – the one that drives a sailing ship onto the shores of an uncharted Mediterranean island – has nothing to do with warming ocean waters, a low-pressure tropical area, or some sort of wind shear. Rather, this storm is the product of an aggrieved wizard’s magic; and The Tempest, William Shakespeare’s last completed play, shows the Bard applying his artistry to a new kind of drama - even as he, perhaps, looks ahead to the conclusion of his own career.

By the time Shakespeare wrote The Tempest, much had changed in his life, and in the life of his theatre company. The death in 1603 of Queen Elizabeth I, and the accession to power of her successor King James I, meant that Shakespeare’s acting company, once the Lord Chamberlain’s Men, was now the King’s Men. That change meant, in turn, that Shakespeare and his colleagues had more money and more resources with which to present their theatrical productions. Envision the excitement in contemporary Hollywood when a film producer says, “Cost is no object here, spend what you need to spend,” and you can imagine how happy Shakespeare and his colleagues were with these welcome changes.

It was also a time when audiences were seeking a new kind of drama. In Elizabeth’s time, expectations for playgoing were pretty straightforward: if you went to see a play titled The Comedy of Errors, or The Tragedy of Hamlet, or The History of King Henry V, you pretty much knew what kind of play you were going to see, and you could anticipate the dramatic conventions that your theatre experience would entail – just the way the moviegoer of today knows much of what to expect, in terms of cinematic conventions, when they are choosing whether to watch Alien: Romulus, or Horizon: An American Saga, or Top Gun: Maverick, or Anyone but You.

By 1611, however, audience expectations had changed. Theatre audiences no longer wanted plays that could so easily be pigeon-holed into one genre or another; rather, they wanted something of a mash-up that might combine elements of comedy and tragedy, work in historical allusions, and set it all in some sort of dreamy, otherworldly setting. I’ve seen these plays called “tragicomedies,” but I prefer the term “romances” – and of the romances Shakespeare wrote toward the end of his career, The Tempest is the best-known, the most highly regarded, and often the most controversial. So, as the sprite Ariel says at one point, “Come unto these yellow sands” of a mysterious island, and experience William Shakespeare’s The Tempest.

The Tempest begins in medias res with, unsurprisingly, a tempest – a fierce Mediterranean sea storm that overwhelms a sailing ship on its way from Tunis back to Italy. We learn little about the ship or its passengers until Act I, scene ii, when we travel into “the dark backward and abysm of time” with the magician Prospero and his daughter Miranda, two residents of the desert island that the ship has been driven onto.

From Prospero, we then learn much regarding this ship – and about why Prospero used his magical powers to have it driven onto his island. It turns out that the ship’s manifest includes Alonso, King of Naples, who was an enemy of Prospero back when Prospero was Duke of Milan. Prospero’s brother Antonio – one of the last of a long line of bad Shakespearean brothers that includes the title character from Richard III, Duke Frederick and Oliver de Boys from As You Like It, and Edmund from King Lear – conspired with King Alonso to bring about the overthrow of Prospero, and their scheme succeeded: Prospero and Miranda were taken out of Milan and cast adrift in a leaky vessel, through which they reached the island.

Yet Prospero is not altogether helpless in this matter. He tells Miranda that, out of all the Milanese advisers, one, an older man named Gonzalo, remained loyal: he could not openly oppose Antonio’s coup d’état, but, Prospero says, “Knowing I loved my books, he furnished me/From mine own library with volumes that/I prize above my dukedom.” Gonzalo has already made a positive impression upon the reader as a man of even temper; during the shipwreck, when everyone around him seemed to be panicking, Gonzalo remained calm, saying of the ship’s singularly rude and profane boatswain that “Methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him; his complexion is perfect gallows.” (In other words, "We have reason to hope that we won't drown in this storm, because this man is clearly destined to die by hanging.") Now, Gonzalo emerges as a singularly important benefactor to Prospero.

The reason is that Prospero’s books are not just a fine all-purpose library with which to while away one’s island exile as best one may: they are books of magical spells, and Prospero has used one of those spells to force this ship full of his enemies onto his island, to do as he pleases with them.

And Prospero and Miranda are not alone on their little island; there are two other inhabitants, both of whom, with Prospero’s magic, take the play out of the realm of the realistic. The first, Ariel, is an “airy spirit” whom Prospero freed from tormenting imprisonment by the witch Sycorax, who once ruled the island; since then, Ariel has served Prospero, though he longs for his freedom. 

The other inhabitant of the island is Sycorax’s son Caliban, described in the list of dramatis personae as “a savage and deformed slave.” Caliban serves Prospero, but is resentful of his bondage, stating that “This island’s mine by Sycorax, my mother,/Which thou tak’st from me.” In turn, Prospero insists that he treated Caliban “with humane care…till thou didst seek to violate/The honour of my child.” Caliban gleefully acknowledges the truth of Prospero’s charge that Caliban tried to rape Miranda: “O ho, O ho! Would’t had been done!/Thou didst prevent me. I had peopled else/This isle with Calibans.” Prospero insists that he has brought Caliban the gifts of language and civilization, but Caliban is unmoved: “You taught me language, and my profit on’t/Is, I know how to curse.”

Ferdinand, the young son of King Alonso, has been separated from the rest of the grounded ship’s company. Ariel draws Ferdinand toward Prospero’s and Miranda’s home on the island, on the way regaling Ferdinand with false information regarding the supposed drowning of his father, the very-much-alive King Alonso:

Full fathom five thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes;
Nothing of him that doth fade
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange. [I.ii.482-90]

The application of such rich figurative and poetic language to such grim subject matter – and in the context of a good young man being tormented with false visions of a beloved father’s death – is one of the most striking moments in all of Shakespeare’s oeuvre.

Guided forward by Ariel, Ferdinand encounters Miranda, and the two fall in love at first sight. When Prospero pretends to find Ferdinand untrustworthy, Miranda objects, saying that she finds Ferdinand attractive, and adding that “There’s nothing ill can dwell in such a temple./If the ill spirit have so fair a house,/Good things will strive to dwell within’t.” Prospero approves of the prospective match between his daughter and Ferdinand – indeed, he has arranged it – but he still plans to impose tests and obstacles for the young couple, to make sure that their love will be true and lasting.

Meanwhile, in another part of the island, various members of the shipwrecked party are revealing their character – or lack thereof. Gonzalo, with kind intent, continues trying to comfort King Alonso – who is convinced that his son Ferdinand is dead, just as Ferdinand is convinced that his father Alonso is dead; but Alonso’s brother Sebastian sarcastically makes fun of Gonzalo’s efforts, noting that King Alonso “receives comfort like cold porridge.”

Yet Sebastian – another bad Shakespearean brother – has villainous qualities that go beyond sarcasm and lack of compassion. He responds enthusiastically to Antonio’s suggestion that “What’s past is prologue” – or, in other words, that the marriage of King Alonso’s daughter Claribel to a Tunisian prince, combined with the (supposed) death of Alonso’s son Ferdinand, opens up the chance for Antonio and Sebastian to kill Alonso and bestow the Neapolitan throne upon Sebastian. When Sebastian expresses doubt over whether the Neapolitan court will accept Sebastian as King of Naples, Antonio assures him that “They’ll take suggestion as a cat laps milk.” [II.i.328]

As is so often the case in Shakespearean comedies, intricate political intrigues among the “noble” characters are complemented, in The Tempest, by low-comedy doings among the “common” characters. Trinculo, jester to King Alonso, encounters Caliban when he crawls into Caliban’s bed to avoid a storm, reflecting that “Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows.” Stephano, who is King Alonso’s perpetually drunken butler, meets up with the two. Caliban offers his allegiance to Stephano as his new lord, and Stephano accepts Caliban’s homage, ordering the insult-minded Trinculo to “Keep a good tongue in your head.” Caliban assures Stephano and Trinculo that he knows the island well – “Be not afeared. The isle is full of noises,/Sounds, and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not” – and the three begin crafting a plot to kill Prospero and give lordship of the island to Stephano!

Yea, verily, one murder plot doth tread upon another’s heels, so fast they follow.

And I can imagine how this story might have ended if Shakespeare has been writing it a few years earlier – during the time when the Bard was composing his “Big Four” tragedies: Hamlet, King Lear, Macbeth, and Othello. It might have gone something like this: Prospero would get revenge against his treacherous brother Antonio, to be sure, and the other plotters of murder would get their comeuppance as well; but one killing would lead to others. Revenge would consume the innocent as well as the guilty, with Ferdinand and Miranda dying before their time, the promise of their love unfulfilled. Prospero likewise would die, with time for a moving deathbed speech about how the revenge he once sought had rebounded upon him and those he loved. And at play’s end, only a few of the major characters would be left – good old Gonzalo, for example, and possibly a reformed and repentant King Alonso – to offer some closing remarks on the inscrutable ways of fate and the vanity of human wishes.

But The Tempest is a tragicomedy, a romance, not a tragedy – and therefore things don’t end that way at all. The playgoer or reader always has a decided sense that Prospero is in control of everything, orchestrating the flow of events. And the suggestion, by many critics, that Shakespeare, through Prospero, may be consciously bidding farewell to his theatrical career might be understandable when one considers what Prospero says to Ferdinand after bringing a magical end to an otherworldly wedding masque that he had conjured in honour of Miranda and Ferdinand’s upcoming marriage:

Our revels now are ended. These our actors,
As I foretold you, were all spirits and
Are melted into air, into thin air;
And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself, 
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a rack behind.

Cut! Master Shakespeare might be saying. That’s a wrap!

Prospero has his enemies in his power. And just when he could use his magic to destroy them all, Ariel invokes their suffering, and particularly the weeping of the loyal Gonzalo, and suggests that “if you now beheld them, your affections/Would become tender.” Moved by this show of compassion from a non-human spirit, Prospero decides to show mercy, saying that “Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick,/Yet with my nobler reason ‘gainst my fury/Do I take part. The rarer action is/In virtue than in vengeance.” Like a few characters in Shakespearean drama – Fortinbras in Hamlet, for example – Prospero consciously chooses not to take revenge; and the happy elements of the play’s resolution, for Prospero himself and for others, flow logically from that ethical choice.

Prospero, invoking “Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes and groves” [V.i.39], talks of all the wonders he has worked with his knowledge of magic, but then adds that “this rough magic/I here abjure”. Not content with merely forswearing any further working of magic, Prospero pledges that “I’ll break my staff,/Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,/And deeper than did ever plummet sound/I’ll drown my book.” Once again, it is a passage that some readers have seen as representing Shakespeare bidding a conscious farewell to his art. Perhaps Shakespeare, who died about five years after completing The Tempest, is also reflecting on his own mortality, as when Prospero states that “We are such stuff/As dreams are made on, and our little life/Is rounded with a sleep.” [IV.i.175-77]

Whatever the truth behind such surmises might be, it is humorous to see how Miranda responds when she sees all the other young men from the now-restored ship. Since Ferdinand is the first, and up till now, the only young man she has ever seen in her life, she has had no basis for comparison. Now, however, she has a great many young men to compare among, and she expresses her feelings thus: “How many goodly creatures are there here!/How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world/That has such people in’t!” One would certainly understand if Ferdinand suddenly felt just a bit jealous at Miranda’s sudden exclamation of enthusiasm for the good looks of young men generally.

The Tempest is a Shakespeare play that is of particular interest to me because, among other things, it is Shakespeare’s most American play. Ariel’s mention of “The still-vexed Bermoothes” [i.e., Bermudas], reminds the reader of an important historical antecedent for this play: in 1609, a ship called the Sea Venture, bound from England for the Jamestown colony, was beset by a hurricane and driven on shore at Bermuda. Sailors’ superstitions held that the Bermuda islands were a hellish place, inhabited by devils; Ferdinand’s cry, upon abandoning ship, that “Hell is empty,/And all the devils are here!” may be a reference to those nautical legends of demon-infested islands. How happy the Sea Venture crew were to find that these “devils’ islands” were actually an earthly paradise, where they could refresh themselves, repair their ship, and eventually sail on to Jamestown.

Another reason why The Tempest draws particular attention is because of the character of Caliban. As an indigenous character enslaved by European colonizers, Caliban, as a presence in the play, evokes some very ugly history. Early productions of the play depicted Caliban as a semi-human creature, often with features like a fish - perhaps because of Trinculo's exclamation, upon first encountering Caliban, of "What have we here? A man or a fish? A fish: he smells like a fish; a very ancient and fishlike smell....A strange fish!" Such depictions of Caliban, as a semi-human creature like the monsters of Greek mythology, could be said to buy into Prospero’s description of Caliban as “A devil, a born devil, on whose nature/Nurture can never stick”. More recent productions and adaptations of The Tempest, by contrast, have taken a more nuanced approach.

The Tempest has continued to draw forth a range of fascinating responses: the science-fiction film Forbidden Planet (1956), which moves the Tempest scenario to a distant planet, with a robot Ariel and a Calibanic “monster from the id” generated by the technology of an extinct alien race; Martinican playwright Aime Cesaire’s 1969 play Une Tempête (A Tempest), which sets the action of The Tempest in the Caribbean, with a white colonialist Prospero, a mixed-race Ariel, and an enslaved black Caliban; Paul Mazursky’s 1982 film Tempest, whose Prospero is an architect who responds to a crisis of identity by fleeing New York City for a Greek island; Peter Greenaway’s 1991 film Prospero’s Books, a wildly avant-garde interpretation of Shakespeare’s play; and Julie Taymor’s 2010 film The Tempest, which explores gender issues in a particularly creative way by making Prospero a woman wizard, Prospera, as played by Helen Mirren.

The extraordinary range of modern responses to this play show how, even more than most Shakespearean plays, it speaks to the problems and anxieties of contemporary times. The storm of responses stirred up by William Shakespeare’s The Tempest seems likely to rage on for the foreseeable future.