Rating: 5/5

"A mind lively and at ease, can do with seeing nothing,"
“Prejudiced! I am not prejudiced.”

There aren't that many things out there, giving one a most fulfilling feeling like reading one of Jane Austen novels. While inheriting author's most beautiful style of writing, each of her works appears to have its own 'uniqueness', offering the reader a wonderful reading experience each time. Emma is no exception to this rule, easily making it to my all-time-favorite-fiction. I'll admit I was a bit apprehensive based on some of the reviews, but for me, everything was amazing. Those very very long sentences are quite amazing one's gotten used to!

“What is passable in youth is detestable in later age”
"The older a person grows, Harriet, the more important it is that their manners should not be bad;"

Emma is my fifth Austen novel (with P&amp;P, S&amp;S, Persuasion, Northanger Abbey being first four) and what struck me from start was how contrasting Emma Woodhouse was to author's typical heroines. Characters like Elinor Dashwood, Anne Elliot, Elizabeth Bennett all shared a certain amount of sensibility and virtue, making them morally superior to most secondary characters. But in Emma, the protagonist does not share the same set of characteristics. Rather, Jane Fairfax is the character here who appeared to have share some those traits - at least to a degree. On the other hand, from the set of male characters, Mr. Knightley inherits all those qualities/ morals, even surpassing the main male characters of other Austen books.

"You might not see one in a hundred with gentleman so plainly written as in Mr. Knightley."
“Oh! you would rather talk of her person than her mind, would you? Very well; I shall not attempt to deny Emma’s being pretty.”

Main plot of the story is revolving around Emma's perception of the events around her, and the way she is interpreting everything without adhering to council of others. This continues on for the majority of story, while highlighting her lack of rationality and it's effects on others. Despite the narrative helping the reader empathize with at times, it was difficult to justify most her actions. I think it's natural for the reader to develop a little dislike toward her during first two volumes. However, there was no lack of humor, and no single part felt boring.

“This man is almost too gallant to be in love,”
"My dear sir, if there is one thing my mother loves better than another, it is pork"

Even with the book being considerably longer than most Austen's other books, the flow of the book was amazing: it was immersive, entertaining and had sufficient amount of plot-twists (though somewhat apparent at times). And I loved the large number of vivid, and entertaining secondary characters. It was a lot of fun reading and understanding each one's disposition, which were well explained by the author. Especially, Mr. Woodhouse, a unique and amusing character who became one of my favorites along with other supporting characters such as Miss Bates, Harriet Smith complimented the plot beautifully.

"No, Emma, your amiable young man can be amiable only in French, not in English. He may be very ‘amiable,’ have very good manners, and be very agreeable; but he can have no English delicacy towards the feelings of other people: nothing really amiable about him.”

As I said before, the somewhat 'shallow' traits of Emma sets this book apart from other books of the Author. But, the concluding chapters did wrap everything neatly, doing justice to all the characters. And Finally, for me, Emma has become by third favorite Austen novel, only falling behind P&amp;P and Persuasion, but not that behind. Will definitely read again.

"One half of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the other.”
"You must be the best judge of your own happiness."
“There is one thing, Emma, which a man can always do, if he chuses, and that is, his duty; not by manoeuvring and finessing, but by vigour and resolution."