Rating: 4/5

Sultana's Dream is a short story written by a pioneer of Women's Liberation in South Asia, Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain (commonly known as Begum Rokeya). This story was first published in a Madras Magazine back in 1905. Reading this story reminded me a bit of Margaret Atwood's 'The Handmaid's Tale', just because of how both authors took a few feminist ideas and showed the readers what it would be like to live in a world where these ideas are implemented. The difference here is Atwood depicted a gloomy, regressive world where women are treated horribly, whereas Rokeya chose the opposite. In her world - Ladyland - the men are confined to the Zenana (or rather a mardana) . A feminist queen rules their world and ensures that all girls are educated. The women are intelligent and efficient. There are air cars, water balloons to harness rain water continuously and solar powered homes, all invented by the women. It's a though provoking, witty and simple story, whose value lies in the fact that it was written over 100 years ago by a forward thinking, liberal, feminist woman.

The book also contains a small collection of essays titles 'The Secluded Ones', also written by Begum Rokeya, whose publication began in 1929 in the Monthly Mohammadi as a series of vignettes documenting women's experiences of purdah. These essays shine a light on the practice of purdah for women, both by Hindu &amp; Muslim communities back in the day. Again, the author's courage to speak up on these subjects, especially during a time when women were expected to confine to the norms and also in a society that looks down upon anyone who stands up against the crowd, is commendable. 

The rest of the book has writings of Roshan Jahan (Cofounder and former president of Women for Women, a research and study group in Bangladesh) and Hanna Papanek (an adjunct professor in the Department of Anthropology, Boston University). Jahan introduces the readers to 'Sultana's Dream' and 'The Secluded Ones'. Papanek wrote the afterword, where she goes into more details about Begum Rokeya's feminist thoughts. She also delves deeper into the Purdah system as it applies to South Asian communities and the various motivations (none of which were in the best interests of the women) that put this system in place and still keeps it going after all these years. It is a call to women to wake up and stand up for themselves because if we don't look after our own interests, no one else will. If Begum Rokeya was able to do this a hundred years ago, we can all certainly figure out how to stand up for ourselves in our own ways in our own daily lives, can't we?