Rating: 5/5

“But I don’t admit that my failure proved my view to be a wrong one, or that my success would have made it a right one; though that’s how we appraise such attempts nowadays—I mean, not by their essential soundness, but by their accidental outcomes.”

This is a true tragedy, but didn’t feel sad, exactly. Instead, the tragic events happen as a matter of course. There was a feeling of predestination in the prose, from the very beginning of the story. I found myself mumbling while reading, like multiple Star Wars characters, “I have a bad feeling about this.”

This is my first time reading Hardy, and while it was certainly full of expected woe, I enjoyed his writing style immensely, and eagerly turned the pages all the way to the end. 

All of the characters in this novel can be exasperating, and it is interesting to compare them and think about who is most to blame. But if you go deeper, you find a multitude of themes within these pages. I’ll mention two that I appreciated most, one active (where the characters have some control) and one passive (where they don’t). 

The active theme is about the risk of allowing dreams to die. This is the story of two dreamers with lofty, unconventional ideas. Jude believes he can be a self-taught scholar, and make his way from poverty to study in the hallowed halls of his beloved Christminster. Sue dreams of living the fulfillment of her ancient, possibly pagan beliefs, which she favors to those that are predominate in her own time.

Jude works terribly hard as a boy, all on his own, to make himself into his dream. While fulfilling his job driving a cart, he teaches himself Greek and Latin by strapping a classic text to the cart and holding open a dictionary in his lap, working it all out as he drove. What can go wrong for someone with such a desire to learn? Alas, the tragedy comes when he allows life to steer him off course, and is intimidated into giving up his goals.

Sue is confusing, because she is a free-thinking woman at a time when she was not allowed to be, which creates all kinds of conflict—within and around her. She if full of feelings and ideas, but instead of putting these ideas toward an ambition of her own, she does what powerless people sometimes do—project them onto someone else (which in this story, doesn’t go well for any of the someone else’s).

“But I did want and long to ennoble some man to high aims; and when I saw you, and knew you wanted to be my comrade, I – shall I confess it? – thought that man might be you.”

The second theme, one the characters have less control over, is how societies rebuke can shake the truly sensitive soul, especially when that soul has unconventional views.

Both Jude and Sue suffer great tragedy, because they cannot bear the repercussions of their ideals. 

“If people are at all peculiar in character they have to suffer from the very rules that produce comfort in others!”

Is this the fault of the character or the fault of society? We still see sensitive, idealistic people suffering the wrath of the mainstream. Some strong characters break through anyway, but how many of the sensitive ones would you find littered by the side of that road who have given up, or worse?

Tragedy indeed.

“'It is wrong and wicked of me, I suppose! I am very sorry. But it is not I altogether that am to blame!’
'Who is then. Am I?’ 
‘No—I don’t know! The universe, I suppose—things in general, because they are so horrid and cruel!’”