Rating: 5/5

Either we live by accident and die by accident, or we live by plan and die by plan.
 The Bridge of San Luis Rey ~~~  Thornton Wilder

   The Bridge of San Luis Rey
 has been on my radar for years. Thanks to my friend, Alan, for giving me the kick I needed to return to Wilder.

The themes of 
   The Bridge of San Luis Rey
 intrigued me since my father passed away several weeks ago.

I first read 
   Thornton Wilder
 in my early teens. At 14 I was working my way thru the classics of the American stage. As part of that reading project, I read Wilder’s  The Skin of Our Teeth, &amp; Our Town. I’ve read both many times thru the years. They are among the greatest plays ever written.

When I entered this universe, I knew very little about this book other than it was written by Wilder ~~ a big draw for me ~~ and Wilder won his first Pulitzer Prize for this ~~ yes, he has more than one.

The story is deceptively simple. 
   The Bridge of San Luis Rey
 is a collection of interwoven stories of five people who died while crossing an incredibly tall Peruvian bridge. Plagued with the seemingly unanswerable question of whether or not these individuals were destined to die, Brother Juniper makes it his mission to learn everything he possibly can about their lives. Rooted in the themes of love, life, death, fate, and art, this novel is more than simply an attempt to answer Brother Juniper’s inquiry; rather, it ponders the very existence of the question in the first place.

Jonathan Yardley said of 
   The Bridge of San Luis Rey
, it 
  deals in universals
. I agree; here, we learn of Wilder's philosophical views. I can't help but think World War I heavily influenced Wilder's views on life and death and love as well as 
   The Bridge of San Luis Rey
.

As I said earlier, I was intrigued by the concept of this novel due to my father's recent death ~~ I view death differently these days ~~ Wilder asks is it possible to reconstruct the lives of those destroyed by tragedy and discover a reason for their deaths? It’s the sort of question that plagues anyone who has lost a loved one. Why did it happen? Was there some sort of reason or purpose? Because death is something that feels so senseless when you’re faced with it. It’s a question that people have sought answers for though religion, and philosophy for thousands of years.

Brother Juniper goes about the question in an entirely different way. He looks at this tragedy thru the eyes of a scientist ~~ science and religion ~~ they fit hand in hand for Brother Juniper. He believes that he can objectively prove and explain God and tragedy, creating a formula of sorts to describe the indescribable.

This is the setup of 
   The Bridge of San Luis Rey
. Soon, Wilder describes the lives of the five victims of the bridge collapse. Each is viewed with their own flaws and desires, sorrows and joys. These lives are filled of the same mixed up confusion of emotions and events and actions that we have all experienced. There is nothing neat or tidy about the lives or deaths of any of these characters. These deaths seem senseless and confusing. Some characters have just turned a page and are trying to start anew ~~ others continue down a path of loss and sorrow.

While each of the dead has their own separate and distinct story, they are also all part of a larger story. Their lives intertwine and interact ~~ each have, in some small way, an effect on the others’ lives. During the characters' stories, we see the other victims begin to play a role in each other's lives ~~ I wouldn't be surprised if Wilder was influenced by Hinduism.

What Wilder suggests to us instead is that death is the beginning rather than the end. This too is the message of Our Town. It is the way in which the survivors begin to come together to mourn and attempt to move on from death that concludes the novel. And it is here that Wilder gets at the root of tragedy and loss. It is only the beginning of the story for the survivors. It is the way in which people attempt to cope with loss and death and find themselves and their lives in the aftermath ~~ yes, death is the beginning rather than the end.

I understand this from having recently mourned the loss of my father. It begins with death as we question 
  Why?
 ~~ we search for answers in the midst of loss. Then we move on to a remembrance of those lost to us. Each of the characters' chapters is a sort of eulogy for the deceased ~~ an in the end, the survivors attempt to find some comfort and means of living their lives in the new reality of loss.

So why should you read 
   The Bridge of San Luis Rey
? It’s a beautifully written story that slowly unfolds as you learn more about these characters. 
   The Bridge of San Luis Rey
 is filled with humor, sorrow, joy, and every emotion in between, and Wilder, as always, write a beautiful portrait of humanity through each of his characters.