Rating: 3/5

In these lectures, Feynman is very good at explaining some basic concepts for those fairly new to physics. For field theory, he uses the analogy of waves in a pool to show how motion in one place affects motion in a distant place. He says that matter goes straight unless acted upon by an external force, but we don't know why; that the earth is pulled toward the sun, as opposed to the earth moving around the sun; and that atoms are always in motion ("jigglings and wigglings of atoms") and that such movement increases with the application of heat. 

Feynman stimulates some interesting issues and questions. Under the principle of conservation of energy, the overall amount of energy remains constant; only re-arrangement of energy/atoms occurs. Feynman states that in joining together, atoms "like certain particular partners, certain particular directions, and so on." In this way he explains why atom combinations (attraction) take particular forms and resist being something other than such forms. This 'integrity' at the quantum level suggests a 'social' context where atoms interact with each other for particular 'reasons' and that an 'inner character' lies at the heart of quantum physics, as opposed to randomness. Feynman also writes that atoms "want" and that "It is the job of physics to analyze why each one wants what it wants." "Want" is an interesting choice of words. He defines inertia by saying that "If something is moving, with nothing touching it and completely undisturbed, it will go on forever, coasting at a uniform speed in a straight line. (Why does it keep on coasting? We do not know, but that is the way it is.)" Does the reference to "coasting" mean that a body is passively carried along in space? If so, carried by what, and what is space? 

Feynman says we don't really know what energy is, but does it involve a 'power' differential where matter and energy move to states of equilibrium? If this is so, then is this one way that gravity (differences in mass and distance) might have a parallel at the quantum level (weight of atoms as they combine or recombine)? Feynman writes that "all planets push and pull each other." If "pull" is attraction of bodies to each other, it's not clear what push means. For that matter, it's also not clear how "push and pull" relate to Einstein's spacetime curvature (oddly, Feynman discusses Einstein's relativity only briefly). Regarding push-pull (attraction-resistance) Feynman makes some suggestive comments when he states that "the force of electricity between two charged objects looks just like the law of gravitation...." In describing the earth's movement around the sun, Feynman says that the earth impinges "on more particles which are coming from its forward side than from its hind side." Does this mean that the earth "bunches up space" ("particles") as it moves through its orbit and is this related to the earth's gravity? Elsewhere, Feynman states that "the earth can be understood to be round merely because everything attracts everything else and so it has attracted itself together as far as it can!" Gravity is not some (mystical) force at the center of the earth, but a pulling of matter and energy inward, against itself, toward the center. 

While this is all fun stuff to think about, these Feynman lectures do not enlighten much a lay person's understanding of the uncertainty principle, annhilation and antimatter, and absolute time. His last lecture on quantum behavior is particularly difficult. Feynman is at his best discussing the role of doubt and uncertainty in science. When he differs with the theories of the past or of his contemporaries, he seems respectful enough, saying that they are not wrong, but "a little wrong" or "incomplete." His footnote at the bottom of p. 59 directly challenges those who say wonder and awe are the province of poetry and religion, not science. He also blends life and non-life together when he says that "'Everything is made of atoms....there is nothing that living things do that cannot be understood from the point of view that they are made of atoms acting according to the laws of physics.'" This is Feynman at his best, and a good challenge for those attempting to put philosophy on a solid materialistic foundation.