Rating: 4/5

I fell in love with  The Phantom of the Opera  after watching the 2004 movie adaptation. Since then, I have wanted to read the book. I didn't know what a surprise there was in store for me. The movie was simply a love triangle between Raoul, Christine, and Erik - the "opera ghost" and nothing more. But the book is much more than that. It is a gothic horror story, quite different from the movie, and is very dark. Reading the book reversed my whole perspective of the story and its characters. 

The "Poor Erik" of the movie was not so "poor" after all. He is not so much the wronged, unlucky man I thought him to be. He is a monster who kills, injures, blackmails, and kidnaps to achieve his desires in life. Just when I thought I have read the darkest classical character in Heathcliff, Leroux presents me with a more sinister Erik! He terrorizes the whole of the opera house with his brutality, especially the young and innocent Christine Dae. Erik is nothing but a villain who deserves no sympathy. And Raoul is no hero. He is more of a fool, with his doubting heart, his childish actions, his short sight, and impatience. Leroux's heroine is Christine. For one so young, she has a surprising strength to undergo the brutality of Erik and is of a mature mind to do what is best for others even at her own peril. 

The story is a dark tale of a man with an unnatural, disturbing mind. The horrifying drama his actions bring about and the fright they cause leave you quite frantic. However, Leroux injects a little humor to assuage the grim atmosphere. Thus, despite the gravity and shocking wickedness so nakedly portrayed, I had quite a laugh too. 

Although the book was not what I expected, it was nevertheless an interesting read in itself. Irrespective of the darker subject matter, I did enjoy the story pretty much. On reflection, I'm glad that it was a complex horror story, coupled with a bit of romance, and not a simple love story.

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/