Rating: 3/5

There will be spoilers ahead!!

The Plot
This book takes place in Angel's third season and goes by frequent references to past events but after the episode "Carpe Noctem". 

The plot was semi-okay after Cordy has a vague vision of Faith, whose currently imprisoned in jail, her life is in danger which causes Angel Investigations to investigate further which supernatural force is behind the plot to have the slayer killed and for what purpose.

Throughout the investigation, Angel's team is split into three groups:

-Faith, who is sprung from jail by the machinations of Wolfram and Hart, some familiar faces Lilah, Gavin, and Nathan, who aids the vampire Marianne whose plot is holding a hunting party, and the slayer aka Faith, is the main event.

-The hotel is attacked, Fred hides, and Cordelia is captured by Benedicta and Bran, while Wesley and Gunn are captured and taken to the same island where Faith is by Marianne.

-Benedicta's motives are to bring forth the Beast (now not the Beast from Angel's fourth season) but this one can somehow procreate with Benedicta to create a new race of vampires and eventually upset the natural balance of humans, vampires, slayers, and demons if this new status quo is ritually successful.

-What is up with demons or vampires wanting to magically impregnate Cordelia?!!? Poor girl can't catch a break!! 

-The flashbacks with the Whirlwind were fun, especially we see Darla separate from Spike and Dru to find a sorcerer who could potentially remove Angel's soul and return Angelus to her, and that sorcerer is more important later on.

Overall, I found the first half of the book interesting and fast-paced though, towards the end of the book, it dragged a bit but still kept you entertained until the end. 

Characters
It was great to see references from past episodes from both Btvs and Angel, which brought so much nostalgia lol 

Nancy Holder captured the voices and personalities of all the characters pretty spot on and it was fun to hear the inner thoughts of Angel, Fred, Cordy, Wes, Gunn, and Faith throughout, on a plus note, it was fun to see Faith make a return appearance in the novels and to see how her journey to redemption is faring as you can see that she has made some conscious effort to change for the better but there were still moments where Faith was internally struggling with the darker aspects of her personality to fall back on old habits, also loved the complexity of the relationship between Wes and Faith, being forced to work together to stay alive to help Angel.

In this novel, Gunn liked Faith straight off the bat which is a huge nod to Angel's fourth season where these two characters get on extremely well. 

There are hints of the growing attraction between Angel and Cordelia, especially on Angel's part which later plays out more in season 3. Wish we saw more of Cordy's thoughts about Angel, I mean, other than friendship.

The villains were so-so, though I wish the author fleshed them out a bit more, It was ok but felt like there was something missing. 

Marianne and her horde with her human husband Chaz joined Angel Investigations to rid the world of vampires, and then Benedicta who was sired by Drusilla back in the 1880s wanted to become the mother of a new breed of vampires. 

I give this book a 3 star rating.