Rating: 5/5

Nostromo begins with a legend. The story goes, among some of the people of Conrad’s republic of Costaguana, that two wandering sailors- “Americanos, perhaps, but gringos of some sort for certain”- persuade a local man to take them out across the Gulfo Placido to a desolate, inhospitable peninsula, where the locals believe there is gold. “The poor, associating by an obscure instinct of consolation the ideas of evil and wealth”, believe the peninsula to be cursed. On the second evening after the sailors’ departure, a spiral of smoke can be seen from the mainland; they’re never heard from or seen again. But “…the two gringos, spectral and alive, are believed to be dwelling to this day amongst the rocks, under the fatal spell of their success. Their souls cannot tear themselves away from their bodies mounting guard over the discovered treasure.” 

The first thing that drew me into this book was the language. I think Heart of Darkness is great, and I liked Lord Jim well enough, but that was all I knew of Conrad; I had never known he could write like this. Nostromo is a demanding book; I often had to read a sentence two or three times, trying to locate the precise word or phrase (sometimes a strangely-used preposition, sometimes a Spanish word, sometimes a description of something in the physical world that I couldn’t picture) that tripped me up. I couldn’t read it after having drunk more than a single beer, and I doubt you could read it with an iPhone in your pocket. It requires some work, but the book reminds you that you don’t want to shortchange yourself by glancing at a screen every other minute; you want to appreciate the language in its complexity. 

Heart of Darkness is compact, with seemingly nothing extraneous; the same cannot be said of Nostromo. I’m not sure I’ve ever read a novel structured this way. Throughout most of the first 200 pages or so we seem to be drifting somewhere in time and language; the story seems to progress more by free association than by chronological order of events. A person or place will be mentioned tangentially and obliquely towards the middle or end of a paragraph- ‘the director of companies’, for example- and then the next paragraph, as if mentioning the director has just reminded the narrator that he wants to tell us more about him, begins with a description of the director. Descriptions of characters- their sharp, vivid faces and personalities- seem to emerge from a fog of language for a paragraph or two, then disappear again. The frame through which we see things can expand or contract very suddenly: from a description of the waters and the islands off the coast of the country, we may quickly find ourselves listening to two characters speaking about something seemingly unrelated (in one case through the eyes of the characters' parrot), without feeling that any abrupt or unnatural transition has taken place. Occasionally we drop in on characters, somewhere in time, who may be referred to by their names, or just ‘the director‘ or ‘the doctor’- this has the effect of making the characters, at first, seem remote, but the remoteness somehow gives them depth and power. 

There are countless minor characters portrayed just as vividly. For example, the ludicrous deposed dictator Guzman Bento:

Guzman Bento, usually full of fanciful fears and brooding suspicions, had sudden accesses of unreasonable self-confidence when he perceived himself elevated on a pinnacle of power and safety beyond the reach of mere mortal plotters. At such times he would impulsively command the celebration of a solemn Mass of thanksgiving which would be sung in great pomp in the cathedral of Sta Marta by the trembling, subservient Archbishop of his creation. He heard it sitting in a gilt armchair placed before the high altar, surrounded by the civil and military heads of his Government. The unofficial world of Sta Marta would crowd into the cathedral, for it was not quite safe for anybody of mark to stay away from these manifestations of presidential piety. Having thus acknowledged the only power he was at all disposed to recognize as above himself, he would scatter acts of political grace in a sardonic wantonness of clemency. There was no other way left now to enjoy his power but by seeing his crushed adversaries crawl impotently into the light of day out of the dark, noisome cells of the Collegio. Their harmlessness fed his insatiable vanity, and they could always be got hold of again. It was the rule for all the women of their families to present thanks afterwards in a special audience. The incarnation of that strange god, El Gobierno Supremo, received them standing, cocked hat on head, and exhorted them in a menacing mutter to show their gratitude by bringing up their children in fidelity to the democratic form of government, ‘which I have established for the happiness of our country.’ His front teeth having been knocked out in some accident of his former herdsman’s life, his utterance was spluttering and indistinct. He had been working for Costaguana alone in the midst of treachery and opposition. Let it cease now lest he should become weary of forgiving!

Nostromo reminds me of something Camus wrote in The Rebel, I think about de Sade (although my copy of the book was lost in a flood, and I unfortunately can’t look it up), to the effect of, “no character is the author who created him. But it may be that an author is all of his characters simultaneously.” I don’t know a great deal about Conrad’s life, but I got the sense that he was Nostromo; Decoud, who dreams of creating a new republic, but who, according to Father Corbelan, “believes in neither stick nor stone; not the son of his own country, nor of any other”; Charles Gould, in thrall, like the gringos in the legend, to the silver of his mine; traumatized Dr. Monygham, thought of by the people he treats as evil; and maybe Father Corbelan as well, whose appearance “suggested something unlawful about his priesthood, the idea of a chaplain of bandits.”

I often find myself, when reading books, thinking in the clichés that I’ve absorbed from blurbs and bad reviews; so I was set to write that Conrad’s view of life and politics is ‘surprisingly modern’, without really thinking about it, ‘modern’ being in most reviews and blurbs a synonym for ‘correct.’ But it seems to me, anecdotally anyway, that modern people tend to feel that the world is moving slowly but steadily towards an ideal of justice, and that technology is a driving force in that. I think that Conrad, if he were alive, would disagree; he at least did not believe that in his own time. The reader is never really given enough information to decide, for example, whether Montero would make a better president than Ribiera, or if Ribiera was even any better than Guzman Bento. In Conrad’s view, it doesn’t really matter. And yes, he’s writing very specifically here about Latin America; but there’s a part in Heart of Darkness where Marlow talks about civilization as a flicker of light. We live in the flicker, Marlow says. This idea gains its full expression in Nostromo: the people rise up against a dictator, perhaps defeat him, but eventually become corrupted themselves. Conrad believes (I think) that history is not a progression towards justice, but cyclical. It's cyclical because people are people, and don't really change. There is an aspect of the occult in this book- spirits and ghosts are mentioned, and play a role in the tragedy, depending on your understanding of those words- but if they do play a role, it is only because people remain susceptible to obsession. 

There are other elements in Conrad that we would probably not consider modern. Conrad believes in virtue, for example. It’s inevitably corrupted and destroyed, but it exists and it’s knowable. He also believes in physical courage. People in his books do things, instead of just thinking about things. Nostromo, the main character, is not especially reflective, not neurotic. There’s very little irony. And another quality of the prose is the sense that he is writing from a place of imperturbable calm, attention and equanimity- the Gulfo Placido, maybe, which one character imagines while sailing it at night is ‘a foretaste of death’. From what I do know of Conrad, I’m guessing that he probably did not write from a place of equanimity. But it’s a great illusion.  

When I told a friend how much I was enjoying Nostromo, he told me that Nabokov said Conrad was ‘cliched.’ Whatever. Go fuck yourself, Nabokov. Go play with your butterfly collection.