Rating: 1/5

1.5 stars, wavering

Overall I found Throne of Isis to be a dry, cold rendering of Cleopatra and Antony. The major details of historical significance were accurate but they were woven into the story as if the author was just inserting uninteresting scenes in-between.

The story is told largely from Dione's point of view, a priestess of Isis. Dione is a fictional character and added pretty much nothing to the story or the history. Dione does start a romantic (pseudo romantic for much of the book) relationship with a Roman, Lucius, an auger for Antony. Lucius is an absolute stick in the mud and bored me to tears. The conversations between Lucius and Dione were rather dull and left no impression of genuine emotions between the two (another issue of the coldness of the writing). I also grew tired of Dione's parts where Cleopatra was nowhere to be found, which was quite often. Dione is rather dull on her own and her parts had many scenes with her children, also boring. 

You would think that the parts involving Cleopatra and Antony would prevail, if not in time spent at least in impact. Unfortunately both characters play too limited a role, in my opinion, and their conversations are largely confrontations. The major scenes in the first half of the book involve Cleopatra demanding her sister's death and lands from Antony. The whole way Tarr chose to have the two interact and Cleopatra react to Antony with or without his presence felt very inauthentic to me. Antony, overall, felt cold and unlike what historians have indicated his character was likely to be. The only interesting scenes seemed to be those when Cleopatra and Dione or Cleopatra and a Roman messenger interacted. Cleopatra did at times have entertaining comments, especially when it came to Octavian and Roman customs.

Another note on the character of Cleopatra: Tarr felt it very important to frequently note the unattractiveness of her face. She made sure to have multiple characters note it and it became quite tedious. But, oh the voice! *sigh* I think Tarr may have just gone simply on Roman propaganda and did no research beyond.

I also have a long-standing distaste for magical/fantasy elements in historical fiction and unfortunately Throne of Isis contains such things. Cleopatra is even shown with essentially a witch's circle, calling upon the gods of the underworld because Antony married Octavia as part of his agreement with Octavian. *sigh* Nevermind the fact that I could not imagine Cleopatra doing this but this scene, in a HF novel? Oy.

Overall I was left unimpressed by Tarr's interpretation of Cleopatra and Antony. The telling focused too much on Dione, too little on Cleopatra and when it was focused on her she felt inauthentic to me. A dry novel, certainly.