Rating: 2/5

Elizabeth is dismissed from her teaching position and is able to find a position as a companion to Lady Honora through her family solicitor. They get along extremely well and Lady Honora treats Elizabeth more like a friend than an employer. Lady Honora is trying to get her nephew, the Earl of Warminster, married. The Earl is completely opposed to marriage but decides to play a joke on his aunt. He comes up with a list of absurd demands for his prospective bride and, if his aunt can find someone with all the listed attributes, he will marry her.

His aunt embarks on her mission to find the lady and, eventually, encounters the perfect young woman through the unwilling help of Elizabeth, who used to be her teacher. Elizabeth believes that the young lady and the Earl are completely wrong for each other, but she has certain obligations as Lady Honora's companion. There is also a young man who falls in love with Elizabeth (he met her while working for the solicitor) and later becomes a protégé of Lady Honora (as well as employed by the Earl), and there's a ton beau who's a pretty nasty villain.

As with some of the other Summerville's books, I really liked the heroine. She's "older" at 24, sensible, and intelligent. I liked that she wasn't deceived by the villain's charms and was also not overly impressed by the Earl at first. And that's because the Earl is the biggest problem in this story. He's surly, rude, and thinks poorly of women. Although there's nothing unique about that in Regency, he doesn't change much throughout the story. He does soften a bit towards Elizabeth and can smile from time to time, but he remains pretty odious. I also could not remember anything romantic about them. We know they're starting to like and eventually love each other because the author allows us to know what they're thinking, but there's little to no spark when they're together. I don't need it spelled out for me, but there should be at least some form of endearment when addressing the woman you love or some accidental touch to show the attraction.

In addition to all this, the villain didn't get a deserving punishment at the end after all that was done (his mother deserved some comeuppance as well for spreading rumors about a friend). There's also a final small thing that happened that bothered me, but this is more a personal issue I have with this type of plot. It's not a huge spoiler but it doesn't happen until the second half of the book so I'll hide it. Even though the Earl thinks very poorly of the young woman his aunt selected for him, he goes ahead and proposes to her just to be done with the issue of finding a wife. Of course, this is after he meets Elizabeth but before he admits to himself that he has feelings for her. I just find that when the hero proposes to someone after meeting the heroine, and without love, it cheapens the subsequent proposal to the heroine.  Besides Elizabeth, the best character here is the young man who's in love with her. Even though they wouldn't suit for multiple reasons, I think he appreciated Elizabeth far more than the Earl.

I've been reading many of Summerville's books recently, because I appreciate her older and sensible heroines. Even though Elizabeth doesn't save this book from being just okay, Summerville definitely has better stories with similar heroines such as Sensible Cecily, Bewitching Lady and Infamous Isabelle.