Rating: 3/5

This novel is the first of Gore Vidal's novels about American politics. It's begins during a period when Franklin Delano Roosevelt was in his second term and then extends into the post-war period when Eisenhower was President. In this novel, we don't get too many direct glimpses of FDR or his successors, but the lead characters devote a great deal of time and energy to the matter of what it would take to become President. 

We join a lead character, James Burden Day, at a moment when his status as a long time Senator from an unnamed South Western state seems to be at its apogee. Senator Day is opposed to Roosevelt and is one of a few senators who teamed up to stop President Roosevelt from a scheme to pack the Supreme Court. We also hear that another lead character, Blaise Stanford, as publisher of the Washington Tribune also contributed to stopping the court packing approach. 

We soon meet the families of both men and it's clear that these families are part of a social and political fabric centered around matters of who has power in Washington DC. Senator Day aspires to be President but is troubled when he's approached by a wealthy man who is willing to back his efforts to be President, but wants some help in return. We also meet Senator Day's aide, a young man named Clay Overbury, who has allied himself with the Senator, but is much more inclined to take ruthless approaches if needed to get ahead. 

Vidal is very good at creating large ensembles of characters and showing their interactions, while showing how the draw of power and sex pushes people in some surprising directions. This novel was published in 1967, but has a more contemporary feel in the way that the characters act on their attractions to both men and women and sometimes threaten to cross moral boundaries. 

This book does offer a sense of how politics work in city such as Washington where it seems like most actions have some element of the political that comes into play. Vidal's later political novels follow some of these themes, but also often show us how life is much different for the elites of the times as compared to the people who the politicians aim to turn into supporters. 

Vidal does draw up well nuanced characters. Most of the primary players in this novel are fictional and we see how the web of Washington lures them to reach for power, but others are just trying to live a life and they are sometimes casualties as the rich and powerful pursue their dreams. 

I liked the novel and the way the next generation of these powerful families each had to find their own way of coping with the expectations of their parents. We get to know Enid and Peter, the daughter and son of Blaise Sanford, and Diana, the daughter of Senator Day, and their various trials as they attempt to make sense of Washington and it's fishbowl atmosphere. We also see the challenges as Senator Day and Clay Overbury both aspire to power and cross swords as the younger Overbury seeks to gain his own platform. 

I'd recommend this book to those who want to get a sense of how politics were being played during this era and at the same time, enjoy stories where the characters are forced to evolve by the challenges in their lives. This is a reasonable starting point as well for readers who would like to go on to the later political novels and see how Vidal handled the politics and elite lifestyles of other eras, which emerged in the stories of Burr, Lincoln, 1876 and Empire.