Rating: 1/5

It was terribly depressing. I'm not going to finish it. I read the first three short stories and could hardly distinguish them. The writing style was at times intriguing, but at other times It was more like I imagine "The Diary of Anne Frank" reads, though admittedly, I never read that book either. The stories are all gloomy tales of apartheid South Africa, but not about the sun or the animals, mostly about colonialist oppression. I'd rather read Nelson Mandela than these stories. The author is a White woman. Writing these little acts of penance may have been an important part of her own therapy, but didn't need to be also published. I hope she donated all the proceeds to help poor blacks in her home country, otherwise its adding insult to injury.

Sadly, It made me think of the stack of books I brought home a few years ago from a wonderful bookstore, Von's, in West Lafayette, Indiana, where my sister lives. Since high school, I always look for books by JMG Le Clezio that have been translated into English. Oh how I loved his novels from the 60's and early 70's. So fresh, so full of life. When I found a stack of his books I had never read, all side by side on the shelf in this Indiana bookstore I bought the whole lot of them, hook line and sinker. It turns out in the 80's LeClezio had some bad bout of White Man's Guilt, and knowing he had a broad international readership, and that his books would be purchased and read no matter what he wrote, he decided that would be HIS penance, his volunteer work, his righteous contribution. And he stopped writing books that were full of joy, and instead wrote one dreary tale of rape and poverty after another. Several miserable books, told only from the point of view of orphans, slaves, derelicts, but mostly from those subject to tyrannical colonial rule by the French. Did I mention he's a White Frenchman? I dutifully read them, out of childhood allegiance, but I owe this "Nadine Gordimer" nothing, so I'm putting "Jump" down.