Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars. is this really a Joan Smith book? it was steamy and hers are never steamy, and it also lacked her trademark humour. interesting. overall, I enjoyed it mostly because of the tropes, whereas I usually enjoy Joan smith books for her charming writing and touch if humour and her excellently painted characters and her fab plots and the way she builds her romances. this one felt very different.

h Flora is a naive 17 year old when the book opens. the eldest child and daughter of a country schoolmaster, impoverished after her father dies and with so many younger siblings to feed, she is sent to London to a relative who will help her find a job. but she is incredibly naive in a bug city full predatorial types, and when she can't find the way to her relatives house she stops at what she thinks is a cafe and falls prey to a brothel owner.

the cafe setup is actually a brothel and she is too naive and countrified to realise it. the madam gets her drunk and spikes her with Spanish fly aphrodosiac and brandy and dresses her half conscious self like a harlot and sells her to a young lord who is out for one last night of fun before he goes off too war.

he is our H, an earls nephew, who came this the brothel for the first time with his friend and stayed because our beautiful young h caught his eye. he is too drunk to realise she is a naive victim when the madam sends him to the room where he finds h scantily clad in bed. she is too out of it to make sense of the situation and finds him beautiful. plus the aphrodisiac makes her responsive. he takes her innocence. afterwards she is horrified and devastated and throws up, but he doesn't believe she isn't a prostitute and calls her a whore. she screams at him to get out.

SPOILERS AHEAD

the next morning she recovers enough to threaten the madam and flee. but is too ashamed and scared amd humiliated to go to her relatives for help. she vows her mother and family must never find out. but finding a respectable governess job by herself proves impossible. night comes and she is nearly assaulted. she ends up back at the brothel and strikes a bargain with the madam that she will be her housekeeper but never a working girl..the madam hopes to talk the beautiful girl into prostituting herself in future so takes her on.

Flora proves herself an excellent brothel housekeeper and cook and trustworthy too, kind to all, and soon becomes indispensable. she is horried to be working in a brothel and intends to leave at the soonest opportunity but her sympathy for the girls grows and finding another job with decent pay is impossible and one thing leads to another and two years later she is still working there.

the madam becomes ill and the only person who can run the house and look after the vulnerable girls and keep them off the streets is Flora, so Flora must step into the madams shoes. she is accosted in thr madams office by one of the greedy nasty customers who gets heavy handed with her and is saved by another man. ahe is horrified to discover hwr rescuer is the H, who she has thought of for 2 years and hated and sworn revenge upon . she is now 19 and has.grown and changed and become a woman, not a child, and is also wearing a demi mask so he doesn't recognise her. but he has returned from war and returned to ask after the girl, Flora, who he hadn't stopped thinking about. he wants to know if she is okay.

Flora says that the girl went back to her home and married a farmer and is fine. he is releived to hear it. but he is also finding himself extremely attracted to thr current Flora in her mask. she is also shocked to find herself attracted to him but won't tell him who she is and sends him away.

she later finds out he returned from war because his uncle died and he is now an earl. her half formed dreams of vengeance die because how could she war make an earl pay for what he did to her?

she thinks about him and follows his actions in the newspapers when he takes his seat in the house of Lords etc. he also can't get her out of his mind so a month later he returns to the brothel to seek her out...

I love the tropes here but I expected them to play out a certain way that would maximise angst but it didn't quite work out that way and I found things a little boring at times.

the madam dies from her illness and she leaves the care of the girls and the business and all her money to the h, who feels compelled and duty bound to care for them because some of them would otherwise be very vulnerable to predators.

her being a brothel madam really interferes with the development of a romance storyline because the whole point of the tropes should be that he coerces her to become his mistress and then discovers her good qualities and that he is the one who caused her downfall in the first place and then deeply regret his actions after he falls in love. it doesn't play out that way. he does want her to be his mistress and does pressure her and them becomes furious and a bit vindictive when she refuses.

then the storyline gets wrapped up in a whole side plot of him trying to find a leak in government that is hindering the war effort and the culprit ending up being a new prostitute at the h's brothel who was selling the pillow talk secrets of a customer who was a govt official. etc. the romance was a bit minimal and not the focus, as it should have been.

even so, the brief bits of romance were sweet and satisfactorily written when they did happen

what I really hoped for was a heroine pining for a hero who only wanted her in bed and not ad his wife but it didn't play out that way. thus the book didn't hit the spot for me.

the ending also felt really unemotional and cold and rushed and clunky. everything came together as it should but it felt mechanical rather than organic and didn't have the emotional depth and angst we wanted, which is surprising seeing as the ending sees the H accidentally shooting the h just after discovering she was the girl flora, who he ruined, and then supposedly suffering the anguish of knowing he had harmed her on two fronts and vowing he loves her and will marry her. but it was a bit boring, alas.

there are two open door sex scenes in the book and they are nicely written and quite affecting but what a pity that the rest of the storytelling wasn't up to Joan smiths usual charmingly told standards.

so I cannot give this more than 3.5 stars really.