Rating: 4/5

Read on blog!!

 

This book like all other Jeffrey Archer books is great. The start of the book reminded me of his book The Fourth Estate (A book review that I have already done) but as you go on reading you will realise that it's nothing like that book at all. 

The story is set in the time between the 1940's and the end of the twentieth century. They have a common rival Elliot, who in my opinion is a total jerk (which is obviously what the author wanted us to feel). There is intense rivalry at different parts with different people which makes the book all the more interesting. 

Fletcher and Nat's devoted love towards their wife and child is adorable, which leads to the small intense action between one of the main characters and the rival (I am not telling who) which is awesome and as I was reading the action part I was rooting for the protagonist to punch the heck out of the other person.

The court proceedings for a murder (mentioned in summary) is very interesting, no doubt due to the authors history in Her Majesty's prison. 

The reason why the twins were not instantly pointed out when they both stand for election is revealed just before the ending. The revealing of the birth secret of the twins is so nerve-wreckingly cool (It's a word that I just made up) that I almost peed my pants reading it.

If truth be told, I stopped reading the book from the second last chapter because I was scared that it was going to be finally over which was obviously something that I would not be able to handle. But curiosity took the better of me and I was back to reading the book after a couple of hours of grieving.

The ending is fantastic. Jeffrey Archer has a way of putting everything into place in the most awesomest ways. I am warning you though, read the ending carefully twice or thrice to get it right. At first you might think something else but if you read it again carefully you will attain the right answer.

I rate it 4.5 for its beautiful way of portraying things and also because I am a full on hater of racists and it seems like the author is too. Woohoo!

Lots of love and pasta,
Raven