Rating: 2/5

So the routine is established. Oke draws me in with really cool character ideas, then breezes over their interactions in an overhead, months passed in paragraphs, view, and completely abandons any attempt to actually sit and write the *scenes* that are happening. It's infuriating. I want to actually read what's happening, I'm invested and I want to be drawn into scenes, but she...refuses to write them. 

There are some awkward lines like 'he smiled into my eyes'. Could've maybe used a good editor or another run through of editing.

Wynn is devoid of any meaningful character and boils down to 'perfect husband who always has all the answers'. I have never been this bored and utterly uninterested in a romantic interest before.

At least in this book, there is the acknowledgement of the fact that Native Americans had their own religion, so I appreciated that, but it was still just a one off line of a fear that 'The Great Spirit' was doing something. Everything else left unsaid. 

I do kinda enjoy the take of woman trying to respect their husband's biblical authority over them - it's a take I don't see often, and while I think this book fails to portray it very well, it's something I appreciate the book showing. The men are pretty much devoid of personality all through out the book, and Wynn is perfect and always Right, so...idk, the whole attempt at showing a husband and father as leader and protector of the family falls really flat for me. 

There's another major flaw in Oke's writing - the total lack of foreshadowing. We don't hear about her wanting new stockings, her hate for mended stockings, or even the fact that she had to mend stockings at all until she tells us (instead of shows us) that Elizabeth got stockings for Christmas. It would've been so much more powerful if she'd been mourning her stockings and mending them throughout the book. The scene feels much like the rest of the book - 'ok, that's nice, but I don't care'. Same thing happens another time, which I won't talk about because spoilers. 

So...why do I read these books? Because, at the end of the day, they're clean, they're Christian, they aren't terrible. At worse, they're a let down because they refuse to show actual scenes happening. I do enjoy the scenes we're allowed, especially the friendship ones, and the side characters glow when, again, they're actually written. Aside from reading like a historical account instead of a fictional book, they're not bad. They're just...not good fiction books.