Rating: 5/5

Halfway through:

Look at Georgia photographed by Alfred Stieglitz: https://www.google.se/search?q=alfred...
Look at the chin. Who she is is visible in her eyes and in that chin.

This book is very, very good. Keep in mind I am no huge fan of all those huge flower paintings. The person is what drew me, and I am not disappointed. Did SHE intend the eroticism so often associated with her paintings? Damn art critics! I have always been terribly dissatisfied with the need of critics to explain art. Isn't it enough to look and ask yourself what you feel? 

**********************************

On completion: 

I adored this book. My pleasure has been drawn from getting to understand Georgia O'Keeffe (1887-1986). What a person! It is her, not her art that speaks to me. I had no idea who she was before picking up this book, other than her art of course. Now I simply feel happy knowing that such a person existed. 

So maybe you think, since I am so happy to "know" her now, that she has been idolized here in these pages. Forget that. This is no hagiography. The good and the bad, all of it is here. I love it because you get the truth; because you feel when you close the book you intimately know another soul. I am thinking, this person was out there, and I knew nothing about 
  her
. I was merely acquainted with her artwork. Do you understand? It is knowing the person that is such an immense revelation to me.

There are revealing quotes, of things she has said and of what others said. She was blunt. She knew what she thought, and she said it. She knew what she wanted to do, and she did it. She was self-reliant. She worked hard. Her advice to other artists? “You must really work and not just talk about working.” Alfred Stieglitz, her husband the famed photographer, said that when she wanted something she made other people give it to her. So true. There is a story about a little stone..... It’s a perfect example! She got that stone, but the point is here that how she got it is so well told. Both what is unknown and what is known is clarified. The author throws in marvelous details that are revealing, amusing, poignant. 

O'Keeffe tried to show people how to see. Listening to her words she made me better appreciate what I see. How to emotionally relate to what is before our eyes. She saw the world around her and she showed me what she saw and how she felt. The emotional impact is part of seeing. It is the author that has achieved this, not Georgia O'Keeffe, because it was her that has chosen the quotes and put them there in the right sequence so the reader understands their import. 

O'Keeffe knew so many famous artists. Easily the book could have succumbed to name-dropping. That doesn't happen; each person referred to is tied in with relevant, fascinating information. An example - at 84 O'Keeffe lost her central vision; from then she saw only peripherally. In reference to this the American artist Mary Cassatt's loss of vision is mentioned. How O'Keeffe coped is well drawn, both emotionally and concretely. There is a particular broach given to her by Alexander Calder, this being another example. 

A word about the writing. The author is married to an artist. You can tell. In the audiobook we see no pictures. I do not know what pictures are included in the hardcover. On one level this isn’t a problem because with internet images are accessible. Yet color, both hue and intensity, is integral to the art of O’Keeffe, and color on a computer screen is not true to life, but neither is it in a printed book! Thus the author’s words in conveying the correct feeling and nuance are essential. The author beautifully describes landscapes, events and artwork with artistic lines. She speaks of “the curl of a lip and the raising of an eyebrow” so you see them. Her written words let you see what a picture can show. Here are some examples:

-the celestial blues, milky whites, pale pinks of the painting radiated a glacial light
-a sunset's hot golden glow on the valley
 -the chunk of heaven the artist had captured

You need such writing in a book about art. 

The book is about O’Keeffe, but it is also about Alfred Stieglitz! Both are fascinating individuals. Their relationship is portrayed honestly and with insight, and how it changed. He died in 1946; she in 1986. That is forty years in-between. Her life was far from over. She needed a new agent. She travelled. She met Juan Hamilton. Her life in Abiquiù, New Mexico. It is all here, up to her death. She chose cremation, no funeral or memorial service. 

The audiobook I listened to is narrated by Grace Conlin. It started off too fast, but the speed slows down except in a few sections. I grew to like the narration very much. When you listen to O’Keeffe quotes you can wonder if she is being sarcastic, deliberately funny or just direct. This is part of her character and it comes across perfectly. 

I believe this books means so much to me because I easily relate to O’Keeffe’s personality. I am too blunt. I am too much of a perfectionist. I share her view on art critics and feminists. She is a feminist by her deeds, not through talk. We both hate cooking but enjoy taste. We both value simplicity and prefer black clothing. We are both tied to nature and see its beauty. Have I given you enough of an idea to determine if O’Keefe as a person might be someone you can relate to? Of course, you can also read the book to simply learn of what she accomplished. 

I was uncertain when I began whether to read this book by Laurie Lisle or Georgia: A Novel of Georgia O'Keeffe. The second is historical fiction. Why read that and wonder on completion which of the details were true? I am totally satisfied with my decision.

If I love a book, the first thing I do is go and check if I can read another by the author. There is this: Louise Nevelson: A Passionate Life. Wow, doesn’t that look interesting? It isn’t available to me, but I would grab it immediately if I could. If you read it, please tell me if it is as good.