Rating: 3/5

As hard as it may be to believe that the Moon landings occurred fifty years ago, it seems equally hard to believe there was a time when people were still imagining it happening for the first time. One of those who did so was science fiction titan Arthur C Clarke whose first published novel Prelude to Space conceived such an endeavor. Though first published in 1951 and imagining events in the 1970s, it makes for enjoyable reading. 

In part, that's because of what Clarke got right. There's a crew of three who end up going to the Moon, each with specific tasks and skills, not unlike the real-life Apollo missions. The portrayal of media coverage of the mission, as well as the public debate about whether space exploration is worth the cost, have echoes of their own in the Space Race and our current era. The way that Interplanetary, the organization behind the effort, is portrayed isn't a million miles off from the likes of SpaceX and private companies heading into space in the 21st-century. Clarke is even close about when the first lunar probe and human spaceflights would be taking place. All of which is rather neat to think about, given Apollo 11's historic mission was nearly twenty years away when the novel was published though he proved right, in the words of his astronaut Hassel, that “The first voyage will be the one that History will remember. After that, they’ll all merge together.”

There's plenty Clarke didn't predict, though. His nuclear powered Prometheus with its stages Alpha and Beta don't bear much resemblance to the Saturn V or the Apollo capsules that made the real journey. There's no space race to spurn things on, so it's the British based Interplanetary that sends the expedition off from Australia. The vision on display of the 1970s can be chuckle-worthy at times, such as a moment about a third way through the novel when at a party, "there was much dancing to the gentle, nostalgic rhythms so popular in the late ’70s." Of course, Clarke is quick to point out in a 1976 preface included with later editions that "contrary to a general belief—prediction is not the main purpose of science-fiction writers," and that he wasn't aiming to do so here either.

Of course, we're talking about a novel written in the 1940s, published in the 1950s, and there are times when it very much feels like it. The dialogue and characterizations are very much of the time, and it was easy at times to think of this as the SF equivalent of one of those old black and white British war films popular in this era. There's a lot of stiff upper lips, even from American characters like our historian protagonist, for example. The plot, too, in what would become a running theme with Clarke's work, is rather thin at places but, one can forgive that with the earnestness in which he gets his ideas across. 

As first novels go, there have been far worse ones that Prelude to Space. Like much of Clarke's later works, including masterworks such as Childhood's End and 2001, this is a novel of ideas first and foremost. While we may have gotten to the Moon even before Clarke's fictional astronauts, what remains is an intriguing vision of those days of future past. Not so much how we got to the Moon, but how we might have done in a different world.