Rating: 3/5

Another book about an overachiever with the path of her life planned out, merely coasting on her way to Yale. Like Vanessa in Plan B, Mara's life is overset by the arrival of a relative who comes to live with her family for the new school year. And like Reed, V is something of a screw-up and rebel. Indeed, these books are very similar; though I think Plan B is marginally better for its approach to the romantic (or unromantic) elements of Vanessa's life.

Mara isn't terribly likeable, really. She's engaging enough to read about, don't get me wrong. Her problems are interesting ones and Carolyn Mackler does a good job keeping the pace of events flowing so that I was never tempted to put the book away and move on to the next. But she's judgmental and self-centered and deeply resentful of V's intrusion into her well-ordered world. The book is about her learning to accept others and to figure out what she wants in life (as opposed to the expectations of others), so only some of her defects are addressed—i.e. she remains largely self-centered, just more healthily so by the end.

V's character is just this side of caricature. She's a bad girl, with bad girl habits, but with an underlying insecurity caused by moving around so much following her flaky mother. Of course she has a heart of gold. Duh. You can practically chart her character path from there. Yes, she blossoms under the love she receives from Vanessa's parents. Yes, she reforms (or is on the way to reformation) during the course of the novel. Yes, she and Mara develop respect, and eventually honest love, for each other. If the story were about V, we'd have a serious problem. As it is, there's enough heart, enough warmth, in her character to let me get over the stereotype she plays in this book and I was, quite frankly, relieved that she didn't turn darker and end up betraying Mara or hurting Mara's parents. Someone blossoming in a loving environment they've never had the chance to receive before isn't inherently unrealistic and Mackler does a good job making her character real-enough to remain believable.

The most interesting part of the book is Mara's romance with James—the 22 year-old college drop-out (can you have dropped out if you never applied?) who owns the successful coffee shop where Mara works. James is that guy with intelligence who decided to apply himself to business early rather than worry about more academic learning. As such, he's an acceptable, though unexpected, match for Mara and their relationship is an interesting one. Mara is naïve and inexperienced, as the book's title suggests, and James is both aware of that and man enough to respect Mara's uncertainty and concerns. He's also key to Mara exploring what it is that she wants and I liked him for his steady good sense and refusal to become just another voice telling her what she should do.

So yeah, the book is a little formulaic. There's just enough substance there to like it, though, so it earned the three stars I'm giving it.