Rating: 4/5

Oh, the nostalgia! I read the "...If You" series when I was a kid and found them captivating. I was really excited to find this book in the library when I was browsing for some Oregon Trail books to supplement our recent trip along part of the Old Oregon Trail down to Shoshone Falls. I love the format of this series because it really gets into the details that kids want to know, what would you eat? what would you wear? would you have school? chores? what would you do for fun? These details really stayed in the mind of my kids and captivated them. 
 Specific to this book, Levine answers such questions as 
"Why did some people want to travel all the way to Oregon?"
"What was a covered wagon?"
"Did anybody lead the wagon train?"
"What was the best time of year to start the trip?"
"How would you cross rivers when there were no bridges?"
"What were the dangers and difficulties of the trip?"
"Could you send a letter or receive one?"
"Without road signs, how would you know where you were?"
and many more!
It's especially good for younger elementary age kids because it presents reality without being too harsh or grim.
Reading this today, I do wish the book included a Bibliography. Also, while I realize that the book is about the pioneer's experience, I would appreciate an Afterward that explained more about the impact of Westward Expansion on the Native Americans 
There’s only a brief section in the book about the “Indians” and it's less than ideal, simply mentioning that most Indians were friendly and wanted to trade with the pioneers or would help them with river crossings etc; it also mentions that some were "not friendly" and might try to steel cattle or horses. "Sometimes a group of Indians got very angry that all these strange people were crossing their lands. So they would fight with the pioneers [however] most of the time in the 1840s, though, there was not much fighting. The real wars with the Indians began in the 1850s and 1860s. It's frustratingly simplistic and I would hate for this to be a kids' only explanation of the Native American experience in this time but, fortunately we've read many Native American stories to our kids already so we can fill in what is lacking here.
 So, with that word of caution, I recommend the rest of the book as my kids were quite captivated by the straightforward approach and variety of details provided that helped the Oregon Trail experience come alive.