Rating: 5/5

This is an amazing autobiography by a great author who just happens to be from a nomadic African herding tribe. 

It is not an anthropological work that looks at Maasai society from the outside; it is an actual report about the Maasai told by someone who actually grew up and lived among them. In fact to describe it as a report about the Maasai probably overplays the anthropological aspects of it. The author is concerned more about conveying his own life than the mores of his people, and he does it exceedingly well. The author spends pages discussing events like the time he fell asleep while his father's cattle herd was attacked. He is able to convey the incredible struggle to defend the herd along with the intense fear of his father's punishment. Through these little stories, the reader really gets the feeling for a life lived on the Serengeti plain. 

There are of course great little vignettes about Maasai society here too: the women rushing to cover their huts with cow-dung to patch leaks during a rainstorm, the tribal dance to commemorate the killing of a lion, and, above all, discussions dealing with the huge herds of cattle. How they have to be corralled with thorn bushes to protect them against predators at night, how they strain after green pastures during the dry season, how they get poisoned by volcanic ash, and so on. It is amazing to see how deeply the Maasai come understand their animals after a life lived in continual contact with them. For instance, the author learns that lions sometimes station themselves upwind of a herd to frighten the cattle with their scent and drive them into another pack of lions.

There are also great scenes here about the author's travels to the West and America, where he eventually earned a Master's degree in environmental science. He travels to Disneyland and loves the Jungleride. He is physically threatened by whites in racially-tense Boston during the busing controversy. He dates a white woman and is threatened by blacks in Harlem. 

This book probably taught me more about both traditional societies and cosmopolitan life than anything else I've ever read. I recommend to everyone.