Rating: 4/5

“You do like to make it difficult, don’t you, M. Poirot?” he said.
― Agatha Christie, Mrs. McGinty's Dead

This was the very first Hercule Poirot novel that I read as a boy and I still enjoy going back and rereadig it on occasion. It is one of the better stories. Some wit tossed in with a whodunit. Poirot's vanity on full display.

Poirot has just finished a rather satisfactory meal at a restaurant and is reflecting sadly on how there are only three meals in a day. When he arrives home he finds an old friend, Superintendent Spence, has come to visit. A charwoman, Mrs. McGinty, had been brutally murdered. Struck over the head in her home, her savings which she kept under a floorboard stolen. Her lodger, James Bentley, had been arrested, tried and convicted. He is now awaiting execution. Spence, who had been in charge of the investigation, is not convinced that Bentley is the murderer. After laying out the facts of the case Poirot agrees to go to the village of Broadhinny and open his own investigation. His “little grey cells” could use the exercise.

Broadhinny may be a small village but it has lots of secrets. Poirot finds that McGinty had clipped an article out of a newspaper and bought a bottle of ink two days before she was murdered. The article was about four woman who were connected to murders decades ago and was accompanied with photographs. Did Mrs. McGinty recognize one of the woman? Poirot starts showing the photographs around Broadhinny and soon after there is another murder. Clearly there is a connection between the photographs and the murders. But which photograph?

This is one of the Hercule Poirot stories featuring Ariadne Oliver, an author of mysteries whose main character is a 60-something eccentric Finnish expatriate detective named Sven Hjerson. Mrs. Oliver is tired of her creation but her fans like him and she is stuck with him. The character of Mrs. Oliver is clearly based on Agatha Christie herself.

Overall a very enjoyable whodunit where you get to match wits with Hercule Poirot and try to identify the real murderer.