Rating: 4/5

From the back cover: 

Here comes Santa Claus--with four stories that celebrate the joy of holiday love and cheer! 

"Promises to Keep" by Victoria Alexander 
After a trip to see a department-store Kris Kringle, a lonely business woman is swept back to a long-ago Christmas--and given a second chance to share a passion that will prove to her it really is a wonderful life. 

"Naughty or Nice" by Sandra Hill 
When a young beauty sets out to steal some Yuletide cheer, she expects to end up with a stocking full of coal. Instead, a run-in with Santa's most virile helper brings her the best gift of all: a heart full of love. 

"Santa Reads Romance" by Dara Joy 
During a snowstorm, a romance writer is surprised when a handsome stranger dressed as Jolly Old St. Nick arrives at her isolated cabin--and stires up a blizzard of desire. 

"A Gift for Santa" by Nelle McFather 
With a dast a Father Christmas's magic, a generous widow saves her town's holiday celebration--and teaches the man she loves the true meaning of the season. 

And my review: 

I absolutely LOVED "Promises to Keep". I didn't expect to like it so much, as I've found that (apart from "The Prince's Bride") this author's work is good for a one-time read, but not as a keeper. But this story was FANTASTIC. I normally don't like the falling-in-love-at-first-sight theme (I usually find it silly) but this author handled it so well, that it was believable. I actually got tears in my eyes reading about the heroine's lost love, and I really rooted for them to get together. And the paranormal time-travel (the heroine went back into the WWII era) twist just made it that much more enjoyable. I know I'll be rereading this novella! Highly recommended. Five stars. 

"Naughty or Nice" started off really well. It grabbed my attention within the first two pages, which is what you really want in a story. And it had some laugh-out-loud moments (glad I was at home at the time). But this author's use of the love-at-first-sight theme was very poorly done, especially when compared to the story that preceded it. And it was really more of a lust-at-first-sight story than a love story. If that's what you're looking for, then fine. But I don't like stories about people who hardly know each other having wild sex in a pantry. I need more motivation for romance than just physical attraction. When the characters jumped each other's bones, I skipped to the next story. Two stars, as it started off well. 

"Santa Reads Romance" also started off really well. I liked the idea of a romance writer falling in love with a publisher (who incidentally thinks that writers are the bane of his existence). The plot started off with a bang, and what could be more interesting (and funny) than having the heroine conk the hero out with a piece of firewood because she thinks he's about to attack her? But then this became a falling-in-lust story, which again is not what I'm looking for. While I have nothing wrong with sexual attraction between leads (necessary for a good romance), I want more motivation than that to make the story work for me. Two stars, as again, this novella started off well. 

"A Gift for Santa" just could not hold my interest. I'm not really sure what the problem was, but it seemed like the author was trying to throw way to much information at the reader without bothering to properly develop the characters. When I have to find myself re-reading the same page over and over and still not having it stick in my head, it's not worth the effort. One star. 

As usual with romance anthologies, if you find one good story, you're lucky. While the last three stories (which were all contemporaries) were not worth my time, the first one was sooo good that I'm glad that I bought this book, and I would recommend it for that one story alone.

Reread Alexander's story December 2012, 2015, 2019