Rating: 5/5

Original review for first edition here: 
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

Note: 2nd edition comes 7th in the series, between Death of Friends and Rag and Bone. 

CW: rape: off-page but briefly described. 

I was not looking forward to rereading this one. This was the second of the two I said I'd never reread. But for the sake of the BR, I managed to get through it, albeit not as quickly as the previous books. Though part of that is because this is the longest book in the series, it's mostly because I didn't want to get to that climax, which I remembered all too well. There were some things that I had forgotten Henry getting taken to the desert, and Henry having sex with his former client, who ended up being a hustler, who was just awful to Henry afterwards, and those were upsetting too. I did remember not liking Richie much and that he did something cagey, but the specifics of how much he screwed over Henry had been repressed. 

This is a harrowing case, and more than any others so far had very real and personal impacts on Henry. He's smart, and incredibly lucky (go, plot armor!), and he manages to escape the worst of the consequences, but the emotional toil will linger, I think. On top of all that, he's still mourning Josh, which makes him particularly vulnerable in this one. :( And yet, I still end up feeling worse for Rod, who gets pulled into this mess by the sadistic turd that Henry's trying to bring to justice. He didn't deserve anything that happened to him, and the fact that his overly religious parents got their claws into him again and turned all that trauma into compliance is tragic. Hopefully, somewhere down the line, he meets the right people who will help him deal with what happened to him and help him comes to terms with being gay. But I can more easily see him end up a depressed, repressed mess. :(

I did managed to read along with the first edition while listening to the audio for the first few chapters. I do like how Nava polished up the wording here and there, and added extra little details that fill in the world better. But if you have the first edition and don't want to buy the second edition, you won't be missing out on anything dramatically different. 

Tom Rivera continues to do great with these audios, and his voice for Asuraz was appropriately intimidating, lol.