Rating: 3/5

I think I’ll need some time to forget about this book. And I want to forget about this book. 
It was not good, it was not bad, for me it was meh. Maybe because I’m not a fan of slice of life stories, because of the writing, because of the themes and the characters. 

I dived in this book thinking nothing, and was quite bored by the beginning. I started to be interested after the first quarter to then be repulsed by the pedophilia being almost normalized, leaving me wondering if the author thought it is a good thing or if she wanted to denounce it. At the end, I had a hard time going through the last chapters because of the suicidal tendencies, idealizations and attempt. There were also too many sex scenes, at the beginning it was okay, I supported them but at the end I skipped most of them. 
I had difficulties loving the characters and I wanted to scream at them most of the time.

I loved how the book portrayed homosexuality at first and how it criticized people criticizing homosexuality given the year the book was published. But, again, I ended disappointed. Homosexually was replaced by bisexuality, praising heterosexual relationships, using the usual “it’s because you didn’t find the good one yet”. I’m still trying to figure out if the book is criticizing homosexuality or not, if it was genuine when homosexuality was said as right or if it only was to mock homosexual relationships and people’s mindset. I was so disappointed in how the story made Dana shift as almost heterosexual, how the story made him in love with a woman and praising how better it was. I wish he would have remained homosexual, because the character was better like this.

Some heavy and important themes were discussed and I find that good, still nowadays it’s important to talk about women, sexual liberty, contraception, violences against women. That’s why I give this book 3 stars, because we still need to read about all this, but some things are unnecessary and made my reading experience awful, made me lost the purpose of the story, made me wonder what was the moral of the story. 

At the end, everything went so fast. We went from Glenn’s depression and alcoholism to a happy ending in less than 2 pages, without conclusion, without moral. I stared at the book wondering if I really read all the pages, and I in fact did read all the pages. 

Not a bad book overall, it has great and important themes, but sometimes poorly handled. Still was interesting to dive into family dynamics, relationships and hard reality of life not being always pink and joyful. 

Trigger Warnings: physical abuse, toxic relationship, car accident, alcohol, sexual violence, suicide attempt, addiction, rape, self harm, sexual content, violence, vomit, medical content, adult/minor relationship, domestic abuse, pregnancy, eating disorder, infidelity, body horror, death, death of parent, suicidal thoughts, pedophilia, alcoholism, infertility, blood, emotional abuse, homophobia