Rating: 4/5

The time ancient China during the dynamic T'ang dynasty of the seventh century, a tired young man Judge Dee a magistrate desperately needing a vacation is traveling with only one lieutenant Chiao Tia, the former criminal a fierce highwayman reformed by the able judge, handy in a brawl which he still enjoys very much, of course I am writing about Chiao, maybe. Stopping in the small town of Wei-ping in northern China and paying a courtesy visit to fellow magistrate Teng Kan but secrets must be hidden, Dee's sojourn is strictly incognito to the surprise of the accommodating official, graciously every wish will be granted to him. But before he leaves Teng reveals a strange yet beautiful lacquer screen depicting a brutal crime...why ?Imagine a week away from crushing duty, just visit the important sights if any, relax go where they want, do anything within reason and be like others without a care in the world this is paradise...not in these books, reality sets in quickly. First case ( there are always three) a wealthy silk merchant Ko Chib-yuan apparently commits suicide by jumping in a river, the suspicious judge is unsure the old man had a pretty young wife. Not his problem though but then case number two arrives, Teng Kan's wife is cruelly murdered at home, obviously Dee must take over, his bad luck . A third case appears a thief has been embezzling the late silk merchant's funds . A stranger here, he and Chiao can infiltrate the underworld and does pretending to be tough miscreants as the two try to find the culprits, but the ease they fit in tells a lot about the tin line between good and evil. Living with the local gang in an inn, their tough boss is called the Corporal, however he doesn't act like a thug or
 gives the impression of a vicious killer, an army deserter; hearing many interesting stories in The Phoenix Inn the spies, still they are petty thieves is Dee wasting his time ? Nevertheless digging up bodies is not a pleasant occupation no matter how many previously Judge Dee has done, it will never be easy...But his job is to bring the guilty to justice, and punish the wicked. An excellent murder mystery by the author who knows China he lived there being a former Dutch diplomat , the scholar loved China and it shows. For those who want something different in genre setting and also acquire knowledge these neglected jewels are for you, once popular in the past, the road less traveled gives a great view. And life is for the adventurous, no chances no gains.