Rating: 5/5

There’s an interesting 1934 incident at Sylvia Beach’s house, recorded in Carlos Baker’s Ernest Hemingway: A Life Story, where Hemingway met, for the first time, the Competition:

The women were talking when he burst in, wearing an old raincoat, and a battered hat pulled over his eyes. Sylvia introduced them. “I want the two best modern American writers to know each other, ” said she. When she went to answer the telephone, Ernest and Katherine Anne stood gazing at each other for a full ten seconds. Then Ernest turned and departed as rapidly as he had come in. Neither of them had said a word. 

I find it fascinating that Hemingway, unexpectedly placed in a Fight or Flight situation, would choose Flight. Oh, I know I’m taking that a bit far, and to be fair to Hemingway, Baker records on the very next page (331) a much more gracious Hemingway &amp; Porter meeting. But I like to think, at that moment at Sylvia Beach’s, Hemingway came face to face with a writer he “truly” respected. It was 1934, and at that point, Porter’s stories had been circulating, and her first collection, Flowering Judas was now out. It is certain, to my mind at least, that Hemingway had read some of Porter’s work.

I’ve always admired Porter, but it’s an odd admiration based on only having read a few of her stories (“Flowering Judas,” “Maria Conception,” “Pale Horse, Pale Rider,” and probably a few minor stories). Her Collected Stories sits like an indictment on my bookcase. I even went through the bother of reading a biography on her several years back (I can’t remember the author or title, it was kind of dry), wanting to know more about her life. I don’t know why I’ve avoided reading her Collected Stories, though I suspect it has something to do with the intense craftsmanship that I find in the few I have read, and my anal need to finish a book cover to cover rather than just dipping into it from time to time (which is what you should probably due with "Collected" efforts). A few months ago, at a used book store, I ran across three of Porter’s short story collections. After reading the first, Flowering Judas, I’m convinced, this is the best way to read this writer. She is intense, each sentence counts, there is remarkable nuance and precision in each line. Porter is a writer’s writer. This first collection must have been intimidating to other writers, because it’s damn near perfect, leaving the reader with the sense that this is a freakish prodigy of some sort. 

Flowering Judas is a death haunted collection. But Revolution (the Mexican, the Russian) and Betrayal (personal and political) also play their parts in many of these stories. It is a collection that is dominated by Porter’s Mexican experiences as a journalist. The “Mexican” stories are, to my mind, the strongest in the collection, and she wisely has the collection bookended with them (“Maria Concepcion,” “Hacienda”). A few comments on the stories below:

“Maria Concepcion.” I believe this was Porter’s first published story. If so, it’s one of the most remarkable opening acts in American fiction. It’s a story of a young Mexican woman betrayed by her husband, who runs off with another woman to join the revolution. Love, pride, murder, madness, ancient cultures and modern revolution. There’s so much going on in this story, that the best thing I can say is “read it.”

“Virgin Violeta.” On surface, a slighter effort than the collection’s opening effort. Betrayal is the dominant theme here, with each gesture, each word, playing a part in the story’s careful construction. This is a Mexican story that focuses on the traditional Do’s and Don’ts of courting a sleazy cousin.

“The Martyr.” Another Mexican story, but this one is about an artist who has lost his lover. Yeah, betrayal is the surface theme, but also Gluttony. (I believe Porter was Catholic, so Deadly Sins may have been on her mind here.) What a sap this guy is.

“The Rope.” A lot of people really admire this story, but I felt it was one of the most gimmicky of the bunch. A young (and poor) couple arguing over the unnecessary purchasing of some rope, and the need to get some coffee. The argumentative exchanges between the two strongly suggest other stuff is going on. Just jealousy or perhaps adultery? I wasn’t totally sure. I need to re-read this one.

“He.” A depression era kind of story that takes place on a declining farm somewhere in the south, involving a mother’s attempt to protect her mentally challenged son from the family’s downward spiral of fortune. Reminded me a bit of a Bob Dylan song (when he was in his Woody Guthrie period). Heartbreaking. Naturalism 101.

“Theft.” This one was a bit gimmicky as well, but handled better. On surface, a young woman returning to her apartment encounters several disappointments (some personal). A maid steals her purse, and they argue over who should have it. The maid (in full People Power mode) feels she has more need. The young woman agrees (which puzzled me), but it’s because the purse was a gift from a former lover. I need to read this one again. If it was me, I would of called the cops. All of that said, I enjoyed the details and the period dialogue in this story.

“That Tree.” An American journalist and poet wannabe living the good life down in Mexico, at least until his prissy American wife shows up. Great detail writing, and a funny take on bohemian bullshit.

“The Jilting of Granny Weatherall.” An old woman dying recalls her life. Outstanding story, and one of the most realistic fictional portrayals of someone nearing the end that I have ever read. As I recall, Porter nearly died of pneumonia. That hazy, feverish experience surely impacted this story. It’s also a story about the need to let go, and forgive. 

“Flowering Judas.” One of the greatest American short stories – ever. A devastating indictment of revolutionaries, involving a young American woman who has become disillusioned with the Mexican revolution, and those who call the shots. The story is filled with a nearly unbearable sexual tension, so much so that you can cut the threatening atmosphere with a knife. This is one of the “Mexican” stories.

“The Cracked Looking Glass.” Set in New England, a married couple not well matched due to age (he’s getting really old, she’s about 30 years younger), trying to get along with each other. She tells big whopper lies, and he grins and bears it. This is a somewhat funny story, and a necessary relief after "Flowering Judas." But there’s a wise sadness to this story as well.

“Hacienda.” This one is the longest story in the collection, and more a novella than a short story. Actually, there are times I thought the story bordered on a journalistic piece. Basically, it’s about an unnamed female journalist (clearly Porter) visiting the set of a Russian filmmaker in Mexico. This is a thinly disguised tale of Eisenstein’s disastrous attempt to film a movie in Mexico. This one reminded me a lot of a Robert Stone type of story (see Children of Light). The woman is clearly disillusioned with this bunch. There was a time when she probably had hopes for the Revolution, but now all she sees in hypocrisy and decadence. And this story has it all: adultery, murder (or accidental death – you’re never really sure), drunken banquets, a whiff of lesbianism, a whiff of incest, graft, and so on. Porter’s eye and pen are used to devastating effect. I tried reading this one years ago, and had trouble with it. But this time around I loved it, and placed within the context of the preceding stories, seemed a perfect endpoint for the collection.