Rating: 3/5

Gabrielle Van der Mal, educated, refined, the daughter of a well-to-do doctor in Belgium determines to put her feet on the path of becoming a nun. With her we enter the Mother House. With her we experience the first day, week, month, year of the journey from novice to nun. She hopes to become a surgical nurse and serve in Africa along the Congo. Indeed, she is sent to school to be trained, but is encouraged by her superior to fail the examination so as not to attract untoward attention, acclaim, and even jealousy from other student nuns. This is just one of the many struggles we experience with Gabrielle, who is now Sister Luke. 

Thus follows the fascinating, sometimes gripping, journey of Sister Luke. 

In 1959 this story was brought to the screen starring Audrey Hepburn, which I now want to watch, having enjoyed the book.

Just a few vocabulary notes for me:
p.229 Atavisms (wikipedia def... is the tendency to revert to ancestral type. In biology, an atavism is an evolutionary throwback, such as traits reappearing which had disappeared generations before.[2] Atavisms can occur in several ways. One way is when genes for previously existing phenotypical features are preserved in DNA, and these become expressed through a mutation that either knock out the overriding genes for the new traits or make the old traits override the new one. A number of traits can vary as a result of shortening of the fetal development of a trait (neoteny) or by prolongation of the same. In such a case, a shift in the time a trait is allowed to develop before it is fixed can bring forth an ancestral phenotype.[3])

in context of book..."The drama of the expanding Congo touched off a patriotic pride she never knew she had, but accepted tranquilly now as one of those atavisms which every nun brought to the convent from her former life and never quite outgrew."

p.236 somnambulists (wikipedia def... is a sleep disorder belonging to the parasomnia family.[2] Sleepwalkers arise from the slow wave sleep stage in a state of low consciousness and perform activities that are usually performed during a state of full consciousness. )

in context of book..."There was a stupefaction in all their voices as they made the responses and their gestures seemed dreamy and thoughtless, like those of somnambulists hesitating on the edge of an abyss."

p.288 Quisling (wikipedia def...(Norwegian pronunciation: [ˈkʋɪsˈlɪŋ]; English: /ˈkwɪzlɪŋ/) is a term used in reference to fascist and collaborationist political parties and military and paramilitary forces in occupied Allied countries which collaborated with Axis occupiers in World War II, as well as for their members and other collaborators.)

in context of book..."The Belgian collaborators were called Quislings, a word Sister Luke pondered and could not solve because she had never heard that just before the blitz which captured her own country in eighteen days there had been a preparatory blitz that had subdued Norway. One of her students told her who Quisling of Norway was and how the hated name had come into their own language as a proper noun everybody understood."