Rating: 4/5

This was my first exposure to reading any of the works by Stuart Woods, and Chiefs did not disappoint. It was a highly enjoyable page turner, which uses not only elements of crime and mystery, but also has historical approach to it as the novel’s plot spans many generations. 

Chiefs also is really three books in one, as each part, or book, takes place in a separate generation with the backdrop of the story taking place in Delano, Georgia. Each book follows the doings of the newly appointed chief of police (Will Henry, Sonny Butts, Tucker Watts) and their subsequent role in the community surrounding. 

One of the focuses of Chiefs concerns the search for a killer. The crime is established early in Part 1 when a few mysterious and baffling unsolved murders take place that have Will Henry puzzled. As the years go on, this case continues to baffle and confuse. 

Chiefs also has a very generational feel to it. In each section, we get to know many of the key characters and locals—some good, some very corrupt—who are the prominent members of this Georgia community. 

While Chiefs might not be high literature, it certainly has themes that predominate and make it a book to ponder on as well. One of the constants prevailing throughout Woods’ work is the theme of corruption within not only the citizens, but the law enforcement. In other ways, Chiefs also exposes the nature of racism, prejudice and injustice in very raw and sometimes shocking ways. (There are several scenes that are pretty uncomfortable.)

In this way, although billed as a crime novel, Chiefs works in other ways. It represents a bit of a social commentary on racial prejudice and injustice (and those who fought against it). It is also a fascinating and gripping mystery involving a decades-long killing spree. It also has a historical-fiction element that brings in prominent key figures and lets us understand how this community functions. 

If there was one beef I had with the novel is that some of the scenes and characters (particularly the villains) are a tad over the top in a few moments and scenes. This could have been toned down a bit, in my opinion. 

Still, overall, I found Chiefs to be a very effectively paced and gripping novel. Even though it is nearly 600 pages, it reads very quickly. I’m looking forward to reading more from this author.