Rating: 4/5

This is not my favorite Georgette Heyer romance, but as light historical fiction it is a delight.

Regency Buck tells the tale of two wealthy though provincial young people as they embark on their first London Season. The dialog is witty, the story peopled with a rich cast of well-drawn characters, details of Regency life are sprinkled everywhere; it is all meticulously researched yet the history is woven into the story in a way that never feels forced or overwhelming. 

The story begins on September 27, 1811 on the Great North Road from Yorkshire to London. Judith Taverner and her younger brother, Sir Peregrine, are planning to spend the night at The Grantham Inn when a fateful and highly embarrassing carriage accident complicates their plans—and their lives.

The Taverners’ visit to Grantham proves livelier than expected in part because a prizefight—a “mill”—has drawn some 15,000 spectators to the area, all eager to bet on Cribb and Molineaux and the fight of the century. 

 

Once in London, Judith and Peregrine are reluctantly but effectively sponsored by their insufferably arrogant guardian, the Earl of Worth, who finds them a house, a suitable companion for Judith, and invitations to all the right social venues. The must-have voucher for Almacks is, naturally, included: 

Judith is outfitted in the style that befits an heiress with £80,000 by her companion, the delightfully odd Mrs. Scattergood. Miss Taverner is "a fine young woman, rather above the average height, and had been used for the past four years to hearing herself proclaimed a remarkably handsome girl….At first glance one might write her down as a mere Dresden china miss, but a second glance would inevitably discover the intelligence in her eyes, and the decided air of resolution in the curve of her mouth."

Judith is one of Heyer’s less lovable heroines: she's young and used to having her own way; she's impulsive; she has a bad temper and it gets herself into situations that are questionable. But what Miss Taverner does have is undeniable style, a certain effrontery and the ability to bounce back when society gossips turn against her.
 
Lord Worth’s word, Peregrine’s title and estates, and Judith’ fortune and beauty gain the siblings entry into the first ranks of London society. Neither Judith nor her brother Peregrine are quite ready for socially exacting world of the ton and their naiveté will catch them out more than once over the course of their first London Season.

Disparagingly dubbed “The Milkmaid” by a sneering dandy, Judith is befriended by George ‘Beau’ Brummel, who has more than a walk-on part and charmingly coaches Judith in cultivated oddities such as taking snuff or driving herself in Hyde Park with great élan in her handsome perch phaeton. 

There she attracts rather too much attention from Prince William, the nautical Duke of Clarence, who provides some of the books most amusing moments.

Meanwhile, Peregrine can’t resist the chance to explore London’s seamier side—from boxing, to gambling hells, to cock fights where the upper crust mingles dangerously with rougher elements.

Then it’s off to Belvoir Castle for the hunting and Lord Worth’s own country estates for Christmas.

And on to Brighton for summer evening music sessions with the Prince Regent at his Pavillion, which glitters in impossible Gothic-Chinese-Moghul glory. 

I enjoyed the romance (sort of) and I liked the final pairing, which seemed to me to be both believable and likely to endure and be the making of both. But history buffs like me mostly appreciate Regency Buck for the pleasures of the London Season and the chance to rub elbows with the rich, royal and (in)famous. 

Read with fellow Georgette Heyer Fans, who always add so much to my enjoyment of these wonderful books: https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/...

Content rating G: A clean read, though animal lovers may cringe at the cock-fighting scene and boxing haters will detest the Cribb-Molineaux fight.