Rating: 5/5

Reading Arabian Sands was an incredible experience for me, not only because as a standalone work it's the best piece of travel writing I've come across, but also its insight into a people, the Arabs, and religion, Islam, that I had been searching for. It has my strongest recommendation.

I've always loved travel writing, it began with Colin Thubron's "Beyond the Wall" about China, he was a fabulous writer, and he put into words what I had felt during a visit in 1988. However, Thesiger travels at a level of inconvenience and real danger that no one undergoes today. As Thesiger travels through the Empty Quarter, the far southeastern corner of Saudi Arabia, it was incomprehensible to me how little he cared about his physical well-being or safety. It's as if his desire to travel and to see these places - the first European to ever see many of them - was the prime driving force of his life. If you like travel writing or books about exploration and adventure, you will absolutely love this book.

The book is also a fascinating autobiography of the author. He grows up in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, moves to England when he is 10 (and attends Eton of all places), and then goes back to explore, he just can't get away. He's the most driven person I've ever read about, and he knows what he wants to do, and will do anything to achieve it.

After some initial forays in Africa, he moves on to explore the Empty Quarter. The Arabian portion of the book can be divided into 3 parts - the initial trip across the sands, which is one of the most exciting things I've ever read, the second trip across the sands, only slightly less so, and then last part, which is not as richly or patiently written, about his travels in the mountains of Oman. The writing is exceptionally beautiful, the descriptions of the dunes and mountains, the plants and the animals. It is quite detailed, one really feels like one is there. My old hardcover copy of the book came with photographs from the journey, and a beautiful map in the back, which really helped visualize the traveling.

Many topics are covered in detail. The descriptions of camels are particularly interesting, and Thesiger minutely describes virtually everything about camels, which is fascinating. When I say everything I really mean that, there's nothing that he is too embarrassed to discuss about camels (or the Bedu for that matter).

But where Thesiger really shines is in his description of the people, the Bedu (or Bedoin), the way they are as a people, their tribal culture, and their Islam, and his personal relationships with them. Thesiger describes how they are as individuals, as people, how different they are, even the differences among the tribes, with highly personal, subjective observations. And the truly amazing thing about the book is how utterly honest and opinionated Thesiger is about the Bedu, how detailed - the good (mostly) and the bad. He is unafraid to say whatever he thinks, and to cover just about every topic.

As a result, at the end of the book one is left with this incredible understanding of and sympathy for the culture of the Bedu. The overarching message is one of incredible complexity, impossible to put into words, but incapable of simplification or stereotyping. There are many things about the Bedu which are so much better than Western culture, one is embarrassed, particularly their warmth. And there are many things that are so shockingly bad and wrong you can't believe that even started to like these people. Thesiger, who is clearly sympathetic and fond of the Bedu, shows his points quite clearly, but does not flinch from showing things which we might find difficult to understand or sympathize with.

He also makes overarching points about the Arabs as a people. They created the world's second largest religion, and nearly conquered the world. They are also the people behind 9/11 (11 of the 15 hijackers were Saudis). I've been studying these topics quite closely over the years, and I never quite "got it", mostly because what I've read has an agenda. While I'm reluctant to share my conclusions in this review, I've never read anything more enlightening.

Final words: this book is truly awesome. Thesiger's honesty and overarching "goodness" permeates the book and in a way that more than anything "makes" it. I expect to be thinking about it the rest of my life.