Rating: 5/5

It's been a long time since I've read this, but the book has stuck with me.

It was written in the late-60s / early-70s and is set in the 60s. It's a story deeply wrapped up in the issues of American culture at that time - the Vietnam War and the changing views on drugs and sex. Through Mr. Fairbanks there are also threads back to the past and the generation that had come before.

Michener is well known I think for books that focus on a place. Hawaii being once such book of that type I recall. I've never read those and suspect that this book is a bit different in that it's really focused on a time and a culture, not a place.

I can't find anything to substantiate it now, but when I read it back in the late 80s I had been given to believe that Michener supported the war in Vietnam. Considering the views of pro-war people at the time, I viewed this book as rather enlightened. It paints a sympathetic view of several views of the war. Likewise it's pretty open to the other elements of the time as well.

The main driver of the book is the group of young adults as well as a few older characters as well. Not all are American and little takes place in America, but the book does have a very American-culture focus. They are all well developed as they are introduced in turn. Later when you follow them from place to place you know them as you would a friend. The non-Americans are still affected by events and views in the States - with Britta being the one exception and even she's influenced by individual Americans. Along the way you get a taste of that time in other countries - Britain, Norway, Israel.

I wasn't alive in the late 60s and by the time I was learning to speak in the 70s the echoes of that decade were muted and distant. But I think The Drifters gives a peek at that time. It is not the only view of that time - I think that time was too chaotic to be captured by a single view - but you get a taste. There's good writing, the characters stay with you and it is a view of a time from the perspective of those surviving it, not driving it.