Rating: 4/5

"There's nothing you can say that I haven't already said to myself. It's lunacy, but you've haunted me ever since I set eyes on you that day in the rain. I flew to New York and everywhere I looked I saw your huge blue eyes. I came home and there you were in my outer office, typing like a demure little mouse, never looking up when I walked past, ignoring me. I can't count the number of times I've walked through that room completely unnecessarily just to see your head bent over the typewriter. You never looked at me once.” -Gabriel

***
I wonder what kind of disorder the heroine Marisa Radley suffered from. She clearly have abandonment and commitment issues having moved around a lot during child-hood with parents that treated her like air. She started work when she was seventeen as a typist in a large company and thats where she meets the enigmatic and forceful hero Gabriel Radley who literally sweeps her off her feet and urges her to marry him after a couple of weeks (she is 19 by this time). Marisa being a shy and quiet introvert had no idea how to express herself to Gabriel and their marriage becomes doomed when they start to fight in their lack of communication. After a ugly fight where he ends up slapping her she leaves him. Not knowing she is pregnant. Giving birth to Jamie gave her a sense of security and gave her first sense of true happiness and love. Her heartbreak when Jamie got kidnapped is excruciating and i am glad Gabriel found her at that point to pick up the pieces of their broken marriage and to try to mend it together and save their son.

What would i have done if it weren`t for Charlotte Lamb`s Romances. She has written so many keepers and i definitely consider "Abduction" one of them since i rarely stumble upon a heroine like Marisa in this case. Gabriel despite his hurt and frustration wanted his wife-body and heart. I like how he tried to talk to her and listen. He really wanted to understand her. I also love how he couldn`t keep his hands off her, i mean he was so much besotted with her that any judgement clouded his mind sometimes, which he actually was aware of.