Rating: 4/5

"Mister," I said, "if you ain't any slicker with that pistol than you were with that bottom deal, you'd better not have at it."
Trouble was, he wouldn't be content with one mistake, he had to make two; so he had at it, and they buried him out west of town where men were buried who die by the gun.

So I’d finished The Daybreakers and immediately started on Sackett. The events depicted here take place shortly after the events of The Daybreakers, but the two books don’t have so much bearing on one another that you couldn’t read them separately. That said: it’s easy to see why they were combined to make a TV-movie / mini-series (The Sacketts, 1979), since it isn’t too difficult to pull the two stories together (there are some recurring characters and at least one, Cap Rountree, who features (somewhat) prominently throughout).

"Are you the Sackett who killed Bigelow?"
“He wasn't much good with a bottom deal."
"Nor with a gun, I guess."
"He was advised."

I enjoyed Sackett’s Tell Sackett as a protagonist, more so than Tyrel Sackett of Daybreakers. Tell is an older, faster, meaner, dirtier, more ornery version of younger brother Tyrel, and yet he is down to earth enough to be endearing. He has more experience and has lived dangerously for longer, which gives him the edge in entertainment value. Expect some amusing dialogue. Even so, I would have to say that Daybreakers is probably the better book of the two.

All I had was a wore-out saddle, four pistols, a Winchester carbine, and the clothes I stood up in. Yes, and I had me a knife, an Arkansas toothpick, good for hand-fighting or butchering meat.

Four pistols? Yes please. Fertilizer is taken from no one here. 

It isn’t a very violent book, but things do happen and people do get their comeuppance where it’s due. It’s a simple little story of survival and adventure, but well told and short enough to be over before your attention starts to wander. 

Trouble just naturally seemed to latch onto me and hang on with all its teeth.

3.5 stars