Rating: 3/5

“We lose our ability to see angels as we grow older, and that is a tragic loss” (9).

I have long been coming to realize that the test of a good theologian just might be whether they can write a good story. The best theologians have vivid imaginations and through their words can capture our imaginations. This is quite different than what I learned when I first encountered theology; I had the impression theologians were the ones who could catalog and synthesize scripture in the most comprehensive fashion. It might be dry and boring, but it covered a lot of ground and was comprehensive.

As a child, my imagination was capture by Lewis’ Chronicles of Narnia and Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings. I did not realize it at the time, but these writers who first piqued my imagination were also theologians who spoke to my heart. Over time new authors were added to this list - George MacDonald, GK Chesterton, Marilynne Robinson, David Bentley Hart and, of course, Madeline L’Engle.

This is the first non-fiction work of L’Engle’s I’ve read. It is a joy to read. She reflects on faith and art, arguing that it is in stories that we encounter truth:

“And so I knew that it was in story that I found flashes of that truth which makes us free. And yet we are still being taught that fairy tales and myths are to be discarded as soon as we are old enough to understand ‘reality’” (45).

Rather than growing up from fantasy, fairy tale and myth, it is these stories which are the vehicle for teaching us truth. 

I love what she says about children’s books:
“A Children’s book is any book a child will read” (104”

“But if a book is not good enough for a grownup, it is not good enough for a child” (105)

Being a parent, I have rediscovered joy in reading some of the books my children have been reading. 

She also reflects on faith. One of the reasons I picked up this book was that I had learned L’Engle was a Christian universalist and I thought it was here she talks about that. She does not, though she does offer profound thoughts on the relationship of Christianity to other religions: 

“I don’t mean to water down my Christianity into a vague kind of universalism, with Buddha and Mohammed all being more or less equal to Jesus - not at all! But neither do I want to tell God (or my friends) where he can and cannot be seen. We human beings far too often tend to codify God, to feel that we know where he is and where he is not, and this arrogance leads to such things as the Spanish Inquisition and the Salem witch burnings and has the result of further fragmenting an already broken Christendom” (23)

Finally, she talks about her love of science and how what she learns relates to her faith:

“When they upset the religious establishment it is not because they have done anything to diminish God: they only diminish or - even more frightening - change the current establishment’s definition of God” (183).

Perhaps all this is tied together - rather than a fear of the change scientific findings will bring, an imagination tied to the grandeur of God is open to wider and deeper understandings of the divine.