Rating: 3/5

Lords of the Atlas is really a mixed bag of impressions. On one side it is immersive and entertaining, on the other it is gossipy, sensationalist and orientalist. 

The first half of the book describing the mountain passes and fortified homesteads of the atlas, the ancestral oasis' of the far south, and the sprawling market cities on the plains is beautifully written and very evocative. But Maxwell is not the author of these passages, of the first 125 pages almost the entirety is copied straight from a travelogue by Walter Harris, with only the addition of some connecting paragraphs. I suppose he really deserves the majority of the credit. The second half which Maxwell wrote himself is much weaker, and I have to admit I started skimming through it.

Lots of emphasis is put on the "inherent nature" of the berber tribesmen as cruel opportunists and schemers. If the berbers are not murdering, looting, raping, torturing or burying their own companions alive, Maxwell is not interested. The same goes for the sultans who are described as tyrannizing despots straight out of an orientalist fairy-tale, without care as to why things were this way. This black and white moralism is evident throughout, Maxwell wants characters to conform to superficial two-dimensional caricatures of good or evil. 

The author is not an historian, what he wants is a good story (up to and including cannibal soup-kitchens). In the introduction he states that Morocco has remained unchanged for a thousand years. He makes many allusions to the "medieval" quality of the berber warlords and their attempt to establish "feudalism". Neither term is in any way appropriate, and only serves to obfuscate local dynamics rather than to enlighten.

2,5 stars

 ---

In the tradition of Maxwell I've decided to copy and append a large section of text which I have not written myself, for those who might be interested:

"The author of this book evidently aimed at writing a shocker, providing the reader with a maximum of frissons by dwelling lovingly on violence, brutality, treachery, sex and perversions, and he succeeds brilliantly. In the course of doing so, he also provides something which, in general outline, presents a remarkably good picture. On details, he is far less trustworthy, and his comments are not profound. Does this matter? The serious scholar will still have to go to Robert Montagne's most remarkable work on the subject, but the general reader will not be misled in outline, nor concerned with the detail. But given the paucity of documentation on this fascinating subject, perhaps it does matter a bit. The characters in this drama were not always very literate, or truthful. If the small proportion of checkable details proves to be unreliable, one wonders about the much larger proportion of uncheckable ones. Mr Maxwell mentions 'verbal communications and unpublished notes' and explains, convincingly, that he cannot specify these. One can only hope that these records will be stored, with whatever safeguards may be appropriate, in a place where they will not be lost to the historian, and that, in due course, they can also be assessed."

"Mr Maxwell's stories are often amusing rather than plausible. For instance, the story of cannibalism in a Casablanca restaurant (p. 238) hinges on the identification of human flesh by a medical student, in a restaurant 'much patronised by students'. The story would gain in plausibility if Morocco were known to have possessed a medical school at the time. Mr Maxwell's no doubt justified scorn of the scholarly apparatus of footnotes makes it difficult to assess the standing of his sources. His scissors and paste method makes him take over French passages without even editing. let alone checking. Thus Damascus appears as Damas on page 156, and a leader of dissident Berber tribes, Sidi Mha, appears (with his name inappropriately spelt) on page 148 without any introduction whatever, as though he were a familiar historic figure. The explanation is that the passage is lifted from a French work, in which however he had been properly introduced. A kind of spurious local colour is conveyed by quoting tribal chiefs in French of which of course they were ignorant: it is not clear why, if they are not quoted in Arabic or Berber, their alleged words should not be given in English."

"The ethnographic account of Berber tribal structure beginning on page 139 is neither correct nor coherent. It is simply not the case that amongst Berbers, 'monogamy was a strict rule'. As far as rules, go as distinct from practice, these often differ from Koranic law in the opposite direction from the one indicated by Mr Maxwell. They allow more than four wives.(The Berbers, however, consider this deviation, mistakenly, to be Koranic.) Practice also does not conform to strict monogamy. There is no justification for talking of 'Berber matriarchy', and no basis at all for the account given for the origin of Berber personal names (p. 46). The amghar was not a 'representative of the central government' (p. 140). The account of religious institutions (p. 218) is shaky: Mr Maxwell uses the term zawiya where tarika would be appropriate. The account of tribal structure is a curious mixture of error and valid perception, and one can only wonder about its origin and the number of hands it has passed through."

"There is a similar lack of care in copying maps. On two of them, the town of Demnate, correctly named in the text, appears for some reason as Denmat. On one of them, Azilal, the administrative centre of the region which had success- fully defied the Glawi and which subsequently remained outside Glawa power, is for some reason transplanted to a point which would place it at the heart of the Glawa domain. On another map, a similar fate befalls the crucial oasis of Tafilalet, the original home of the present Moroccan dynasty, which is surprisingly claimed for Glawa territory, in contradiction of the more plausible list of possessions given on page 177. These errors again suggest that the author had not bothered to look carefully at the maps or at what they depict. It is simply not true that (p. 59) 'the French had no representation of any sort beyond the foothills of the High Atlas' until after the death of Caid Hammou in 1934. Still less is it true (p. 159) that 'the "pacification" of the South was delayed until after Hammou's death in 1934'. In fact the pacification of the Atlas was completed in 1933, and that of the extreme south, irelevant to the balance of power in the Atlas and Glawa lands, in 1934. It was delayed by dissident tribes, not by the lords of Telouet. On page 198 the date of the American landings in Morocco is given as 1943 (though it is given correctly elsewhere), and on page 197, the date of the arrival of the German armistice commission is given as 1939. A generalization on page 198, about the attitude of French officials to Vichy, is unsubstantiated and extremely implausible. The political implications of a story given on page 159 hinge on the quite unfounded assumption that powder play by mounted warriors implies hostility, instead of being a conventional form of entertainment. On page 196 Allal al Fassi is described as being exiled to Gaboon. A more important mistake occurs on page 182, concerning the politically crucial Berber Dahir (decree) of 1930, which underwrote Berber customary law as opposed to Koranic law, and provided Berber tribes with the option of retaining their custom. This is a point at which Mr Maxwell abandons scissors and paste and appears in person. 'In the opinion of the present writer its (i.e. the decree's) greatest weakness was a failure to recognise that the majority of the Berbers to whom it was meant to appeal were already labouring under the despotic rule of the Great Caids . . .' They were not. This, like crediting the delay in pacification to Hammou, is once again a terribly Marrakesh-bound view. It is true that the majority of the Berber tribes inhabiting the mountains visible from the windows of the Mamounia Hotel in Marrakesh were indeed by then under the great Caids, or had by then passed under their sway. It was simply not true of the tribal groups elsewhere, just as numerous. The regions of tribal custom remained as extensive as those in which customary law had been officially abolished, right until the coming of Moroccan independence."

...

"But if the details are suspect and the comments lack depth, nevertheless the many readers who will obtain their picture of the period from this book will be given, in outline, a correct picture."

Gellner, E. (1970). [Review of Lords of the Atlas. The Rise and Fall of the House of Glaoua 1893-1956, by G. Maxwell]. Middle Eastern Studies, 6(2), 224–227. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4282327