Rating: 4/5

Prior to the ceremonial opening of the Babylon 5 station, the Vorlon ambassador Kosh has been waiting and watching for three years near a planet on the Rim known to humanity as Alpha Omega 3 but to other species as Z'Ha'dum. He sends a message to the Minbari ambassador asking her to request Jeffery Sinclair to intercede with earth authorities to immediately command the expedition to the planet to return home. But the expedition is a private one (allegedly) by IPX, and is (allegedly) for the purposes of archaeological exploration. 

John Sheridan's wife, Anna, has been invited by her hero and mentor Dr Chang on a trip that promises to be the discovery of a lifetime. Anna had already found in a box of "miscellaneous" from another dig on another planet a small object she called "the mouse". It seemed mechanical but she wasn't sure and, on holding it, she felt some kind of activation and some unusual sense of union with it. Taking a risk, she engages a telepath to see if it can be fully activated by psychic powers. It goes very wrong and the telepath becomes mindless jelly, repeating over and over, "I am the machine." Only later does Anna find out that every telepath in a three-mile radius was similarly affected. 

Normally it takes many months to fit out an expedition of this scale, but somehow in just a few weeks IPX has one ready to go to the Rim. Anna has been waiting for John to join her for a long-overdue reunion but he is caught up in striving to deal with the failed inspections of his new command ship, Agamemnon. Until his crew is battle-ready, he can't afford his scheduled R&amp;R. Meantime, Anna gets to know the linguist Dr Morden who has tragically lost his wife and child in an accident at a jump gate and is terrorised and tormented by the thought that they may be trapped in hyperspace, in the traumatic moment of dying, for an eternity. 

As the IPX expedition heads off on the Icarus for Alpha Omega 3, it becomes clear that Donne, the telepath aboard, is working with the captain to gain the secrets of the biomechanical technology Anna has accidentally discovered. Those secrets will change the power structure of all planetary alignments and, in the eyes of many in the earth hierarchy, give humanity the edge in the galaxy.

But, as Kosh could have told them, it's a trap. There is now only one choice: to serve the powers of Z'Ha'dum. There are only two options in that choice: free or enslaved. The price of freedom: to choose to fulfil your deepest desire.