Rating: 3/5

Like Susan Ferrier, whom I read a few months ago, Emily Eden (1797-1869) has been tagged as the second Jane Austen. I felt there was more justice in this description in Eden’s case than in Ferrier’s. Ferrier is diffuse and rather rambling in her pacing, closer to Scott than to Austen, whereas Eden has much more of Austen’s concision and point. That’s not to say that she’s genuinely a match for Austen (who is?), but she’s an interesting minor novelist in her own right.

One great difference between Eden and Austen is in their social background, which is fascinatingly reflected in their novels. Austen was the daughter of a country clergyman, and she never left England, even though she had some intriguing and more cosmopolitan family connections. Eden came from a much more “public” and aristocratic background. She was the daughter of a prominent Whig politician, and she lived in India for seven years while her brother was Governor-General there. She was a close friend and political crony of Queen Victoria’s first Prime Minister, Lord Melbourne, and a much later Prime minister, Anthony Eden, was a great-great-great nephew.

Unsurprisingly, politics is far more prominent in Eden’s writing than it is in the hermetic private world of Jane Austen. British and European politics in the 1820s forms the backdrop for the domestic dramas of Eden’s The Semi-Attached Couple, which she wrote in her early thirties in 1829, even though it was not published until 1860. One of the best satirical characters in the novel is the vain and scheming political hostess, Lady Portmore. Other sharply drawn minor characters include an absent-mindedly philandering Prime Minister, “Mr G.” and his adoring private secretary, Mr Fisherwick. A ludicrously corrupt election scene, distantly shadowing those which became a staple in mid-Victorian fiction (Felix Holt; Middlemarch; Mary Barton) illustrates very clearly why the 1832 Reform Act was a good idea.

Where the domestic scene is concerned, a great difference from Austen is that Eden—though unmarried herself—feels confident enough to tackle the emotional dynamics of an initially unhappy marriage, rather than focusing purely on the courtship of her protagonists and leaving married life as the great beyond. The main characters, the very young and sheltered Helen Eskdale and her slightly older, passionately jealous husband, Lord Teviot, rework Pride and Prejudice on the other side of the marital divide, misunderstanding and hurting one another, while still being patently in love. Around them, Eden arranges a range of comic and semi-comic characters, treated with a sharp, but generally benign, eye for human foibles. The cast-list extends to a couple of servants—another characteristic that distinguishes Eden from Austen.

Eden’s only other novel, The Semi-Detached House was written thirty years after The Semi-Attached Couple, but published before it, in 1859; presumably, it was the second novel’s favourable reception that encouraged her to pull the first out of her drawer. I found the later novel less successful than the first; it’s a similarly fresh and breezy read, but it lacks the political dimension and it’s more superficial in its characterization. The Semi-Detached House opens with a fastidious young aristocratic wife, Lady Blanche Chester, retiring for her health to a riverside villa in the invented London suburb of Dulham, and being horrified to discover that she will be sharing the building with a middle-class family with the shockingly plebeian name of Hopkinson. There’s a lot to like in the novel’s treatment of class prejudice—the ’orrible 'Opkinsons turn out very different from Blanche’s expectations—but I felt uncomfortable with the portrayal of the main satirical characters, a family of flashy, nouveau-riche, London-Jewish bankers. There is definitely a degree of anti-Semitism at play here, even if it is mitigated in part by the appealing characterization of a young niece of the family, the melancholy, Byron-quoting Rachel.