Rating: 5/5

Twelfth in the Anita Blake, Vampire Hunter erotic urban fantasy series revolving around Anita Blake, necromancer, vampire executioner, and middle-class American with middle-class values thrust into a "partnership" with a vampire descended from a long line of vampires using lust as their primary tool.

My Take
Incubus Dreams is about acceptance: Tammy and Lawrence's Halloween marriage; Anita and Nathaniel; the Wicked Truth; Richard realizing that he's a hindrance; Anita's preferences in bed; and Damian's being accepted as a person with rights.

The key points are Anita's forming her second triumverate [sic] with Damian and Nathaniel which encourages Richard to acquiesce in merging their primary triumvirate. [We know this won't last!] The three of them also begin to analyze just what characteristics each has gotten from the other two…a useful exercise brought about by Anita's second triumveirate.

I do enjoy this series. Anita is such a kick-ass little thing. I especially enjoy when she forces acceptance on the big bruisers simply by being herself. The girl lives a full life with her harem, her job at Animators, Inc. and her encounters with Bert, the policework with which she's involved, her relationship with Ronnie, and the insights she uncovers about herself. Yeah, she and Richard both frustrate the heck out of me as well. It just keeps ya wonderin'.

In some ways, this is a very happy story with all the acceptance going on. Marriage, new triumvirates (re-)forged, warriors brought into the fold, Richard is actually trying, sexual preferences acknowledged, remodeling...

Busy, busy, busy...In some ways, this is a very happy story with all the acceptance going on. Marriage, new triumvirates (re-)forged, warriors brought into the fold, Richard is actually trying, sexual preferences acknowledged, remodeling...

Busy, busy, busy...

The Story
Anita is appalled that she welcomes a request to come to a murder scene when she's supposed to be at Tammy and Lawrence's wedding reception. A reception where she only makes more trouble for herself with Detective Jessica Arnet who is confused about the crossed signals flashing from Anita and Nathaniel. Hers is not the only confusion as Louis has asked Ronnie to marry him, sending Ronnie into a major fit. With a huge conflict between Ronnie viewing a future of monogamous bliss when she wants more what Anita has with her harem of men.

The major tragedy is a killing spree as an old master vamp kills his way across St. Louis easily stumping the St. Louis Police Department as he skips off to Skin Trade. The only one who doesn't buy the fake-out is Anita.

There are some pluses in Incubus Dreams, the Wicked Truth is absorbed into Jean-Claude's family; Richard, Anita, and JC finally merge their triumvirate; and, it Asher, Richard, and other friends helping to convert Damian’s basement coffin room into a space of his own.

The Characters
Anita Blake is a 26-year-old necromancer with a high kill-count in taking out vampires and other monsters as well as a Federal Marshal. A petite little thing, Anita is currently dating, officially, Jean-Claude while living with Micah and Nathaniel. Although Nathaniel is only "food" as are Jason, Requiem, Byron, and lord knows who else due to the ardeur which Anita has inherited from Jean-Claude through their triumvirate.

Micah is the Nimir Raj to Anita's Nimir Ra; leopard king to leopard queen. Micah and Anita live together along with Nathaniel, a stripper at Guilty Pleasures, one of Jean-Claude's clubs. Micah is also the leader of the Furry Coalition, an organization which promotes cross-shifter support and acceptance as well as liaises with government organizations such as the police and hospitals.

Jean-Claude is a 300+-year-old vampire who is the Master of the City of St. Louis. He is very much in love with Anita almost as much as he is love with power. Power which Jean-Claude sees as a way to protect himself and his vampires from stronger vampires who have hurt him and others in the past including his maker, Belle Morte. Anita is never sure with Jean-Claude if he's maneuvering her for power or simply from love. Jason is Jean-Claude's pomme de sang, a werewolf, and a stripper at Guilty Pleasures. Under Richard's rule, Jason still puts himself in danger to protect Anita from Richard's anger.

The Thronnos Rokke are...
...a clan of werewolves of whom Richard Zeeman, a junior high science teacher, is Ulfric. And he hates what he is. Richard wants the white picket fence with 2.5 children. Instead, he's a werewolf with the power of life and death over his wolves. He's also incredibly conflicted over Anita. He hates and loves her. He hates that she's more comfortable with the monsters than he is and wants nothing to do with her. Yet he also loves her and becomes violently jealous of the men in her bed.

the Regional Preternatural Investigation Team (RPIT) is...
...a division within the police department that deals with all things supernatural. Lieutenant Rudolph "Dolph" Storr is in command. Sergeant Zerbrowski is the main go-to guy on the vampire serial killings. Although there is a sheriff who throws his weight around until Anita shoves it right back at him. Then there's the Mobile Reserve, a SWAT team led by Captain Parker, that must enter the trap baited by a live hostage.

The Church of Eternal Life is...
...a vampire church with Malcolm as its Master. They are indulging in some very risky behavior with their eternal members; Jean-Claude and Anita will have to fix this soon. And make RPIT much happier.

The Cover
The cover is so very golden with the Anita propping herself up while blindfolded and wearing a very sexy teddy with partial lace cups. I suspect the red blindfold is simply to suggest the new depths to which Anita must accustom herself as she tries to understand her pard. The title, Incubus Dreams refers to the strip club on the other side of the river where yet another victim of the serial vampire killers is found.