Naturally, this most famous play by Aristophanes is historically valuable for various reasons. To begin with, there is the context of war and peace. The play was created and performed in 411 BCE, when Athens was in a very tight spot during the famous Peloponnesian War with Sparta. Shortly before, a particularly risky attempt to move the theater of war from the Greek mainland to Sicily had ended disastrously, the allies had risen in revolt, and all of Attica, the countryside around Athens, was occupied by Spartan troops.

In Athens itself, a peace party had always existed that occasionally managed to gain the upper hand, leading to attempts at a diplomatic compromise with Sparta; however, the radical war party, partly through demagogic tactics, usually held the loudest voice, meaning the war had now been going on for 20 years (with a break of a few years). In that context, this play, with the highly original concept of a sex strike by the women to force their husbands to make peace, was by no means politically neutral. 

The final scene, for example, in which the protagonist Lysistrata—the instigator of the sex strike—delivers her closing argument, would almost make you forget that this play actually was a comedy. Her concrete accusations that the men (Athenians and Spartans) can indeed cooperate when an external enemy threatens them, and also when there are (Olympic) Games; and the fact that Sparta and Athens once saved each other from ruin, hold absolutely water historically. And her dramatic closing argument that they are destroying each other while Greece is threatened is nothing short of prophetic (the enduring conflicts would lead to incorporation into Macedonia in the following century).

It goes without saying that this play once again (as in the tragedies, but naturally in a very different way) reveals much about the position of women in Greek society. For a broader discussion of this piece, apart from the historical aspects: see my general account on Goodreads: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show....

And I also point out a later piece by Aristophanes, The Ecclesiazusae (or Women in Council), the historical relevance of which is at least as important.