Rating: 1/5

The first "for Dummies" that let me down.

For starters, the one topic I was interested in and the main reason why I picked this up, was not covered until no exaggeration chapter 22 out of 23 total. Then the answer provided was just so weak and unfulfilled, I should have just done a Google search. 

Even ignoring and pushing that aside, my biggest issue is with how biased the author was about dog aggression. The author must have had a bad experience at some point in her life, because she just goes too way far with her fear of dogs in this aspect. My pitbull, supposedly a dangerous breed, is the sweetest and most gentle best friend you could imagine to my 2 year and 6 month olds. Such a good dog. 

The author makes wild statements like:

"Never play tug of war with your dog. One minute everything is all good, the next the dog could bite and attack out of no where!"

Are you kidding me. I play tug of war with a rope all the time with my dog and she loves it. 

This is just one example of many. She even talks about giving dogs chew bones lead towards aggressive behavior.... what??? She even says that dog aggression is a disease and if the dog shows it... you need to euthanize your dog. If you don't, it's going to be your fault when the dog brutally harms a small child. She goes way to far with this and too often in the book. To give her praise, she does openly admit this expressed fault and even apologizes for it. But still, I just think it really is a bit much.

Other extremes include, "if you give your dog table scraps... you are killing your dog" and also "dogs can't control how much they eat, it's your fault." 

First off... come on... a little piece of meat here or there, absolutely nothing wrong with that. Second, my dog does not over eat what so ever. I have a bowl that fills itself after she eats with a drop/gravity based system that stores food in a wide plastic cylinder. She eats when she is hungry and is fit and athletic and doesn't just eat to obesity or death. I understand some dogs do not have this control, but mine does so I recommend not casting blanket statements that over generalize. 

Another subject that is seriously f'd up... is de-barking? I find this absolutely terrible. Cutting a dogs vocal cords so they can't bark is pretty cruel to me. We already rip out their reproductive organs... I guess we can justify that with over population,, lack of control, heat cycles, etc.... but de-barking.... this is just again too much. 

Lastly, too much of this book is geared towards buying a dog for the first time. Around 40%. It seems like that is the target audience. But, her strong opinions unfortunately I think if people eat this stuff up with be steered into a direction I don't agree with or believe in. 

If you've ever owned a dog in your life, I do not recommend this book. Also her opinions really push me away from giving this book a rec as well. 

I hate to say it but I really have nothing positive to say about this book. I was trying to come up with reason to give it at least +1 star for a 2/5, but i couldn't.

Worst in class "For Dummies" title holder right here.

I am writing this review from my phone, so please disregard/understand any possible errors or auto-corrects.