Rating: 2/5

I read this book because of the great reviews it received on Amazon. I thought it was an okay book but I didn't love it.

The Good:
Technically, this was a well written book. It has a polish and a sophistication that one does not normally find in an author's first book.

The dialogue was great. It was snappy and witty and I could actually "hear" the characters talking.

The not so Good:
I didn't care about the characters. Alayna was the most repressed, isolated character I have ever read about. I didn't like her and I didn't sympathize with her. Normally, this isn't such a bad thing as long as the character grows and changes during the course of the story. I don't feel that Alayna's character grew at all during the story. I think she was simply repositioned.

I actually liked Ben, but for a hotshot lawyer he didn't seem very hot-shot at all. The follow through of the character did not live up to the set up. But, of all the characters I think he was the one with the most depth.

I thought the secondary characters dragged down the story. I appreciate secondary characters a lot in a story because they can really add texture, and a great supporting framework for the main characters. But the father storyline and the sister storyline were distracting. Maybe that is because the primary storyline of the romance between the two main characters just wasn't very engaging.

This takes me to my biggest disappointment. I didn't feel as if these two characters connected to each other at all. Alayna seemed so disdainful of Ben and white people in general that it seemed really bizarre that she would actually unbend enough to date a white guy let alone marry one. I think the author tried to so hard to showcase Alayna as a strong black woman that she forgot to show how even a strong black woman becomes vulnerable in love. Alayna never became vulnerable in my opinion. So much so, that I found myself wondering why did Ben even bother.

As I got toward the end of the book I kept wondering how the heck they'd get it together and become a couple. Alas, it was a quick dénouement where everything happened all at once. I wish the book had a bit more depth and a lot more emotion.

I do not recommend.