Rating: 4/5

Lucy Fly is a translator who has lived and worked in Japan for ten years. The story opens as she is taken into questioning by police about the murder of her missing 'friend', Lily - although it soon becomes apparent that Lily wasn't quite as much of a friend as she may have appeared. Lucy's narrative looks back on her life in Japan: how she came to be there, the development and, in some cases, demise of number of friendships including her acquaintance with Lily, and her relationship with her lover Teiji. The Earthquake Bird is ostensibly a mystery/thriller focused on the question of whether Lucy killed Lily, but to my mind it is much more of a character study exploring the complicated psyche and motivations of Lucy.

I didn't really like Lucy at first, despite feeling that I had certain traits in common with her (which would normally make me like a character, even if they're meant to be horrendous). However, the further the story progressed, the more I began to warm to and sympathise with her, even as I continued to find her behaviour and decisions strange - for example, on Sado Island it really seemed that she was encouraging Teiji to cheat on her with Lily, and I couldn't think of any explanation for this, unless she was simply being deliberately self-destructive. She has something of the classic unreliable narrator about her, and relates her story in a clear, almost sparse narrative style, which fits the setting perfectly and is incredibly effective at evoking both the romance and the loneliness of her life in Japan.

Lucy has an irritating habit of occasionally referring to herself in the third person, and I was disappointed that this was a bit of a red herring - I wondered for much of the book whether 'Lucy' would turn out to be an assumed identity/alter ego, but it seemed not. I also found it distracting that the names Lucy and Lily looked so similar on the page, but I expect this was deliberate, as Lily often seemed to typify the things that Lucy hated about herself: there were times when I wondered if Lily had even existed, or at least whether Lucy was projecting her own negative traits onto her. Lily's contrasting attributes didn't seem to add up to a believable person, but I did feel this was a deliberate decision by the author, and said more about the untrustworthy nature of Lucy's account than it did about Lily. As with many stories of this nature, the actual details of the peripheral characters were, in the end, almost irrelevant.

I chanced upon The Earthquake Bird in the library when I was actually looking for the author's most recent novel, When Nights Were Cold. This is why I will always love going to the library, even though I own a Kindle: I'd probably never have heard of this book if I hadn't stumbled across it, and I'm so glad I did, because it proved to be one of my best discoveries of recent months. It's quite a short book but there are so many layers, so many things to examine and decipher - and I adored the surreal ending. I would definitely recommend this one and I'm very much looking forward to reading more by Susanna Jones.