Rating: 4/5

Grapes of Wrath Review (8/12/12)
Gave 5 stars
The Grapes of Wrath is a poignant novel which follows the story of the Joad family.
I loved the symbolism of the story and the deep meanings and themes.
The ending is by no means a happy ending, but it ends on a positive and hopeful mood. 
This is definitely one of my favorite Steinbeck novels. Steinbeck is a genius when it comes to depicting the how the characters actually feel and the hardships that they have to face. Another great American classic by Steinbeck. I like this book almost as much as I loved East of Eden. ;)

The Moon is Down Review (9/02/12)
Gave 4 stars
Interesting novella that follows the story about a "silent" rebellious coastal townspeople who have recently been conquered by an invading army. While the townspeople do not outwardly or actively rebel or resist, they look on to the invading army with cruel, cold, and un-trusting eyes which kills some of the invading army's soldiers. The dialogue was really creative and the characters were well-crafted. 

Cannery Row Review (8/29/12)
Gave 3 stars
This novel is not plot-driven, but the story focuses more on delineating the town and characters of Cannery Row. Cannery Row is a good book for a quick read. As he always does, Steinbeck implies important short lessons about life in his story about the struggling between the rich and the poor. 

East of Eden Review (8/31/10)
Gave 5 stars
I was astonished at how profound this book was. I loved how the symbolism of the biblical story between Cain and Abel was included. And despite this being the first time reading Steinbeck's work, I can totally see why he said that it was his best work. He transitioned the story so perfectly well (despite having so many characters). His meandering throughout the book necessarily added the effect of the story. The symbolism was creatively crafted into Cain and Abel. And, of course, East of Eden left an important message to its readers through a heartfelt, memorable story. *Timshel*

Although I admit being shocked when I first saw how inevitably long East of Eden was (I had to read it as a summer homework assignment), it was very entertaining as a matter of fact. It wasn't boring at all. I really didn't think of East of Eden as one huge, never-ending book anyways. East of Eden was really like a big collection of four books put together. Like a series of books. 

I RECOMMEND TO EVERYBODY. REALLY ONE OF THE GREATEST AMERICAN MASTER PIECES EVER WRITTEN!

Of Mice and Men Review (2/02/11)
Gave 4 stars
I recommend to all Steinbeck reader fans. The ending is extremely sad, but Of Mice and Men is a worthwhile read that cannot be ignored.

The friendship between George and Lennie is extremely complex, and they have a genuine companionship that is not parasitic-but rather mutual-istic. Lennie needs George for intellectual and emotional support, but George leans on Lennie for enthusiasm and hope. Once their dreams of someday owning a rabbit farm are shattered, George has to man up in order to save Lennie from a painful torture and death.

General Review of all of these books 
Short stories (under 200 pages): 
The Moon is Down, Cannery Row, Of Mice and Men

Long chunk of a story (over 500 pages): 
The Grapes of Wrath, East of Eden

Better of the bunch (my personal favorites): 
The Grapes of Wrath and/or East of Eden

Best short story of the bunch: 
Of Mice and Men