Rating: 4/5

Wells is hit-or-miss with me. I'm an avid sci-fi fan so I certainly can't just pass him by, but he's not always a smashing success to me. I really like War of the Worlds, but The Invisible Man and The Time Machine were both pretty lackluster. The plot of The Sleeper Awakes caught my interest, so I bought it - the Penguin Classics edition, which I recommend for anyone reading Wells. The Penguin Classics editions of his work has footnotes for all the weird words and references he uses that modern day readers might not understand. It really helped with my enjoyment of the story, because I don't know about you guys, but I'm very bad about looking up words or names that I don't recognize. I just skim past them. Footnotes are win. I might give The Time Machine another try if I can get it in this edition.

All right, anyway, technical details aside. The story starts in England, around 1895-ish. A fellow walking along the beach comes across a distressed man by the name of Graham, who says he can't sleep and hasn't slept in six days. He's been participating in some sort of experimental drug...something. The insomniac is pondering suicide, so the beach-walker takes him back to his house. That evening, Graham falls into a coma, something like suspended animation. Cut to 203 years later. Graham wakes up to find himself encased in glass, in some manner of museum. Turns out, while he was sleeping, his assets were invested repeatedly and he is now the richest and most powerful man on earth - the world is run by the Council, who acts "on behalf of the Sleeper" and runs the world in his name. It is a brutal hierarchy with a few extremely rich aristocrats at the top, and the majority of humanity living in poverty and pseudo-slavery. The only hope of the common people? That one day the Sleeper will wake up and use his fortune and power to save them.

Fascinating? Oh yesh. Like I said, I can't resist a plot like that. Wells did everything right - he didn't play up the generic parts of a plotline like this, but made it as complicated as it would truly be. It's amazing to read about the poor Graham, who knows absolutely nothing about anything in this new world, but is expected to finally fix it. Also, there are not Good Guys and Bad Guys - Graham has no way of telling who wants what and what's the best choice; everyone's in it for themselves. It reminds me of the Gemma Doyle books, where she couldn't actually trust anyone - books often have the standard person or group who is Good, and all the main character needs to do is listen to them and all will be well. There's no one like that here. Everyone wants him to do what's best for them, and that's different in every case. It's pretty intense. One thing though - as with many older books, you have to be ready for the various racist and sexist moments that come up. Wells doesn't really say anything too bad; I've read that he was a proponent of gender equality and equal rights for all, but...well, cultural prejudices are hard to overcome entirely.