Rating: 2/5

Re Win or Lose - KT reverts to very old skool here with her usual independent career lady vs male chauvinist. The h is a 25 yr old free lance journalist who was married to the 33 yr old H two years ago and walked out after a few weeks when he wouldn't compromise on where they lived and wanted her to be a stay at home mum. 

 She needs a quick divorce to marry another man and the H is going to be playing a snooker championship in the US soon. She is hoping that since they got married impulsively in Las Vegas, she can go over to Reno while he is there and get a divorce. 

The h has met a diplomat that has the same kind of background she does and he wants to take her with him on his new posting. The only problem is she is still married to the H and will have to wait another year for an English divorce. 

 She hunts down the H and he uses her to run off his current girlfriend - he has slept with a lot of women during the separation and the h has not. And he makes it clear that he won't sign the divorce papers unless the h accompanies him to the US.

The story of how they met is told in flashback and it is a large part of the book. The h was a 23 year old reporter who does profiles on famous people. She is considering an article on the H who became the world snooker champion and then she meets him, falls into bed in two days and starts a torrid affair. 

 The H is very blue-collar and takes her home to meet his family who are also very blue-collar. His mum is somewhat of the local tart and his dad raises racing pigeons. There is tension between the H and his family as his youngest brother is the result of the mum's affair with a local man. The H is concerned that the information might be leaked if anyone digs into his background too closely. 

The h failed to mention that she was a journalist, he finds out and threatens to rape her but is satisfied with spanking her instead. She thinks she should end the fling, but they wind up in Las Vegas. 

After he tries it on with another woman, he then decides to marry the h when she sees him and walks away. He says he was only buying the OW a drink, but KT always throws cheating in whenever she can, so I am sure he was planning for a later adventure. They do marry, (the h was so concussed from the lurve club she couldn't think straight,) and then the real problems start.

The h is a Londoner and the H wants to live in the North of England - the h hates it but the H is adamant. The H is also on tour a lot and the h doesn't want to trail around after him, she has her own career. Then the H goes on a several weeks long Australian tour and expects the h to settle down into stay at home mumhood. Which the h doesn't want to do, she wants her life too. So she leaves him a note and goes back to London. She expects the H will come and talk to her, but he just picks up another woman instead.

So that brings us to the present and the h agrees to go to the US with the H. They fight a lot but wind up lovers again and the divorce doesn't happen because the h is now happy to be his shag buddy and dumps the man she was supposed to marry. She seems okay with being a toy and then she almost drowns and the H saves her, declares he loves her but wanted to make her suffer and now she can be a stay at home mum while he shags his way around on tour and HEA.

I did not believe the HEA and I was mostly bored by this one. That kind of chauvinistic H was out of style by the end of the 70's and he was a throwback even for HPlandia when I read it 30 years ago. I felt the h devolved rather than evolved and I just did not feel any love between them for a marriage to work, and now they are involving kids which was really bad. 

 This is another that is read cause it is there and not cause it is worth it, in fact I think I would rather watch paint dry than read this one again - the different shades of interior gloss as it dries would surely be more interesting.