Rating: 4/5

Claire Raphael is a woman who has everything - two great children and a husband who she adores; a thriving part-time business and a hectic yet extremely happy life. She has built her wicker furniture business from the ground up - basically from nothing - and made that business successful through her own imagination, creativity and hard work. In fact, everything that Claire has, she has legitimately earned. On her own; through benefit of her hard work and, as such, thoroughly well-deserved.

Then, one evening, Claire returns from a particularly difficult business trip and is utterly blindsided. Dennis - her seemingly loving husband - hands her divorce papers along with an order to vacate their house; effective immediately. He also wants sole custody of the children. He tells Claire that this is all for the best.

Claire is devastated by Dennis' actions. She had always believed that even though they may have had their issues, the marriage was still strong. She had absolutely no inkling that her marriage was so close to the brink of disaster; nor any clue that Dennis could possibly be so devious. He was obviously planning this ambush for weeks, if not months - Claire is certain of her suspicions.

She has no idea just how quickly her happy but hectic life will change; how fast everything she has worked so hard for will come crumbling down around her. Claire doesn't know what to do; where to turn or who to trust. Yet, over the next few weeks, Claire will discover something about herself: when everything she values is threatened, a woman is as tough as she needs to be.

First of all, let me say that this was a reread for me from approximately ten to fifteen years ago. I absolutely loved this book back then; I always enjoy reading stories about strong women dealing with difficult situations. Although I still enjoyed reading this book very much, I must admit that I didn't find it quite as good as the first time around.

I can't really put my finger on what was different about the story, but I did notice that the plot seemed slightly forced or stilted; at least in my opinion. I would still give this book an A!