Rating: 4/5

This review is of “Amber Treasure”, book #2 in Elaine Barbieri’s “Amber Trilogy”.

The Story: “Amber Treasure” picks up several years after the previous book “Amber Fire” ended. At the beginning of “Amber Treasure”, Melanie Morganfield Young, the heroine of the “Amber Trilogy” and her former lover, now husband, shipping magnate Simon Young, are preparing to embark on a year-long trip to Canton, China, aboard one of Simon’s ships, the Golden Mistress. The captain of the ship, Worth Randolph, strenuously objects to Melanie’s presence for a variety of reasons. 

Although they begin as antagonists, Worth realizes that he is in fact in love with Melanie, and she is shocked to realize that she has feelings for him as well. The trip to Canton goes well, but tragedy rears its ugly head on the return to America when (spoiler alert) Simon is killed in an accident. (Asa Parker, Melanie’s first lover, was also killed in an accident.) In her grief, Melanie has sex with Worth, believing he is Simon. After discovering the truth, Melanie tries to commit suicide, but is saved by Worth. Later, two big events occur. The first: the reading of Simon’s will which includes a codicil which bothers Melanie greatly; the second, the re-emergence of malevolent figures from her past. Once those figures are disposed of, Melanie and Worth marry and are happy. 

Upside: As I have stated before, Ms. Barbieri is an author who is exceptional at displaying her characters emotions. I felt every emotion her characters felt and that is something not every author can do. 

Downside: I find Melanie a hard character to like. Maybe I’m biased, but the constant neediness and her judgments are questionable to me. Toward the end of the book, there is a scene-which continues in a storyline in the next book in the “Amber Trilogy”, “Amber Passion”-which I found very creepy. 

Sex: The sex scenes are mildly graphic. They are not erotica, but are descriptive enough to let the reader know what is going on. 

Violence: Melanie is abducted twice: one scene ends in the man being beaten badly by Worth; the second in the individual being shot. The violence is not graphic. 

Bottom Line: “Amber Treasure” is one of my favorite books by Ms. Barbieri. What keeps it out of the 5 star category is that Melanie and Worth are sometimes unlikeable. Beyond that, though, it checks off most of the boxes for books I like.