Rating: 3/5

A collection of scholarly essays rather than an organized monograph, Klapisch-Zuber covers unfamiliar group with studies on topics like children's toys, wet nurses, raunchy music, and nuptial gifts excluding dowries. Additionally, Klapisch-Zuber backs up her narrative with strong primary source material and some statistical modeling. The result is thorough, ground-breaking research if a bit dry and at times difficult to digest.

The early chapters are some of the hardest to read. They are long and attempt to use statistics to support observations in the source material. The basis for these chapters is Catasto, something akin to a census for the territory of Florence ca. 1427-1430. American studies analyzing census data is not nearly as difficult to read as these chapters. Similarly, there are charts and graphs attached to one of the essays that are mind-boggling to decipher. In several cases she uses a scatter-plot graph without labeling wither axis. 

The second type of source she uses are the Ricordanze, a type of family journal among Renaissance Florentines. Her studies that rely on these sources are much easier to understand. Her brilliance at studying and describing obscure topics shines through. Even though many readers would glance over essays on dolls and wet-nursing, there are interesting conclusions and the essays are very informative, if a bit dry. Because the Ricordanze are written by men and have a business-like construction, women and children appear to be much more like commodities than people. This view leads Klapsich-Zuber to describe society in very unflattering terms and to add a rather dark perspective on an era known for humanism. 

The style remains very academic and this is certainly not for a casual reader. However, the subject matter is largely novel, so readers curious about women, children, and society in the Renaissance will obtain a very new and startling look at Florentine society. I learned a lot from every essay, whether it was about source material for Renaissance Italy or how raunchy serenades had to be regulated in cities because of a threat to the general order, I hesitate to recommend to advanced students of history.