Rating: 5/5

For the solar eclipse last month, my family traveled to the friendly little town of Benton, KY, which was in the path of totality. I love to visit the public library wherever I may be, so that was our first stop. I was drawn like a magnet to a few shelves set aside for an ongoing book sale. Hardbacks were a quarter, paperbacks just a dime. Well, you can't beat those prices! One of my treasures was the autobiography "Growing Up" by Russell Baker, for which he won a Pulitzer Prize in 1983. I know I read it all those years ago, but it was so long ago, my only memory was of an engaging read. So, I read it again----and that is something I seldom do. (I have so very many books to read, I don't usually re-read, no matter how much I may have liked a book.) My memory had not been wrong---the book was just as delightful as I recalled. Mr. Baker (who is apparently still alive, now 92 years old) was born in 1925, just a year before my mother. These were children who grew up during the Depression and those experiences colored the rest of their lives. Mr. Baker's father died in a diabetic coma (before insulin treatments had been developed) when Russell was five years old. He included his very early memories of his father and his father's people, but the book really centers on his mother. The book opens and closes with her as an elderly woman with dementia. In between those bookends, his life is unfolded for us in vivid vignettes about all of his colorful family members. The family is affectionately but sharply drawn, so the reader almost feels as though she is sitting around the table with them as they have a meal or play cards. After his father died, his mother took her two oldest children, Russell and his younger sister, Doris, to live with one of her brothers. (She left the baby, who was 10 months old, with one of her husband's brothers and his wife who had not been able to have children. She made that decision at a time of enormous stress and perhaps later regretted it. This meant that Russell's littlest sister, Audrey, was never again really a part of their lives. They visited with her a time or two, but she lived in another state and her life was quite different from their own.) As the years of the Depression ground on, more and more of his mother's family came to live in the house of her sheltering brother. While Russell didn't have a father to raise him, he was surrounded by loving and quirky family members who all pitched in. I am impressed at how much Mr. Baker remembered fifty years later. These impressions ran deep. Perhaps one of the parts of the story that brings home the tragedy of the Depression is the account of his mother's budding romance with Oluf, a Danish immigrant, mostly carried on through letters. Oluf's letters, as he traveled about looking for work, started out optimistic, but you can read how hope died, bit by bit, until he asked Russell's mother to stop writing to him, as there was no chance they could ever afford to be together. She did eventually remarry, when she was about forty. Russell was an adolescent by then and was initially resentful of his step father because Russell had been so favored by his mother until then. His mother had high ambitions for her only son, which meant she was always pushing him to be more, to "have some gumption". (I felt a little sad at how Doris, the child who actually did have spunk, was apparently discounted because she was a girl. When Russell didn't sell all of the newspapers left from his route, his sister went back out to the street corner with him and marched right up to cars, knocking on car windows with her tiny fist, selling all of the papers left. Her strong personality reached right out of the pages and over the years.) Russell's mother had been a teacher in Virginia (before marriage and children), but after her husband's death, they had moved to New Jersey, which wouldn't accept her credentials. She eventually found work in a five-and-dime store, 12 hours a day, $18 a week. The book includes Mr. Baker's memories of his unexpected chance to attend Johns Hopkins University on scholarship, of his military career as a pilot for the navy, of how he finally achieved his goal of being a newspaper columnist, and of the courtship of his eventual wife, Mimi. The best stories for me though were those of his youth, gathered around the kitchen table with the warmth of his family, seeing the hard times through together. This is a lovely book. I feel a bit of serendipity to have found my roundabout way back to an old friend.