Rating: 4/5

Having now read An Excellent Mystery by Ellis Peters, I've completed 12 books in the Cadfael historical mystery series and as always, have found the story to be entertaining and engrossing. Cadfael is an ex-Crusader, now a Benedictine monk who acts as herbalist / sometimes medical assistant at the Benedictine monastery at Shrewsbury. This 11th book in the Cadfael takes place in 1141, during the continuing struggles for the English throne between Empress Maud and King Stephen.

The battles themselves take place a distance from Shrewsbury in this story but one of the results is to bring two monks seeking refuge from the battles around Winchester. Brothers Humilis and Fidelus arrive and are given sanctuary at the monastery. Humilis is another old Crusader, who was injured seriously in the Crusades. Fidelus is a mute who has attached himself to Humilis as his care taker. Humilis's injuries are aggravated by the journey to Shrewsbury and it's evident to Cadfael and the Edmund who is basically the monastery doctor, that Humilis has not long to live and they want only to keep him in comfort.

Arriving also at the Monastry is Nicholas, a knight who has been participating in the battles, and was previously Humilis's squire. Due to his injuries, Humilis had called off an arranged marriage 3 years previously. Nicholas wishes Humilis's permission to ask for the lady's hand in marriage and it is granted.

This is the crux of the story, with Nicholas's journey first to ask her hand in marriage and then when it's evident she has disappeared, purportedly to become a nun, to find her. It's an interesting story all-around. Cadfael plays a relatively minor role through the first part as it involves Nicholas's quest, but as the story builds, he plays a more important role, especially when it actually comes down to solving the mystery. There is a side-story involving some other brothers, which could have been left out, I think, but it doesn't hurt the story to have it there.

The final twist, although I sort of had it figured out, was very interesting and different. One of my favorite Cadfaels so far and I'm glad I still have a few left on my book shelf to enjoy. (4 stars)