Rating: 4/5

Brendan Gill was a writer at the New Yorker from 1936 to 1996. In this 1975 memoir he says that as of that point, he had published more words in the New Yorker than anyone. He published profiles, short stories, drama reviews, book reviews, casuals, and anything else that was needed. Since he continued for another 21 years, I suspect he still owns that crown.

This is a surprisingly frank memoir. He describes, "Thurber, that malicious man.". He says that Harold Ross, the founding editor, was a virulent racist who refused to hire a single black employee. Edmund Wilson hated Catholics. The owner Raoul Fleischman was a self-hating antisemite. When he meets John O'Hara, the great short story writer, he says, "I was startled by his ugliness."

Even his friends come in for savaging. He says that "thinking of Stanley Hyman, (a writer and Shirley Jackson's husband) I begin to smile" He then describes how his good friend was a fat drunk who constantly cheated on his wife. Even though she made more money than him, he controlled the money and put her on an allowance. This is his portrait of his good friend. 

Ironically, the only person who he has nothing bad to say about is Charles Adams, the cartoonist who is famous for his weird, scary, creepy cartoons. He says that everyone always assumed he was deranged, or unbalanced and he was actually a very nice perfectly normal guy. 

Gill tries to make himself the innocent among these strange people. He writes a vicious review of a novel by his friend John O'Hara and is shocked when O'Hara tells everyone that his going to knock Gill's block off. When he gets hired, he tells the payroll department to hold his monthly draw until he may need it, and he doesn't understand why everyone thinks he is a spoiled rich guy. 

To be clear, because of this ruthlessness, the book is a great read. It is aimed at those of us who are fascinated with the New Yorker world. It is the equivalent of a Hollywood gossip book but set among intellectuals in NYC. It is full of interesting stories about interesting people, and it is well illustrated with cartoons and candid photos.