Rating: 2/5

This earned a star from me for the research and inventive musings the author had obviously done to do pedantic exhibitions about:

1. monsters;

2. the Aristotelian concept of "potency" (which he managed to tie up with the sexual act);

3. the two types of women, the "woman-trinket" (one who can be manipulated by men) and the "woman-landscape" ( one whom a man can only visit);

4. benign inversion (evil becoming good, sort of) and the malign inversion (the reverse);

5. euphoria, phoria ("to carry"), phoric, phore, anthropophoric (the pricipal protagonist, Abel Tiffauges, likes to carry sick, young boys in his arms, experiencing euphoria in the process);

6. atmospheric saturation, e.g., when an atmosphere is saturated with beauty one feels an intoxication that has a distant affinity with phoric ecstasy (like, again, holding a wounded child in one's arms);

7. photography as the raising of an object to "imaginary power";

8. developing photo films as involving the inverse and reversible worlds;

9. the French Penal Code;

10. the use of pigeons during war, the different kinds of such pigeons;

11. the peat-bog men (carcasses of long dead men preserved in peat bogs);

12. Nazi hunting lodges, their games, animal droppings;

13. the different ways of measuring stags' antlers;

14. the dynamics of horses;

15. the origins of great East Prussian families traced way back to the Teutonic Knights;

16. human twins;

17. human hair;

18. symbols in war; and 

19. different positions of boys while asleep.

I also gave it another star because although I already "knew" the overall complexion of the story and its probable trajectory (what with its dead giveaways : the "ogre" title, its first 1/3 part consisting of Tiffauges's "sinister diary", his huge body and the smallness of his penis, his obvious megalomania and pedophiliac tendencies, the war era, France and later Germany as settings) it turned out differently and quite beyond my expectations.

Apart from these, however, I felt this was just a piece of crap. Yes, I've read the other reviews, and saw its high GR ratings. But what can I possibly do when, after finishing it, I felt that the author had just taken a dump inside my brain?