Rating: 4/5

The author brought together the 8th-9th century Viking/Anglo-Saxon/Welsh cultures marvellously, through the stories of protagonist[s] from each: Bern Thorkellson and his father, the exiled Thorkell Einarson of the Erlings; Prince Athelbert of the Anglcyn, and Prince Alun ab Owyn from the Cyngael. Three of these characters, ostensibly enemies, work together to prevent a revenge raid on the Cyngael farm of the man who, a generation before, had slew a famous Erling and now has his sword. Bern has become a mercenary, and is involved in that coming raid; his father had fled to Cyngael and is a servant on the farm. The princes, Thorkell, and Alun's faithful dog make their way through a haunted wood to arrive at the farm. I held my breath. Can they prevent carnage? The only nods to fantasy I could see are the same world of the blue and white moons as that in Kay's Sarantium trilogy; faeries with ever-changing hair color; and souls which had been taken by the faerie queen, then discarded when no longer useful to her, becoming malevolent green spirits.

I liked very much the different points of view of the three protagonists, their cultures, and the characters' interior thoughts. We were presented with motivations. The novel was well plotted, except the ending was a little too 'pat'. Characterization was very good and I liked that the author used no terribly outlandish names. Bizarre names are a real blot on fantasy, in my opinion. I liked that the author used a variation on the 'King Alfred and the Cakes' story; also that Alun, at the farmhouse, an amateur harpist, recited the author's variation on a poem from the Canu Heledd medieval poem cycle: "Ystall Gynddynlan" [The hall of Cynddylan]. http://www.kmatthews.org.uk/history/c... 
Poem #2. The time period absolutely came alive for me through the excellent writing. 

Yes, this book was a fantasy, but I consider it a fine example of a Viking story and I felt Vikings were presented accurately. I feel the author really did his research into this whole historical period. I felt he really captured the Welsh spirit. I did not see how Jadwiga and her fiancé fit into the story. There was one small episode, then they were dropped. I wish there had been more on Judit, Athelbert's sister.