Rating: 2/5

A selection of nearly 30 interviews with prominent men and women of the early 1980s (the selection was published in 1983), the bulk of this will probably not mean much to anyone born after 1965 or from outside the UK. They are also very short and so have no space to be truly revealing.

Nevertheless, as a snapshot of the time, the book retains some value. Mortimer (lawyer, playwright, memoirist, 'bon viveur' and creator of 'Rumpole of the Bailey') undoubtedly writes well. It also ranges nicely across the establishment - churchmen, politicians, authors, actors, judges.

I have been in the room with one of his subjects (Healey), met with another (Benn) and knew a little more of a third and fourth (Livingstone and Foot) as well as worked and danced with the daughter of a fifth (discretion at this point). All are presented true to life as far as I could see.

Each interview would be useful in a biography as a source of a quotation or two and each is part of the legend - the sexual obsessions of Simenon, the Christian authoritarianism of James Anderton or the working class origins and aspirations of Catherine Cookson.

Nobody comes across as unlikeable though some come across as cyphers. The only businessman in the group, the now-forgotten Robb Wilmot, here almost epitomises Marcuse's 'one-dimensional man'. One gets the impression that Mortimer simply does not 'get' business.

Mick Jagger shines despite the questioning. Eric Morecambe's origins in pre-television entertainment are interesting. David Hockney is cheeky and probably the one who seems the most intelligent of all of them. Dick Francis appears as integrity incarnate as does Frederick Forsyth in his unusual way.

The religious (Runcie and Hume) are perhaps a little evasive and too willing to placate an avowed atheist. Arthur Scargill comes across as a rather fun character (certainly compared to the dour Benn, the aristo-socialist). 

Ken Livingstone is captured whole at his moment of first triumph at the GLC accompanied by the somewhat fanatical Valerie Wise. There are no surprises with the more establishment politicians - indeed, there are not many surprises at all. Everyone plays to type.

Mortimer also has some interesting (for Britons) interviews with American lawyers who are presented as living on a totally different planet (made more clear by the interview with Lord Denning) which they are. The myth that the UK and US are of one culture and one blood is nicely punctured here.

I would not go out of your way to read this but if it falls into your hands and you know the era and the characters, some of whom have survived well into the current century as figures of note, then you may find this amusing.