Rating: 5/5

"Hawaii" book cover best suited for "West Wind to Hawaii".

ON April 1 and 2 I read James A. Michener’s West Wind to Hawaii and loved it immensely. Actually, I read it in a volume of Reader's Digest Condensed Books whose editors have taken the liberty of describing the story of only the first generation of a Polynesian tribe that leaves the island of Bora Bora heading off for the North on a canoe named "West Wind to Hawaii" in search of Havaiki -- which probably became Hawaii with the passage of time.

 
James Michener and his wife, Mari, at home with their formidable art collection.

 By the way, Hawaii for Mr Michener was just not a literary interest, it was also his home. He and his Japanese wife lived in a house given to them by a group of Hawaiians -- in the hope that he would write the story of their people. With his epic Hawaii he did exactly that, writing about the stories of five or six generations of the island's original settlers. Of course, he mixed it with spicy tit-bits of fiction.
"The author did much through his writing, through his travels, and in his personal life to foster sympathetic understanding between the West and the people of the Orient."

 
The beautiful Jocelyne LaGarde was a Tahitian who became famous for her one acting role in the 1966 motion picture, Hawaii.
 
 Sixty Bora Bora islanders, including their King Tamatoa, his younger brother Teroro and their sister Natabu, set off on their perilous journey via sea with food, supplies and a house for their rock gods. Constellations help them in finding their way. Once they almost run out of food and water, so a storm with heavy rain helps them in quenching their thirst. Thus, they are provided a new life.
 “On the long voyage spirited Teroro put together the rough chant that would be remembered in the islands for generations after his death and which served to guide subsequent canoes from Tahiti to the new Havaiki:
Wait for the west wind, wait for the west wind!
Then sail to Nuku Hiva of the dark bays
To find the constant star.
Hold to it, hold to it
Till wild Ta’aroa sends the winds.
Then speed to the clouds where Pere waits.
Watch for her flames, the flames of Pere,
Till great Tane brings the land, 
Brings Havaiki-of-the-North
Sleeping beneath the Little Eyes.”
 Ta’aroa and Tane are the names of two rock gods while Pere is the name of a volcano rock goddess. Little Eyes is the name of a constellation of three stars which help in locating Havaiki.

 
James Michener, with a painting of himself, at his home in Pennsylvania in 1962. At the time he was running for the United States Congress.
 
 Tamatoa and Teroro's aunt Teura can predict the future with the help of omens. Mano, the great blue shark, also comes to her aid. She can converse with it and find the right course to their destination.
 The islanders surely had some strange customs which with the coming of the missionaries a century or more later became taboo. "The woman with whom the king lay was his sister. It had been believed since ancient times in the islands that for a king to breed an heir who would combine the finest lineage and utmost sanctity he must mate only with his full-blood sister; although both Tamatoa and Natabu might also take other spouses, their principal obligation was the production of royal descendants." 

 
On May 12, 2008 a 59 definitive stamp was issued to honour James Michener as part of the Distinguished Americans series...printed in small panes of 20.

 
One film equals one Oscar nomination for the French (Tahitian) Jocelyne LaGarde.