Rating: 5/5

A powerful story! I don't think a 5 star book has to be perfect. No story is perfect. This story tells an amazing story, but the end has problems for me and I still love this book. When a book makes me feel so much and I simply can't put it down, that's a 5 star review.

There isn't any way to review this without spoilers:

Spoiler Warning:

Melinda was at a senior party and called the cops and everyone knows and so she is now the 9th grade pariah and outcast. The reason she really called the cops was she needed help. She was raped and didn't know what to do. She couldn't speak after that. The rest of the year her grades tank and she has one somewhat friend. Art is the only class she feels safe in. 

The whole year she barely speaks. She is alone, in pain and depressed and she can't deal with her wounds. She needs to speak and can't. It's only when her used to be best friend starts dating the same guy she had an encounter with that she does speak. 

The problem with the ending is we don't get to see the character arc. It stops at the climax and there is nothing after. The moment of change is when Melinda speaks out. We don't get to see the change in Melinda. The last few pages show the change in other people toward her. We don't get to see how her parents react as they didn't handle it well. How does finally speaking changer Melinda??? We don't get to see it. The character arc is not completed. We are left hanging. 

I wanted to see the change inside this inward character and I didn't get to see it. I didn't get to see how anyone around her helped her. I don't know that I've loved a book so much when the ending isn't that good, but I feel Laurie really blew the ending.

The point of the story was the pain Laurie was in and how frozen she was. How is was all too much to deal with. It was brilliant how Laurie did that. I read 170 pages of this in 2 days once I got into this and couldn't put it down. It was fascinating being in Melinda's head and wanting to help her and reach out to her and not being able too. I never dealt with rape or something like that in school, but I did struggle with depression and I know what she was feeling inside. I understood her. 

The book is an amazing study on angst and depression in high school, but the ending is a real miss. It has to be one of the worst endings I've seen. Who helped her after she helped herself? What came out of her once the dam broke. 

I do recommend this book to people, anyone who has struggled in life with feelings and overwhelm.