Rating: 5/5

This novel has made a deep impression on me. I am not particularly religious, but surprised myself by being deeply moved by the religiosity of the mushroom-picking teenage runaway, Ann Holmes, who experiences the Marian visions. The flawed, but very human, not to say humane priest, Father Collins, also attracted my sympathy. The rather cynical and educated societal dropout, Carolyn Greer, acts as an effective foil to the visionary and also manages to inject some dark humour into the novel; her protectiveness towards the visionary is rather touching and clearly sincere notwithstanding the fact that she is also trying to exploit the situation for her own benefit. It is obvious almost from the outset that the ex-logger, Tom Cross senior, who openly admits to hating and paralyzing his own son, and is, on the face of it, unpleasant, mildly racist, and even menacing, yet still eager to be redeemed by his faith, is going to feature prominently in the denouement.

The dark, rain-soaked, mysterious forest provides a wonderful backdrop to the story. The spirit of the place is evoked in very poetic, literate and polished prose that is occasionally, as one reviewer has put it, 'thesaurus-splitting'. One very unusual and rather radical aspect of the writer's style is the fact that he doesn't use apostrophes to report speech; instead the characters' spoken words feature within normal sentences. I cannot recall a book I've read where the author has chosen to do this, yet it works well here.

I think this novel is not only entertaining, and gritilly realistic, if a novel about Marian apparitions can be described as such, but it also touches on some very profound epistemological and ontological questions (yes, both those words feature in the book). And although I don't recall the author mentioning shamanism, I think the experiences of the teenage seer have as much connection to that ancient form of spirituality as they do to Roman Catholicism. Perhaps it is the novel's explicit association with Roman Catholicism that is the reason for some of the totally unwarranted and jaundiced reviews of this book I have seen elsewhere (e.g. on Amazon); some reviewers appear to take offence when characters and events don't live up to expectations they may have because of their own Catholic faith. Ironically, I do not believe that the author presents the Roman Catholic faith, or the Church, in an unsympathetic light at all; his take on religious experience and belief is nuanced and sophisticated.

I loved this haunting and vivid book, and will never forget it.