Rating: 5/5

Author Robert van Gulik, an accomplished Dutch diplomat, linguist, and Orientalist, yet again proves himself a great writer as well with The Haunted Monastery, the fifth book in the wonderful Judge Dee mystery series. In this short book, set in western China (in what is modern-day Sichuan Province) in A.D. 666, Judge Dee takes refuge during a terrible rainstorm in the Monastery of the Morning Clouds. Judge Dee, had been traveling home with his entourage, when the cart broke an axle. Judge Dee, uneasy because of three mysterious deaths at the Taoist monastery the previous year, takes advantage of his ill luck to investigate the deaths and some other strange goings-on. His decision leads to a close brush with death as the perpetrators panic when Judge Dee starts getting too close. Most Judge Dee novels demand to be devoured, but this one is even more exciting than most!

Van Gulik, staying true to Chinese tradition, sprinkles three mysteries into The Haunted Monastery; as is less usual, the three are intertwined in this case. In the end, Judge Dee not only solves the requisite three mysteries, but he also makes it possible for two couples to fall in love and marry -- despite being uncharacteristically cranky throughout the novel because of a head cold! The novel also contains much information on ancient Taoist monasteries, customs, and beliefs; T'ang Dynasty politics, the lives of actors and acrobats of the time, and the ancient Chinese's rather enlightened attitude toward homosexuality. (The latter must have appeared quite shocking to Western readers who read The Haunted Monastery in 1961, when it was first published.)

Judge Dee was a real-life Chinese magistrate during the T'ang Dynasty named Ti Jen-chieh. The 7th century jurist became noted for his incisive mind and quest for justice for all. Simplifying the magistrate's name to Judge Dee Jen-djieh, van Gulik introduced the world to Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee, first published in 1949 (although not translated into English until 1976), which was based on 18th century Chinese mystery novels. Van Gulik's ensuing Judge Dee books, while original, always included aspects the author gleaned from ancient records or other 18th century Chinese mysteries. In this case, van Gulik included the Confucianist view of Taoism as less than savory albeit better than the despised imported religion, Buddhism, and the biggest clue in the Case of the Embalmed Abbot.