Rating: 5/5

4.5 rounded up. I am still pondering this story and really want to discuss it with someone. I listened to the audio and even though there is nothing wrong with that, it would be better to read the book. It is deep and complex. I think I missed some aspects by listening to the story and I found myself rewinding and relistening. Given that this is a 1972 Newbery Honor book, it tackles topics that are so relevant today. It is in a stark setting of New York. Junior and Buddy as well as Mr. Pool are very complex characters. The themes are deep and very well written. It is definitely distinguished. However, I think this is more for 14 and up. I saw one place recommending it for 8-14 and I was stunned. There is not inappropriate content, it is just such a deep story with mental illness, homelessness, and societal woes that would just go over younger readers. I had to really focus and I missed some aspects myself. Virginia Hamilton's writing is not a light read and at times is bizarre and strange. This title was like that in an interesting a good way. Even though I did not agree with how Buddy and his homeless network did every thing like steal- it does not promote bad behavior. It shows how as a community we need to come together and do our best to be interdependent. The characters in this setting could not trust and rely on the systems in place, and the adults in their lives (did Junior really have a dad out-of-town?) Instead of pushing some of the classics on kids that grow to hate reading from that- this seems like a title that would appeal to a lot of modern readers and click a lot of the boxes (appropriately) for class or small group reads. Some topics depicted are: mental health, poverty, homelessness, addiction, obesity, urban survival, features character of color, own voice author etc. I am not sure why this title is not more prevalent in schools. Story seemed ahead of her time. This is my favorite Hamilton title and I hope to someday read a hard copy when I can locate one. Very unique story that also has also been made into a movie.