Rating: 4/5

Of the sixteen stories in the Modern Library edition of Jack London's South Sea Tales, four in particular struck me. My synopses...

1) A seven-inch centipede nearly spoils a dinner party in Kona, Hawaii by falling into into Dottie Fairchild's coiffure. 

2) A burning ship is unable to land at Pitcairn, and the captain lets aboard the island's chief magistrate, casual and soft spoken, to calm the near-mutinous crew and guide the vessle through the treacherous archipelago to safe landing at another island. 

3) David Grief, the millionaire owner of holdings and ventures throughout the Solomon Islands, sails the South Seas for excitement and harasses small-timers who owe him money. 

4) A scientist who lands on Guadalcanal to find a rare butterfly risks fever and headhunters, as a strange, recurring, island-filling sound turns his curiosity to stories of a giant red object that's feared and protected by the island's leaders and is possibly thousands of years old from another world. 

All sixteen stories are set in or near remote, uncivilized islands. Though written a hundred years ago, each story is surprisingly contemporary. The variety of plots compensate for the dry, unemotional language. 

I'm grateful I gave this collection a try. Each story gave me an enjoyable escape, took me on exotic adventures I could safely return from. 

This collection also includes a story titled The Heathen. Written in 1910, two main characters--a pearl buyer of European descent and a native of Bora Bora--get in and out of adventures, sometimes saving each other's lives. 

I first read the story in 1979 when I entered Catholic high school. Why did Jack London title it The Heathen? Mr. Governale, teacher of freshman English, wanted each student to figure it out. He assigned it as an essay question. 

The school wasn't in Hawaii or the South Seas. It was in a northwest suburb of Chicago. No heathens on my block. Everyone around was German, or Italian, or Polish. Why the title The Heathen? My essay focused on the guy from Bora Bora and a line from the story about his not being baptized. Governale graded it and handed it back. I didn't give the answer he wanted. 

My missing the point stayed with me. 

In 2002 I bought my copy of The South Sea Tales to again read The Heathen and get the answer right. Even at 37 years old I didn't get much more out of it. But now I'm middle aged and I've survived (less exotic) adventures of my own. Now I can write the answer that Governale was looking for. 

The pearl buyer of European descent was more of a heathen than the guy from Bora Bora.