Rating: 4/5

Some people may feel like this book misrepresents itself as a science text, when in fact it's more of a travelogue, in the spirit of Charles Darwin or Freya Stark. I read reviews and a summary (always wise) beforehand and was thus prepared for this not to be a scientific analysis, but more of a personal account. I have also read a number of Mr. Ward's other books and was well acquainted with his literary quirks of throwing about personal experiences and events in his life as they happen in the timeline of the discovery process; I.e: In The Life and Death of Planet Earth, he uses the slow, heartbreaking death of his mother as a narrative tool to widen the emotional scope of the transient life of the planet, and all life on it. 
I, personally, find it to be refreshing- as he comes across as both genuine and imperfect. He doesn't shine himself in the best light- he seems to know his flaws, but he is honest, about himself and others. He is insightful and observant, but occasionally also stunningly oblivious or socially inept (science folk often are, myself included)- to both personal and scientific facts. 
The book is largely devoted to his time spent in the Karoo desert in South Africa. The social upheavals of the times he visited, his interactions with others while there, what the sky looked like, what kind of car they rented, what they ate for dinner, how loud they argued, how uncomfortable the beds were, what being mugged was like, looking for bones while jet lagged, the infuriating process of drilling cores, the smell of the night air, the heady intoxication of success, the bitter sting of failure, and what they found and how- both the exciting and the mundane in equal measure, interlaced with Ward's particular literary flourishes and love for long, adjective heavy descriptions of time and place. 
Ultimately, he draws the book in to a reasonably good conclusion, and though I do wish there were *more* to the whole book (it clocks in under 250 pages) it was a lovely way to break up the largely science and fact-heavy nonfiction books I've been reading lately, and to throw in some adventure, tick bites, sunburns, and mashed up sandwiches.

Thumbs up, fun read!

On a side note:
Some people have remarked that they found this book to be either sexist or culturally insensitive, but frankly that's just horseshit. He reflects on the beauty of a female coworker briefly- he also reflects on her strength of character, and the beauty of the African stars so it's condemned out of context, though I would hazard a guess that working in the field, there's quite a bit of uh... unexpected fraternization? He also describes the mid and post-apartheid governmental upheaval in the most condemnatory of ways. His observations and opinions are his own, and he makes no claim of being an engine for social change. Though he clearly is progressive minded, ultimately his interests lie in science, and his opinions and actions aren't as nuanced as the clearly perfect saints who've offered their critiques. I'm of the opinion that the people who found this 'offensive' were looking for something to be offended by, frankly, but that's just imho, and I'm a total a*hole, so whatever.