Rating: 2/5

“From the darkness of what I have done to you there shall be light, or I shall die trying to make it so.”

Truth to be told, I expected a road to perdition. While I didn’t perish, The Darkest Road does not offer deliverance. It is a suboptimal finale to a trilogy that started great but deteriorated with each consecutive instalment. 

The plot is so dense and complex that at this point I am not even trying to summarise it (the brief summary at the beginning of the book is really helpful). In most general terms, the war with Rakoth the Unraveller has started and hinges upon many factors of which one, the most important, is also the most volatile; unpredictable and impossible to manage. In a sense, everything is secondary and dependent on this wild card tossed freely onto the winds of events. 

Mr Kay packed a lot into the Fionavar Tapestry; it is a true gobelin woven with rich pictorial design of stupefying detail. This overabundance of detail might pose a problem I indicated already in my review of The Wandering Fire: the lush Tolkienesque universe is supplemented with another fantastic realm, i.e. the Arthurian Legend which results in overabundance of archetypes, tropes, and themes. It wouldn’t be bad if Kay had supported his creative temerity with solid background work. As it is, the book is so dense in the names and places department with so many things the reader is expected to remember and connect that it reaches the Malazan level (albeit without the Malazan finesse). Many of the names are just names without any substantial character development, we move from place to place, and over time from mythical lands to milieus already known in a whirlwind of events and references. 

Kay's gift with the language makes it all bearable (but only just) and readers are offered with the whole candy shop of fantasy treats: you will have magic and battles, sailing with the dead, walking on water, demons from the deepest marrow of the earth, giants, dragons, a Dwarfmoot that counsel with silence and many, many other things. 

Unfortunately, the bad outdarkens the good. Firstly, because the many protagonists central to the plot are often separated they then spend a lot of time catching up and telling each other what has already happened so if you add recounting the past events from the previous books that means a lot of repetition. At this point the book is saturated with the repetitiveness of motifs. We had the longest road in the previous book, now we have the darkest road embellished with similar undertones: the loss, the choice, the sacrifice, the love embraced even, or specifically, in and through death. Kay doesn’t spin anything new here or add anything meaningful that would be truly surprising. 

My main problem lies with the central premise of this book that looks at love as a binding shackle. As you remember Jennifer gave birth to Rakoth’s son deciding that this child is her answer to the Dark. She has given the child away to be fostered with love. I am not going to argue with that but everything else doesn’t have sense. I have issues not with Jennifer herself but rather with what and who she has become. I have issues with her decisions steeped in her tragedy that becomes so tragic that turns into pathetically grotesque. I refuse to accept the stupid assumption that because love is binding Darien must have been set free (read rejected) as only this enabled him to make a choice to discover what was there at the root of his soul. I cannot agree that pushing somebody away is a way of showing trust. 

The coming climax, an end to war or an ending to all things is a prolonged, three-pronged sequence of events that seem surprisingly shallow, somehow even over-talked. Even the final wrap up wasn’t neat I was devastated by Diarmuid's death. I know that many people have had some reservations about this wayward prince, but I always liked him. To have him being taken away stung me but to leave Sharra crying over his body without even bothering to pick up this plotline was not only unfair but simply lousy, particularly that Kay had given her own POV before. and we are left with loose threads in the tapestry. 

Mr Kay tried to shape a light from the devastating darkness but for me – he failed. I judge The Darkest Road as the weakest of all his books and I wouldn’t recommend it to anyone. If it is true that the Author has entered into a development agreement for the Fionavar Trilogy to be produced as a TV series, I think there is a huge chance that it is going to be far more enjoyable than the original.

---

Also in the series: 
1. The Summer Tree
2. The Wandering Fire