Rating: 4/5

Ever wonder what it would be like to live a life of pure unadulterated selfishness? Look no further than the life of Roy Cohn in this excellent biography. Cohn's "doting mother created a person who was totally free of the rules that you and I or most people go by....Roy played by his own set of rules. Whatever he wanted at any given moment was the right thing."

Cohn, after a privileged childhood (his uncle owned the Lionel train company) and education became a lawyer at twenty. And although lacking organizational and brief-writing skills he was "a focused man locked on to his objectives, able to coordinate and lead large enterprises through undeviating concentration."

He was friends with or represented the likes of Donald Trump, Ronald Reagan, Barbara Walters and a large assortment of media types and mobsters. His fever-pitch intensity and scorched earth policy left the other side in a legal battle intimidated by his very presence. If you wanted to win your case, you hired a high-powered Ivy-league lawyer. If you wanted do destroy your opponent, you hired Roy Cohn.

And yet, Cohn's upbringing (an entire part of the four part book is called "Mama's Boy."), inferiority complex, depression and demons drove him to endless excess, financially and sexually. He wrote: "There it was again--that drive for the big time, the only thing that could cure my inferiority complex and lift me out of what was still left of my depression, which by this point I could define as directly related to my ability to rise above the crowd."

And rise he did, hobnobbing with the elite of the elite, but he had no core within himself. He was only his latest legal or sexual conquest. And those conquests he fed upon. The bloodier the conquest, the better. "Ordinarily when he (Roy) was attacked in the media it was not for being ineffective but for being evil, and that was the kind of publicity on which Roy thrived. Newsweek magazine quoted a lawyer as saying, "Every time someone says he's ruthless, the practice just gets bigger."

Whereas most people seek a nice even keel to their lives, Roy sought to reside only in the rarefied atmosphere of the highest highs. He stomped on others. He lied, cheated and stole. He lived the life he wanted. And what a life it was.