Rating: 5/5

By the 1940’s one man stood as the most powerful one in America next to only the President. That man was Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Director J. Edgar Hoover. In 1917 Hoover had graduated from George Washington Law School and landed a job in the Justice Department. During World War I Hoover registered interned aliens, this experience led him to identify and deport dangerous Communists. His formidable organization skills were noticed and he was promoted to assistant director of the FBI in1921 and subsequently appointed to the directorship chief in 1924. 
As director, He transformed the Bureau from an old-line detective agency politically controlled and staffed through patronage into one characterized by professionalism. He invented the fingerprint system to individually identify people and kept a well-organized collection of fingerprints. He also instituted a rigid system of control to combat any kind public scandal that might diminish the Bureau.

In the 1930’s Hoover’s FBI captured notorious gangsters such as John Dillinger. He also is given credit for helping President Franklin Roosevelt to promote his New Deal policies by giving the country confidence that they were well protected. 

Also in the 1930’s Hollywood was searching for material to publish. The exciting field of Investigation got in their sights, they began to produce and show G Men movies such as “You Can’t get Away with it,” These movies made Hoover not only famous but also popular as an American hero. 

When Harry Truman became President, he became the first President that Hoover didn’t like and get along with. Hoover always viewed Communist activities as America’s number one crime. Truman didn’t share that opinion. He was a friend of Dwight Eisenhower and President Eisenhower approved of all of Hoover’s plans. However, when John Kennedy took over Hoover distrusted him as a symbol of social change that Hoover hated and feared. When Lyndon Johnson succeeded Kennedy. Hoover had a 20-year friendship with Johnson. Under Johnson, Hoover finally began to enforce civil law rights in the South. 

Hoover very much liked President Richard Nixon and Nixon reciprocated. However, Nixon’s aids disliked Hoover, they felt that Hoover was a relic and way past his prime. Nixon though didn’t have the heart to fire Hoover. Nixon did, however, have his own people take on projects rather than rely on the FBI to do it. It is said that Nixon Aid’s didn’t trust the FBI to break into the Water Gate Hotel. So, they did it themselves. 

On May 2, 1972 Hoover died. He was given a Military Funeral. However afterwards through the Freedom of Information Act files of FBI abuses emerged including illegal wiretapping. 
J Edgar Hoover was a hero to the crime and anti- communist sector of the public and a villain to the civil liberties sector. Either way he was one of the 20th Centuries most important people.