Rating: 5/5

There is a stigma in this country around questioning. It is the same type of stigma that surrounds the word "socialism" - meaning that by effectively demonizing a word or phrase, the associated person and/or issue is demonized as well and effectively shut out of conversation. In the case of this book, of course, the phrase is "conspiracy theory". A conspiracy theory by definition is a theory involving more than one person in a particular act - usually of high prominence. By definition, there is nothing inherently "wrong" with a conspiracy theorist, it is used in multiple situations, including in most cases of high profile inquiry, determining who, what, when, why, where and how people were involved. To say there is a "conspiracy" is only to say that multiple people are involved in important cases, usually politically based. But the label "conspiracy theorist", when effectively applied to a person in America, is associated with "nut job". This shuts down any questioning of the government before it can begin, leaving all framing of a national/international case to the media/government (apparently they are to be unquestionably trustworthy). If we cannot question and critique our government, what kind of a free society are we? In the case of James Earl Ray, there are a few facts you should consider in your decision to read this:

Fact - James Earl Ray NEVER had a trial for MLK's murder. 

Fact - The King family has come out in support of Ray after King's assassination.

Fact - The FBI and House Select Committee investigating the assassinations of JFK and MLK have King's FBI documents and wiretaps classified until 2027 - and it is on official record that the COINTELPRO operation involving the tracking of largely African-American political groups was heavily focused on MLK. 

All of these facts are verifiable from multiple sources. This book is very important if nothing else than as a statement of the defense, which was never heard in court - it is a historical document in that respect. 

Who knows what really happened with the MLK assassination, but to entirely place one's trust in the world's most powerful government is at best a bit naive.