Rating: 1/5

At some point in my childhood, I probably would have really enjoyed these stories. They aspire to scratch an itch I definitely had at the time, a militaristic presentation of ancient history with a mythological flair. It reminds me of the days I spent ogling the Atlas of World Military History, devising pantheons that were really just cheap riffs on Classical mythologies, and reading much better fantasy. Later works that built on Howard’s foundation but took it in much better directions: things like David Eddings’ oeuvre, which I think is maybe a fair comparison (insofar as they’re both pulpy genre fiction with no aspirations to raise fantasy into interesting territory, at least). 

At that time of my life, I would maybe not have cared about, or even particularly noticed, Conan’s many, deep flaws. It is fantasy’s Worst Self. Its only redeeming factor, the only reason anyone (including me—I had a pretty good idea of how bad it would be) would read it today is for the historical perspective. The only redeeming trait about these stories is that they bear the seed of the modern fantasy genre—though how redeeming that is presumably depends on your opinion of the genre. The historical perspective is valuable, though, if only insofar as it shows how far we’ve come. Comparing Logen Ninefingers to his barbarian precursor shows the nuance and depth of Joe Abercrombie’s work in stark contrast. 

I decided to read Conan because of the central place it holds in fantasy history. That impulse is definitely vindicated. It is at once entirely familiar, echoing the dashing heroes, evil sorcerers, gleaming treasure, and stone-built trap-filled orientalist tombs of every fantasy game ever. It’s clear that Conan has as much of an influence on especially games in fantasy, if not novels, as Tolkien. On the other hand, it is surprisingly close to Weird Horror, a marriage of genres I had (quite naively, apparently) thought to be a recent phenomenon. It also provides the most literal point of evidence imaginable for my old (and obv unoriginal) observation that fantasy worlds are drawn up to mimic a (probably fictive) worldview of late medieval Europe: Howard quite literally drew the maps for the Conan world over a map of Europe and North Africa (and god it is so boring, all the countries are squares, there are no oceans between them, ugh). 

But I actually had some hope for this book, since it is included in Keely's fantasy recommendations list, along with many other titles I love and respect. It’s insane and deeply suspicious that Game of Thrones and Borges didn’t make the list, but otherwise it’s a good list, and it’s treated me well for recommendations. It got me a lot further into fantasy than I was when I started exploring the genre consciously, at least. I just can’t handle how bad Keely’s review of Conan is, bending over backward to apologize for Howard’s most glaring flaws by doing what seems to me like an irresponsibly shallow read. Though I’ll acknowledge up front that a lot of this may just be accounted for by differences in taste and political bias. 

I feel like I’m beating a horse that ought to be long-dead with this, but given how many four and five star reviews there are here, I’m going to tackle some of the ideas in this review. 
Howard’s setting, the “Hyborian Age” is an admitted smokescreen for him to play fast and loose with history. I have no problem with that idea. While it seems self-evident that doing the research, integrating your fantasy elements, and owning up to the limitations of the alt-history premise is a recipe for better fiction, I can see why someone who respected history might shy away from that tack. The alternative, of course, is creating your own world, something that has now become blasé in fantasy, though it must have been more of a novelty in Howard’s time, before Middle-Earth was conceived. 

What Conan does, instead, is simply draw on historical resonance to populate a largely new world. The geography, the names of places and races are changed, but never enough to distort their recognition by contemporary audiences. Who could mistake the hook-nosed Shemites? Conan consistently leads northern, white armies against southern, non-white foes, often led by sorcerers (who are also literal devil-worshippers in the theology of the north) who can only defeat the stronger but honorable northmen by devious tricks and magic. 

Keely tells us that our reaction to these elements is anachronistic “political correctness,” that they’re genuine tidbits of historical verisimilitude. This is an old, tired argument, and it just crumbles on close inspection here. Howard avowed his own disinterest in such faithfulness, and there are more places where he skews history to match racist notions than the opposite. There’s no critical examination of how gender and race were treated in historical societies, no cultural framework that distances the author from the characters (quite the opposite, given Conan’s extreme Gary Stuishness). No, it’s clear that all of the gender and race issues at the core of this series are there because Howard wanted them there—this is his fantasy version of the world. And I see no reason to blame that on his audience—dude was close writing friends with HP Lovecraft, who was ahead of his time on racism, closer to the Nazis than the general public of his day. 

In terms of sexual politics, Keely makes a different argument, which on the surface seems a bit more plausible. Conan spends a lot of time bluntly winning over and (implicitly—it’s not even as fun as if it were just smut) fucking (exclusively white, regardless of where the story takes place) beautiful women. And often (not exclusively, as Keely claims) those stories are told from the point of view of the woman herself. This provides a veneer of sexual agency, of mutual enthusiastic consent, but I don’t know how any intelligent reader can take that at face value. The central point, to me, is that the language Howard uses to describe the way these women are attracted to Conan is the same language he uses elsewhere to simply describe Conan as part of the narration. Moreover, while these sexual conquests often have roles of power, their position as Princess of Pirate Queen is not an element of characterization. There is no characterization. Their role is to be a mirror, reflecting Conan’s beauty back at him, providing him an opportunity to emasculate them by comparison as their martial and political strength is reduced to a wilting urge to submit sexually. 

All that is not to mention that, while Keely insists that “He doesn't pressure women, or conquer them, or trade for sex,” there is a whole story in here in which Conan chases a teasing ice-lady and would defo have committed some sexual violence if she hadn’t been rescued by a literal deus ex machina. And another scenario in which Conan rips off a woman’s veil in an alley at night to ascertain her social class (or something like that—either way, she was deceiving him!). The language used is about as rapey as you might imagine it to be (although that’s not to say later fantasy authors haven’t done worse). 

Perhaps it’s unfair to dissect these stories politically (I obviously don’t think so, but for the sake of argument etc). They were meant to be considered as fun adventure romps. Do they succeed? IMO, they’re terribly dull, full of exposition, light on character and interesting action, shallow in their depictions of monsters (they're all either spooky snakes or ape-men, cmon), with flavor that is at least in retrospect as dull and tired as anything could possibly be. 

In his review, Keely insists that there’s something Howard has achieved in his economical plotting that other writers take thousands of pages to fail at. I’m not sure what that would be (though I suppose evidence of absence etc, can’t rule out the possibility I’m just not giving it a fair enough appraisal). The stories genuinely seem to be written around a single end: jerking off the title character. The plot does nothing but create opportunities for him to show off, put him in situations that highlight his various virtues. Other characters barely exist other than for him to contrast himself with (in the case of fat, civilized men), fuck, or murder. The settings are bland unless they’re exoticized, and they are exotic in bland ways. Nothing feels real or particular—it lacks grit, even. Conan’s arc is a smooth rise to power, facilitated by shallow plot devices and fawning comrades and swooning princesses, with no time to stop and reflect. 

There is really nothing to these stories other than Conan, and Conan is nothing but an avatar of Howard’s wish fulfillment. They’re a bald-faced paean to racialized anarcho-fascist ultraviolence. They love armies but hate nations and taxes. The nihilist self-aggrandizement might be interesting if it weren’t so oblivious and boring. It’s not a realist depiction of the clashes of nations; it unironically finds glory in the guts and gore of fights it has no investment in. Political structures are exposited to showcase their corruption and lack of honor, as a matter of sort of general ideology, simply to contrast with Conan’s (and presumably Howard’s) respect for simple man-to-man respect or something. The whole worldview is so familiarly political that it’s hard for me to understand anyone mistaking it for subtlety, or anything redeeming. I guess the fact that this Breitbart asshole likes Conan and hates Joe Abercrombie says about as much as I can in what is this, 1600 words? Sheesh, rambled a bit, sorry.