Rating: 3/5

"I!" said Lisbeth. "I see vengeance wherever I turn in nature; insects even die to satisfy the craving for revenge when they are attacked."

For some reason, Balzac is the French novelist I've always struggled with and his vast La Comedie Humaine series just doesn't compete, for me, with Zola's Rougon-Macquart. La Cousine Bette, often noted as one of the best in the sequence, feels to me like a quirky mix of soap opera, dark comedy, farce and polemic. Don't expect subtlety here: from the angelic Adeline to the ugly, Machiavellian Bette consumed with a voracious appetite for revenge, characters are defined by one or two key characteristics.

Money permeates the text as Balzac quantifies emotions and human relationships in terms of financial transactions - everything, he seems to be saying, has a price. His cynical vision of French bourgeois capitalist society where everyone is consumed with self interest (except Adeline? but then look what happens to her...), where public figures are corrupt and self-serving, where love is sexual obsession, punctuated by money and, largely, exploitative is not that far from that of Zola - yet how differently I respond to their books. This one had me laughing somewhat derisively and while I don't want to include spoilers let me just say that any book that seriously includes an incurable native poison from Brazil has a hard job compensating for that low point!

The two most interesting characters are Bette herself and Valerie, a toned down version, in some ways, of Zola's Nana - a kind of unofficial courtesan with whom every man is obsessed. Their relationship, rather crudely, is articulated as a quasi-marriage as they scheme, plot and share confidences. All the same, they don't have quite the same pull as other manipulative women: Becky Sharp, say, or Madame de Merteuil. 

I might give Balzac a further try (I've previously only read his Père Goriot but the fact that this took about 3 weeks for me to get through it is saying something.