Rating: 4/5

Fascinating book! While reading another book by a guy who had moved to Thailand, this was recommended. I ended up putting aside the Thailand book in favor of this one. It was just so thought-provoking. Here we are, immersed in a huge country, with this culture that has infiltrated most areas of the world, and most of us are quite unaware that not everyone has the same underlying assumptions that we do as they look at life. In essence, the West is based on the philosophical ideas of the Greeks, who, because they had a rocky land of mountains that fall right down to the sea, were mostly herders, maritime traders, or even pirates. Theirs was a culture based on individualism. The Chinese were influenced by Confucianism, and lived in large, mostly agricultural communities, so their culture emphasized harmony with the whole. This has so many interesting implications. Science in the West developed by categorizing and ordering. Surgery was nonexistent in Eastern medicine until the 19th century because every part was deemed important to the whole. I guess you could say, in the West we are looking at the trees, and in the East, they are looking at the forest. The author illustrated the text with examples from many, many studies. He points out that the most popular beginning readers of the twentieth century, "Dick and Jane", had short sentences that focused on the individual characters: "See Dick run. See Dick play. See Dick run and play." The equivalent Chinese primer showed a picture of a smaller boy on the shoulders of a bigger boy and said: "Big brother takes care of little brother. Big brother loves little brother. Little brother loves big brother. " The focus is on the relationship. (page 50)
Also interesting is his assertion that "the further to the West a given country lies, the greater, in general, that country's endorsement of independent values." (page 70) Even within our own country, there are gradations in the valuing of independence and individualism. He says, "We generally find that it is the white Protestants among the Americans participants in our studies who show the most 'Western' patterns of behavior and that Catholics and minority group members, including African Americans and Hispanics, are shifted somewhat toward Eastern patterns." (page 70-71)
An example he gives illustrates this:
"I once knew a very distinguished and well-placed social scientist, a crusty Scottish-American Presbyterian steeped in Calvinist rectitude. He had a son who was also a social scientist and who had to struggle from time to time to sustain his career during the 1970s, when jobs were scarce in the U.S. My colleague would sometimes state proudly that, although it would have been easy for him to do so, he had never intervened to help his son's situation. The colleague's Anglo-Saxon Protestant friends would nod their approval of the justice of this stance in the face of personal pain they knew the colleague had experienced. His Jewish and Catholic colleagues, with their more Continental values, would stare in shocked disbelief at his lack of family feeling." (page 70)
Here is another interesting finding:
"...to the Asian, the world is a complex place, composed of continuous substances, understandable in terms of the whole rather than in terms of the parts, and subject more to collective than to personal control. To the Westerner, the world is a relatively simple place, composed of discrete objects that can be understood without undue attention to context, and highly subject to personal control. Very different worlds indeed." (page 100)
Because Western culture is more focused on objects, children tend to learn nouns first and more quickly than verbs. In Eastern cultures, children learn nouns and verbs at the same rate. In a study that watched mothers interact with their very young children, he relates:
"American mothers used twice as many object labels as Japanese mothers ("piggie", "doggie") and Japanese mothers engaged in twice as many social routines of teaching politeness norms (empathy and greetings, for example). An American mother's patter might go like this: "That's a car. See the car? You like it? It's got nice wheels." A Japanese mother might say: "Here! It's a vroom, vroom. I give it to you. Now give this to me. Yes! Thank you." American children are learning that the world is mostly a place with objects, Japanese children that the world is mostly about relationships." (page 150)
The Greeks, the author says, "were fond of categories and used them as the basis for discovery and application of rules. They also believed in stability and understood both the physical and social worlds in terms of fixed attributes or dispositions.....the ancient Chinese were uninterested in categories, believed in change, and understood the behavior of both physical and social objects as being due to the interaction of the object with a surrounding field of forces." (pages 152-3)
These ideas play out in interesting ways, such as in how the culture views the education of children, as seen here:
"...the dispositions of objects are not necessarily stable for Easterners. In the West, a child who performs poorly in mathematics is likely to be regarded as having little math ability or perhaps even as being "learning disabled". In the East, such a child is viewed as needing to work harder, or perhaps her teacher should work harder, or maybe the setting for learning should be changed." (page 153)
There is a provocative sentence at the close of the book:
"... the results are strongly suggestive that cognitive processes can be modified by dint of merely living for a time in another culture." (page 228)
This is such an interesting book! I guarantee it will make you think.