Rating: 4/5

The premise of "Memories of the Ford Administration", as well as the process of reading it, is bizarre. This is it: A college history professor is asked by a professional historian organization to reflect on the years of the Ford presidency for an upcoming symposium. The professor's response is apparently to write a book which is half John Updike novel, and half pseudo-non-fictional biography of James Buchanan (our 15th president).

The protagonist, Alf Clayton, admits in the closing pages of his work that he didn't actually say much about Ford. Indeed, there are moments when the rowdy events of his love life occupy his memory, and he cannot recall whether they even occursed during his target era.

On the surface, getting in synch with this novel just requires the reader to throw a switch every few dozen pages and shift from reading a standard John Updike novel to reading a historical account of the life of Old Buck, James Buchanan. It's a wierd juxtaposition, but nothing an adept reader can't juggle. Alf's life is that of the typical Updike-man: naively greedy, self-centered, sex-obsessed. The historical portions read like slightly-more poetic biography than you might get from a David McCullough.

[Sidenote: I read "John Adams" recently, which ends with the death of Adams in 1826. The first chunk of Buchanan's life Updike tackles occurs in 1819. The overlap, and inclusion of the politics behind the election of John Quincy Adams (and Buchanan's role in it) interestingly made me feel like I was reading some kind of sequel.]

What at first struck me as strange, however, was Updike's insistence on including little notes from Alf to his prospective editor; each time one pops up, it reminds you that this history is not supposed to have been written by Updike, but instead by his character, Alf Clayton. As this continues, you begin to see the parallels between the frustrating life of Buchanan and that of Alf. And before you go feeling all clever for noticing the parallels, Alf starts talking about the parallels in a strange act of metafiction (or is it meta-non-fiction?). All of this made the act of untangling the various voices a novel little game. Updike, the author; Alf, the sometimes subject, sometimes narrator; Buchanan, the hapless, unwitting subject of Updike's subject.

Some people complain about the lack of plot in Updike novels. I'd agree that there is an aimless, meandering quality to the paths his characters run over the course of his novels. His books are more like character portraits than tightly plotted stories. And although there is a distinct through-line for the life of Buchanan (the serpartion from and death of his fiance, the rise of his political career, his ascension to the Presidency, the crumbing of the union from under him), Alf just sort of wanders around the Ford era filling us in on his crude sexual exploits, and the exasperation with which he confronts the disappointment he endears in his various mates. That he is a chauvenist bastard is something about which he is utterly oblivious.

Anyhow, inattention to plot is attractive to me when the negligence is enacted by such a poet as John Updike. I don't care where the novel is going, as long as I'm given several chances to get lost in his lush descriptions and metaphors. He is elegent in the way he turns a phrase into a sentence into a paragraph. In my reading experience (which broad through it may be, is relatively limited, I'm sure) only Heller or Faulkner are comparable in modern times, and beyond that, it isn't too far fetched to begin comparing him to Tolstoy and Hugo. Updike's subjects aren't as epic in scale, but his strong sense for conveying very subtle emotions and sensations and impressions is sometimes stunning. And it becomes all the more impressive when you realize he's turning these tricks both in his standard prose style, as well as in the style of the more formal and stuffy attitudes of the early and middle 19th century.

Besides the weird meta-fictional pas-de-deux, a few other themes are touched on. There is a striking comparison, for instance, of the societal mores dealing with sex and relationships as they existed in the Ford and Buchanan eras. The maleability of history is touched on several times, as Alf not only comments on his difficulties pinning down what happened when in the life of Buchanan and his love, Ann Coleman, but also as he struggles at times to pin down what happened when in his own life. Though the Alf we read about is still in his virile thirties, we're reminded in a few instances that the actual man writing this account is an aging grandfather, whose thoughts on old age and death also crop up occasionally both in thoughts about his own life, as well as in his reflections on the life of an aging Buchanan.

In no way is this novel a light read. It's definitely one that requires your attention, and even an eagerness to delve into what some might consider 'dry' accounts of history. But if you're a fan of Rabbit Angstrom (although he was kind of a bastard too, so 'fan' might not be the right word), then "Memories of the Ford Administration" will take you down a similar path, with, albeit, a slightly more strange premise.