Rating: 3/5

This is a first contact story, published in 1960, which reads like a precursor to the New Wave, which changed SF drastically later in the 1960s. I read it as a part of the monthly reading for December 2025 at Hugo &amp; Nebula Awards: Best Novels group. The novel was nominated for Hugo in 1961, lost to A Canticle for Leibowitz.

The novel starts in 1959 (“just yesterday” for its readers in 1960) when two men discuss what to do to avoid the situation with the third man in the room – a drooling idiot. In the following text, I will describe the SF part of the story, for it is secondary to the psychological part, which I will discuss later. This book is like a murder mystery, where the investigator comes and the rest of the book, instead of searching for a killer and their motive, all characters wallow in their own psychosis.

In 1957, the USSR launched Sputnik. To beat the Soviets to the Moon, (dark) US geniuses create a mass teleportation system, which first scans a person to his (brave scouts are all men, of course) atoms, records the image, and sends it to its destination (in our case Moon). Meanwhile, the original here on Earth is put in the sensory deprivation chamber, which allows him, for some time, to keep a telepathic contact with his double. A great win for the US space program (and JFK has no need for his famous 1962 speech We choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard.) and a great discovery: there is something artificial on Moon, and when researchers enter this ‘labyrinth’, they inevitably die within seconds or minutes if they are (un)lucky. And this death of themselves leads all telepathically connected originals on Earth to go crazy sooner or later.

The protagonist, Dr. Edward Hawks, who is behind the development of the mass teleportation system, needs a man who will withstand constantly repeating deaths. For this, the firm’s HR Vincent Connington suggests Al Barker:  ‘Parachutist in World War Two. Transferred to the OSS in 1944. Specialized in assassination. Used to be an Olympic ski-jumper. Bobsled crewman. National Small Arms Champion, 1950. Holds a skin-diving depth record. Used to mountain climb. Cracked an outboard hydroplane into the shore at Lake Mead, a couple of years ago.’ Al has an artificial leg, but this in no way diminishes his desire to risk his life constantly. He has a girlfriend Claire Pack, who is also a psychopath, constantly teasing men (Connington is in love with her).

So, after a short preparation, Al becomes the main scout of the program, regularly dying but moving even further through the labyrinth. However, if a usual SF story would have gone in trying to understand the nature and/or purpose of the artifact, this book doesn’t care about it. Instead, it cares about characters’ mental disorders. In his 1961 review of the book in F&amp;SF Magazine, Alfred Bester notes that it is the ideal of science fiction, the story of how human beings may be affected by the science of the future. And in some way, I agree with him. Just like the mass teleportation system creates an image of a person, so each person creates an image of themselves and others in their mind. For example, at the beginning, Connington discusses that “There’re all kinds of people in this world. But they break down into two main groups, one big and one smaller. There’s the people who get moved out of the way or into line, and then there’s the people who do the moving. It’s safer and a lot more comfortable to go where you’re pushed. You don’t take any of the responsibility, and if you do what you’re told, every once in a while you get thrown a fish.” Of course, he puts himself among movers, a version of what modern pseudo psychology for boys calls Alphas or Chad. The self-images of others are also flattering (and also likely wrong). 

It is an interesting idea; it transcends SF, but as an SF story, it is lacking.