Rating: 4/5

Require book for a college course on leadership. In this book, Bennis presented a version of “how” to become a leader. Bennis interviewed many individuals, who were leaders or Chief Executive Officers of organizations and companies. He included their biographies in the appendix of the book. The author presented the personal traits a leader needs to develop, how a leader should lead, and how they must develop within an organization. Bennis characterized leaders as those with the abilities to guide the vision, inspire others, bring integrity to the organization, which he calls the most compelling characteristic of effective leaders. The author makes a clear distinction between leaders and managers. He contended that leaders are not managers and that the differences between leaders and managers are enormous and crucial. For example, managers focus on systems and structure, while leaders focus on people. According to Bennis, leaders are not the people in the company who have undergone training, are focused entirely on the company, and who work for the single goal of efficiency of resources. Instead, leaders are the people who know themselves and know how they fit within a company's mission. By interviewing leaders with a wide range of backgrounds, Bennis articulated that leaders are not born, but made. Bennis stressed the importance of experience as the primary and ultimate development vehicle for leaders. He argued that leaders become leaders by using their experiences rather than despising them. The author defined leaders as people who are capable of fully expressing themselves. Some of Bennis’ writing in this book appears to be random political opinions. He appears to support a liberal stand on politics. The Epilogue to the Twentieth-Anniversary Edition appears to be a political summary of President George W. Bush and his administration’s handling of the financial crisis of 2008. Bennis even called President Bush, a dangerous leader. Bennis called Bush’s eight years in office a failure and blamed the decline of America on him. On the other hand, he praised President Clinton for the way he led d the country during his years in office. Despite liberal and political views from the author, this book is recommended for anyone interested in the study of leadership.