Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars

If you're looking for a humorous, time-traveling romp through Arthurian England you'll be disappointed. The humor in this novel is dark and, IMHO, much of it not very amusing. For the most part, this story is a caustic satire of chivalry, monarchy, nobility, and established religion. 

The protagonist is a late 19th century superintendent of a large arms factory--based on Hartford's Colt Armory--who's transported back to 6th century England by a blow on the noggin received during a fight with a belligerent worker. He wakes in a place that hardly resembles the legendary realm, not to mention the musical fantasy land of "Camelot." On the contrary, in this story King Arthur is a noble dunce, Guinevere an upper-class floozy who doesn't count for much in the story except as a plot driver, the knights a bunch of dim-witted, privileged bullies, Merlin a snake-oil purveying charlatan, the priests and monks a bunch of knaves and fools.

6th century England is dark, dirty, abysmally ignorant, unspeakably cruel, plague-ridden and depressing. The Yankee believes in progress through education, enlightenment, science, industry, free trade and technology. He uses his advanced knowledge from 13 centuries in the future to perform "miracles" and soon becomes Arthur's right-hand man, titled The Boss. With the help of his loyal page Clarence and his "fair lady" Alisande (Sandy) he sets about transforming the backwards nation on the sly. He sets up academies, factories, newspapers, advertising and marketing, communications by wire (telephone and telegraph), steam engines, an electrical power grid and dreams of abolishing slavery, feudalism, the established church and the monarchy with the ultimate goal of transforming King Arthur's realm into a constitutional republic where all men and women have guarantees of equal rights and due process under a rule of just laws. Does he succeed? No spoiler here. Let's just say the ending is consistent with the pessimism that's present in most of Mark Twain's later writings.