Rating: 3/5

I'm approaching the end of my Wheel of Time re-read (and first time read for the last few books) so I wanted to start another series- and these times of quarantine and pandemic, I couldn't think of anything better than the origin story for McCaffery's 'Talent' saga.

Beginning in the not-to-distant future (at the time, anyway)- The Wings of Pegasus tells the story first of Henry Darrow, who when he's in a car accident gets proof that ESP is actually real and changes the world forever. Soon he's founded a center for these 'Talents' and manages to get them a permanent home before his death and the work of achieving professional immunity then passes to the second generation and Daffyd Op Owen- who must contend with rogue 'Talents' that seek to derail their hard won victory for professional immunity and a new talent more powerful than they've seen. (And all that is just in 'To Ride Pegasus.')

'Pegasus In Flight' skips ahead even further to the next generation where we meet Peter Reidinger, a quadraplegic teenager who develops a new Talent- using kinesis in gestalt with machines to enhance his power- which comes in handy when the Talents are forced to send their strongest kinetics to help build the great space platform of Padrugoi Space Station so humanity can take to the stars. 

I kind of wonder how McCaffery is viewed these days, becase there are aspects of this book that feel curiously dated to me. Don't get me wrong: this is pandemic comfort reading and I love it- but at the same time, her vision of the future is curiously dark. ("Illegal" kids get sterilized whether they want too or not, because their births were against the law, there's a thriving trade in illegal kids, with sickos using them for slave labor/organ donation/sexual perversion. There's also a little matter of AI being used for initial court appearances- which was an odd touch I didn't pick up on the last time I read these books. There's also fake nicotine, which is "better for you.") With Tirla's story in 'Pegasus in Flight' we sort of see a glimpse of day to day life for regular folks- and I'd be curious to see more from the 'ground level' as it were, because aspects of it feel kind of fucked up in many ways.

Also, can we talk about Sascha and Tirla? Tirla is 12. Sascha is not. Sascha 'pre-cogs' that he's going to marry Tirla--- and while in the book, Sascha realizes this and thinks, 'well, damn I gotta wait 8 or 9 years here'- which is responsible and less creepy-- the end of the book is like, "shit, they 'ripen faster' in Tirla's culture, so she'll be ready to be married in four years." At sixteen years old...
 
It's sketch. And a little uncomfortable, to be honest. But... okay then. (The words 'she's very heteronormative' spring to mind and there's a thing here where Talents gotta breed with Talents to make more Talents which is also kind of... uncomfortable- but at least vaguely in line with population controls already well established in McCaffery's world here. (Lagos/Ruth Horvath need to apply for permission to reproduce which strikes me as... sketch as well.) 

But still: COMFORT READING IS AWESOME AND I LIKE THESE BOOKS.