Rating: 5/5

Allen Drury worked for the United Press for 20 years, reporting on Washington, DC generally and Capitol Hill specifically. In Advise and Consent, Drury uses that experience to craft a compelling and realistic tale of US politics, circa 1959.

Drury's story starts with an unnamed US President nominating Robert Leffingwell to be the next Secretary of State. Leffingwell holds liberal views and will work toward rapprochement with the Soviet Union, something many US citizens want but of which others are wary. The nomination goes to the Senate, who must confirm the nominee - or as the Constitution describes it, they must "advise and consent" to the President's selection. Majority Leader Bob Munson begins work immediately to get his votes lined up, but knows he will face at least some opposition from Seab Cooley. Cooley is an aging Southern Senator and a member of the minority party who has bad blood with Leffingwell. Cooley succeeds in throwing enough cold water on the process to send the nomination hearings to a subcommittee, where opponents dig up old dirt on Leffingwell. Brigham Anderson, a younger Senator and a rising star from Utah, leads the subcommittee through their investigations and interviews. However, things grow really ugly when the President and others start applying more serious political pressure on various members of the Senate to move Leffingwell's vote to the floor.

It's been quite some time since I have found myself so enthused by a book; I was completely drawn into the world Drury depicts. The characters are vivid and nuanced, the dialogue crackles like a Billy Wilder script, and the minute details of life in the Senate add dimension and texture to the setting. The Senators do their public work by a code of conduct that has a number of formal strictures, yet they must also answer to the dictates of their own conscience. Therefore, what occurs in public spaces - at press conferences, on the floor of the Senate, etc. - and what occurs behind locked doors, is often quite different. Drury opens those locked doors, giving us the behind-the-scenes tale of how the sausage gets made and the result is spellbinding narrative. Do you want to be in the room where it happens? Drury takes you there, whether that room is a Senator's private study, a diner out of town, the Oval Office, or a back bedroom during a party of gathered DC socialites.

Perhaps the thing I most appreciated about the novel was that no one comes across as pure hero or villain. In the early chapters of the book, I found myself aligning with certain characters as they seemed the most likeable, moral, or reasonable. However, as the story progresses, we see these players do things that disappoint, horrify, or shock us. Meanwhile, other characters who seemed unlikable or unreasonable stand up for what is right. No one is all good or all bad, and each major character struggles with moral decisions related to their personal beliefs about what is best for the country and whether the ends justify the means. I appreciated that Leffingwell's fate remains in doubt throughout the book, and that, as a reader, I wasn't always clear on whether I wanted Leffingwell to get the job or not.

The final act of the book includes several dramatic events that change some hearts and minds and decide the outcome of the confirmation vote (among other things), leading to a crowd-pleasing finish. Drury overplays his hand a bit here, wandering over the line into melodrama a couple of times. The final scenes in Advise and Consent reminded me of the speeches in Frank Capra's Mr. Smith Goes to Washington or President Ryan's tough choices in Tom Clancy's book Executive Orders. Still, perhaps we can forgive Drury his patriotic desire to see the "good guys" win. His time in the press corps may have made him a touch cynical, but he clearly still wanted to believe that a good man (or woman) had a chance to hold their own in the machine of Washington politics.

Despite being over 60 years old, this book feels timely. Given the dysfunction we've seen and experienced lately in our national politics, reading this gave me a strange kind of hope. Yes, politics is a nasty business and yes, both the system and the people within it are imperfect. Reading this book however, I was reminded that ideas still matter. An aspirational political stance might seem naive, but it may also light the only way out of the morass that is business as usual in our nation's capital.