Rating: 5/5

*** 2025 reread - 

As I type this in January of 2025, Goodreads tells me that I've read over 2000 books. Of these, I've read about 60 at least twice - the Discworld books, the Dune books, some others. 

Of these books, I've only read a handful three times or more. This is now one of them. I read this last year and then I read this with my book club.

This is one of the great fantasies of the last 50 years. Varley's writing is inspired and his world building is first rate.

Cirocco Jones is one of the great SF characters and this time I also paid closer attention to other member of the Ringmaster, consigned to Titan, especially April Polo, who becomes April the Swift.

Great fantasy, highly, highly recommended.

*** 2024 reread - 

First read in HS so this is about a 40 year gap between readings. If anything, this is much more enjoyable the second time around.

I’ve read lots of fantasy writing over the past 40 years and I’m up here on my magic mushroom to state emphatically that Varley’s world building here is some of the best in this genre.

To sum up the surface story: a ragtag crew is out by Saturn, investigating what was thought to be a moon, because its that big, but its some kind of construct (reminiscent of Clarke’s Rama) and then they are attacked by the thing and then they are off on a WILD adventure inside the construct which is several powers of MASSIVE and there are also different kinds of sentient lifeforms, and some of the crew can mysteriously communicate with the beings, and then there is a meeting with a very mysterious entity, really very very cool fantasy.

The Hugo award voters considered this one and the sequel, Wizard, for the best novel award and I really enjoy his writing as well. He’s got PKD level imagination but without the over the top schizophrenia or amphetamines crazed urgency. What my man Varley lays down is a smooth high fantasy but grounded in level headed approach.

We also see some exceptional dialogue and characterization, focused mainly on our protagonist Cirocco Jones. Varley describes her as a larger than life adventure hog but also demonstrating real leadership qualities. The interactions between the earthlings and the Titan creatures was maybe the best thing about this, besides just the sheer imaginative AWESOMENESS.

Highly recommended for fantasy readers; though we notice some 70s disco sensibilities, this has actually aged rather well.