Rating: 4/5

Amor Vincit Omnia?

After reading the first two chapters of Hide My Eyes, I braced myself for another lukewarm reading experience with Margery Allingham because the plot seemed really all over the place and I felt like quitting. Luckily, however, I soldiered on against the odds, and the third chapter already rewarded me for that as the drift of the story became clearer and also made sense of what had gone on before. This mystery novel is not at all a whodunnit but more like a thriller in which we already know the identity of the murderer and are left on tenterhooks as to whether the police will put a stop to his deadly game in time.

Still, it is not only about suspense but also about the depths of human nature as exemplified in the relation between Polly Tassie, a rather simple-minded old lady, and Gerry Hawker, a psychopath, who has established her (and her late husband) as a shield behind which he commits his crimes, which are quite erratic: Whenever Gerry finds himself on a shoestring, he kills in order to replenish his funds, and then he burns his money until the need for the next strike arises. He is quite a predator behind his charming and winsome exterior, and there is apparently no conscience and no human feeling inside him. To a chance acquaintance, whom he intends to use as an alibi for a murder, he sums up his way of life rather frankly, like this:

”’That’s the secret of my success. […] I never let anything tear my skin. I’ve never been faintly fond of anything or of anybody in my life. […] I’m deadly serious about this. I spotted the plain mechanical truth of it as a child. […] Any kind of affection is a solvent. It melts and adulterates the subject and by indulging it he loses his identity and hence his efficiency. By keeping myself to myself in the face of every conceivable attack I have remained successful, bright and indestructible. […]’”

With a readiness to charm other people and a cold firmness of purpose Hawker has indeed been rather successful in his crimes, and when he realizes that Polly is beginning to see through him, he not even balks at the thought of silencing her for good. As to Polly, she is one of those people who simply have to love somebody and see something good in them. Having found out that Gerry has been defalcating money from her, she intends to put “the boy” right by setting him up in marriage with a niece of hers because she thinks that he deserves a second chance, and even when it dawns upon her that Gerry might not only be dabbling in embezzlement and petty crime, she is ready to hide her eyes and appeal to Gerry’s feelings for her. There must be some, after all, mustn’t there?

I am not going to tell you here, of course, but all I can say is that Hide My Eyes is a very engaging and compelling read, which would easily lend itself to the silver screen. Another plus of this novel is that Mr. Campion does not play a big role in it and that we are spared his antics this time.