Rating: 4/5

I read Jude the Obscure years ago in an undergraduate Literature course and remembered feeling emotionally devastated. Time has erased almost all memory of the setting and plot except that of a young child who made a brief appearance. He is called Father Time because he seems perpetually melancholic and aged from having lived a storm-tossed life despite his tender years. My heart broke when I met him again and encountered the hopelessness he must have felt.

Father Time is the son of Jude Fawley, the lead protagonist, in this 1895 classic story that is set in fictional Wessex in the southern part of England. I lost count of the times I said to myself “Oh Jude!” or “Poor Jude!” I finished reading this book on Valentine’s Day, a day romantic love is celebrated, and was struck by how Jude the Obscure must be one of the saddest love stories in classical literature. Love, ostensibly between individuals who profess to love each other, is sorely tested and cruelly blighted by a confluence of factors that are insurmountable: core character traits/flaws, deprivation marked by poverty and lack of education, traditional values surrounding morality and marriage, and the stronghold of social opinion. Hardy painted a worldview that was irredeemably bleak as the lives of the characters seemed to be driven by Fate, leaving them no autonomy to chart their own future.

Hardy first introduced us to Jude as an 11-year-old orphan weeping by a well as he bids farewell to his teacher (Mr. Phillotson) who is heading to Christminster to further his studies. Jude lives with his Great Aunt Drusilla who dutifully raises him but regards him as a burden. To earn his keep, Jude works on a farm as a human scarecrow! This tenderhearted child ends up feeding the birds and getting beaten. To young Jude, the birds ‘seemed, like himself, to be living in a world which did not want them.... A magic thread of fellow-feeling united his own life with theirs.’ Jude aspires to go to university in Christminster like his teacher in hopes of one day becoming a member of the clergy. How can one not feel protective toward Jude, cheer him on, and hope he realizes his dreams?

Jude’s tender-heartedness and honesty are his areas of strength as reflected in his readiness to help others (e.g., find storage for Phillotson’s piano, advertise wonder pills for a money-faced village doctor who promised him Latin grammar books but forgot them; run errands for his Great Aunt’s bakery). However, they also constitute his greatest weakness and render him susceptible to manipulation and deceit. In his youthful naivety, Jude (barely 19 years old) is dubbed into marrying Arabella Donn, a coarse and morally lax pig farmer’s daughter who seduces him and feigns pregnancy. His plans for Christminster vanish as he finds himself rearing and slaughtering pigs instead. Arabella soon abandons Jude for greener pastures but returns to hound him several times, each time diverting him yet further from his aspirations. She thrusts their son Father Time (a son he does not know he has) on him, which upsets his relationship with Sue Bridehead, Jude’s true love. Jude yields to Arabella’s importunity and manipulation time and again, including marrying Arabella a second time. Oh Jude! How stupid can you get?  Jude’s soft-hearted nature also means that he is easily moved by others’ distress, defers to others’ opinions, and readily caves in to their demands against his better judgment and needs. Sue is a seemingly unconventional, asexually frigid woman who holds him at arms-length, and refuses to marry him. Jude concedes to all of her reasoning for not wanting a permanent relationship. Alas, Victorian society does not look kindly on couples who live together without a marriage license. In one horrific episode, the couple is denied housing when they show up with their children; a hyper-sensitive Father Time takes the hostility to heart with tragic consequences.

Add to Jude’s gentle nature his passive tendency to wait on the sidelines instead of taking prompt action, and we have a slow cooking crockpot of disaster - unfulfilled dreams and a sequelea of events that culminate in tragedy. He has too many scruples for his own good and is his own worst enemy. Another tragic character flaw is perhaps Jude’s low sense of self-efficacy that has its roots in his humble beginnings. Jude clearly values education and the high calling of the church. In his own words, ”I care for something higher.” However, he has doubts about his ability to succeed given his lack of access to books and tutors. Circumstances such as the snobbery of the university elite also pose huge roadblocks to his quest for betterment. The one time he picks up courage to write for admission to the Christminster colleges, he is rebuffed and rejected. Poor Jude! There is nothing more deterrent than being humiliated for taking a step forward. 

What upsets me the most is how the story rewards the bad and punishes the good. Shallow and unprincipled characters like Arabella who are unscrupulous in furthering their own agenda end up getting what they want and having their own way. In contrast, characters with integrity like Jude get short-changed. Similarly, unconventional characters like Sue who value independence suffer because society is not ready for them. Religion too is cast in an extremely poor light with guilt gnawing at the conscience, bringing destruction. Sue regards her children as deserving death because they are begotten of sin; she perceives their death as punishment for breaking her marriage oath to Phillotson whom she does not love. The loss of her children precipitated a reinstatement of her marriage and conjugal rights to a man she loathes as penance for longing after a man she loves.  I hated how Hardy gave opportunistic and lying Arabella the last word in this novel. It is grotesquely unfair. How could you, Mr. Hardy? 

The tragedy that unfolds in this story feels overblown and melodramatic. By design it is perhaps Hardy’s indictment against life in Victorian England that despises the working class, ‘the so-called self-taught’ with their ‘laboured acquisitions’ and denies them opportunities to better themselves. Hardy criticizes the Church whose religious conventions constrict rather than liberate the human soul. Likewise, he criticizes the institution of marriage. One of my GR friends, Ken, astutely observed that Hardy likely used his characters “as a foil against society, the Church, and other harsh monoliths. In other words, the characters aren't the point themselves so much as they're used to MAKE a point."

Jude the Obscure turned out to be an absorbing but difficult read. Hardy wrote a strong prose that was itself a pleasure. I had the privilege of reading it with a group of extremely well-read and erudite Goodreads members and learned so much from our group discussion. There are religious allusions and literary conventions that are an inherent part of this novel’s richness and complexity, which I will not go into. Suffice to say, Jude the Obscure is a well written classic that showcases Hardy’s profound understanding of human nature and empathy for individuals who are trapped by circumstances beyond their control.