Rating: 5/5

Tales of an upper-class, sexually liberated Mexico City teenage girl in the 1980’s. I say upper-class because we are talking cars, maids (plural), vacations in Acapulco and Europe and shopping trips to the USA. 

And I say sexually liberated because at times she is juggling four male friends and still sleeping with one while she is engaged to be married to another. This young woman is so 'hot' (she’s a model) that every wealthy 50-year-old guy in town wants her as his mistress. 

In a breathless monologue translated from the Spanish into valley-talk, she talks to us throughout the book as if the reader were one of her girlfriends, which can get annoying after a while. “I told you that already, didn’t I? Un-huh. So anyway, you know, right? Like I told you…Never, never, never… no, no, no…very, very very… puleeze” with an occasional “Ay chingale! thrown in. 

There are good metaphors like “…white as an altar boy’s ass” and “…his gaze was so intense you could feel you buttons start to pop off.” 

She gives us her take on coming of age in Mexico during this particular time and in this particular social class. She hangs out in high-class restaurants frequented by celebrities, gays, prostitutes, government ministers, drug dealers and con artists of various stripes. 

She invites a visiting Cuban dance troupe to her home and her mother retreats to her bedroom screaming, “There are ‘Negroes’ in our house!” 

Since this is Mexico, violence intrudes.  Both her father and uncle are killed in separate brutal incidents. 

A lot of local color of Mexico City which reminds me a bit of Bolano’s 'Savage Detectives' set in Mexico City a decade earlier. 

Despite its drawbacks, it held me spellbound so I gave it a 5. 

The Mexican author (1940-2015), who taught at Indiana University, wrote two dozen novels but this appears to be the only one translated into English. 

Top photo of Mexico city's bar scene from travelbible.co
The author from latinamericanwriters.files.wordpress.com