Rating: 5/5

“Mother must be dying.”
“Stop trying to cheer me up.”
  

Now that, my friends, is what we in the business call a wild ride. This is a ridiculous 1970s soap opera that I could not help but enjoy, but I think above all else, it made me hunger on a deep level for a San Francisco I’ve never experienced. 

Well. We’ll talk about that in a little while. For now, let’s just say this: Tales of the City is a wild ride from start to finish. On both the level of “this is fucking hilarious” and “holy shit, that was a plot twist”. It’s like someone combined Revenge, the 2012 television show, with The Office. It made me feel like I was on crack. I loved it. 

  “Finally, she looks at him intently and says, in a voice fraught with meaning, ‘which do you think you’d prefer, Rich? S or M?’”
“And?”
“He thought it was something to put on the hamburger.”

The tone of these is so delightfully absurdist — you have to lean into the humor a bit and suspend your disbelief to get to the good bits. Actually, it took me a while to get that the chapters were being absurd on purpose (okay, so I received these without context).

Some highlights of the admittedly ridiculous character cast include: 
→Mary Ann, a San Francisco newbie trying to make it but making bad romantic decisions along the way. Often dumb but occasionally iconic. 
→Mona, Mary Ann’s first friend when she comes to town. Best friend to Michael. Excellent person with some drug issues.
→Michael, a gay icon, Mona’s best friend and second roommate. Constantly looking for long-term love but hasn’t found it yet. 
→Anna Madrigal, landlord to Mona and later Mary Ann and Michael. Mentor type. Some secrets of her own.
→Beachamp, rich and seemingly happy husband to DeDe. Secretly dissatisfied. Sort of a dirtbag.
→DeDe, rich daughter of a richer man. Not always the smartest.
→Edgar, dissatisfied dying man trying to come to terms with a wasted life via his new friendship with a certain landlord. Father to Dede and husband to Frannie. 
→Brian, disaster and a half. Token heterosexual. One-time lover to Mary Ann. 
→Jon, possible lover to Michael. Gynecologist. 
→Dorothea, black lesbian back in town to get back her old lover. 
→Vincent, depressed crisis hotline operator whose wife has left him to join the Israeli army. 
→Norman, older man living on the top floor. Maybe a few secrets.

I think in basically any other book, this character cast would’ve been absurd, but in this book, they feel perfectly believable. I love how all of the characters are written as both flawed and at times selfish but still generally endearing. And the comics are not without their moments of genuine heart: the relationship between Anna and Edgar is honestly really wonderful and tender, and the friendship between Mona and Michael is — honest to god — peak mlm/wlw solidarity. (You will not be surprised to know they were my favorites.)

Due to the serial format, these issues often feel very distinct, at times dealing with very different characters and themes. But I definitely had some favorite scenes and plotlines. 

➽Here are some of my book highlights (light spoilers only):
→Anna giving Mary Ann a joint as a welcome to San Francisco gift
→Michael’s meet-cute with Jon, which takes place at a skating rink after he breaks his nose trying to subtly skate up next to him
→when a feminist talking about rape shows up at Dede’s country club and a minor character says delightedly “this is better than when they brought the bulldyke in!” 
→the scene in which Brian is trying to sleep with a woman who thinks he’s gay and trying to sleep with women to repress it, and who then, when he says he’s not gay, says clinically “You must not be in touch with your body” and walks out. an ally
→when Michael answers a call from Mary Ann’s mom and her mom is scandalized about the strange man at her apartment and she then has to tell her mother about the existence of gay people
→Mary Ann getting hired at a crisis hotline, accidentally making a pun about playing it by ear, and then contemplating biting her own tongue off
→the scene in which Frannie is unloading all her problems but cutting it with “no, but I wouldn’t want to burden you, darling” and you think it’s like, to a friend, and it’s to her fucking dog
→WHEN MICHAEL’S PARENTS FIND LUBE IN HIS FUCKING REFRIGERATOR
→when Brian asks Michael to go cruising with him and Michael is like… why are straight people like this but then does it anyway. relatable content from 1978
→the guy who photocopied his dick and used the enlarger

And before I get serious, a brief spoiler section:

  about a bicon:
 Listen, from the very first page, Mona had bi energy. More importantly her and Michael were at PEAK mlm/wlw solidarity and I literally typed in my review notes “I know she’s straight but this is mlm/wlw solidarity at its finest” and then it WAS. actually I think the book isn’t really taking a position on her sexuality (she actually says she’d prefer a long term friendship to having a lover at one point and i was like okay!! !! ! ! ! ! legend ! ! ! !!). it’s just as long as we acknowledge that Mona is in no way a heterosexual we’re good 

  it’s Michael Sad hours, really no spoilers just a rant:
 I actually absolutely love the way Michael is written. because this portrayal of the gay scene is clearly a reflection of promiscuity being really mainstream at that time, a hard-earned freedom. but the narrative still makes it so clear that he just… genuinely wants love? (Michael’s energy in this is the same as my energy when I tweet about wanting a gf every day.) but in all reality, it’s a wonderfully subtle arc and the scene with his parents made me die inside just a little bit.

  some incredible plot twists:
 okay holy SHIT the minor reveals of characters being involved with each other? INCREDIBLE. I LOVED the way the book did the Mona/Dor reveal, that’s a built reveal babes. the revelation about BEAUCHAMP? when he’s in the bathhouse and Jon sees him? absurd. the fucking Norman investigating Anna reveal left me shook as hell because it immediately made so much sense especially given Edgar’s earlier talk about the Madrigal’s being ridiculous!! Jon being Dede’s FUCKING gynecologist?? ? ?? ?? The thing with Lexy and Norman was awful :(( I loved connecting the dots. the point is I was left shook by so much of this

  some less incredible plot twists:
 The only thing is that I did not like the twist about Dor, at all. I think it has some really awful connotations to have the only black character in your novel actually be white. I know it’s a soap opera from 1970 but this made me super mad and is honestly the only reason I'm even tempted to not give this a five.

The thing is, I said I was going to get serious, and there’s something I need to say. 

  Conservatives have long loathed it as the axis of liberal politics and political correctness, but now progressives are carping, too. They mourn it for what has been lost, a city that long welcomed everyone and has been altered by an earthquake of wealth.
 -from Washington Post's How San Francisco Broke America’s Heart
I grew up 10 miles south of San Francisco — at the time of writing this, I'm leaving for college in almost exactly a week — with a mother who works as an opera singer up in the city. When I was eight, I knew without a doubt that as soon as I left for college, my mother would be selling our house in favor of a nice apartment near SF opera, as most of her friends had. Ten years later, the idea itself is ludicrous. The money we would receive for selling our (fairly nice) house wouldn't pay rent on anything but a studio. Many of my mother's friends have moved to Oakland, taking long commutes simply to arrive. One of my best friends lives with her family in Brentwood, an area past Oakland and two hours from San Francisco — her mom works a job in Woodside so she can attend a private school in the Bay Area. 

I grew up knowing San Francisco as a place of gay culture and a thriving arts scene — a place with a large homeless population and some crime, but also a place where people came to be themselves. Now, I know it as a city where the culture of old residents is rapidly disappearing, replaced with the more homogenous Silicon Valley scene.

In reading this book where San Francisco is known as a weird and quirky city with a thriving gay scene, I found myself mourning for a San Francisco (and a Bay Area) I am barely old enough to have experienced, let alone to remember. I've known for years that I wanted to leave for college, but I wonder sometimes whether, thirty years earlier, I would've wanted to come back.

Blog | Goodreads | Twitter | Instagram | Spotify | Youtube