Rating: 4/5

I spent 15 minutes searching THE BIG BOOK by Donald Katz before I came to my senses. The Big Store: Inside the Crisis and Revolution at Sears is a very big book though at 604 pages, and after childhood of Sears catalogs called The Big Book, I think I will forgive myself. 

There has been a Sears store in every place I've lived, even in the smallest of towns where it was a catalog shop. Sears was my first credit card barely out of high school and our first refrigerator, washer and dryer when we first bought a house. I remember the old Birmingham, Alabama Sears store, downtown across from Big Boy - was there a towering Big Boy there or is that just a fiction of recall? That Sears store in 1982 was low, aqua colored and pretty run down, just a tire store by then but nevertheless, where I always got my tires. The big new Sears store over the mountain in Hoover was spectacular and that's where I got my first hammer and a Craftsman drill that lasted until just this year. 

Later Sears picked up K-Mart to fill in the bottom layer of buyers - for cheap goods. But remember K-Mart is where Martha Stewart started her rehabilitation to celebrity and Martha's 100% cotton sheets were heaven and affordable. My K-Mart tableware is stainless steel, with a beautiful heavy feel in the hand - the set is still complete and used daily for almost 50 years. And I always loved Basic Editions shirts and pants -- one of Sears' mantras was "basic, basic" to describe its everyday quality, variety and price-right merchandise. Comfortable and durable, Basic Editions have always been good enough for me. As K-Marts closed throughout the country I mourned the loss of each one in my region.

Sears filed for chapter 11 protection in 2018 and today the Sears stores in Hoover, Alabama and Medford, Oregon are shuttered. What with the coronavirus, market analysts suggest that the 25 stores that have reopened are at risk. I can still order appliances on the website, Sears.com but Basic Editions clothing is only on the used market now. 

It was an honor and a pleasure to read of Ed Telling's instinctive vision to unite a labyrinth of retail sites and merchants. Telling re-created Sears as one store and at the same time expanded Sears' business lines to include real estate, credit and other financial services. It was amazing to have some understanding of Ed Brennan's strategy, personality and hard hard work to get all of that done. To call Sears a store, even one of such leviathan size and complexity, is to understate its role in America's cultural and economic history.

So thanks to Katz, I sort of know how Sears started out in 1886, the years since and what happened at Sears from January 1, 1978 when Ed Telling emerged from the ranks as chairman and CEO and January 1, 1986 when he retired and Ed Brennan succeeded him in the role. The Big Store is a nearly day-by-day, blow-by-blow account of those nine years, mirroring or leading US financial policies, politics, fashion trends and economics and coming out on top. Again.

I'm so curious to know the inside of what happened next.