Rating: 4/5

I was so excited when in 1990 it was announced that David Lynch's series 'Twin Peaks' was going to be shown on tv. 

I taped the entire series but by the end of the series I was lost and wondering to myself what had just happened. It was a great story with some intriguing special effects but I couldn't make head or tale of it and I never did understand 

'who killed Laura Palmer.'????

Reading the Long Shot has left me feeling the way I did back then. The mystery is lost in the surrealism of the story and the complicated language.

It is written well and I enjoyed what I could understand but this book is like Twin Peaks all the way. 

When Paul Monette first published The Long Shot it didn't go down well with the critics. I am not surprised. I don't think they were clever enough to 'get it' because it isn't enough to get this story you also have to get Thoreau and other references that Paul Monette makes in this book.

One review from 1981 describes this book as 'almost entirely ineffectual in its straining for serious emotional substance'.
https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-re...

Ouch!!

I think that is rather harsh. It isn't that bad. I just think the book is not easy to understand but beneath the complexity there is a story trying to come out, a bit like a butterfly trying to emerge from a cocoon. 

Alas the butterfly doesn't make it.

The documentary (Brink of Summer's End) about Paul Monette's life describes how he felt frustrated by the critical reviews of this book and his other early books. Monette was a harsh critic himself describing his early novels including this one as 'silly and glib novels.'

Well I didn't think this was silly or glib, it was just very complex and surreal. 

Apart from that I quite enjoyed the little that I was able to follow even though its writing style is really different to his later writing. Paul Monette's writing style changed when he went through the furnace of AIDS, loss and grief. Who can remain unchanged having gone through such a thing? And so his later books have a fierceness and a directness of a person who is running out of time but those were his later works and this is his early work.

And so it meanders with a dream like quality, dancing around in the explanation with so many things not being said, rather peculiar characters and a mystery that doesn't feel like a real mystery. 

Although we do get to find out who did it in the end. 

Unlike Twin Peaks and Laura Palmer. 

So reviewing this book is challenging because the story is like modern art and those paintings that you study because it could either be a beautiful cathedral on a mountain top, or fish bones on top of a rubbish dump.

In the end I reflected on this book in a different way.

Some thirty four years after publication I read this book with knowledge of the author's life and I read this not just as a novel but also as a chapter of Paul Monette's life.

And I am not the only one to do so because this book has been republished and released as an audio book and people are reading it as they discover Paul Monette and because they want to read his fiction. So despite all those terrible reviews in the eighties (hard luck Kirkus) and despite its surrealism, this book is still going strong in 2015.

It is not an easy book to read. I had to slow down and re-read some passages in order to understand the story. Paul Monette doesn't tell us about the characters in this book, he shows us, but he shows us through glimpses of the characters, hidden by some very flowery language.

Jasper (a supposedly straight and married Hollywood star) is found dead in a hot tub with a young man (Harry). It appears to be a joint suicide but Greg who was at the very beginning of a relationship with Harry does not believe this and thinks it was murder. He then sets out to solve the crime and enlists the help of Viviene, Jasper's wife.
So this appears to be a straightforward murder mystery but it isn't. It has a kind of dreamlike quality as Greg imagines that he can solve the murder by observing those close to Jasper and by imagining what Harry would have done even though he didn't actually know Harry very well himself. Greg is assisted by his two neighbours Edna and Sid with whom he runs a business selling fake autographs to Hollywood fans. And Viviene has someone she suspects killed her husband and so together her and Greg try to solve the crime. 

And they do but the mystery is lost in the surrealism, the past, the self discovery, the dream like quality of the story, the peculiar characters, Hollywood and the film industry, Thoreau and Walden, stardom, wealth and failed careers. Yes all those and more.

The good thing is it was well written. The bad thing is it was hard to understand. The best thing is we know 'whodunnit'.

But, I am still trying to puzzle out who killed Laura Palmer in Twin Peaks????