Rating: 5/5

"Eneas looks into the face of the killer and it has the set effort in it of a person struggling for precision in a world of Godless souls and wormy hearts."

Eneas McNulty - an ordinary man. A man who loves his country, the town of Sligo, his family. He is an ordinary man with ordinary goals: to live close to his family, to have a family of his own, to grow old in his homeland, simple goals easily attained, until they are not. The life of this humble young man is irreversibly changed when he seeks employment with the Irish Constabulary. This innocent act results in being marked for execution by the Irish revolutionaries. He becomes an enemy of Ireland. Through no fault of his own, his life is forever altered. An ordinary man exiled from all he loves, all he had dreamed of. An embittered man? Not Eneas McNulty. This ordinary man accepts the wayfarer's life, makes the best of an unfortunate turn of events.

Where can a man go if he can't go home? Eneas begins his forced odyssey in Galveston, Texas serving in the British Merchant Marines. Through two world wars, in France, England, and Africa his character shines through. A beautiful friendship with Harcourt, another exiled soul, brings some peace. "It seems to be the way for us both. A bit of happiness here and there. Throw out your leg now and the and be dancing. Otherwise, a crooked way." I was so hoping his luck would change, but it wasn't to be. A few brief trips back to Sligo to see his family reignited the death warrant. With his backpay earned as a veteran, he and Harcourt, now in their seventies, open a house for homeless men in the Isle of Dogs. With one noble act Eneas illustrates the ultimate meaning of friendship, of love, of being virtuous, of being anything but ordinary. Eneas McNulty is a man to be admired, an extraordinary man.

The Whereabouts of Eneas McNulty is an unforgettable and moving story of goodness and evil, the fine line between a hero and a murderer, of life's cruel turns, and the ability we all may contain to accept what is not fair, to find contentment in small things and not turn bitter; to find peace. Sebastian Barry's writing is exquisite. The use of Irish dialect, although not always comprehended, only enhanced the lilt of the prose. This is an ode to life by an author who is the antithesis of an ordinary writer.

"Fear is an animal that lives in a man separately, and pokes its head out at will. No, it is that fear so long endured. The fear has become something else, could he dare call it strength, a privacy anyhow. A sort of privacy private to himself, a house with a private garden."