Rating: 2/5

This book didn't inspire me to write a review but, since there's none here, I thought it might help some people decide if they wanted to read it or not. Two stars might seem harsh but Goodreads considers two stars as "it was ok" and that's decidedly what this book was.
The basic premise is that the ton considers everything Scottish fashionable after the success of Sir Walter Scott's The Lady of the Lake. Phoebe and her friend are low in the social sphere and are looked down by the ton, including their "friend" Olivia, who's always slighting them. When a Scottish laird comes to London to find a wife, Olivia is determined that he'll wed her and Phoebe and her friend (cannot remember her name) want to thwart her by making him fall in love with one of them. Yes, it's very immature and the friend is young and silly enough to justify such thoughts, but Phoebe is older more mature and shouldn't have accepted it. In any case, the laird decides that Phebe is the right candidate but, due to misunderstandings, he thinks she's engaged to Olivia's brother and offers for her nameless friend with the understanding that they can break it off if they decide they won't suit after a visit to Scotland. Phoebe is invited to go with them and more misunderstandings ensue.
The main problem is that the romance is just meh. They supposedly started to fall in love in London, but there were not enough interactions between them to justify that. The misunderstandings were somewhat silly and you can't help but wonder the wisdom of Lord Murray's decision to offer for the friend. The character I enjoyed the most was Olivia's brother. He is youngish, shy, and can't keep his clothes unrumpled and clean for five minutes. He hates his sister and he's honest to a fault. I love bumbling fools with a heart of gold who can see right through exterior beauty and admire the more plain heroines, and he's certainly one of them.
This is a clean book and, as mentioned before, there's nothing particularly wrong with it but nothing particularly interesting either.