Rating: 3/5

This was an okay book not really the best book someone can read when reading a non-fiction about someone's life let alone someone like Elvis Presley. This book was written by Elvis' good friend and hair dresser Larry Geller. 

The book made me look at not only Elvis' but other celebrity's in a whole new light. The story made me realize that celebrity's are people too, they have feelings, likes, hobbies, desires, and some didn't grow up in the best conditions. I and lots of other people often forget that celebrity's are people too and they deserve to have a private life just like the rest of us. And there are some messed up fans out there that will anything to get close to their favorite celeb, and I mean anything.

 Elvis:  He was very demanding of his friends and employees, he expected them to be able to drop their whole lives at a moments notice and serve him. I would classify him as a asshole at times, but hey that's just me some people may say different. He had no good judgement of money, don't get me wrong, a kid that had absolutely nothing growing up wants to spoil his mother and friends I say go for it, if you want to do it but there is a limit. He gave people often the same people 2 or 3 cars, Jewry that he bought a week before and just give them away on a whim. He gave a car to a random fan just because he had an extra one (Hell I wouldn't mind having that happen) just why have a extra one to began with. Elvis really loved his fans and friends though. Some celebs don't appreciated how they got to the top but Elvis did and he wanted to give them everything he had to show how grateful he was to them but as he said many times "If it wasn't for them man, I wouldn't be here." Towards the end of his life get sick more often and started to gain some serous weight but a lot of it had to do with his eating habits and how he took care of himself. He would eat 2 or 3 hamburgers before he would go to bed. He had ate 5 ice cream sundaes in a row. And he had a prescription drug addiction. (Which that isn't that big of a secret.) Days before he died he went to the doctor for a check up and 2 days after his death they found out that he had cancer of the bone marrow. Rumors had it that he was a sex addict but he wasn't he wanted to care for a woman before going any further. And I learned that Elvis dyed his hair black I did not know that.

The Colonel: I hated him. He had no respect for Elvis. All he seen Elvis as was a big ass pay check. He was sick one night and he really shouldn't have gone out but the Colonel told Larry that he wanted him out on stage that night if he wasn't he wouldn't get paid for that night. What a scumbag. A few month before Elvis' death he had been thinking about replacing the Colonel.

Priscilla: She did not support anything that Elvis wanted to do or liked. He became super religious after Larry joined the gang and she hated him for that, at one point when Elvis was sick and confused, she had Elvis burn the books that Larry ave him. She was a complete bitch. There is a book that is on my to-read list by her telling of her experiences with Elvis and I'm seriously considering not reading it because she pissed me off so bad and I will go into reading the book with a sour attitude about her and not enjoy reading it at all.