Rating: 4/5

I started reading this on Halloween with my 11 year old as a bed-time read aloud. I will review the stories here as we read them, not necessarily in the order of the book.

Vengeance is Mine, INC--this is cute, but more than a little dated (they are going to retire with $20K as if they are super rich). They also can simply disappear (which is much more difficult in modern society). He liked the story though as as concept and I think the evidence of a historic time period was interesting.

The Butler--this one was a bit over my 11 year old's head. He followed well enough, but the subtleties of classism and wine conosourism were lost. Kind of how they were for Mr. Cleaver. Short and cute; I also wondered about the relationship between Estragon and Tibbs.

Mrs. Bixby and the Colonel's coat---so clearly these are not children's stories. On one hand, I wish I had realized that before we started, but on the other they are providing great talking points. We liked that Mrs. Bixby did not get the coat, certainly after 8 years cheating on her husband she doesn't deserve it. The secretary showing up with it was the coup de grace though...a surprise but then also overkill. After all, if he is cheating too then it kinda puts Mrs. off the hook.

The Automatic Grammatizator--this story so clearly epitomizes our fear of machines (and is rather prescient for the time it was written) as replacement for humans. We are still pursuing AI (and I don't imagine that the formulization of stories is so difficult), but in different and more interactive ways that Dahl envisioned here. I found it interesting that my boy (born in 2005 and very computer-literate) scoffed at this about halfway through; "There is no way that a machine can write stories that are good enough mom. Only people are truly creative."

The Way Up to Heaven--We starting reading this one together, but then my son finished it without me (he had run out of things to read on his kindle). After I finished, we discussed it. He understood that the husband died in the elevator, but had missed the wife's listening at the door and so had not realized that she KNEW and essentially murdered him. We went on to discuss the theme of revenge in all of these stories and he insisted that murdering him just for making her late for a flight was a bit extreme. He seems to think that the wife will get a come-uppance in her later life.

Royal Jelly--This was just odd. Neither one of us particularly liked it. The idea of a honey-based super food is intriguing (and not completely unbelievable), but the fact that the husband had turned himself into part-bee and was on the way of turning the baby was just a bit too much. It also didn't fit with the revenge theme of the rest of the book.

Katina--This was just a sad war story. It reminded me of "Sweetheart of the Song Tra Bong" by Tim O'Brien. As a woman, I have always been rather happy that I can't get sent off to war; I am rather intrigued by these stories of women (girls) who find themselves as part of the platoon.

The Umbrella Man--The title story is short and cute, but far from the best in the book. Ironically enough he did not get his comeuppance. We get to see the con man at his game, but there is no punishment. I wasn't quite sure this fit with the others and was surprised that it was the title story.

Parson's Pleasure--My husband came in while we were reading this one and he said he knew it, but he was rather surprised to hear it was Roald Dahl. I also thought this story was familiar, might be that it was in another collection somewhere? Anyway, again Dahl drives home the theme of just desserts; the swindler does not get swindled, but he is deprived of his treasure.

Man from the South--Again, this was good enough with the whole betting shenanigans until we got to the end and Dahl adds the layer of the woman and man having bet multiple times. It was just funny enough to be not creepy; if Dahl had taken a different tone, this could have been scary.

The Landlady-- I liked this one quite a bit. We knew right away that the old lady was gonna kill him, but the taxidermy at the end was a cute add on. So far, I am pretty sure it is my 11 year old's favorite in the book.

Taste--As I mentioned earlier, my son has snuck off with this book a few times and read some stories without me. This has been an interesting lesson in how much he enjoys short stories; we shall get him some more for his kindle. Anyway, He read this and Neck alone a few days ago, so I read Taste last night to play catch up. I had it figured out as soon as the host boasted that he keeps the wine breathing where the gourmet had suggested. I did not think the gourmet would be unveiled though until it was too late (maybe fast forward a bit and it was after the wedding or after the daughter is pregnant). Rather absurd story overall considering that the girl should have a stronger say in her marriage.

Neck--I am just not sure I got this one. I have yet to discuss with the little one (this is the other story he read on his own); clearly the husband would have killed the wife with the axe, but is the saw any better? Why not just unmask her adultery and divorce her? I was just not sure HOW Basil would get his revenge.