Rating: 4/5

This was an emotionally intense read that could definitely be a trigger for people. I wouldn’t say this is an angst fest but it is emotional and for some that is their source of angst. For me something that is angsty are when the characters love each other but they have been hurt and are purposely being cruel or evasive to cover their own feelings and they usually have no idea how the other is feeling. Sometimes it involves other people such as ow’s and om’s. That is not the case with this story. 

Before I go into spoilers I will give an overall gist of the story. 

The 24 year old heroine, Kyla, owns a shop in New Zealand(one of my favorite settings). Her shop sounds likes my kind of shop. It specializes in local handmade goods(for the tourists) plus there is a 2nd hand shop within it that is great for locals on a budget. The location is perfect for families as it is near a park and bus stop. She has a 5 year lease and plans on staying. 

Meanwhile, the Hero, Marc, is big business and has the building next door, he wants to expand and has bought out all the businesses surrounding the h. She is the hold out. This doesn’t make for friendly relations. The company is definitely offering her a good price, but she is resistant. Shortly after the story begins, the Hero rescues the h from a situation. He brings her home and from here he starts wooing her. The company even figures out a better spot for the h which fits her specifications. 

Our h is pretty non responsive with the H. He realizes quite quickly that the h has had little to no experience with men so he is patient with her and does baby steps with her. The H is in his 30’s and has never had issues with the ladies, but alas he has not settled down because he is looking for the one. He actually comes from a stable family, parents are dead now, but his sister is married with kids. 

The h and H keep dating and even though their relationship hasn’t passed kissing stage the h pops the question and the in love h accepts. It is obvious through her comments that she is not very close with her family and only exchanges letters with them. She doesn’t want a traditional wedding with a white dress and wants to keep it small. Her parents and sister come up for the wedding. 

The honeymoon does nothing to defrost the h. The H and her occupy separate beds and return home with a still unconsummated marriage. Needless to say our H is getting a little frustrated with the timid h and although he has tried to be patient his ego and libido are taking quite a hit. Well we the readers can read between the lines, and this is probably why I am not giving this story 5 stars. It was obvious there was more to the h’s situation. Shortly after the H almost forces himself on the h, the truth comes out. There is about 30 pages left in the story. 🛑 spoilers now, I will put trigger in first sentence in case someone doesn’t want to read anymore🛑

(The heroine was gang raped at 17.) 
The heroine tells the H that he is under the illusion that she is a virgin. She tells him that she is not. He figures it was probably some teenage indiscretion and asks her who it was. To me this was the powerful sentence from the h……

 “She looked up at him with a bitter smile and said mockingly, 'He?”

“For a moment his eyes were blank with shock. Then he straightened suddenly and said softly, ‘Oh, God! ’ Turning away, he walked several paces before he faced her again.”

He realizes he is no longer dealing with a an indiscretion. The h tells him her story. DC leaves out details, but gives enough information for the reader to fill in the blanks. My heart breaks for what used to be a 17 year old scared girl. I can sit here and say, she should have trusted the H with her story ahead of time, he is a good guy. She should have done this or done that. Instead my mind keeps going to the 17 year old girl. We find out later with a few more thoughts/insights from the h why she didn’t divulge her story. 

The H looks at her angrily. He has disgust. She interprets this to mean that he is disappointed with her lack of virginity. Her uncleanliness. She tells him that a divorce would be best. Thinking this is what she wants he agrees. 

While they are separated, we see some other insights. The lack of support from her mom(who was distraught over no white wedding), the whispers of the town people, that even her own sister who was 11 at the time heard later and had her own interpretation of events (like it was just a silly teenage thing).

We also find out that the h tried to move on, not once but twice. She shared her stories with both men. The first one was disgusted by it and removed himself from the relationship. The 2nd one seemed turned on by it which made the h leave that relationship. 

Written in 1980 this is a time where there was still a lot of victim blaming. She didn’t have the support that many rape victims get today(many, not all). I was a teen in the later part of the 80’s. If I was walking home and 3 boys from my high school, one that I knew well(maybe even liked)offered me a ride home I probably wouldn’t think twice about it. 

The hero is called by a mutual friend to check on the h after she hurt her ankle. He finds her in the rain as she tries to rescue a cat. It is a night like the one she was raped. She doesn’t recognize the H at first and tries to get away. He catches up to her and she falls into his arms relieved. He takes her back to her place and more truths come out. 

He wasn’t disgusted with her. He wanted to kill the rapists and was disgusted with himself for almost raping her. He never wants a divorce, and although he wants their marriage to be real, he will continue to do baby steps with her(hopefully counseling as well). His acceptance of her and her feelings for the H result in her asking the H to make love to her. She wants the light on. And we find out why she keeps her hair up most of the time(the rapists stuffed her hair in her mouth to keep her quiet) this was a fleeting thought that crossed her mind, but she was able to dismiss it and enjoy the H’s loving. He was tender. He was encouraging. The story ends with them asleep in a single bed. Hopefully, the H will encourage her to get counseling despite their marital breakthrough