Rating: 4/5

Sturgeon's Law (heavily paraphrased):
90% of science fiction is crud. But then, 90% of everything is crud.

This stuff is in the other 10%.

Theodore Sturgeon was one of the most influential and prolific fabulists of the mid-20th Century. In an era when most writers of speculative fiction (by which I mean to encompass fantasy, horror, science-fiction, magical realism, slipstream—all of the many varieties of fiction that aren't limited to our tired old reality) seemed to be content to keep repeating the sins of SF's pulp-fictional roots—the same flat characters, rickety plots and purple prose—Sturgeon wrote stories that were literary and lyrical, mature and complex, and in so doing helped elevate genre fiction as a whole.

Sturgeon's efforts did not go unnoticed, either; the annual Theodore Sturgeon Award (established in 1987) seeks out and recognizes modern authors who work to the same high standards of literary excellence. (As of this writing, the current holder of the Sturgeon Award is Kelly Link, for "The Game of Smash and Recovery"—one of the better stories in Rich Horton's The Year's Best Science Fiction &amp; Fantasy 2016, the anthology I read just before E Pluribus Unicorn.)

Which is not to say that the stories in E Pluribus Unicorn have been entirely untouched by the passage of decades and our society's changing perspectives. After all, this Sturgeon collection was first published in 1953. These stories have more than half a century of wear on them. Even the paperback copy I have in hand, with its gorgeous Boris Vallejo cover art, is a solid forty years old... and sometimes that shows.

You could skip the introductory "Essay on Sturgeon" entirely, for example—prolific early SF anthologist Groff Conklin's fulsome prose and blithely unaware sexism are grating now, and utterly redundant to the appreciation of Sturgeon's own work... work that ranges across all sorts of genres—fairy tales and horror stories and science fiction with a twist—and all sorts of styles.

Take the lead story, "The Silken-Swift." It's a pastoral tale, albeit with a lusty undercurrent. There's a feudal manor, a village, and a beautiful pool in between; two maidens vying for the same young man's favor; and, yes, a unicorn.

That one's swiftly followed up by "The Professor's Teddy Bear," an entirely different sort of story, in which precocious Jeremy, four years old, tells his teddy bear, "I will be five feet, six and three-eighth inches tall. I will be bald on top and wear eyeglasses like little thick ashtrays. I will give lectures to young things about human destiny and the metempsychosis of Plato." To which the teddy bear replies, of course, "What's a metempsychosis?" (p.20)

And the third story is one of the most quietly creepy horrors to appear in this or any collection. "Bianca's Hands" is about just that—Bianca's hands, which are quite beautiful, though the rest of her is anything but.

I will not detail every page of E Pluribus Unicorn—that wouldn't be fair to you or the book—but I will point out a few more landmarks to take note of on your journey.

The slick Beat generation patter of "Die, Maestro, Die!" may be hard to translate nowadays, but I have no reason to believe it's anything but pitch-perfect. And the story? Gone, man. Real gone.

Then there's "The World Well Lost," in which two star-crossed lovers from the secretive world of Dirbanu land on Planet Earth... and get shipped unceremoniously back. This one could never be written the same way today, I suspect, but it has by no means lost its relevance.

But the greatest, most haunting story in this collection, the one that lingered most in my mind during the decades since I first read it, is "A Saucer of Loneliness," in which an ordinary woman in New York City is touched by something mysterious and wonderful, right out there in public one sunny spring day in Central Park, and then—understandably, maddeningly, furiously, gloriously—refuses to explain it to others. If you get this one, you'll get Sturgeon, all the way—and maybe even understand humanity, a little bit, the way he did.

The secret of Theodore Sturgeon's success, you see, is that his stories, however strange the setting may be, always circle back to his unerring insight into ourselves. Out of Sturgeon's many different viewpoints comes a singular vision... a unicorn, if you will.