Rating: 3/5

[7/10]

"May you live in interesting times!" is a long established curse on the Counterweight Continent of the Discworld. The Agatean Empire is just heading this way as its aging, demented Emperor is about to die and  five noble families who have fought one another for centuries: The Hongs, the Sungs, the Tangs, the McSweeneys ( very old established family) and the Fangs  gather their armies around the capital city of HungHung in preparation of the war of succession. High above them in the clouds around Hub, the Gods are having a betting game on the outcome, with Fate and Luck throwing the dices. The outcome may turn on the reluctant actions of a Great Wizard from ancient history, one that is prophesized to return and awaken the Red Army of the first Agatean Emperor. A Great Wizard, or a great 'wizzard' ? Now, who on the Discworld is liable to mispell his job description?

 Adventure! People talked about the idea as if it was something worthwhile, rather than a mess of bad food, no sleep, and strange people inexplicably trying to stick pointed objects in bits of you. 

Rincewind would have none of this adventure business, preferring to remain on the isolated, deserted tropical island where he landed at the end of his last adventure ("Eric"). Not even naked Amazons in search of bed mates could tempt him. I wonder what is the connection in Rincewind's mind between hot babes and mashed potatoes?

 He really craved dullness. He'd really liked his island. He'd enjoyed Coconut Surprise. You cracked it open and, hey, there was coconut inside. That was the kind of surprise he liked. 

Unfortunatelly for Rincewind, the Patrician of Ankh-Morpork, Lord Vetinari, and the Arch-Chancellor of the Unseen University, Mustrum Ridcully, decide it is in the interest of international relations to send the great 'wizzard' on a mission to the Agatean Empire. With the help of Hex (Hal's deranged AI cousin built with ants and magick by young wizard Ponder Stibbons) Rincewind is teleported to the other side of the Discworld and right in the middle of 'interesting times'.

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

Rincewind is probably my least favorite lead character in the Discworld universe. He is a bit of a one-trick pony : a coward who in trying to run away from trouble lands in even deeper s__t, yet manages to save the day by pulling the wrong lever or knocking down the evil overlord just as tries to pull the plug on the world. After reading mostly later issues of the series, it was a bit of a shock to go back to the silly jokes, easy puns and pratfalls that marked the early episodes. The line  ""Your wife is a big hippo!"  is repeated about twenty times in the text. Please don't get me wrong : even on an off day, Pratchett is still one of the funniest men ever to put pen to paper, but I got used to the more subtle and more far reaching satire of his later novels, not to mention the passion over thorny issues and the deep humanism that characterizes the lead characters of these episodes - Sam vimes, Tiffany Aching, Moist von Lipwig.

With Rincewind doing what he does best (being a coward and running away from trouble:  "Luck is my middle name," said Rincewind, indistinctly. "Mind you, my first name is Bad." ), the novel is saved by another recurrent character, one that makes the times 'interesting' whenever he shows up :

 This is Ghenghiz Cohen. Doer of mighty deeds. Slayer of dragons. Ravager of cities. He once bought an apple. 

Cohen the Barbarian is a hilarious parody of every mighty-thewed barbarian that has infested the sword &amp; sorcery genre since Robert E Howard. Cohen has his own plans for retirement from the heroing business and he is keen on a last heist in the Forbidden City of HungHung, residence of the ailing Agatean emperor. To help him overcome the forty thousand strong garrison of the citadel, not to mention the five hundred thousand strong armies of the five lords (The Hongs, the Sungs, the Tangs, the McSweeneys and the Fangs ) surrounding the city, Cohen has put together the Silver Horde - Discworld's answer to the  Magnificent Seven  francise. The silver in the Horde's title comes from the white hairs of its geriatric heroes - Boy Willie, Mad Hamish ( "Whut? Whut? Whutzeesayin'?"  being the whole range of his conversational skills), Truckle the Uncivil, Caleb the Ripper, Old Vincent, Teach. The last one being the brains of the outfit, a former teacher named Ronald Saveloy, who is trying to instill in the Horde some rudiments of civilized behaviour, since your regular barbarian needs brawns not brains.

 Self-doubt was not something regularly entertained within the Cohen cranium. When you're trying to carry a struggling temple maiden and a sack of looted temple goods in one hand and fight off half a dozen angry priests with the other there is there is little time for reflection. Natural selection saw to it that professional heroes who at a crucial moment tended to ask themselves questions like "What is my purpose in life?" very quickly lacked both. 

The plot is 'interesting' with a lot of plots and twists and surprises, some of them scary, some quite spectacular and funny. The satire part was weaker than usual, with the attempt to use China as a source of inspiration illustrating certain post-colonial insensivities and patronizing atitudes toward the culture - calling its ancient traditions a stale society ready to be plucked by the enterprising adventurer/merchant and launching a lot of barbed arrows at the revolutionary Red Army and its leftist beliefs. The lack of political subtlety is compensated though by the fun of coming across old friends, sometimes in new disguises. 'Disembowel-Meself-Honorably' Dibhala is the Counterweight doppelganger of the infamous Ankh-Morpork street seller 'Cut-Me-Own-Throat' Dibbler. Here are a few cameos from these old friends:

 It was a beautiful afternoon. Lord Vetinari was sitting in the palace gardens, watching the butterflies with an expression of mild annoyance. He found something very slightly offensive about the way they just fluttered around enjoying themselves in an unprofitable way. 

- - - -

 Well, we are wizards. We're supposed to meddle with things we don't understand. If we hung around waitin' till we understood things we'd never get anything done.  [Mustrum Ridcully]

- - - - 

 Ook! 

- - - -

 "How about Organdy Sloggo? Still going strong down in Howondaland, last I heard."
"Dead. Metal poisoning."
"How?"
"Three swords through the stomach."
"Slasher Mungo?"
"Presumed dead in Skund."
"Presumed?"
"Well, they only found his head." 
[Cohen and the Silver Horde discussing old acquaintances in the hero business]

I saved a last quote from Ridcully as an example that even the least favorite characters have a chance to shine and to embrace the wider humanist worldview of the author :

 "Don't go around believing that Great Wizards solve all your problems, because there aren't any and they don't and I should know because I'm not one!" 

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

Recommended for fans of the Discworld and series completists.