Rating: 2/5

"After the Bible, it [The Pilgrim's Progress] is the most popular book in the English language." - The Outline of Literature by John Drinkwater

The Pilgrim’s Progress is a religious allegory which started off as an interesting and intriguing idea but got old fast.

In the first part, there is a gentleman named Christian who is going on a pilgrimage. At the outset, he meets with his neighbors, and only one of them agrees to go with him, Pliable. They head off, and almost immediately fall into a pit of something. Pliable decides that he has had enough and goes home. 

Oh will this decision haunt him for the rest of his life and beyond! At every opportunity, Christian throws poor Pliable under the bus. 

Now, imagine your friend wants to go on a cabbage soup diet. Reluctantly, you agree to also give it a try. After three weeks of diligently eating soup, you are ready for a change. Is your friend grateful? Nope. Should you be condemned for all time? Apparently so according to The Pilgrim’s Progress.

Most of Part 1 is shame-based and how the pilgrims are always right and everyone else is certainly wrong.

Part 2 is about Christiana’s journey (Christian’s wife). 

Part 2 is blatantly sexist. A pregnant woman is described as “a breeding woman.” Yikes! The women also rely on Great-heart. They apparently are incapable of handling anything by themselves and need to rely on a big strong man for support. But relying on the husband? Absolutely not. He is completely absent. Although his name is dropped so frequently that I burst into giggles when the author started yet another round of Christian hero-worship.

While I found this book a dreadful chore, it does talk about Vanity Fair, a city of wicked, evil doers. Subsequently, this would inspire William Makepeace Thackery to write an absolutely wonderful novel called Vanity Fair. This novel Vanity Fair, in turn, inspired F. Scott Fitzgerald.

However, Pilgrim’s Progress has been going strong since 1678 and Lisa of Troy has only been going since 1985 with debatable strength.

There is a 1904 edition by Henry Frowde. It has this wonderful white leather with incredible gold plated flowers on the cover. The illustrations are by George Cruikshank. They are extraordinary yet familiar--the reason is that the illustrator also illustrated Oliver Twist! When they say they don't make books like they used to, that is this book. Every time, I pick up this book and hold it in my hands, I feel a rush of joy. Book could be absolute rubbish, but the tactile experience.....

The Green Light at the End of the Dock (How much I spent):
Hardcover Text – $38.90 on eBay (1904 edition)
Audiobook – Free through Project Gutenberg (the narrator was Joy Chan)

Connect With Me!
Instagram/Threads: @lisa_of_troy
Blog: lisaoftroy.com