Rating: 4/5

The World Spilt Open: How the Modern Women’s Movement Changed American, written by Professor of history at U. C. Berkeley, celebrated journalist and feminist, Ruth Rosen is not only a thoroughly researched and well written documentation of the modern women’s movement. However, it also stands as a personal record of the author’s own experiences as well as those of many other women, whose personal accounts fill the book, bringing the reader closer to the history. Rosen sets out to accomplish a mammoth task in adding a comprehensive history of the modern American women’s movement to the growing gender studies literature. Rosen asserts, “American political culture shaped feminism, and the women’s movement, in its turn, has transformed that culture.” She also goes on to explain that although as most readers know that American feminism bore out of the political culture of the 1950’s and 1960’s, it also is rooted in class politics, evolution of religious traditions and changing feelings towards centralized government (xiv). By using relying heavily on primary sources and oral interviews, Rosen succeeds in giving the reader an inside view of the women who experienced, felt, responded and created the movement and the opportunities that women today have available to them. 

 Rosen begins her book with a lengthy timeline that traces the American women’s movement from 1848, when married woman gained the right to own property to 2006 and the death of author of the Feminine Mystique Betty Friedan; however, for the rest of the book she focuses on the post- World War II period. Rosen begins by demonstrating the importance that Betty Friedan’s Feminine Mystique was in influencing American housewives to speak out about the “quiet desperation” that they felt as they spent their lives devoted to home and hearth and little else. Many of these suburban housewives felt pressured to stay home by the social rules, their husbands and even to combat Communism and the Feminine Mystique showed them they were not alone in their isolation. 

 Rosen goes on to demonstrate the problems that women faced in their quest to utilize their higher education, the opposition they experienced in the workplace and confusion they felt in the bedroom. All of these experiences along with the shackles of the Feminine Mystique laid the groundwork for future challenges to the status quo, which would later ignite the fires of activism, especially in their daughters, who did not want to grow up to live the lives their mothers had. 

 The author goes on to describe each victory and set back women faced during this turbulent time. For instance, the addition of the word “sex” to Title VII and the subsequent “Bunny Law” backlash it created, the founding of the National Organization of Women (NOW) by nervous but courageous women, including its first president, Mystique author Freidan and how NOW was not radical enough for the young women participating in the women’s liberation movement. Rosen does an excellent job of letting the reader peer into the lives of the activists and the juxtaposition of their activist life versus the life they lead when they came home and “slept with the men they had just criticized in front of other women” (133). Even as activists, women faced opposition even within their own movement, experiencing harassment, jeering and threats, which encouraged them to branch out into other political arenas, making a change from organizations such as the New Left to ones that supported their need for equality.

 Her strongest section is the section on the role sex played within activist culture. Rosen demonstrates sex within activist culture contradicted the feelings of value the women placed on themselves and the ideals for which they were fighting. Even further, some women who had once believed in the common creed, “Make Love, Not War” found that in it laid another sexual pressure, the pressure to say, “Yes” (147). This section also illuminates subjects as the Hidden Injury of Sex, such as “the faked orgasm,” lesbianism, birth control, rape and pornography.

 Rosen’s technique makes for an interesting and deeply personal read. Her use of personal accounts, excerpts from oral interviews and a veritable reading list of books and articles is a recipe for understanding feminism and the American women’s movement. She does a good job of showing the reader their plight affected many women of this period and how they turned it into victories they could relish, using their own words, in turn making the history tangible to the reader. However, Rosen relies too heavily on Betty Freidan as the catalyst for changes made in the American women’s movement. Surely, other women had just as much of an influence on the women of this period. In addition, her small section on 1996 Welfare Reform is deceiving, as many of the TANF programs are accomplishing their goals, as countless poverty level women owe their success to these programs and subsidies (including education, housing, childcare and healthcare) they provide low-income families. Despite this criticism, the book is exhaustive in its aim is an easy read and its use would be welcomed in both undergraduate and graduate Gender Studies or American history courses and would be an excellent choice for those wishing to foray into the studies of the modern American women’s movement.