Rating: 1/5

Golly this was terrible.

Here's a snippet from the goodreads short bio of Collins: "...after his death, his reputation declined as Dickens' bloomed. Now, Collins is being given more critical and popular attention than he has received for fifty years."

Well, we can stop giving critical and popular attention again. The verdict is in.

He wishes he had a point of conflict for this novel. The principles in here - a woman who's been blind since age one, another woman who's the widow of a revolutionist, and a guy who escaped the hangman's noose after he was all but convicted of a crime, and has seizures as a result of being hit in the head while robbed - are now hand-wringing because the blind girl dislikes dark things.

A good slapping party could have ended this book about page 50. Get over it! *slap* You! Tell her you took silver nitrate because your stupid Victorian medicine thought it was good for seizures! *slap* Then tell her to get over your blue skin! *slap* You! Stop playing along with all their histrionics! *slap*

I mean, seriously. It's almost bad enough to enjoy hating all the characters, like a one-star horror movie, but it's not quite so bad that it's enjoyable. Plus, it's way too long to read with sustained irony.

And the guy flatters himself in the preface as a good observer of human nature! Nobody ever behaved the way these people did!

He also is a tiring and uninteresting turner of phrase.

And unable to say something other than what he means. Where Dickens or Austen would have a money-obsessed jerk like the reverend in this book talking about how a moneyless marriage prospect was disagreeable, or indolent, or anything but poor, that's beyond Collins. It's so dull.

Two small exceptions. The reverend's wife was a damp lady. He's not terribly clever about it, but it's there. And the German doctor is obsessed with mayonnaise. Kind of funny.

But I can't end with that, because the upshot is I want you leaving this review with the message Collins is terrible. So let me add he probably had Hummels adorning his house.