Rating: 3/5

I started reading this book several years ago, after falling in love with 'Notes on a Scandal'. (A year later I read 'The Believers', which differed greatly from the other two. More on that in a moment.)
One thing about Zoe Heller is clear: she has an incredible gift for creating the most repugnant, misanthropic, and irredeemable characters imaginable.

The protagonist from "Everything You Know' is Willy Muller, a middle-aged Englishman living in LA. To call him "cynical" or "jaded" would be extending undeserved politeness; the man is quite simply an asshole. He has contempt for everything and everyone around him, including his girlfriend. (A woman whose style of love exists in the realm between staunchly loyal and excessively needy-Willy claims that she 'clings to me like a limpet to a rock'. Penny's speech is peppered with "lookits"and phrases like "are you mad at me?" and "why do you have to be so mean?" To be honest, she probably would've gotten on my nerves too.)

At the beginning of the book, we learn that Willy has two daughters- both estranged- and the younger one, Sadie, has just committed suicide. Each chapter opens with one of her diary entries, spanning from childhood up to her death. She, like her father, is fairly one-dimensional; both share an utter contempt for themselves. The only difference is that Willy's extends to the rest of the world. While his observations are malicious, they can also be accurate and even funny. He describes one woman as "one of those who pride themselves on being tremendously unaffected and down to earth. But she tends to get scratchy when the little people whom she is polite enough to pretend are her equals do not show themselves sufficiently sensible of the condescension." 

To add to Willy's colourful character, there are several hints that he might also be a pedophile. At the same party, he comments numerous times on how "beautiful" a six-year-old girl is. Observing that a child is beautiful is one thing; but harping on the fact is nothing short of unnerving. Near the end of the book, he mentions having "sexual thoughts about Sophie (his daughter) when she was a young teenager. I say sexual, you will note, rather than lustful, because they were more like inquisitive daydreams rather than black fantasies. I merely wondered what her bed manners were like."

Ew. Ew. EWWW!!! 

This is the kind of book that gives you pause more than a few times- but the imagery is vivid enough, and the story compelling enough, to make you anxious to find out how the story ends. Or at least what kind of wacko situation Willy will find himself in next.