Rating: 5/5

Imagine a future America where parts of the country are essentially ruled by ultraconservative Christians while at the same time people discovered that by singing passionately enough they could literally project their souls from their bodies, kind of like "American Idol" if the prize was transcendence instead of Kelly Clarkson's career. Well, keep in mind this book was written in the late seventies so that the second part is more the fantasy and the first part is the situation over the past year or two that we'd rather wish didn't seem to be happening. But hey, maybe they both seemed farfetched when he wrote it! At least I hoped it seemed farfetched to him but I think perhaps events have perhaps revealed Thomas Disch as maybe a bit too optimistic?

As probably many people before me have pointed out, Disch is the same person who wrote both "Camp Concentration" and "The Brave Little Toaster" and a quite a few other things besides. I always think of him as a SF writer because that's how encountered him ("Camp Concentration" is good but "334", a series of vignettes about an apartment complex in the future of 2025, is something else entirely and I hope never goes out of print) but the truth is the SF portion of his career by the end was a just small subset of decades of literary/theatre reviews, poetry, fantasy, and horror (I'm pretty sure "The M.D." sold decently well) though he probably never really escaped the label of "The SF guy who sometimes writes other stuff." One of the smartest writers to work in the genre, his style wasn't for everyone but when it worked, boy howdy did it work.

This one didn't hit me like "334" did (very little would, but then I also encountered that book in college so it was probably somewhat formative for me) but it sure hit the critics hard, garnering a wide range of praise and awards almost out of proportion to how obscure its become. I had forgotten he had even written this until I encountered it in my stack but at the time critics fell all over it, with Harold Bloom even listing it in his "Western Canon" and David Pringle including it as one of SF's hundred best novels. It won the John W Campbell Aware and was nominated for basically everything else but these days its out of print and even before Disch's death in 2008 (sadly, he died of suicide, having lost his partner of thirty years in 2005) it had fallen into a bit of obscurity . . . my copy is from 2003 and it doesn't seem like it was in print again for very long.

You could say its just a case of tastes changing or a book just being massively overpraised before coming back down to earth but here it does seem to be one of those instances where critics were readier for this book than audiences were. Something I find interesting is how sneaky it is in its premise . . . we're introduced to Daniel Weinreb, a boy growing up in good ol' Iowa. When we meet him his mother had run off, leaving him and his dentist father to fend for themselves (she eventually comes back, which is when we get the first references to "flying") and its only very gradually that we get the idea that something is odd in the state of Iowa. Daniel is a young child when we first encounter him and so we don't get a sitdown lesson in the recent history of the US, meaning you have to pick up stuff from context. It’s a subtle approach but it also tends to keep things at a slight distance so its hard to really get a handle on how much life has changed. But then, everyone seems miserable which is a familiar feeling the last few years.

So without putting all the changes front and center like "The Handmaid's Tale" and a plethora of near-dystopias you're left with what amounts to a coming of age tale against a backdrop of everything falling apart, a young man surrounded by people who for the most part are just as terribly off as he is . . . no one seems sure how things have gotten here and frankly no one is in a position to do anything about it anyway. So Daniel kind of blunders along with his life like any kid, testing boundaries until one day he gets a little too close to a boundary and it decides to bite back.

The book does a little shift at that point, going from a place where the previous "boy, being in Iowa sort of sucks" is replaced by "Holy crap, being in Iowa really sucks for me personally". Daniel spends some time in prison and again, much as you want to blame Ugly Future Iowa for how bad this section of the book is, prisons right now still have forced labor so its not like Disch is giving us much of a stretch here. But comes into focus here is Daniel's increasing fascination with the concept of flying, something that becomes, if not an obsession, at least a Top Three concern for him going forward all the way through to the end of the book. He learns more about how it works and discovers that it requires to some extent a good singing voice (which he does not have) and beyond that, a real surge of feeling to accompany lifting one's voice, like karaoke taken to off the charts level of passion, only it doesn't necessarily require an audience. Imagine being a legend in your own mind and then somehow doubling that image. Maybe, then, possibly, you two can fly.

Yes, it’s a metaphor (and though the book has LGBTQ themes, its not the secret story of Disch's coming out . . . if nothing else he had been out for ten years by the time this was written) and if the book seems to stumble its in how to exactly handle the whole idea of flying . . . at times it seems to lean toward the whole concept as a representation of everyone's desire to get away from this terrible world and other moments it mostly focuses on Daniel's inability to fly as a symbol of his distance from his fellow human beings. Which means it kind of hovers in the background without really taking center stage and when it starts to inch a bit more into view its unclear what real purpose it serves. Replace "flying" with, I don't know, "wanting to live in Hawaii" and I'm not sure how much different the book would be. Daniel doesn't seem to be the only person who can't fly but he seems to be the only person who cares quite a bit about it to not be able to do it, which leads to some interesting life choices along the way.

What this is that for all intents and purposes the book becomes a sort of a parade of Daniel trying to make the best out of things going wrong all the time. After prison he falls in love withe the daughter of a local rich guy (who doesn't automatically hate him! but rest assured he's not a benevolent rich guy) which goes not terribly until flying enters the picture again and suddenly Daniel is on his own in New York City, mostly broke and under a different name (though not for the reasons you might think). And what do you do when you're down and out in NYC . . . why, go into the theatre, of course. But again, not the way you might think.

By this point in the book you've either agreed to go along for the ride or you've given up. What Disch is good at here is giving us what feels like the texture of a fable, a vision of a world broken but survivable . . . what strikes me while reading it is there doesn't seem to be one main event that has made the US such a rickety place, no sudden takeover or imposition, it just feels like one by one people stopped caring and left the people who did care in charge, except the people who did care were either evil or didn't know what they were doing, or both. Life in Iowa doesn't seem to have improved any with the ascent of the "Undergoders" but life in NYC doesn't seem to be much better, everyone scurrying around trying to gather what scarce resources they can in a country where the basic functions don't seem to be functioning properly. Everyone is an island thrusting their hands out for help in the dark and hoping that what greets their grasp isn't topped with a chainsaw. There's a sense that the scenes in the Midwest take place during the day while the New York scenes only occur at night and its how the book makes the world gradually close in on Daniel even as he keeps trying to expand himself to fit that shrinking space and maybe find a crack in the walls that he can escape through.

For me you're not reading this book after a while for what happens, but for how it happens, Daniel's gradual building of a life while trying not to lose sight of what he really wants, his simultaneous embracing and deflecting of the people around him. It’s the backdrop of life done in the midst of the barely functioning machinery of the world that gets me, a tipped sense that never goes completely over into despair but always seems to be asking "What are we doing here?"

That gets driven home in a late scene where someone who has been flying for literally years comes back to this world and finds nothing worth coming back to or sticking around for, as if being away for so long has made them see it with new eyes and finds the very fact of existence somewhat lacking. It's where the book feels tangibly wrenching, where Daniel truly feels truncated in his inability to leave the earth. One of the biggest mysteries of the world is where people go when they, you know, go or if we go anywhere at all. Daniels knows for sure there is a place to go, as wide as everything, and he can't get there. There's an answer inside a song but he can't find the notes in the song, or even the song itself.

To that end I'm not sure how I feel about how it all wraps up. It finishes suddenly, like driving full speed toward a wall and then at the last second the wall revealed to be a painted cloth that gets pulled away to demonstrate that you were headed for a dark pit the whole time, careening quickly into something endless. I can see how it would have made some readers throw up their hands in frustration, not because we're denied a strictly happy ending but because it seems we read all those pages to feel like none of it mattered. I'm not sure its quite that simple and the way I want to read the ending is that the universe gives Daniel what he wants, with a sense of grace that can feel terrifying opaque to us because it only makes sense when you're in a position to see it coming toward you in the very second that it hits. For everyone else it seems absurd and pointless, or a reflexive fallback to a sense of faith, a world "that works in mysterious ways". In Disch's world, everyone goes somewhere and sometimes you can follow and sometimes you can't, sometimes the world stays behind and sometimes it tries to come with you. Perhaps it’s the pit that we're all flung into but I think Disch's gift here is to bring us as close to that edge as he can and make us lean over in the darkness until there's nothing else to be seen, until everything that is and has been is seemingly swallowed, now and eventually. But with an ear into the border of oblivion, he can convince you that the fragment of a note of a song might have come back, an echo from someone gone or the arrival of what could be coming, one day, eventually, the future and tomorrow, or a yesterday displaced. It’s the shiver of implied sound. Its what the book hangs on, in its way. Its what the propulsion of life gets built around.