Rating: 3/5

Poor Comet. How will he ever find a save place to relax?

As a fan of Jan Brett, I had high hopes for this book. The cover art pulled me in and I sat down to peruse. However, I found this book lacking in wit and charm. Comet's character seemed rather flat and uninteresting. The art, while pretty and perhaps appealing to adults, wasn't fun and the dogs in dresses came across more contrived than cute. The whole thing came across as too busy to me. I felt overwhelmed and slightly claustrophobic at the relentlessly art packed pages.

I liked the Nantucket setting and the sense of adventure the book elicits. As a one time through read, it was enjoyable and the story was pleasant with a nice, clean, happy ending, despite Comet's 8 brushes with death. However, with so many charming, clever books with more to offer than this one, it would wind up at towards the back of my bookshelf. Not a terrible book, but there are just so many better choices.

Publishers Weekly

Brett (The Mitten; Armadillo Rodeo), a Massachusetts resident, stays close to home with this latest book, setting it on Nantucket. Capturing the island's rustic charm, her characteristically bustling, elaborately bordered art showcases weathered shingle buildings, a gray-blue sea and shell-sprinkled beaches. Comet, the protagonist, appears to be just about the sole feline in a Nantucket otherwise populated by nattily dressed canines. In search of a home as well as adventure the roaming cat meets with peril. Snoozing in a bookstore, he is buried under a pile of books; taking a ride on a scallop boat, he's swept overboard by a huge wave; visiting an ice cream shop, he falls headfirst into a milkshake. Though some of these scenarios have comic potential, all eight of them prove fatal to poor Comet, whose ghostlike, winged image is in each case seen fleeing the scene. Brett, of course, makes it all better in the end; observant readers will have noticed that Comet isn't the island's only cat: side panels throughout show another cat in obvious search of a companion. Though not the author/artist's most finely wrought story, the book delivers a visual treat her fans (and Nantucket admirers) shouldn't miss. Ages 4-8. (Sept.)
School Library Journal

I agree that this isn't this author/artist's most finely wrought story. This review mostly just summarizes the plot, because, really, that is all there is. Comet just isn't a loveable character. I think this might be a book more for Brett fans.

PreS-Gr 1-Comet, a white cat with orange markings, goes through eight of his nine lives in one of Brett's more playful offerings. Readers will enjoy anticipating how Comet will lose his next life: eating foxglove, having a shoe thrown at him by a famous actress, falling into a tuba-these are just a few of the humorous demises he suffers (and he always manages to look catlike, dignified, and somewhat surprised that any of these disasters should be happening to him). The Nantucket setting is lovingly shown and expertly woven into every picture. Elaborate borders are fashioned with shells, wildflowers, and fishing line; the island is populated by dogs, all quite realistic looking and all wearing human clothes. Attentive children will enjoy poring over these detailed pictures and will feel satisfied by the conclusion, which has been nicely foreshadowed throughout. Brett's many avid fans are sure to love this book.-Lauralyn Persson, Wilmette Public Library, IL 

I found the anticipation of Comet's lives ending rather anxiety inducing rather than fun. I didn't find them humorous at all. Yes, the borders are elaborate, but I don't think young children will appreciate this and it makes it hard to find the more subtle aspects of the illustrations which are trying to further the story. Perhaps this detail would appeal to a more "attentive" child, but I don't see this as having wide appeal.