Rating: 4/5

✰ 4 stars ✰

  “But how can that paper bird make me well?”

“Don’t you remember that old story about the crane?” Chizuko asked. “It’s supposed to live for a thousand years. If a sick person folds one thousand paper cranes, the gods will grant her wish and make her healthy again.” 

She handed the crane to Sadako. “Here’s your first one.”

  3rd Grade Treasures

1996-1997. 3rd Grade. The year the Trapper Keeper was all the rage. (Google it - it was such a nifty stationary item! 📁) The year I learned spin art in Ms. Stella's art class and had two entries in our elementary art fair. (I still have them - they were quite good, I must say. 🎨) The year Fruit Roll-up and Dunkaroos were my staple recess snacks. (I wonder if they're still around... 🤔) And it was the year, I read Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes for our class reading assignment.

Sadako was in Hiroshima when the United States Air Force dropped an atom bomb on that city in an attempt to end World War II; ten years later she died as a result of radiation from the bomb. In the early 1960's, Eleanor Coerr traveled to Hiroshima in the hopes of finding Kokeshi - a collection of Sadako’s letters and her journal that her bamboo class published into a book, naming it after the doll that they had gifted her while she was in the hospital. Through fortuitous circumstances, Ms.Coerr stumbled upon the original and quickly rushed home to Canada to translate it, so she could write the children's story of Sadako's life that has touched so many lives since it's release in the last 70's. 

Some books can hit you right in the chest with hard-hitting feels - some books leave a quiet mark on your heart. Sadako's story is neither loud or soft - it is simply true. True in the truest form that you can stay hopeful and optimistic - no matter what. Even as it gives readers a way to accept death and sadness - it is done with kindness that touches upon your heart. 💔💔 Sadako showed a quiet resilience and courageous spirit of such will and longing that if not making paper cranes to bring good luck to herself, but simply to ease the pain that she was causing her family. It reminded me of times when I too would be hurting from an injury, and I would shield my own tears and fight through the pain - just so, my family would not be hurt by visible pain. 😢 

“Don’t cry,” she begged. “Please don’t cry.” 

Sadako wanted to say more, but her mouth and tongue wouldn’t move. A tear slid down her cheek. She had brought her mother so much grief. 

And all Sadako could do now was make paper cranes and hope for a miracle.”

The beauty of this story is that there is no direct malice or resentment towards the horrific event that took place in 1945 - it is simply a gentle but firm reminder of what it left behind in it's tragic wake - how far-reaching it was - whether you were there or still in the womb - it left it's impression. ❤️‍🩹❤️‍🩹 And how important it is that fighting is never a solution that solves everything - that a little peace and kindness can make a much more beneficial solution than the course of actions they take instead. 

“After visiting hours it was lonely in the hospital room. So lonely that Sadako folded more cranes to keep up her courage.

Eleven ... I wish I’d get better.

Twelve ... I wish I’d get better ...”

Ms. Coerr's heart-felt writing makes you feel Sadako's hopes and her pains -the sadness for making her family hurt, the gentle joys in her last few days. Poignant and pure, through her eyes we feel her dreams - how she wanted to live life long and strong - being the fastest runner in her class, only to become as slow as a turtle, who can't even lift her arms long enough. Yet, those tender and hopeful feelings of courage - even in the face of death - transcend beyond the page, because it does not only relate to moments of illness; even in her vulnerable state, she never loses faith. It can even give hope to those who have lost the will to survive and need a reason for living - a feeling worth fighting for. 🤍🤍

The joy of children's books is that it makes such an impact - even in the simplest of ways. Sadako's thoughts and prayers and loneliness echoed a gnawing pain in my heart - that she wasn't able to complete her paper cranes - is that a sign that if you don't - the dream that you have - the wish that you make - does it not come true? 

No.

Because the memory of her lives on - like a seed it spread to so many parts of the world - to even a little girl like me, living in Pakistan - I learned of her story. And that is why stories are told - so that they can live on forever - 'in the hearts of people for a long time.' 🙏🏻🙏🏻

I don't quite recall how I felt back when I first read it; although, I do remember faintly that we learned how to make paper cranes of our own as a class activity afterwards. Mine weren't very good, I'm afraid. But, there is one memory that stands out in my mind. When I was in the 5th grade, after studying World War II in social studies, our class was going to watch the film Hiroshima. One of our foreign students was from Japan; he approached our class teacher and very politely requested that he be excused from watching it. 

And as the film was loaded into the VCR, I recall so very clearly, looking out our class window, as he walked down the hall to the ESL (English as a Second Language) class - with a tight feeling in my chest - not quite knowing what I should say to him. And it was at the same moment, my mind drifted back to a book that I once read - the story of the little girl and her hopeful wish for life, by believing in the dream of a thousand paper cranes. 😔😔