Rating: 5/5

SUMMARY: In the aftermath of the Dakota War of 1862, Genevieve LaCroix struggles to accept the horrible news that Daniel Two Stars has been falsely imprisoned and executed as a criminal, when, in fact, he risked his life to save others. When a man Gen respects proposes, she learns that obedience can require painful choices. But then, just when she has learned to be content as Simon Dane’s wife and stepmother to his children, Gen learns that Two Stars is alive.

REVIEW: I realized part way through this book that I was reading the second of a trilogy. I would definitely recommend reading them in order as some of the events referred to obviously happened in the first book. I will definitely go back and read the first and then the third as I really liked this story. The historical detail and the glance into the Indian wars and round up of the Indians during this time period makes this book very fascinating. All of the main characters were well developed and interesting. I especially liked seeing the trust that developed between some of the white characaters and the native Americans with whom they were interacting. The author definitely depicted the idea that people have to be judged individually not by their race. I also liked her depiction of how sometimes struggles draw people away from God but then later draw them closer.

FAVORITE QUOTES: "What about the promise that He will give us the desires of our heart?....I don't think that promise means God gives us what we want. At least not in the way you mean. I think it means He shapes our desires."

"When God says no to something His children want, it is because He has something better for them. It's not just a cliche. He does what is best. Always."

"How like God to do His best work when everything was in a shambles from a human perspective."

"Pray..." "He does not hear..." "How do you know that?" "Nothing changes." "Perhaps He is waiting for you to pray that He will change YOU instead of the things around you."