Rating: 5/5

A PHOTOGRAPHIC INTRODUCTION TO THIS SYNTHESIS OF YOGA SYSTEMS

The back cover of this 1970 book explains, “Yoga is a system for purifying the body and the mind, for making each of us the master of our senses so that we may develop our emotions and intellect to a level at which we function healthfully and in perfect harmony… Swami Satchidananda has prepared a simple, lucid… introduction to Hatha Yoga which can be used individually in the home or in conjunction with local yoga classes… Satchidananda was born in India … He tried his hands at many fields… But none of these endeavors brought him the lasting joy he sought. At the age of twenty-eight Swamiji started upon his full-time spiritual quest. For several years, he practiced … in seclusion… 

“In 1947, he met his Master---His Holiness Sri Swami Sivananda Maharaj, the founder of the Divine Life Society… he was initiated into the Holy Order of Sanyasins… A year later, his master conferred upon him the title of Yogiraj, for his mastery of the intricate techniques of the Yogic science. Swamiji… became a professor Raja and Hatha Yoga at the Yoga Vedanta Forest University in Rishikesh. He has organized and served branches of the Divine Life Society and other Yoga centers… In 1966 Swamiji came to New York for an intended two-day visit. He was immediately surrounded by students who wanted to study under his guidance, and, in August of 1966, the Integral Yoga Institute was founded.”

He explains in the Preface, “What is Integral Yoga? Integral Yoga is a combination of specific methods designed to develop every aspect of the individual: physical, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual. It is a scientific system which integrates the various branches of Yoga in order in order to bring about a complete and harmonious development of individual…

Integral Y0oga is a synthesis of all Yogas. The goal is a body of perfect health and strength. Mind with all clarity, calmness, and control. Intellect as sharp as a razor, will of steel, heart full of love and mercy, a life dedicated to the common welfare and Realization of the True Self… This book contains very little theoretical material, but has been set up as a sort of Hatha Yoga directory---including precise and simplified technical details plus pictures with each pose.”

This well-photographed book will be “must reading” for anyone wanting to practice Integral Yoga.