Rating: 5/5

Pierre Clastres was a Hegelian with an anarchist bent, and in his short life he created a body of work which has been credited with helping to inaugurate the subdiscipline of political anthropology. Clastres did most of his ethnographic fieldwork in the early to mid-1960s, and spent the rest of his time at Lévi-Strauss's Laboratoire d’antropologie sociale. His thesis, which would become the book, Chronique des indiens Guayaki (1972), trans. Chronicle of the Guayaki Indians (1998), drew upon his fieldwork experiences with the Guayaki people in Paraguay from 1963-4. In the book, he describes how the lives have the Guayaki have been affected since coming out of the forest and submitting to a more sedentary life under the patronage of a Paraguayan boss.

Clastres is representative of the kinds of questions anthropologists of Amazonia were asking mid-century. To begin, like many other Euro-Americans up to this point in time, he notices that Amazonians do not organize themselves politically or socially in ways similar to Europeans. And as a good follower of Durkheim, he thinks of society as an organism which must be maintained through rules and regulations, and such rules are reproduced through ritual. The structuralist innovation was that such rules and regulations were deep, underlying structures in the consciousness of community members. For example, observing the birth of Pichugi's son, he writes that the Guayaki “are always anxious to use each event in an individual's life as a way of restoring tribal unity, as a way of re-awakening in all the members of the tribe the certainty that they formed a community” (1998, 57). The emphasis on lacks and explaining them through ritual would continue for some time.

There are several other assumptions about the Guayaki which are characteristic of scholarship at the time. First, there is assumption of the universality of the Western gender binary, which can be seen in the chapter “The Life and Death of a Homosexual,” which focuses on the characters of Krembegi and Chachubutawacgugi. According to Clastres, Krembegi was a non-anomaly: “No one in the camp paid particular attention to him, he was like everyone else” (290). And yet he was also something that demanded explanation: Krembegi's habits made him “outside this social order” (294). Second, but more subtle, is Clastres's assumption that the Guayaki are as afraid of death as Europeans are. For Clastres, Guayaki men (who represent culture) are doing everything they can to subdue the power of death by controlling women (who represent nature). This assumption is perhaps best demonstrated by reflecting on his explanation of the game of to kybairu, a game played during the “honey celebration,” in which players put their heads together in a pattern which resembles the hexagonal cells of a beehive (221). He goes on to write that the game “symbolizes the reconquest of universal life, it expresses its spirit, it celebrates its victory,” and, most plainly, that it “is against death” (233). Even if we accept Viveiros de Castro's (2010) injunction to read Clastres loosely and defer from nitpicking universalizing statements, we should not gloss over the ways in which such explanations may lead us astray from Indigenous Amazonians’ own ideas of what they are doing. Third, Clastres is also important because his thoughts on cannibalism among the Guayaki are cited by several other scholars of Amazonia (e.g., Vilaça, 2000). If anything, Clastres stands as a testament to the anthropologist's difficulty grappling with the subject of cannibalism. He vacillates between materialist explanations (Guayaki have plenty of protein, cannibalism is not for want of meat) and more structuralist interpretations (e.g., musing on the way the verb ‘to eat’ is often used instead of the verb ‘to make love’). Later scholars (e.g., Vilaça; Conklin) would take issue with this inconsistency and attempt to offer more coherent definitions.