Rating: 5/5

I’ve read this a few times, but guess I never reviewed it. A favorite Lord Peter mystery, this intricate case finds him hastening to the seaside to assist Harriet Vane in investigating a brutal murder that could be a suicide.

Harriet, last seen in Strong Poison being tried for the murder of her former lover, is trying to get away from it all. I enjoyed getting inside her head at the beginning of this mystery; she’s trying not to become cynical but has definitely grown a thicker skin - her recent horrifying brush with the law has upset her life, obviously, but to her chagrin has also lead to a certain notoriety, no bad thing for a mystery writer. Her books are selling well, she finds herself wealthier than she’s ever been. She’s been working hard and writing, is in fact in the middle of a book - but clear her head she must, so packs her backpack and sets off on a solo walking tour. All is going well until she nods off on a deserted beach over her picnic lunch, and wakes to find a gruesomely slain body on a nearby rock.

The tide is rushing in, she can’t recall the nearest phone, so she takes pictures and learns as much as she can through observation - a nasty task, as his throat is deeply cut, and he’s still bleeding.

Good thing she’s conscientious, as it takes a few hours walking to get to a phone - ah, the simpler days! Anyway, Lord Peter descends to lend a hand, and I really enjoyed the scenes of the two characters working on the case, and thrashing out their relationship…Harriet’s no dummy and knows Peter came running because she’d be viewed as a suspect. But they work very well together and I enjoy the intelligent rapport. The time spent rehashing alibis and cipher methods became a bit tedious, but I’ve always been in awe of Sayers formidable intellect and intricate plotting. 

One of the few examples where the tv version (with Edward Petherbridge as Lord Peter) was better than the book, only because all of the cipher talk. It’s a very dense and convoluted story, which is why I’ve only read it a few times, but I very much enjoyed it - this time I was thrilled to find the audiobook brilliantly narrated by Ian Carmichael on YouTube, which added tremendously to my enjoyment! I’ve seen him as Wimsey, and although he seemed much too old, his voice is lovely for Lord Peter.