Rating: 1/5

When her beloved sister becomes engaged to the man of her dreams, the heroine is beyond happy for her. But never did she expect that with planning a wedding will also come with a dark family curse and a haunted house to boot! The heroine never took any stock in silly things like ghosts, that is, until she stepped foot in the manor. That first night she is visited by the family's ancestor who was wronged on the day of his wedding by his fiancé and murdered. Now, it's his responsibility to appear at every wedding day of his family line to proclaim whether the match is approved or not. The heroine may not be beautiful or overly social but she bright and she is hell and determined to prevent anything from ruining her sister’s happiness and the talk of ghosts is very unsettling to her sister. So, the heroine decides to put an end to it by discovering the mystery behind the ghosts death and allowing him to find peace- therefore ending the curse. She didn't count on the fiancés surly and antisocial brother being added to the mix and suddenly-thanks to this interfering and silly ghost- she finds herself caught in a compromising position with the hero and is forced to accept the idea of marriage. She knows she will never go through with it but the hero’s painful past of his own betrayal is upsetting to the family and so she must play along. There follows a story of betrayal, trust and mystery. The hero and heroine, once enemies, soon become something more but if they are not able to trust one another than the curse will really and truly win in the end.

This book is very much a discounted harquin novel. Meaning it is short, very uncomplicated and not exactly true to its portrayed era. The language of the time faded in and out as the author lost focus of the time period and repeatedly referenced modern phrasing and mannerisms. The vast majority of the scenarios were typical historical but a lot of the time I found myself rolling my eyes at the lack of true character reactions. Never would an unmarried female have any freedom of choice in marriage after she was caught in a man’s bedchamber. Never would she decide to ride along with a man without a chaperone. These things threw me off and paired with the rushed tone of the book and sever lack of chemistry between the characters made this book rate low for me. I felt no love between the characters and indeed most of the 250-page book was spent with them at odds with one another and having little to no private interactions. I wasn't a fan but then again, I should not have expected a whole lot out of it.