Rating: 5/5

Henry V is indeed the grand finale of Shakespeare’s second historical tetralogy, right after Henry IV, Part 2. Here, exit Falstaff, whose death is recounted by Mistress Quickly in the first act, and we are now in the presence of a conquering and “warlike Harry”, who is like chalk and cheese when compared with his former self, the dissolute Prince Hal. A few of Falstaff and Hal’s companions remain however on the battlefield and provide some colourful moments.

Henry V is an incredibly dynamic play, performed at the very opening of the Globe (“this wooden O”), but feels, in retrospect, as if it had been written for the big screen: the action leaps in space from one act to the next, from London to Southampton, to Harfleur, to Paris, to Agincourt, back to England and back again to France. So much so that Shakespeare felt the need to add a Chorus, who, like the rolling billboards at the beginning of each Star Wars episode, provides some context and clarity to a possibly inattentive or disoriented audience. In fact, Shakespeare boldly tramples all the rules of Aristotle’s Poetics underfoot, just as Harry successfully rides roughshod over all rules of military strategy.

Then, there is this effervescence of languages, as the story of Henry V spans across most of Europe: Scotland (Jamy), Ireland (MacMorris), Wales (Fluellen), England (the court of Henry V), France (the court of Charles VI), Bavaria and Milan (the Queen of France), Burgundy (the Duke Philip the Good). The blending of accents and idioms and the misunderstandings that follow are absolutely toe-curling and quite often uproarious. (I guess that, if Shakespeare had lived in our time, he most probably would have drawn a great tragicomedy out of the Brexit situation!)

Finally, unlike most of Shakespeare's Histories, which are, in essence, tragedies, Henry V is fundamentally an epic poem. More than in any other play, there are moments in it of absolutely breathtaking heroic flight. There is the gripping scene before the walls of Harfleur, of course: “Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide, / Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit / To his full height” (III,1). Above all, there is the famous St Crispin’s Day speech, just before the battlefield at Agincourt: “And Crispin Crispian shall ne’er go by / From this day to the ending of the world” (IV,3). This text is indeed shorter, but entirely on the level, in my opinion, of even the Bhagavad Gita, another divine address ahead of an epic battle. Apparently, this sort of eve-of-battle-speech later became a prerequisite in epic stories, especially in movies: from Chaplin’s Great Dictator to The Return of the King, Braveheart, Gladiator, 300, The Deathly Hallows, Game of Thrones, and many others… not to mention the great military and political speeches recorded throughout recent history, from Winston Churchill, to Charles de Gaulle, to JFK.

Edit: Watched the cinematic adaptation of this play within the Hollow Crown series, with Tom Hiddleston (best known as Loki in the Avengers movies) as the title role. His performance is remarkable: he delivers the Azincourt “locker room” speech in the gentlest, simplest, almost hopeless manner, making it a real tear-jerker. Loved it.

Edit 2: Watched The King, the epic movie with Thimotée Chalamet, recently released on Netflix. The film covers the period between Hotspur’s rebellion (see King Henry IV, Part 1 in Shakespeare) and the Treaty of Troyes (in Shakespeare’s Henry V). Director David Michôd distances himself quite a bit from Shakespeare’s play, in the plot — case in point: Falstaff is one of Henry’s major strategists at Agincourt in the movie, whereas he was already long dead in Shakespeare’s play. The tone is quite different as well: when Henry V is, for the most part, a heroic play, The King feels like a dark conspiracy drama. Chalamet as a gloomy English King and Pattinson as a ridiculous French Dauphin are both outstanding. The visual depiction of the battle of Agincourt is a major highlight: the tactics are extremely well laid out, and the mayhem and horrific aspects of hand-to-hand battle and stampede in the bog (a sort of super gritty and bloody rugby scrum) are indeed awe-inspiring.

&gt; Previous play in the Henriad: Henry IV, Part 2
&gt; Next play in The War of the Roses: Henry VI, Part 1