Rating: 4/5

“History doesn’t repeat itself, but it does rhyme.” — attributed to Mark Twain

At this moment when our reality is being warped by rabid demagogues, right wing media, and corrupt politicians, it is worth revisiting an equally troubling time in which those same actors starred. The introduction sets the stage in which an America, transformed by WWII which brought it out of the Great Depression, is searching for a new war. Joe McCarthy, an unremarkable Republican senator, takes the national stage by creating a war on American loyalty, perhaps to distract from his own closet full of skeletons. All he had to do was keep lying to keep the cameras on him and the House Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC); everyone was guilty by association and anything could be used against you. The media boiled over with dramatic headlines and televised courtroom reveals, giving legitimacy to what we now know was a wholly manufactured crisis. Neither President Truman, nor the media, nor the public, tried to stop this runaway train, which destroyed the lives of countless Americans. Speaking out against it would put your own loyalty in question.

Lillian Hellman, a renowned playwright, looked back at her own life during this time and the destruction that those baseless accusations had on her and those around her. Rather than fold under pressure to implicate others in this Ponzi scheme of recriminations, Hellman took the stand and refused to name names. This hour long trial had consequences for her finances, her career, as well as on her relationship with Dashiell Hammett, who had been jailed in this fiasco and was blacklisted for the remainder of his life. This brief book blends diary entries, memoir, and news, at turns introspective, optimistic, and melancholy. One scene that stands out is their last night on the farm that they were forced to sell. They watch a herd of deer graze on their property. That she was able to find beauty and magic during a moment of crisis reminds us that life goes on.