Rating: 3/5

In 1960, at the age of 10, author Julia Alvarez fled the Dominican Republican in the company of her parents, who had collaborated in a plot to overthrow the longstanding dictator, Rafael Trujillo. While Before We Were Free is not a strictly autobiographical account of these events, it is clearly influenced by them. Like Alvarez, the novel's narrator is a young girl coming of age during the final years of the dictatorship. Over the course of the novel, she realizes that the man whose portrait hangs on the walls at school and at home is not a beneficent national father and that her own father is conspiring to have him killed.

Alvarez is an author I have been meaning to read for years, and I picked up this particular novel with the idea that I might add it to my syllabus for a class on young adult literature. Certainly, the book excels at revealing the injustices of the Trujillo regime through the eyes of an pre-adolescent narrator. Though I was familiar with the general history of the period, I learned a great deal about how it felt to live in an oppressive regime that is being shunned by the rest of the world. I was especially interested in the scenes set in the US American school, which the narrator attends alongside the children of diplomats from other countries. Though the teacher pities her Dominican students for their country's political situation, she demeans them in other ways--by drawing condescending contrasts between the honorable United States and corrupt Dominican Republic, by assigning the darker skinned Dominican students the roles of Native Americans in the class's Thanksgiving play, and so forth. Perhaps one of the benefits of the embargo is that this school was forced to close.

Ultimately, I think the book works better as a history lesson than a novel, and honestly I am a little surprised by the accolades it has received. As a reader, I found the narrator's voice rather "evolved" for a twelve-year-old, with reflections and an expressive style that seem unrealistic for her age. Worse, so many of the scenes between the characters themselves feel abridged, as if the author had been required by contract to keep the book at less than 200 pages. This is particularly evident in the scenes involving Tony, the narrator's rebellious uncle. At the book's beginning, the author suggests that Tony has been "disappeared" by the dictator he had been discrediting. Then, when he finally returns home, his backstory and family reunion are summarized in a couple of efficient paragraphs without even a word of dialogue. As a didactic novel for use in the middle school classroom, the book accomplishes its purposes in spades. As a novel to recommend to adults not reading it for a class? Meh.