Rating: 5/5

This is another one of those books that marked me in my early twenties because it was my mentor's favorite and also that of my best contemporary, a kind of two for the price of one, a must read, and to like Artaud seemed to imply you were in some kind of club, but I'm not sure what membership entailed. Max's favorite essay of Artaud's (the character from "If So Carried By The Wind, Become The Wind") was "Van Gogh: The Artist Suicided By Society," and it was one of the longer works in the anthology, and certainly one of the most lucidly vitriolic attacks towards psychology and bourgeois culture that I've ever read but there's a lot in this book, and that's the understatement of the day. Every page of this compilation is full of poetry, and though I've read other Artaud collections, I'd say this is the definitive one for the uninitiated, and even for the initiated this could last a lifetime.

I'm not sure what Artaud became famous for to Gen X but for some it had to do with theater, and for others poetry, and for others sheer madness. He was kind of an enigma and a hard figure to define, because he wasn't really a writer in the traditional sense, but came to writing from acting, so that writing was almost like some bare essential form of communication for him, rather than a developed style, and indeed many of his pieces seem like fragments and why an anthology is so good for him. But Artaud did write the long essay about Van Gogh, and another called "The Theater and its Double," that went a long way to explaining to me why words were dead, and why I'd done the stupidest thing of all to be a writer, but it was too late, and if anything Artaud's realization that words had lost their meaning freed me up in a kind of perverse way. I guess he was the indescribable unknown madman genius for a generation of artist lunatics, and gathering around Artaud was like salting the wound with sweet pleasure, and I can imagine a time when getting his books was very hard, but it's not so hard now and that's probably good. 

I'd say the collection has poems, essay's, and journal entries, but no real stories, and it's not a work of fiction in the least. I think it was intended to be the raw expression of a man's mind in all of its lucidity and grace, but exposing neither, and both, in horrible streams of light. The book has no pretense at all, no point of view, or fictitious narrator, cloaking a narrative in artistic guise, it has none of this, and I don't get the idea that Artaud ever wrote a story with even a shred of dialogue, but that's his greatness, he had forsaken books and literary convention for raw emotion, leaving it for the stage and film where he was more famous as an actor, but this isn't a mere notebook, either, given the the literary significance and greatness of many of the pieces, some of which are taught in theater departments around the Country. It's a very hard book to describe and the kind that many suicidal artists dream of leaving behind for posterity's sake, but never do, or if they do, no one cares. But this isn't fair to the lucidity of Artaud's poetic vision, for lack of a better word, that an amateur journalist only dreams of since I'm not sure he ever dreamed of writing a great play or story, because writing was something else for Artaud so that his point of view as a creator was completely different than the ordinary fiction writer sitting down to write a tale with a clever narrator and voice. Writing was a kind of a spiritual absolution for Artaud mixed with a hearty dose of literary criticism, and asked for nothing in return, but acknowledgment of his spirituality.