Rating: 3/5

Padraic Colum, author of The Golden Fleece and the Heroes Who Lived Before Achilles, was born December 8, 1881, in County Longford, Ireland. In 1914, he and his wife, Mary, moved to the United States where he began writing children’s stories and books based on Irish folklore and mythology. In 1922, his retelling of Greek myths was recognized as a Newbery Honor Book. Padraic Colum later authored two more Newbery Honor books, The Voyagers: Being Legends and Romances of Atlantic Discovery in 1926 and Big Tree of Bunlahy: Stories on My Own Countryside in 1934. In addition to publishing more than 60 books over his lifetime, Padraic Colum was a professor at both Columbia University and the City College of New York. He died in Enfield , Connecticut on January 11, 1972, at the age of 91.
 Padraic Colum’s retelling of the story of Jason and the Argonauts begins in the forests of Mountain Pelion where a servant has brought the young boy Jason to Chiron, the centaur, with a request from Æson, the deposed king of Iolcus, that Chiron “rear and foster this child” as he had once cared for Heracles. Years pass, Jason grows to manhood under the tutelage of Chiron and when he has learned all that the centaur can teach him, he returns to Iolcus to reunite with his father and perhaps seek revenge against his wicked uncle Pelias who had overthrown the peace-loving king of Iolchus, Æson. Pelias sends Jason on a quest to Colchis to win the Golden Fleece from King Ætes. Part I of the book details the adventures of the Argonauts as they sail to Colchis.
Part II of the story opens in the court of King Ætes where Jason has asked the king to give him the Golden Fleece in exchange for their services as warriors against the Sauromatæ, enemies of the king. instead offers Jason a trial of bravery – yoke two fire-breathing bulls to a plow of adamant, plow the field of Ares, sow it with the teeth of a dragon, and slay the armed men as they sprout. Jason accepts the challenge and with the help of Medea, Ætes’ sorceress daughter who has fallen in love with Jason, is successful; but King Ætes does not honor his pledge. Jason and Medea conspire to take the Golden Fleece and make their escape. The remainder of Part II tells of the Argo’s return to Greece.
In Part III the reader is entertained with tales of the heroes of the quest, Atalanta, Peleus, Theseus, Heracles, Admetus, Orpheus, and Jason and Medea. Pen and ink drawings created by Willy Pogany illustrate the text in a style reminiscent of ancient Greek art.
While I enjoyed reading this rendition of the story of Jason and the Argonauts, I am not sure that the youthful reader of today would have spent much time trying to slog through the 287 pages of text filled with archaic words and sentence structure. While appropriate to the theme, the writing style made for a slow read. This reading challenge entails reading all of the Newbery Honor and Medal books since inception of the award in 1922, so I will be reading the two other honor books written by Padraic Colum. I’m just not sure that I am looking forward to the experience.