Rating: 3/5

Leslie Petersbourough, the charming sidekick in The Unflappable Miss Fairchild, is back in his own novel. Now that he's inherited the titled of Marquis of Hastings, his godmother Lady Agnes De Guis, has made him promise to marry a woman of her choosing. Les refuses to allow his aunt to play matchmaker but agrees to give some thought to marriage. Lady Agnes chooses Cleopatra Renfield, her goddaughter, as Leslie's bride. Cleo's older sisters want her to make an "advantageous" marriage, but if their own marriages are anything to go by, Cleo wants none of it. She is interested in the dashing Major Cutter. Her major rival, Elsie Watkins, is a former schoolmate who has a shocking secret that only Cleo knows. When Cleo learns that her godmother wants to marry her off to her childhood playmate, Leslie Petersbourough, she decides to talk Leslie into creating enough mischief to give her sisters a disgust of him. Leslie agrees to go along with Cleo's crazy plan but didn't anticipate his physical attraction to the woman his little pal has become. Cleo leads Les on a merry dance but learns that it's difficult to toe the line between shocking her sisters and shocking Society. By the time Les realizes the depth of his emotions for Cleo, it may be too late for Major Cutter also has an eye on Cleo and his motive may not be entirely innocent. Leslie has to decide how far he's willing to go to keep up the charade and Cleo gets a lesson in love and courtship she'll never forget. 

This is another light, fun novel. It's not quite as light as Miss Fairchild, but still fun. I liked Cleo well-enough though she is rather young and innocent and doesn't really understand the rules. Leslie is charming and a lot of fun. Though it seems like the romance could be resolved right away, it gets drawn out and ends up better and more interesting for the length of time it takes. The secondary characters are complex and interesting. My favorite character is Hector, the talking parrot, who made me howl with laughter. Fans of Regina's other novels and Zebra and Signet sweet Regencies will love this one.

The central romance is clean and sweet but there is a scene with dialogue spoken by a villain that may make some readers uncomfortable.