Rating: 4/5

Racy, crazy and engaging. But a few nagging apprehensions too.

The apprehensions first.
1) Hero is 34, the girl is 17. No, its not a ward-guardian story. Its a boss-employee thing. He is the company owner, she is a temp in his typing pool. But right from the day they meet and start squabbling, he comes across as sexually aggressive towards her. Domineering kisses, very adult touches, rude/arrogant behavior. I would have gladly overlooked all this as 'normal', had the girl been atleast a couple of years older. But 17 !@?!@??@!?@? Yuck. Its disgusting to think of a man in real life, doing all these things to a 17 year old girl. I would have been up in arms, if it was in the real world. But, this is a fictional universe. So I just grin and bear !

2) Why authors rely on such wild coincidences to take the plot forward, I don't understand. In the whole wide world, the heroine happens to be the one girl the hero should technically despise ! She is the love child of his sister's erring husband. The sister was in a wheelchair all her life and her hubby dear had a little affair on the sidelines, to assuage his grief !@?!? Their ages? Don't ask !! Again the guy was 35 and the girl was 17, then. The sister dies eventually. Erring brother-in-law comes back home and finds his grown up daughter (the heroine) and her mother (who is masquerading as her aunt! Now that was a neat twist that I did not anticipate in the least !)). Ta da, happy family !!!!

3) 34 year old hero - considered the most eligible male in town. Every female's secret desire. The heroine's young aunt is also 34 (the mummy, remember?). But she is portrayed as an old grumpy maiden. Just looking to fade in the twilight with a passable husband. The gender inequalities are harsh to read. But unfortunately, they are exactly as we see in the real world around us !

Ok, now for the engaging bits. Plenty actually.
1) The heroine is not a meek naive, school girl at 17. She is a spit fire !!! Knows her mind, knows what's good for her. Allows the hero a few kisses and touches because she likes them too. But never allows him to go any further. She clearly tells him off !!! "What if your craze for me fades in a while? How will I go back to work in your company after an affair with the boss? What about my family, my future, my self-esteem?" So she keeps him at bay, yells at him if he bosses around too much. Basically never allows the massive age difference to turn into a master-slave relationship. And that's exactly why the hero is a total goner, right from the word go! 

2) Dialogs. Very punchy, real, funny, high octane, sexy at the right places. All characters have perfectly tuned dialogs to match their character. The hero - rude, domineering but weak kneed in front of his little firecracker ! The girl - extrovert, brazen, fun, sexy, but still retains the freshness and innocence of her youth. The colleages, uncle, aunt (mom), the long lost daddy. Everybody had well scripted dialogs.

3) The chemistry between the leads. Very strong, palpable. Explosive fights but also passionate embraces. She gives as good as she gets. He hurts but immediately soothes. And mercifully he talks in the end about 'waiting' for her to grow up before taking her to bed. After marriage, of course. Now that's a small relief !

4) Humour. The aunt, the uncle and our little miss - all work in the hero's firm. So he is the terror around there, all of them defer to him. But when when the aunt, uncle, even other colleagues see our little firecracker yelling and screaming at the hero with gay abandon, the comical disbelief they experience is great fun to read !!

Over all, good read. In spite of the niggles.