I had high expectations for this book, but I was let down in every way. I got so incredibly bored, but I couldn't live with myself knowing I couldn't finish a mere 186 page book, so I plunged onward. By page 80, bookmarking the craziest sentences was the only way I kept myself sane.

I'll try to organize my complaints critiques into a list. Spoilers are not marked, proceed with caution. Not that there's much to spoil about this book.

So, my problems with Stargirl:

1. THIS IS NOT HOW POPULARITY WORKS. Stargirl goes from being popular to unpopular to popular in about two seconds, and when she is shunned, the entire school (except for on person) goes along with it! I understand that Mica High is a small school, but no way in a real school would everyone shun somebody like that. The whole book feels like a grade schooler's imagining of high school.

2. Stargirl is a speshul snowflake- I might even dare to call her a Mary-Sue. She never makes mistakes, the protagonist falls in love with her, and everyone is captivated by her/loves her. Even Archie says that from the moment he met her, he knew she was different. It also sort of seemed like Star was doing all of those antics purely for attention. If she had gone to a school like that in real life, the teachers- not to mention other students!- would have made her stop the bullcrap almost instantly.

3. There is no character development. I guess I should have expected this out of a book so short, but the characters were breathtakingly stagnant. Except for Stargirl, of course- but she went in the opposite direction altogether with her insane, sudden, out-of-character transformation (which was only temporary, but I digress). Aside from that, though, there wasn't even any characterization of her. And I won't even begin to touch on the shallow relationships that were barely there, much less thoroughly explored. (I must keep reminding myself that this is a children's book, and less than 200 pages, so I can't stress about small things in a small book.)

4. The writing is terrible. It was all "I" this, "I" that. The book sort of read like a list. A very redundant list. Has Mr. Spinelli never heard of a comma, or a linking verb? Or an editor?

Now I was feeling sorry for her I sat back down beside her. I took her hand. I smiled. I spoke as gently as I could.

 I didn't mention myself. I didn't say do it for me. I didn't say if you don't change you can forget about me. I never said that.

As short as this book is, it took me two days of forced reading to get through what was essentially a giant list. Some of the expressions used are also mad weird. Like this phrase, here:

 She faced the mountains, bathed in sun syrup, her face as still and peaceful as I've ever seen a face.

Wtf? Sun Syrup? ....As I've ever seen a face? What the hell?

  

5. The message, which is clearly "originality is great" and "be yourself" and all that jazz, was practically shoved down the reader's throat, as painfully as an only-partially-chewed chip fragment, and just as excruciatingly slowly. I get it, Jerry Spinelli. I really don't like it when the message of a book is so painstakingly obvious; I like to have to think. Now I'm not saying a book has to be as cryptic as a crossword or anything, but this book should have just been called "Shoving the merits of originality down your throat."

6. The fact that Stargirl followed people around, made up stories about them, sent them anonymous gifts, and took their pictures sort of left me with a bad taste in my mouth. I understand that the acts were meant to be nice, but that doesn't change how creepy the actions were.

7. This scene:

 "He's nuzzling you. He likes you. Especially your ears. He never meets an ear he doesn't love. By the time he's done, that ear of yours will be clean as a whistle. Especially if there's some leftover peanut butter in it."

I could feel the tiny tongue mopping the crevices of my left ear. "It tickles!" I felt something else. "I feel teeth!"

"He's just scraping something off for you. You must have something crusty in there. Have you washed your ears lately?"

  

Do I even need to explain? (Star's rat was eating the narrator's ear. Yes, straight from the book, word for word, page 82.)

I think I need to move on to a book meant for an older audience. This one killed me. I am dead now.