Rating: 2/5

Madeline in America is perfect for children in second grade. This edition contains Madeline in America and three other short tales. In Madeline's story, she is informed that she must attend the reading of the will and testament of her grandfather who lived in Texas. Miss Clavel and the other girls from Paris join Madeline on an exciting trip to America. Together, they all tour her grandfather's land and riches that he left behind for her. As they make their way to their hotel, Miss Clavel notices that Madeline is missing. A Texas Ranger helps find Madeline and returns her to her group. The next day Madeline meets with after her grandfather's lawyer only to find out that he left her all his wealth but only when she turns twenty-one. Until then she goes back to school in Paris with Miss Clavel and the other girls.

The Count and the Cobbler is the story of the poor family of a Dominik the cobbler. One day, a Count orders shoes from Dominik. The cobbler then traces the feet of the Count. In seeing this, one of the cobbler's sons unintentionally helped create shoes for all his siblings with his drawings.
A Bemelmans Christmas Memory is a very short story of Christmas eve in 1949 in New York. The author was a little girl was was humbled by her family not being so “flashy”.
Sunshine was the last story in this volume. It was about a man named Sunshine who put a for rent sign up in an apartment. He wanted someone to rent it who would be a quiet neighbor. Little did he know that Miss Moore, the lady that signed the lease, was also a music teacher and would turn the apartment into a music school. He tries to get her to leave but the lease signed. Miss Moore almost ended up losing the house due to her entering an umbrella auction. Suddenly it began to rain so hard that she ended up selling all her umbrellas all over New York landmarks. This helped her financial situation and Sunshine had a change of heart towards his tenant and music.

This book may be a bit outdated. The story of Madeline is the glue that holds this volume together. The other stories seem out of place with the only thing they have in common is that they take place in America. In Sunshine, it reads ,“Punctual” he said. “Right on the dot. In a woman that means an awful lot.” This seemed to be the mindset about women the 50s.
I would not recommend this book as it is outdated. It is not good that the character in the book is so surprised that a woman can be punctual. Also, the story of A Bemelmans Christmas Memory seems to just be thrown in at random.

Madeline and The Count and the Cobbler have colorful illustrations on every page. The difference between these two is that in Madeline the illustrations are large and fill up most of the page. The Count and the Cobbler’s illustrations are smaller and are strategically sequenced on each page. Most of Sunshine’s illustrations are in yellow, black and white. The images start off small and few on each page but as the story comes to an end the pictures begin to fill the page like in Madeline and they begin to use all colors. A Bemelmans Christmas Memory includes a black and white photograph, two landscape drawings, two drawings by children and a full color illustration at the end of the story.