Rating: 5/5

This is like half a joke, but also it's also half NOT. Mostly I just don't want to do my real work: 
"Bread and Jam for Frances" is a story about the sacredness of eating together. It also looks at the fine balance between who we are as individuals and honoring our loves, our expressions, and our desires and our need for community, sharing in a collective experience, and finding a sense of belonging with others through trying new things that might be unfamiliar (and possibly self-betraying?) but ultimately may lead to a sense of connection.
Other themes include the different senses of connection we get from sharing food in the home vs. in public with friends/colleagues/classmates and how food is a medium in which we mediate and experience different forms of closeness, distance, and intimacies. 
Through the usage and the form of song, improvisation, and lyrical choice, the character Frances also brings up questions of our relationship to food, our reckoning with the once-alive nature of what we consume, the anthropomorphizing of food as we juggle the need to nourish our bodies with other animals and plants, the reality of being part of a great ecosystem of living things, and our uncomfortable yet convenient and privileged place as the ones who decide (or have put ourselves in the place to decide?) the hierarchy and fate of animals, plants, laborers, products, and systems: 

“Poached eggs on toast, / Why do you shiver / With such a funny little quiver?” 

“Jam on biscuits, jam on toast, / Jam is the thing that I like most / Jam is sticky, jam is sweet, / Jam is tasty, jam’s a treat - / Raspberry, strawberry, gooseberry, / I’m very / Fond…of…jam!” 

"Bread and Jam for Frances" is an important piece of literature for critically analyzing our cultural landscape today. It covers questions of community, relationships, the self, conceptions of the environment, and ethics. 
I will die on this hill. The kids today who are reading this book are asking the questions of tomorrow.