Rating: 4/5

I love the world Pournelle created here and the second installment of the series does not disappoint! Haven, largely a backwater in first the CoDominium empire and then the Empire of Man, possessed around 20 million souls when the when the Saurons arrived at Haven. The Sourons, genetically bred 'super soldiers', were on the run from the defeat of their empire, but the Empire of Man basically used their entire Navy to do so. Basically, another 'dark age' quickly ensued. 

The Saurons quickly decided to make Haven home, with the long-term hopes of once again rising to the stars. First, however, they needed to pacify Haven and after their arrival, used kinetic strikes from orbit to obliterate what little industrial base Haven possessed and then established a foothold on the planet. The next few years witnessed great death across Haven due to starvation and such; with the technology gone, the survivors either learned to live off the meager land or perished. 

The Saurons started with only about 3000 soldiers from their ship and to augment their ranks, took to breeding with the 'cattle'; their name for human 'norms'. Haven's harsh climate and low oxygen already turned the people on Haven into survivors. Unfortunately, for successful childbirth, women need to be in the 'lowlands' or valleys due to the thin oxygen. So, the Saurons took control of all the valleys and charge tribute to the various tribes to bring their women their; the tribute included a percentage of their women. While the tribes hated it, the Saurons used their military might to enforce it well. Jeez, do the Saurons make great villains! 

This volume, like the first, consists of a variety of themed short stories and novellas that explore the trials and tribulations on Haven after the Saurons arrived. The first two novellas (by Don Hawthorne and Roland Green/John Carr) are exceptional, but the rest of the stories also are very good. The time line jumps quite a bit among them, from just before the Sauron arrival on Haven to hundreds of years later. While obviously military science fiction, many of the stories explore a rather sociological dimension as societies/tribes struggle to survive and evolve. Sometimes this means rediscovering their ethic roots like the Steppe nomadic tribes. Others see a brighter future as they struggle against the Saurons and try to rebuild civilization. Foremost among these are the haBandari, an odd amalgamation of a religious sect and some 'heavy worlders' stranded on Haven. The haBandari, located outside of Sauron control, rediscover some tech and emerge as trades far and wide on Haven. I do not know how Pournelle managed to keep all the authors on the same page, but it works. 4 solid stars!!