Rating: 4/5

In my very late teens, I spent four months acting as chauffeur for my mother's mother, who was finalizing her elaborate act of denying the late stages of early-onset Alzheimer's. At least once a week she would go to the local library, located less than a half a mile from her home of 50 years. Two years after these events, that library—the Robert E. Smith regional—would have its collections decimated and deluged after Katrina (or the US Armed forces or a private paramilitary group or simple neglect or fate) broke the levees and flooded the city. The four months in question were the tail-end of the hurricane season. Katrina's older brother, Ivan, considered hitting the Big Easy after a round in the Gulf, but luckily for us, went for the smaller-yet-easier to wreck Mobile. The inevitability of destruction coupled with the dumb luck that saved New Orleans was infectious, leading many to stay put a little longer, laugh a little longer at suggestions to "prepare for a storm" by any means other than finding an extra bottle or book or body to hold. For my grandmother, it was simply God's will: she never evacuated from a storm in her life, not even for Betsy, the terror of 1956. She certainly was not about to do so now that her husband spent most of his days in a hospital bed beside five feet from her breakfast table. She'd sooner have him driven to go vote (which we did do, he and I, much to her chagrin as she fought in every way possible to deny his vote for John Kerry). 

Point being, just prior to Ivan's turn to Mobile, when New Orleans was dragging its heels in the muddy waters of the Mississippi about when to close its public services early due to the very real possibility of total destruction from what was at the time the biggest storm to enter the Gulf of Mexico, my grandmother wanted to get new books from her library and then go to Robert's to make groceries. I drove her through the empty roads, stopping at three different gas stations before getting only half a tank and then to pick up masking tape for the windows (more for the appearance of preparation than actual safekeeping, I had been told by many that taping windows does nothing whatsoever but I didn't care, I was nineteen years young and reveling in the risk of civic catastrophe, revealing only my unfashionable pretensions and impudence.) 

At the library, my grandmother wept quietly, having forgotten the little black book in which she made note of books she's read. I ended up helping her find a few authors I knew she liked, some of the titles she had tried before, some she'd finished, some were new. I was a shitty grandson. Before attending to her distress, I went straight to the librarian-in-training whom I had been crushing on for the past two months. She did not want to talk to me. Not only had my attempts to woo her long since fizzled, she was in a state of panic due to the imminent landfall of Ivan. Quickly I spied a copy of Kafka Amerikana on the reshelving cart. I had returned the limited edition, numbered, double-signed copy of these short stories based upon both the works of Franz Kafka and late 20th century American culture a mere two days prior. And still, the book was not yet returned to the shelf! The travesty! What if I wanted to recheck out the book? I knew enough of this particular library's practices that a book may not be checked out again until it was manually entered back into the database and returned to the shelf. A book taken from the reshelving cart by a patron and brought to the front counter will result in an error message, stating that the book is not yet back "in circulation". And that is precisely what I chose to do, wanting only to exacerbate the anxiety of my the object of my affection. Once she realized I had knowingly and impishly selected a book that was not available for the taking (due to my having returned said book just two days prior) she began cursing me under her breath, stating that New Orleans would surely sink and that there was no hope as the young men of the city were not worth saving due to their dedications to futility and lust. At this point I chided the librarian-in-training that I should be allowed to simply steal the book. She reminded me, not for the first time since I have known her, that doing so would result in an alarm sounding off. I countered that she could do us both a favor and remove the book from circulation entirely, deleting it from the library's system entirely so that I may keep it for my self to read during the impending storm. Bewildered and beseiged, the object of my crush did exactly that. She removed the book from the New Orleans Public Library system and shook her head. Her friend and coworker saw the exchange, checking me out as she checked out the books I planned to return. I brought my now-weeping grandmother to the checkout desk, careful to conceal my holdings. Grandmother checked out. Ivan went to Mobile. I got drunk and thought about the librarian-in-training, who had evacuated with her boyfriend, and carelessly left the rare first edition on the floor. The dust jacket's plastic covering protected it from my red wine when I finally passed out, after an aimless jaunt through the empty city, complete with a free ride in a streetcar (one-way, alas).

Two weeks later, Jonathan Lethem came to New Orleans to read from his then-newest novel, Fortress of Solitude. I presented to Mr. Lethem a few used copies of his works I had collected and enjoyed. I also brought to him a just-purchased copy of his newest work. In the middle of the used books, I snuck in the stolen tome. He was aghast at the sight of it, stating firstly that he could not sign it, as it was already signed by him! This refusal incited an immediate and infinite barrage of questions regarding identity and authenticity and the Law and reputation and repetition. Kafka would have smiled, or perhaps smacked Max Brod for burning his works (incidentally, I did ask Mr. Lethem about that posthumous-publication legend and he assured me that Kafka did not at all wish for his lifeworks to be destroyed by fire, as "no true artist would ever want that, and Kafka was a true artist" (paraphrased from memory)) so Lethem was already aware that I was a trouble maker, as I expressed dissatisfaction with his dismissal of the legend. I heckled him.

He would not sign the book, not again. He offered a limp rationale that the book was the property of the parish and that the Robert E. Smith Regional library might not want a second signature of his on their copy. I explained to him how I had saved the book from Ivan, due to it having been once the property of the library. And that as the new owner of the book, I did indeed want this book signed again. The owner of the bookstore where the signing was taking place began to step in, stating that she had friends in the library who would be outraged to find their holdings being stolen. She wanted to know how I did it. Being a true moron, I stated that I had a friend on the inside. The bookstore owner grabbed the copy from Mr. Lethem, who seemed relieved to no longer be holding the book he had once signed so many years ago, when he signed 500 of the damned things in one go. I grabbed the book from her, then took my stack of used Lethem books. I left the Fortress of Solitude. It was paid for, but it was too hefty and I did not wish to be encumbered any further. Quickly I made my way out and back to the safety of a nearby cafe, where I telephoned my aunt to rescue me. She seemed surprised that the reading was done so quickly.

Two weeks later, the librarian-in-training is removed from the staff of the Smith Regional. She begins sending me hateful messages via text and livejournal, cursing me for causing her to waste two years of her life and thousands of dollars on library school.

Two years later, Hurricane Katrina destroys most of the books in the Smith Regional, along with myriad homes—the one that was my grandmother's among those left in soggy ruins.

Nine years after that, I brought that same book back to New Orleans, with the intention of leaving it in the book depository. Having only scant time in the city, I chose to "forget" to do the right thing. The following summer, I mailed the book to the central library of New Orleans. Signature confirmation requested &amp; no return address.

original review: Some of the pieces are stronger than others. It's a cute concept of a book, worth seeking out if you like Kafka or Lethem (chances are if you really like one, you'll like the other).