Rating: 3/5

And the enjoyment drops again... The Westlands series is certainly a bit up and down. On the other hand, the downs are not really that low and A Time of War is perfectly enjoyable, advances the greater story, and sets us up for the final book very well. It has its own resolution and plot points and it is does what it needs to in terms of the wider series. However, it just lacks a lot of what elevated the previous book, and that is a shame.

There is a lot less focus on some of the more interesting characters who were introduced in Omens, with them largely becoming background figures who are more plot devices than characters, or just disappearing entirely. One of the more interesting historical plot lines gets dropped again. Presumably it will become important enough to revisit again at some point, but apparently not here. 

We do get to explore the wider world rather more, which is always interesting. This does come at the expense of once again a focus on the character of Rhodry... Who I have become really rather bored with. He is so moody and broody, and so handsome and tender, and slaps women just the right way, and holds their hands and clasps them to his manly elven slender muscly chest in passionate embraces, drenched in the blood of his enemies as he laughs insanely at death, his one true love... Of course any woman who meets him is going to get wet and want to get down with him within minutes of meeting him. 

To be fair, Kerr does not quite take it to this level of pastiche that I am implying, but she skirts very close to it, and the real problem is that I can see this image in her mind when she is writing and her (or an editor) reigning it back. I do feel that the character has developed and changed over the years, but at the same time is very much still true to what he was. I feel that some of the exploration of the idea of a life longer than others being a curse is explored well, and the amount of death and blood the character has seen has really taken its toll. The cracks are beginning to show, and we get the impression that his wyrd holds yet more things in store for him... which is all very well, but frankly I am a bit over this character. Unfortunately, when we start having flash backs to other times and incarnations, and those actually just include a younger version of Rhodry acting even more like a dick, while this underscores the changes the years have wrought in him, it fails to give any break from him.

I think following the next in the series and the conclusion to this cycle, I shall take a break from reading these for a while to let my irritation at the character pass. I had originally been planning to read the next six or so directly after as well to aid in keeping names familiar and events straight. However, there are a couple of downsides to this. One is I am noticing literal cut and paste writing in Kerr's prose from book to book, which I would not have if there were a year or more between reading each instalment. The second, and stronger downside, is Rhodry bloat. I am just getting sick of reading about this character and would like more focus elsewhere... particularly frustrating when there are actually more interesting characters in the story.