Rating: 3/5

Picking up a couple of months after the events of The Snatch (the first book in the series) The Vanished reintroduces us to the Nameless Detective. His health is still causing him concern and his insistence on pursuing his career as a private detective has cost him a relationship but he remains dedicated to his job.

For the sake of simplicity, from this point on I will be referring to the detective simply as Nameless.

The case that presents itself here is a missing person, Roy Sands, a retired soldier who was heading home to marry his fiancé when he fell off the radar. Nameless is hired to try to find out what happened to Sands between the time he left his base in Germany and the last time he contacted someone while he was on his way home in California.

The result is an investigation that gradually grows in complexity as the detective worries away at the scant threads of clues that he starts with. The search takes Nameless north from San Francisco to Eugene which is the last known place in which Sands was spotted. This, in turn, sends him off to Germany as he bids to try to turn up any skerrick of a clue.

Ultimately, the scant pieces of information he can find out about the man returns him Stateside. Through all of this he picks up bits and pieces of information from Sands’ three army buddies.

It is through one of these army buddies that Nameless meets Cheryl, the sister of one of them and a relationship quickly develops that is based around a certain mutual loneliness and desperation. It is this part of the story that feels the most compelling and provides an earnest fascination about the detective.

Although this is only the second book in what would become an extremely long-running series, there are signs of what is to come. Nameless is dogged and determined, tough and sincere and has a sharp mind that misses very little. All of these qualities are put to good use in this outing where clues are sifted, examined and either discarded or stowed away to be part of the overall completed picture.

This reads as a pretty standard detective story with the clues determining the direction and pace of the story. To that end, the story does tend to creep along for the first half before ramping up to a more feverish and confronting finale. Clearly the main character is a work in progress with enough intrigue to be interesting and likable.