Rating: 3/5

I've read a good deal of Larry Niven over the years. I lost faith when he was writing his fascist military books together with Jerry Pournelle but I got this from a friend and it was worth a few hours reading. There are some pretty wild ideas but most of the stories are so easily forgettable I had forgotten the ones in the beginning by the time I reached the end. I didn't hurry. What's the point of a short-story collection if you can't drag it out. 

All the Myriad Ways refers to the theory of the multiverse in which every decision everyone faces spawns a new universe. Niven puts a couple of spins on this. It it's proved true, for example, what's the point - of anything? You live, you die, you're happy, you're not - if not here then somewhere you are and are the opposite.

There is a sword and sorcery story which foretells his series that begins with The Magic Goes Away. I assume, I haven't read those but have heard it referenced and that is in fact what is happening in an ancient world of sorcery. 

The most famous story is no doubt Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex in which Niven points out the difficulties of Superman ever having children with a human woman - Lois, for exampel. Mr Niven assumes that all of Superman is super so that each of his sperms would batter its way into her egg which wouldn't matter really as his ejaculation would blow off the top of her head. 

There's a long essay - lecture - on teleportation and another on time-travel, both based on physics (as we know it) and neither very edifying or exciting. Better to read fiction!

Not being a dummy Niven saves the best for last. The final three stories are all unique and exciting. In Inconstant Moon he shows us, among other things, how a writer can hoodwink a reader. First presenting an argument for the sun going nova. As someone who has read a deal of popular astronomy I know this is balderdash. Our sun is not the type to go nova, something which Niven later confirms. It does make a good story though.

In What Can you Say about Chocolate Covered Manhole Covers? he invites us into the world of an intellectual elite and then shifts it completely. What if all creation myths were true?

Finally in Becalmed in Hell he takes us to Venus to discuss how things work, or don't work, in the future in an atmosphere of "searing black calm". Not a pleasant place but an interesting environment for us to meet two humans in trouble. Or are they? Human I mean, they are absolutely in deep trouble.

Quite a bit of fun, actually.