Rating: 5/5

"The world of trucks isn't as real to me as the world on the other side of time."

This one had a unicorn!

Okay, maybe not that  unicorn.

I had to turn off my adult, analytical brain, and access the child deep down inside me, the one that holds the capacity to wonder, to believe, and to learn, because the corruption of past has not tainted it. In other words, I had to let go of all I think I know. It provided an awesome experience! I remember the awesomeness and wonder of reading these as a child. I hope to contact that mind of innocence again.

I remember, as a kid, I had frequent panic attacks. I didn't know it then, but I believe philosophers would refer to this as existential dread. I lay in bed at night (I remember the first time with vividness), and would think, and imagine. What if nothing existed. What if color did not exist, no black, no white, no something to contrast with nothing. Nothing. I felt my mind go somewhere else, and it terrified me, like I was losing my reality, losing my existence. Abnormal? Maybe. After all these years, I realized I didn't just make up those thoughts. I read them in this book. It amazes me the impact books can make on the human mind, especially the mind of a child.

The story had that "feeling" I love, that otherness of reality, what Tolkien referred to as "suspended disbelief." I think something more lies within that feeling, something real. Again, abnormal? Maybe. I can tell you, though, I like it, and I want to be there. In fact, I want to stay there. Let's be honest, this reality we live in can beat you down and scatter your blood to the four winds. Its nice to go somewhere else for awhile. It's nice to believe in another, better world- some where, some place, maybe beyond world, beyond place, beyond time. I remember criticizing Borges in my heart because he didn't know if he existed. Now look at me. I should have criticized myself. Ignorance keeps us believing the reality we know, what we see, feel, touch, experience. We feel fine as long as we don't get uncomfortable with something we don't understand. Then, fear....

So, the basic story-line: Famous Dad scientist gets a call from the President of the U.S. World War Three, and the end comes tomorrow. Sister's mother in law gives a poem called a rune, used throughout the novel. Charles goes to the rock in the field outside. Unicorn picks him up and takes him to several points in time to change the "might-have-been." This ties in with the end of the world with a grand crisis and resolution.

"He rode a Gaudior who had become as tiny as a dragonfly, rode among the fireflies, joining their brilliant dance, twinkling, blinking, shooting over the star-watching rock, over the valley, singing their song, and he was singing too, and he was himself, and yet he was all he had learned...And he rode a Gaudior who had become as large as a constellation, rode among the galaxies, and he was himself, and he was also Madoc...flying through showers of stars, caught up in the joy of the music of the spheres... part of the harmony, part of the joy."

Can you feel that? Can you believe it?

Part of the Trifid Nebula, The Unicorn