Rating: 4/5

First posting 6/11/2014 for A Question of Upbringing
Second posting 7/29/2014 for A Buyer's Market
Final Posting 8/19/2014 for The Acceptance World

This edition includes the first three books of the 12-volume series. I'll "review" them individually, as that is how I'm reading them.

A Question of Upbringing introduces us to who I assume will be the four main characters throughout the series. It is told in the first person by Jenkins (first name as yet unknown) and begins in "about the year 1921." The "boys" are apparently in the last years of public school. Widmerpool is at least a year older than Stringham, Templer, and Jenkins. Each has sufficient family resources to be in public school, but the differences are apparent.

There is not much plot, just a telling of life as it happens. I don't expect the series to be very deep, nor especially emotional, but a very pleasant read being the times and lives of just the sort that appeals to me.

A Buyer's Market tells us the narrator is Nicholas "Nick" Jenkins. That might have been in the first story and I missed it. The boys are now definitely men and out in the world. I think these will just be a pleasant interlude to heavier reading. I think they are on the 1001 list because of the insight into this wealthier class of people in the years between the wars and a way of life that probably no longer exists.

The Acceptance World is the final installment in this first 3-volume book of the series. I feel as if I'm settling into Nick Jenkins telling his story. He makes observations about people - and he knows a lot of them. Their personalities are varied. They are mostly people who are somewhat affluent, or come from affluent families. His characters try to keep up the appearance of affluence, even when they no longer have any real hope of being such. This story takes place in the Depression, or the slump. Jenkins is a writer - yes, this is semi-autobiographical - and his contacts for the most part move in the world of letters and art.

I'm giving it 4 stars at this point, but I think it resides at the lower part of that group. I look forward to the rest of the series, although I may have to lay it aside for a few months.