Rating: 3/5

#2013-1

So as reading this book some of well-known superheroes are proved either impossible or probable, scientifically of course. Some hardcore geeks might defend their heroes. But Mia tends to go for weirdos the likes of Batman, seriously guy who hides behind mask and lives two different lives definitely has some issues, then Hawkeye, more because of the archery -Robin Hood was her first book along with Jane Eyre- and the fact that it's Jeremy Renner who portrays him.

Oh she's still falling head over heels to that Green Arrow bloke from Smallville series, I think he's in the show only for a while and it's quite funny as Mia, usually, despise anything Green hence the Hulk in not in the lovelist. The X-Men guys quite okay yet I think she likes Scott summers's glass and the fact that his eyes are leathal, and that Rémy LeBeau ... I'd rather not talk about him and yes the weirdos list can go on and on.

Talking about superheroes and antiheroes is fun, especially when most of characters are basically insane and well egomaniacs -they can't stand each others-. Superman is not that cool, he's TOO perfect and now scientifically proven, he's impossible ha! Does he ever sweat? Come on there's always something about sweat, body odor and ... anyway then there's Flash, another impossible character since 'Nobody can move faster than the speed of light' (p. 128). 

The amazing revelation is about the Amazing Spider-Man who's actually not that amazing. His fans won't like the chapter, might even argue till their last breath but hey if you come to think about it there's something phony about him. I concure that it's kind of fun watching him swing around in a high-poppulated city with his phony err artificial web.

This book is a perfect start for the new year, now it's 2013, despite written back in 2002. Who ever thought that Mia is a geek!

PS. Mia is considering to start re-reading Donald Duck adventures. Long live the Duck Man, the real deal hero.

***

Buku menarik yang membahas setiap karakter superhero terkenal dari sisi sains. Seru juga ketika fakta-fakta sains dibeberkan sehingga jelas sekali beberapa karakter superhero yang kita kenal sejak masa kecil, hingga dewasa sekarang pun, sebenarnya sangat tidak mungkin ada. Beberapa kejanggalan dipaparkan dengan apik, dan hey bahkan aku yang tidak terlalu ehem berhasil di lab kimia dan fisika bisa menikmatinya loh.