Rating: 3/5

3 stars. The first time I read this, I wasn’t impressed. I didn’t like the characters, I was bothered by the storyline, and I didn’t fully understand what was going on. Upon reread, I enjoyed this much more! I adapted the method of reading the play on my own (no edits, comments, nothing) and then reading a modern translation on LitCharts (https://www.litcharts.com/shakesclear...). I was thrilled to find I understood 98% of the play, and the few bits I missed were mostly due to obscure words/puns or very convoluted speeches.

So, typically Shakespeare, it's not exactly clean. (#understatement) The whole plot consists of Bertram being determined not to accept Helena as his wife, and then trying to seduce Diana, who partners with Helena to deceive Bertram by having him be with Helena when he thinks he’s with Diana, so that Helena can fall pregnant and make him accept her as his wife. There’s also quite a few bawdy jokes from the clown. I wasn’t a fan of Bertram at all (#anotherunderstatement) because he’s stubborn, stupid, and unscrupulous. I liked Lafeu and the King and the Countess; Parolles was hilarious despite being an absolute donkey; Helena I was pretty indifferent to—Diana + her mother as well. 

There is no real moral to the play, but rather an ironic display of deceit. Helena claims that “all's well that ends well; still the fine's the crown; whate'er the course, the end is the renown,” essentially, “the end justifies the means,” and thus she and Diana assure themselves they’re in the right for deceiving Bertram… while he, when deceiving Helena, had assured her that it was for the best. There’s a continual overlap of deceit, strongly shown in the scene where the lords deceive Parolles to prove that he’s deceiving them. It certainly leaves you thinking about the value of “the end justifies the means” in the actual end. 

As always with Shakespeare, there’s amazing writing, and absolutely delightful puns. The whole scene with Parolles’ kidnapping is hilarious, and Lafeu has plenty of excellent lines as well (so does the clown, when he’s not being nasty). Also, the King has a pretty great speech about nobility!

Overall, not my favourite, but I’m glad I reread it and I’d do it again. Maybe with censoring next time though.

*Quotes to come.*