Rating: 5/5

I listened to an excellent audio streaming version of this, narrated perfectly by Johanna Ward. All E. Nesbit should be narrated by Johanna Ward; her voice encapsulates all that is droll and witty and excellent about Nesbit. Elsewhere, I've seen The Magic World described as "influential" and I have to agree. I'm not a scholar of either fantasy, or children's literature, but this collection of short stories seems to me to be the homo erectus from which all modern fantasy, particularly urban fantasy, sprang forth. Nesbit has a boy and a cat trading places, in a trope that became in various ways both The Sword in the Stone and Freaky Friday (and even Disney's The Shaggy Dog). In this story, she also talks about how the boy and cat have to follow magical laws, or destroy the universe, another concept that will come up in various ways again and again in modern fantasy (J.K. Rowling, Diana Wynne Jones) In "Accidental Magic" she has a lonely boy at a horrid boarding school use magic to travel back in time, to the building of Stonehenge, with a just a touch of horror; again, this trope will be used to great effect in novels of the future. Nesbit always uses the same narrative voice; it's a close, personal third person, in which the author injects herself again and again with drolly, witty asides that invite the reader, particularly a young reader, in, as if sharing really delicious secrets. It's this narrative voice that both makes Nesbit sound so modern, and also makes her so different and accessible from other fantasy or books for children around the same time; there are no morals either (see the end of "The Mixed Mine" for Nesbit thumbing her nose at morals at the end of stories). You can't read Nesbit and these stories, without thinking again and again of C.S. Lewis; it's obvious he patterned the narrative voice of his Chronicles after his favorite childhood author; there is even a wardrobe in Nesbit that magically takes a young girl to another world; and a White Witch in another story, although Nesbit's White Witch isn't as evil (and thus less interesting) as Lewis's scary White Witch. Nesbit has a magician as well, but Lewis's magician is more of a bumbler; I think you'd find more Nesbittian magicians in Diana Wynne Jones. If you love fantasy, particularly urban fantasy, then take a look at this collection of short stories.