Rating: 4/5

Well, this was fun, well-told and well-written. 3.5

Gist: a noblewoman sick of singing for her supper with social-climbing Cit relatives who've taken her and her mother in for their own advantage has struck out on her own and become a much-in-demand governess. She's hired to bring twin hellions into line before they're packed off to Harrow by their guardian in absentia, a baron who served in the navy as a captain. His wards, a young marquis and his twin brother, raise rumpuses in the isolation of their Devon home but it's time to civilize them. Anne, the governess, has just the knack needed, challenging them with unorthodox lessons in survival, natural history and scientific observation. She also develops a strong antipathy for the feckless, no-show guardian. 

The captain has yet to meet with the purported governess, but he regards her with distaste, assuming she is a light-skirt hired by his useless fribble of a cousin(?) for his own pleasure. This dandy has been hiring and firing staff in his absence with his tacit permission. He has also been gambling and spending money so freely, the good captain has hired runners to determine if he's embezzling income from the young marquis' estates. So H/h are on a collision course and each is supremely well equipped to raze the other to the ground if need be.

By chance, the very tall governess lays eyes on a very, very tall man in town and is smacked upside the head by love at first sight. Ditto for him. This bit was the only thing I wished wasn't so. But they have yet to meet officially. When they do, sparks fly.

So the three lords of the title are not rivals for her (there are two friends of the captain introduced in the beginning that led me astray) but rather the two young boys who charm and challenge her and the third, big lord she can't seem to ignore.

There are several baddies stirring up trouble to add to the plot. The beginning was delightful, the rest fine but not up to the great start for me.

Overall impression, I enjoyed reading this but I'm not tempted to re-read it, so not a 5-star book for me.