Rating: 5/5

In this sequel to their best-selling The Light and the Glory, authors Peter Marshall and David Manuel cover that fragile time in America’s history from 1787, after the 1783 Treaty of Paris, to 1837, as the country plunged westward and expanded across a continent. During this time, the infant nation faced many challenges and overcame her growing pains by clinging to the Christian faith that was her heritage. The 444 paged paperback includes an index, making it an excellent reference work for homeschooled high school students studying American history. Marshall and Manuel’s way of presentation is better and more exciting than fiction, making learning about the history of the U. S..A. fun. However, everything that is written is factually documented by copious footnotes, and there is a complete bibliography of source materials. Of course, this book looks at our nation’s past from the standpoint of providential history. All three books in this series develop a historical view of the United States from a Biblical perspective. 

 The authors may attribute many things to God which we might question, but it is still good to consider history in the light of God’s will. Who can successfully deny that God may well have had a plan for America in mind? Much of From Sea To Shining Sea deals with America's attitude toward slavery, but it is by no means only about this subject. It also discusses the shameful treatment of the Indians (Native Americans). And it is even-handed in its approach, pointing out both the strengths and the weaknesses of key figures and policies. As I said in my review of The Light and the Glory, I may not fully agree with every conclusion presented by those who espouse providential history, but it is certainly refreshing to read of historic events without the Christian point of view being purged. Marshall and Manuel’s work is highly recommend for all who enjoy history and especially for those who want to learn more about America's Biblical roots. The sequel is entitled Sounding Forth The Trumpet and covers the period of 1837 to 1865.