Rating: 4/5

The miracle behind this beloved Christmas classic occurred, appropriately enough, at a department store - with a story idea that occurred to screenwriter Valentine Davies when he was standing in a long queue. One can imagine the premise taking shape in Davies’ mind: What if Santa Claus – the real Santa Claus – was working as a department-store Santa in modern times?

The Santa Claus story that Davies crafted, and presented to producers at 20th Century-Fox, became Miracle on 34th Street (1947), one of the best-loved holiday films of all time. This novella version of the story, published in tandem with the film’s original release, was a best-seller in its day; and for modern readers, it should provide a pleasant return to the compelling magic of the original cinematic story.

As in the film, the story’s protagonist is one Kris Kringle, who lives at a “home for the aged” in Great Neck on Long Island. When a combination of circumstances makes it necessary for Kris to vacate his place at the home, he finds his way down to New York City, and happens to be there just when the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade is in danger of being ruined by a drunken man who is in no shape to portray Santa Claus. Kris reluctantly agrees to portray Santa, to the considerable relief of Doris Walker, the Macy’s employee who is in charge of the parade.

Bitter life experience, including a divorce, has taught Doris to take a strictly practical approach to life, and to raise her daughter Susan in the same spirit. She is not harsh or cruel; she is simply a good person who has been wounded by life, and is determined not to let anyone hurt her daughter in the same way. Toward that end, she has raised Susan not to believe in anything that is not “real” – including Santa Claus.

Doris’s neighbour Fred, a young lawyer, is concerned about this aspect of Susan’s outlook, and is privately convinced that he and Doris could make a good match. Susan, however, politely rejects any attempts at the beginnings of courtship, though she sees that Fred plays a positive role in Susan’s life.

Kris Kringle eventually becomes the store Santa for Macy’s, in spite of Susan’s misgivings about him – on his Macy’s employment form, he lists his age as being “As old as my tongue and a little bit older than my teeth” (p. 18). Once he is on board at Macy’s, he tells Doris of his concerns regarding what he sees happening to the celebration of Christmas:

“You know, Mrs. Walker,” he said, “for the past fifty years or so I’ve been more and more worried about Christmas. It seems we’re all so busy trying to beat the other fellow in making things go faster and look shinier and cost less, that Christmas and I are sort of getting lost in the shuffle.”

“Oh, I don’t think so,” said Doris. “Christmas is still Christmas.”

“No,” said Mr. Kringle, shaking his head. “Christmas isn’t just a day. It’s a frame of mind. That’s what’s been changing. That’s why I’m glad I’m here – because maybe I can do something about it.” (pp. 27-29)

One of Kris’s goals is to help both Doris and Susan overcome their cynicism about Santa Claus, Christmas, and life in general. Fans of the movie Miracle on 34th Street will remember the moving scene when Kris, in his role as the department-store Santa for Macy’s meets a little Dutch girl, from Rotterdam, who has been adopted by an American family. The face of the solemn little girl, a (presumably orphaned) survivor of the Second World War, lights up when Kris greets her in perfect Dutch. Kris talks with her in Dutch about her Christmas wishes, and even sings a Dutch Christmas song with her. The girl’s adoptive mother looks on, her face aglow with happiness and gratitude.

No, I am not getting teary-eyed with my recollections of that scene. I’m not crying, you’re crying!

The scene doesn’t quite pack the same emotional punch in print that it does on screen, but Davies emphasizes how, when Susan sees Kris with the Dutch girl, “There was something very real about this Santa Claus and it puzzled her considerably” (p. 23).

Eventually, Kris gets Susan to at least talk about the concept of a Santa Claus who grants children’ Christmas wishes. Susan says that what she wants for Christmas is a nice suburban house in Long Island, with a yard to play in. Kris points out that “if every child got what he wanted right away, life wouldn’t be half so much fun now, would it? Sometimes it’s better to keep on wishing, so that when you get your wish, you really appreciate it! In other words…there are lots of reasons why every wish a child makes can’t come true” (p. 46). Susan tends to think that Kris is just a nice old man with a big white beard.

The crisis of Miracle on 34th Street occurs when Kris is accused of assault by Macy’s arrogant store psychologist, Albert Sawyer, and faces the prospect of institutionalization. In the book, the basis for Sawyer’s accusations against Kris is handled somewhat better than in the original movie. I have never liked the moment in the film when Kris, angry that Sawyer has been subjecting a young and naïve Macy’s employee to Sawyer’s armchair psychoanalysis, hits Sawyer with his cane; it seems decidedly out of character for Kris, and – let’s face it – it is a case of assault and battery, no matter how much we may dislike Sawyer.

In the book, by contrast, it turns out that Macy’s has a “Personnel Study Group,” chaired by Doris, that meets regularly for lectures and discussions. And the study group’s agenda for the evening of December 18, at the Neighborhood Center Auditorium in Greenwich Village, has been set by Mr. Albert Sawyer, and the subject is “Exploding the Myth of Santa Claus” (p. 60). 

One week before Christmas? Really? Really?

Kris attends the meeting, and eloquently refutes Sawyer’s poorly made points, and in response Sawyer makes as if to assault Kris. “Kris raised his cane, prepared to defend himself, and Sawyer grabbed for it furiously. With a quick tug, Mr. Kringle pulled it free. As he did so, the stick grazed Mr. Sawyer’s cheek” (p. 66). Sawyer, who is clearly in the wrong, nonetheless has a basis for accusing Kris of violent tendencies.

Confined to the Bellevue mental hospital, a despairing Kris is visited by Fred. Kris has deliberately given wrong answers to the clinicians’ questions, and seems perfectly ready to be committed. When Fred, who wants Kris to fight for his freedom points out that even Doris is starting to believe in him, Kris replies that “It’s not just Doris. It’s men like Sawyer. He’s dishonest, selfish, vicious. Yet he’s called normal and I’m not. He’s out there and I’m in here. Well, if he’s normal, I don’t want to be. I’d rather stay in here!” (p. 75). It reminded me of Henry David Thoreau’s words in Civil Disobedience: under a government that imprisons anyone unjustly, the only place for a just person is likewise a prison.

News of Kris’s arrest goes nationwide – understandably, as Kris’s willingness to send parents to stores other than Macy’s for the right Christmas gift has prompted Macy’s, and Gimbel’s, and every other store in New York City to adopt the same sort of goodwill policy. A New York radio columnist praises “Kris Kringle, the little Santa Claus who alone is responsible for the wave of good will which has swept this city”, denounces the charges of lunacy against him, and concludes that “If bringing back the true Christmas spirit is a form of insanity, then these are very strange times, indeed!” (p. 83) 

Fred commits to represent Kris at Kris’s commitment hearing, even though doing so means giving up his post at a prestigious New York law firm – and imperiling his increasingly close relationship with Doris. The odds against Kris and Fred seem strong.

But, as in the film, Susan, who feels sad for Kris, writes him a letter, addressed to him at the New York County Court House. It reads, “DEAR MR. KRINGLE, I MISS YOU VERY MUCH AND I HOPE I WILL SEE YOU SOON. I KNOW IT WILL COME OUT ALL RIGHT. I BELIEVE YOU ARE SANTA CLAUS AND I HOPE YOU ARE NOT SAD. YOURS TRULY, SUSAN WALKER.” And Doris adds, as a postscript, the words “I believe in you, too. Doris.”

Doris’s growth and change is emphasized in passages like this one:

“Faith is believing in things when common sense tells you not to,” said Doris, echoing Fred’s words as much as herself to Susan. The child didn’t quite understand, so Doris went on. If you didn’t believe, you never would get the things you really wanted. Doris had learned that, to her bitter sorrow. Anyone could have faith when everything was fine. But real faith meant believing, rain or shine. (p. 117)

And Susan’s sweet little letter to Kris Kringle, at the New York County Court House, turns out to be the catalyst that moves Miracle on 34th Street toward its Christmas-magic happy ending.

Valentine Davies was just 55 years old when he died at his home in Malibu, California. “Marian Saphro, who was Davies’ secretary at the time of his death, recalled many years later that her boss passed away in the midst of a hearty laugh. Somehow, it seems only fitting for the man who gave the world Kris Kringle, with all his joy and magic.” He was president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts &amp; Sciences at the time of his death, and the Writers’ Guild of America “now presents the Valentine Davies Award as one of its highest honors” (p. 125).

Would Miracle on 34th Street the book have done as well without Miracle on 34th Street the movie? Perhaps not. But I suspect that the movie’s many fans will turn to this book with the same sort of enjoyment that they have derived from the classic film. Merry Christmas to all, and to all a good day!