Rating: 1/5

Faute de pouvoir donner cinq étrons, je le donne une étoile.
I am stunned that one of my favourite authors could have written a book this bad. I read it on the heels of his brother's Corfu Trilogy expecting an exposition on the island similar to that on Cyprus found in "Better Lemons." Instead I got a grotesque mishmash of recollections and preposterous ideas. The book is dominated by descriptions of alcoholic conversations involving Durrell and the other members of his bohemian circle on Corfu that he frequented between 1938 and 1941.
The primary leitmotif of Corfu as Prospero's island is typical of the book's fundamental problems. After several rounds of drinks, one of Durrell's friends puts forward the idea that Corfu is a good match for the island on which Shakespeare's Tempest takes place. Shakespeare however never left England during is life and certainly never visited the Greek archipelago. The idea that he had been thinking of Corfu as the location for the Tempest was no more that the witticism of an inebriated person and certainly lacks the substance to carry to a book.
Durrell's efforts to delve into the folklore and traditions of the Corfiots are nothing short of disastrous. At one point he informs the reader that the shepherds frequently have favourite ewes with which they perform sexual acts. The source for this tasteless revelation again appears to have been drunken chatter heard in a taverna. Like his good friend Henry Miller is capable of passages in dreadful taste.
The sad thing is that Durrell knew both Corfu and Greek culture very well. Amongst other things he was the translator of Seferis and other Greek authors. Unfortunately, none of Durrell's remarkable understanding and erudition can be found in this appalling work.
For me the last chapter which is constituted of extracts from the letters written in Corfu by the 19th century English poet and illustrator Edward Lear constitutes the low point of the book. Lear's correspondence offers no insight into anything at all and one suspects that Durrell included the material in the book in order to achieve a certain minimum number of pages for the publisher.