Rating: 3/5

RE Born of the Wind - this is pretty standard fare for the Commonwealth of Pargeter- young, beautiful-but-martyred by her relatives h and very physical, threatening, bullying H. As we are in Australia, the martyring and the bullying take place on the respective sheep stations of the h and H. 

We get a bit of local guidebook colour and we are also introduced to the works of Banjo Patterson - the Australian poet who wrote Waltzing Matilda and MP shares part of his other poem 'Clancy of the Overflow'. as well. The really big thing about this book is that MP finally confirms that her characters are in contact with aliens - a rumor that has long been whispered in the other provinces of HPLandia. 

The story starts with our angry H invading the h's home and shaking her because her brother is going out with his sister. (As will all MP book, there is a lot of physical shakes and slaps from the H).

 The H is rich and the h's family is not. The h lives with her grandfather and brother on a sheep station. The grandfather pressured them to move to Au from England after the h's dad had some financial scandal and died. The brother hates the whole place, but the h likes it and learns everything she can about it. When the grandfather died he left the station to the h's brother - thinking that would force him to stay. The h gets left out of the inheritance and yet she was the one who worked the station.

The H threatens the h that if her brother messes up his sister's life, he will ruin her. This is one of the many contradictions that abound in the MP Commonwealth of HPLandia - every single male in the book thinks that women have no power and no place outside of being bed warmers and objects d'art for the home, but the H expects the h to reign in her brother or he will destroy her.

By his own acknowledgement the h is merely a weak woman - How is she supposed to stop a big man from doing what ever he wants? -- Which is another thing the H demonstrates with regularity in this book - he is continually picking her up and forcing kisses on her. The h is madly in love tho, so for her just the thought of punishing kisses, being flung around like a small sheep and tossed onto bales of hay only make life more exciting.

Eventually the brother helps the H's sis marry another guy and he takes off for England. The h is left alone to run the station and the H keeps interfering and the station workers follow the H's orders and basically ignore the h - she still continues to work with them and doesn't tell the H that her brother is gone for good. She is afraid of what the H might do. The H's actions finally coalesce when we find him escorting a more socially acceptable OW around and he tells the h that she is good for fling but not for marriage. 

In all MP books the h's get thinner and more malnourished as the torture of loving the H but him hating her goes on - and this one is no exception. The h continues to work the station, feels increasing conflicted by not telling the H that her brother is gone permanently and by her fainting feelings of overwhelming passion for the H that turn into pain when she sees him with his OW. 

After the OW pays a warning-the-h-off-her-H-territory visit at the h's home and the H tries another forcible seduction of the h but gets diverted, the H goes off to fight bush fires. The h anxiously waits for news and is told he has been injured. She then chastises herself for not giving in to what the H wants (which as far as we know is to use her and dump her), and vows to be what ever he wants. 

When the H returns, slightly injured but in one piece, the h goes to his house in the middle of the night. As the H is flinging her on the bed in the act of passion (and yes, MP uses the word fling here), the definitive proof of alien contact comes when the h thinks she is being possessed by an alien. The lurve clubbing provides more magical possession but the h wakes up and the alien contact is gone. She feels ashamed of herself and sneaks off home.

The H eventually catches up with her, decides to buy the h's station and marry her, and with mutual avowings of eternal love, the alien mind control lock is complete and HEA's are all around. 

After reading this one I was sorta glad to have the rumor confirmed, maybe MP decided the truth should be told at last - cause really nothing else but Alien Mind Control could explain all the contradictions and last minute changes in main character behavior's that usually abound in MP's backlist. 

Now that we voyagers in HPlandia know the real facts behind H and h's actions in her books, the stories have much more believabilty and the HEA's are much more assured - cause everybody knows that once the alien mind lock is in effect, there is no room for reverting to former behavior. Overall I confess I personally am very relieved by this announcement, as I was starting to doubt my capacity for logical thinking every time I picked up a MP book.