Rating: 4/5

4.5 *

THE MOVIE
I first learned that E.L. Doctorow had written a Western novel when I saw the film adaptation on television many years ago.
 
I always read the movie credits (doesn’t everybody?) and back then they were much easier to read. That was because there were fewer of them (no gaffers, grips, or best boys), the lettering was much larger, and they were not scrolled.

So, when I read the credits for Welcome to Hard Times, I saw that it was based on a novel by E.L. Doctorow, which was published in 1960. Although the film was released in 1967, it had to be after 1975 that I saw it, because until the publication of Ragtime that year I had never heard of Doctorow, even though I later learned that it was his fourth novel.

To be honest, despite a stellar cast headed by Henry Fonda, I didn’t think much of the movie. Maybe the problem was due to something else I recently learned. The film was originally planned as a TV movie. However, because of some rather graphic violence it was instead released as a theatrical film. Since I viewed the film on commercial TV (cable-TV arrived rather late in our area), the version I saw had to have had whole scenes edited from it.

But the problem could have been Doctorow’s original story; he would not have been the first easterner who didn’t understand the historical West. However, my interest was piqued by the fact that I knew that Doctorow never wrote another Western and, even more than that, I later learned that it had been his debut novel. I found it ironic that this easterner (born in The Bronx and died in New York), a philosophy major no less, had begun his career as a novelist with a story set in the Dakota Territory.
 
Ever since seeing the film I have been on the lookout for a copy of the book. Oh, I could have ordered a copy from Amazon, but being stingy tight frugal, I didn’t want to pay ten dollars or more for a paperback when I anticipated that I wouldn’t even like the book. Then just a couple of weeks ago I found a copy at the local used bookstore for only two dollars. It had taken only forty years or so to locate one, and since I happened to have a couple of dollars on me, I bought it.

THE BOOK
Let me say right off the bat, the book is much better than the movie. Not only was a good cast wasted in the movie, so was a good story. They and Doctorow deserved better.

Beginning with the very first paragraph in which we meet the Man from Bodie, it is apparent that we aren’t in Zane Grey territory. The second paragraph takes things a step farther and we begin to realize that this is one of the vilest villains to be found in a Western novel – and I have read a lot of them. In fact, he may have no peer.

Unfortunately, there is no Gary Cooper type to make a stand at high noon and bring the bad man to heel. One man, Blue, the de facto mayor of the town, demonstrates more courage in dealing with the brute than he is given credit for, but being severely overmatched there isn’t much that he can do.

After the Man from Bodie kills six people (I think; I may have overlooked someone), he burns the town down. When he finishes the town is more cemetery than town 

These events occur in the opening pages and therefore are not spoilers. They are the first things that the reader learns about the hardscrabble town of Hard Times, Dakota Territory, and what happened to it on that day.

After the Man from Bodie departs, most of the town’s inhabitants do the same. With the destruction of the town there is nothing to keep them and the fear of the killer’s return is a good reason to skedaddle.

Blue, on the other hand, does not leave. Instead he begins a campaign of encouraging people passing through to settle down and to help him rebuild the town. And some rather diverse characters do. Hanging over the town, however, at least among the original settlers, is the fear that the Man might return to the scene of his crimes, to rape, murder, and burn once more. 

This is not a formulaic or what could be called a genre Western, the kind that down through the decades has been responsible for more published books than any other genre. Instead of a Western, it could be classified as an anti-Western. It is a book that individuals who normally shy away from Westerns might want to read.

It has hardly any stock Western characters. The main character is not a hero and, in fact, there are no heroes in the story, at least not in the traditional sense. Another important character is a prostitute, but she doesn’t have the requisite heart of gold, but one more like stone. And a boy who is orphaned when the Man From Bodie killed his father turns against his father figure who has taken him in.

It is a grim allegorical tale that pits good against evil with the odds being heavily in favor of evil. Such a conflict has been written about countless times before, but Doctorow put a new twist on it. 

_________________

“… Doctorow cleverly turns the horse opera stereotype on its head. If you are not a fan of sagebrush prose, don’t let the notion that this is a “Western” dissuade you from reading this short, intense book. This is closer to Joseph Conrad than it is Louis L’Amour.” – David Abrams, author of Fobbit and Brave Deeds (The Quivering Pen blog)