Rating: 4/5

Sorelli, a principal dancer in the beautiful, new, and fabulous Paris Opera House ( circa 1880) is angry, her dressing - room has been invaded, by half a dozen hysterical young ladies, ballet dancers. The frightened performers have seen the legendary Phantom (Ghost), claiming to have noticed a very ugly man, but well dressed in the passageway. The superstitious but brave woman, opens the door quiet slowly and takes a careful peek. The shadowy in gaslight, reddish walls give a strange ambiance, but there is nothing around, the door is quickly shut ...The new managers don't take seriously the old ones, MM. Debienne and Poligny, warnings of the Phantom, receiving them as a joke to amuse Armand Moncharmin, and Firmin Richard, such distinguished gentlemen, playing silly childish games. The duo will be sorry they did not take their advise . Christine Daae, a young Swedish singer, gives an awe inspiring performance when La Carlotta, the spoiled prima donna, lead soprano singer, at the Opera House, through illness, missed her engagement . And the "man" in box five, falls madly in love with Christine, he is the Phantom ( call him Erik) and can help her achieve stardom, maybe not with a gentle touch. Many sightings of this phantom, but he is never caught after all, how can you stop a ghost? Trapped doors, secret passageways, magic mirrors, voices inside walls from empty rooms, a lake under the opera house the intelligent Phantom, knows everything about the gigantic building. A stagehand is found hanging , lifeless below in the cellars, he had seen a flaming head no body though, flying by people , thought he was drunk; a heavy chandelier crushes a woman in the audience during a performance, and at the farewell dinner for the old managers, this man with a death mask sits down at the table. No one talks to the weird, would you ... unnerving stranger, he tells the gentlemen that Joseph Bouqet, the dead man didn't commit suicide. And vanishes as fast as he had arrived ... Raoul Vicomte de Chagny, 20, a person who knew Christine, when both were children loves her too, not surprisingly the jealous Phantom, is not happy indeed. Neither is Phillippe , the Comte de Chagny, and snobbish older brother of Raoul, isn't pleased at all either. Erik kidnaps Christine, descends deep down, under the dungeon like cellars, the monster has a house on the eerie lake. He plays on a organ, his opera that he is writing for Christine, a beautiful voice comes out of his grotesque head. Christine is curious, when the fiend is playing with his back to her, she lifts the death mask ... a hideous, unbelievable repellent, repugnant, revolting face, she faints away. Meanwhile the frantic Raoul , meets the Persian, a person everyone knows but nobody can say who he is. But immediately, Raoul trust him, trust him he must, he knows where Christine is. The Persian gives him a revolver, takes another and they walk down, into the vast, darkness of the opera house basement, to rescue Christine, first seeing a shadow moving near them, but the Phantom it is not. Then a flying face all a blazed, thundering noises rising coming closer and closer, they reach the wall and can't go any further , the strange face approaches, the sound deafening ... thousands of rats, from the blackness, the pair, await their doom... A good old-fashioned tale for people that don't take it seriously and like the atmosphere of an amusing adventure too enjoyable to be real.