Rating: 5/5

"When people ask me abstract questions about time, or space, or reincarnation, I may respond by asking whether they exercise regularly, eat a wholesome diet, get enough sleep, show kindness to others, and remember to take a slow, deep breath on occasion--because it seems important to bring our spiritual quest down to earth. Of course, there's nothing wrong with philosophical speculation. But let's not mistake conceptual thought for the spiritual practice of everyday life. After all, what does it serve to know whether angels wear earrings if we can't hold a regular job or maintain a long-term relationship? What good does it do to pray like a saint or meditate like a yogi if we are unchanged when we open our eyes? What good to attend a place of worship on Saturday or Sunday if we lack compassion on Monday?"

~ Dan Millman from Everyday Enlightenment

Dan Millman has easily been one of the biggest influences in my life.

I was given his book Way of the Peaceful Warrior almost exactly a decade ago when I was a 25- year old CEO running my first business (eteamz.com) during the dot com boom of the 90's. The market had just crashed and we were about to go from 45 employees to 14 before selling the biz. Dan's wisdom helped navigate that juncture of my life... and many since!

In fact, he was the first author I loved so much that I went out and read all of his stuff. Some of my favorites (that I think you'll also dig) include: Way of the Peaceful Warrior and Everyday Enlightenment (of course), Body Mind Mastery, The Life You Were Born to Live and Living on Purpose.

(Also, since that first read, Dan and I have gotten a chance to play some chess and share some great conversations and it's been a pleasure to see a Peaceful Warrior in action in Everyday life. :)

A former world champion gymnast and coach at Stanford and UC Berkeley, he's an awesome blend of East and West--with an unflinching focus on the PRACTICAL aspects of spirituality.

In Everyday Enlightenment, Dan explores what he calls the "Twelve Gateways to Personal Growth": Discover Your Worth; Reclaim Your Will; Energize Your Body; Manage Your Money; Tame Your Mind; Trust Your Intuition; Accept Your Emotions; Face Your Fears; Illuminate Your Shadow; Embrace Your Sexuality; Awaken Your Heart; and, Serve Your World.

I'm excited to share some of the Big Ideas:

Discover Your Worth - The 1st gateway.
"St. Nike" Was Right - Just do it!
Habits: - Desired &amp; undesired.
Carpe Punctum - Seize the moment, yo!
Daredevils - Are terrified, too.

Here's to gracefully walking thru the twelve gateways and, of course: Carpe punctum!

-----

Here's my video review:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xpfH3...

And click here to find 250+ more of my reviews:
http://bit.ly/BrianReviews

Brian