Rating: 4/5

For anyone thinking of putting James Joyce on your “must read this year” list for 2019 here are my suggestions.

BY

1.	Dubliners

Brilliantly atmospheric scraps of Irish miserablism – must read to get where JJ is coming from. 

2.	A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man

Strangely – tiresome and inessential. Bangs on about religion and more Irish miserablism and a bit too much like a portrait of the author as an insufferable young genius. 

3.	Ulysses

The essential book out of all of these. Difficult but also very funny and not impossible. FWIW my short bluffer’s guide to this truly astonishing book is here

https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

and my long review of it (chapter by chapter) is here

https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

and here

https://www.goodreads.com/story/show/...

(it’s very long)

4.	Finnegans Wake

This is really not recommended. But this is – a 10 minute excerpt (“Anna Livia Plurabelle”) read by JJ himself

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=grJC1...

I had thought, this small part being so beautiful, that FW would be another masterpiece, but the rest of it isn’t one tenth as fascinating or linguistically lovely, and it will do your brain in. The only thing I’ve been able to do with FW is parody it, rather lamely

https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

which was unnervingly easy to do once you get into the swing of it. The reader who can gain enjoyment on any level from the great mapless madhouse that is FW has my undying respect. 

ABOUT

1.	The Most Dangerous Book : The Battle For James Joyce’s Ulysses By Kevin Birmingham

By far the best book on JJ and Ulysses I ever read – you almost don’t need a real biography after this. It’s a total page turner. It’s not an analysis, it’s the story of how it was written and how it was published – long, painful and thrilling. 

2.	James Joyce : Richard Ellman

But if you do want a big biography, this is the one. 

3.	My Brother’s Keeper : Stanislaus Joyce

Or you could stick to this memoir by JJ’s faithful brother. It will make you love JJ (and Stanny) a lot more than most books will.

4.	The New Bloomsday Book : Harry Blamires

I liked this not-too-scholarly voyage round &amp; through &amp; about Ulysses better than any other analysis/interpretation

5.	The Finnegans Wake Experience : Roland McHugh

I only read one book about FW. It was this. It’s hilarious. Mr McHugh is a total obsessive with a screw loose &amp; dedicated his whole waking being to reading FW correctly and then explaining how to read FW correctly. Elastic bands are an important part of the process as I recall. I think it was self published so might be hard to track down. 

6.	James Joyce’s Odyssey : Frank Delaney
7.	James Joyce’s Dublin : Edward Quinn

These two are luxury items - gorgeous photo books full of black &amp; white pix of dear dirty Dublin as it was and I don’t think is anymore. Not essential but just a delight. 

AVOID

1.	Ulysses and Us : Declan Kiberd
2.	Ulysses on the Liffey : Richard Ellman

These two do exactly the same thing – with their jawbreakin pontificatin somnambulatin ramblin they like to make you want to find the English Literature department in your nearest university and burn it down. 

3.	Ulysses Annotated : Don Gifford

Proving that the more you know the less you understand.

***

Cocklepickers. They waded a little way in the water and, stooping, soused their bags and, lifting them again, waded out. The dog yelped running to them, reared up and pawed them, dropping on all fours, again reared up at them with mute bearish fawning. Unheeded he kept by them as they came towards the drier sand, a rag of wolf’s tongue redpanting from his jaws. His speckled body ambled ahead of them and then loped off at a calf’s gallop. The carcass lay on his path. He stopped, sniffed, stalked round it, brother, nosing closer, went round it, sniffling rapidly like a dog all over the dead dog’s bedraggled fell. Dogskull, dogsniff, eyes on the ground, moves to one great goal. Ah, poor dogsbody! Here lies poor dogsbody’s body. 
—Tatters! Out of that, you mongrel! 

"How many roads must a man walk down...."

Sorry JJ, couldn't resist.