Rating: 4/5

I read this book for my Children and youth literature course's assignment about youthbooks. I had to read two youth books which both represented a genre called new weird, which was new to me, and write an essay about them. This is the part in my essay where I discuss about the book.

I think this was the weirdest book I have ever read. Right after I read the back cover I started to think about Henry Selick's movie Coraline (2009). I haven't yet read Neil Gaiman's book to which I think the movie is based on. Gaiman's Coraline was published 2002 and The Other Side of Silence was published 1995. I don't know if the similarity is coincidence or not so I'll leave it to those to decide who have read both books.

First I wasn't so sure if I liked the book or not. At times, the narration was very vague and I couldn't keep on track. I would have liked to know more about the characters' backgrounds and their relationships to each others. But the more I read the book, the more I started to like it. It didn't reach for my favourite book, but it was really entertaining. It was shame that I had to read it in rush. 

There were a lot of elements of horror and tension. And maybe because of these, there were a little feeling of a fantasy too. I couldn't help to think how this book could turn into a cool movie. In my opinio,n this is again one of those books which would make an interesting movie if the main character's silence wouldn't be a problem. Hero speaks a lot, but not out loud. Story is told from Hero's point of view. I'm not quite sure if I understood right why Hero didn't speak. In a way the book tells the reason, but in my opinion it's a silly reason. But it might be that, I just can't understand as a whole why someone would stop talking even if they could talk. 

The realtionship between Hero's parents and their children are peculiar. The first thing you notice is that the children won't call their parents as mom and dad. They call them Annie and Mike. The family relations are very peculiar and it's very funny because mom has written a bestseller about raising the children. In the end they don't really tell you what kind of raising it is but all of the children are quite odd. I doubt some sort of a free raising. The oldest child Ginerva is very independent. She moved early to Australia, probably because she had a big fight with Annie, and she ended up crashing cars. Athol seems to be hard-working student but actually he is secretly writing a soap opera (and he is using his family as an inspiration). Sap is a cheeky little girl whose treasure (at this moment) is a book called Mrs. Byrne's dictionary of unusual obscure and preposterous words, which she quotes annoyingly in every oportunity. And then there's Hero who doesn't talk expect sometimes to Athol and who lives half in imaginary world. Dad, Mike, seems a little timid. I don't really know what he does and what is his role in the family. The age of the children are also vague. I think there was a mention of the ages but I forgot them right away and remembering them was hard because nobody acted like their age through the book. At times, they seemed very young and sometimes they seemed very old. I think Hero was 14 years old but I imagined her a lot older many times. Ginerva and Athol seemed to be in their early twenties. And Sap where somewhere between 7 and 10. And sometimes Sap seemed to be a lot younger and sometimes a lot older. The family is very loud and temperamental, and what I understood, Annie and Ginerva argue a lot and loudly. There's also a new person in this family. Ginerva has her so called stepson, Sammy, with her, a hiphopper who has lived a tough life and who rhymes with skill. I don't really understand Sammy's role in the book. He seems a little unnecessary relative to the story, although he has a big scene in the end and at time,s he is remembered but mostly he seems quite useless and invisible. 

You notice at once that Miss Credence isn't quite healthy and she's dangerous. Miss Credence is one of the most interesting characters in this book and because of her there's tension, horror and mystery. The story tells well all the different aspects, or should I say roles or even personas of Credence. She's a scary person and through the book you'll get a little subtle clues about her scary side. But the ending, the big explosion and reveal, in my opinion, came too soon and with a one big rumble. I think that youth books aren't supposed to be very thick but the author could have still feasted more with Credence and lengthen the tension and mystery.