Rating: 3/5

Two priests, friends since seminary, one traditional and now working as an administrator in the diocese, the other shrouded in controversy because he's said to be able to heal others and working in a small church filled with those who can't hear. This is the premise behind The Unspeakable by Charles L. Calia. Peter Whitmore, an administrator at the diocese is asked by the Bishop to investigate the claims of Jim Marbury being able to heal others. Peter, who knows Marbury is assigned to investigate what's going on. Marbury who claims God has stolen his voice is now mute and unable to talk, but Peter is able to converse because he too knows sign language. The story revolves around a "miracle" Marbury claims happened in PA on his way to a seminar, however Whitmore, who's already skeptical of Marbury's claims, begins his investigation into the events and can't find any proof that Marbury's story is true. 

The story is mainly dialogue between the two priests and goes back and forth between present day, days in the seminary as friends and the "miracle" that happened in PA. The story is extremely thought provoking and even though I don't consider myself religious in any way, I found I too was wondering "Can a mere mortal heal others in the name of God"? Marbury who is being threatened with a transfer to another church or even excommunication stands by his claims that there are those that can heal. Whitmore tries to break through his story and discover why he won't talk, even though Marbury says God stole his voice after the event in PA. 

This one was more of a book of deep thought and wonderment for me. I found it extremely interesting and informative. Like I said I don't know much about organized religion, but did learn a few things while reading this one. I think the author did an excellent job of portraying each of these men as men of God, but also as mere mortal men with all the flaws and detriments that go along with that. It was a quick read for me, as I couldn't quit turning pages to find out what was going to happen next. Can other's heal in the name of God? Can we hold God responsible for bad things that happen to others? These are a couple of the questions I continued to ask myself while reading this book. I didn't come away with any real answers, but I thoroughly enjoyed every word of it. Again very thought provoking and a good book to delve into if you've ever wondered what are the rules when it comes to God. Something to really think about! Happy Reading!