Rating: 4/5

This book has many of the ingredients that I usually dislike in my romances.
Like an exhausting amount of push pull that can leave one quite dizzy and eager to get off the particular Ferris wheel. And I can never stand a stony, self-righteous h whose feelings for the H are ambivalent for most of the book. And for whom the H never comes first. 
But what works for the book is the intense, irrefutable connection between the mcs, making it a thoroughly satisfying read with never a dull moment or letting up of pace at any point. Most books turn dull when all the cards are laid out on the table, but not this book!

And I see people have either loved it or hated it. 
And the hate is for one out of two reasons. The h or the H.
I loved them both and I loved their love-hate story.
Because I love intense, passionate love stories (if they can convince me without hamming it. )

The h is hated as she’s perceived as cold, heartless, callous and implacably so. And that she is! 
“Go to Spain! I hope a bullet finds you and you never return”
Nothing the H does is good enough, adequate enough to melt her. And really, he’s just a man deeply, hopelessly, obsessively in love with a girl with no mercy. The h/H have an inflammatory history of over 5 years and he displays his feelings, his passions more than once but she remains completely unmoved. It’s ‘misanthropy’ and her inability to trust him at first and then her absolute fixation with her feckless brother that comes between them. 

And the H is one of the most infatuated I’ve ever read about. It’s so plain that he’s crazy about her but she gives him no quarter even as she melts in his ‘masterful’ embraces. He’s an uber-dominant alpha but is no match for her cold armoured self. So no wonder he acts like a barely domesticated beast who turns feral on being denied a petting or attention. 
He even uses the typical male words to slay her for her coldness. 
“And you, Miss Fenton," he ground out, "had best resign yourself to maidenhood, I beg your pardon, spinsterhood. You have the capacity for passion, I grant you, but the softer virtues of your sex are beyond you.”
 “And you, sir, have all the predatory instincts that are natural to a man.”
So well yeah! I felt for him but I couldn’t help but admire her!

His failing is that his grabby-shaky-spanky tendencies turn rapey too. There’s a much discussed non-con/reluctant/rape scene. And that makes it a no-deal for many readers. 
Now this is a book written in the 80s so maybe should be judged by the ‘then’ sensibilities. The H feels the only way to coerce her into marriage would be to compromise her. So it doesn’t happen in the heat of passion or anger but with planned ruthlessness.
“If you do this, I shall never marry you—never! I swear it." Her voice wavered and the threat sounded weak and empty.
"I am of the opposite persuasion. You will never marry me if I don't.”
Yes, she ends up ‘enjoying’ it and they do it multiple times. But it starts out with her very scared, very helpless. And she says 'No' several times. So, only if one can overlook, overcome that, can one accept the whole story. 

She was his wife, he worshipped her, but the galling truth was that he would never be first in her loyalties or affections. 
The MUs and push-pull continue well beyond it’s thinkable. Even after they are sure of each other’s love and settle into an almost-hea, they continue to savage each other. So, what are the odds they won’t continue similarly even after the definitive hea! *eyeroll*

The addition of the real-life Earl of Uxbridge as a secondary character is interesting and well done.
The ow is an exceptional character and I like that the h couldn’t help liking and admiring her despite their competitiveness. But, yes, I cannot imagine a regency lord asking a well born lady (a lady he loves) to accompany an actress/’lightskirt’ about town to help her gain respectability, however charitable the cause. It ran the risk of the lady losing some of her own respectability instead. 

That his love had endured time and distance and every imaginable obstacle she had thrown in his path seemed like a miracle to her.
Actually, a miracle! Any lesser (obsessed) man would have given up a long time ago.