Rating: 2/5

According to publication dates, the 3rd or 4th book Marion Chesney wrote of a middle-class girl catapulted into London society in Edwardian times.

Kitty lives a barren existence in Hampstead Heath with her mother and father. Her mother is a cold, spare woman with a zest for pennypinching, and her father uncaring of his family. All she can remember fondly of her father is a trip to Scotland when she was young and a young lady who cavorted with her father. She is mostly brought up by her mother who brown-noses the local Lady Worthing and orders the timid Kitty to steer clear of all other undesirables. Their house is kept in a state of coldness and all Kitty can dream of is warmth and food. Her one dream occurs when Lord Peter Chesworth passes through on a visit and they share a few words after church.

They are suddenly incredibly wealthy when her father dies of a heart attack outside a night club and her mother is comprised of a new zest -- to push her daughter into the ranks of the aristocracy. To that end, they suddenly put their house for sale, rent a fashionable address in London, and her mother even hires an impoverished lady -- Lady Henley -- to help them navigate through the high society. 

It is not far into the book when Lady Henley and her mother combined manages to corner Lord Chesworth -- who has had an ongoing liaison with a beautiful Veronica Jackson for the past 5 years -- into a marriage of convenience to save his country estate. Lord Chesworth is every inch of a useless fop and arrives drunk to his wedding night, insults Kitty, and then goes off to his mistress, to utter the words, "If Kitty were dead right now, I would take her money and marry you."

The timid Kitty is thus foisted on Lord Chesworth's neighbors, who love to play practical jokes. In fact, Kitty is terrorized at a party that Lord Chesworth sends her alone and is only rescued by a newcomer, a Lady Mainwaring, a friend of Lady Henley's. Lady Mainwaring takes the poor, naive, and resolutely idealistic Kitty under her wing and tries to make her over, snooty etiquette and all.

There is more cat and mouse with Lord Chesworth as Kitty longs for him and Lady Mainwaring keeps them separate in order to foster more warmth on the baron's part. A few attempts on Kitty's life are made -- adders in her bed, the balcony collapses and tosses Kitty into the garden, and a jealous Veronica pushing her off a yacht. Somehow, Lord Chesworth falls in love with Kitty (how?) by constantly comparing Kitty's "freshness" with Veronica's "overblown behavior" from long distance. Kitty would love to fling herself into his arms, but events (life attempts) and Veronica's intervention always serve to stop them.

By and by, the culprit is revealed to be  Lady Henley  although this was an incredibly strange turn of events as she had professed loyalty to Kitty's mother and was Lady Mainwaring's friend -- although this conflict was never mentioned. Kitty and Lord Chesworth finally get their HEA, and Kitty is seen as maturing -- she knows how to handle new servants and she even plays a practical joke on her previous practical jokers. Much of Lord Chesworth's devotion is only voiced by the other characters and unconvincing to the reader -- he makes almost no effort to disengage himself from Veronica Jackson even though she tries to humiliate Kitty socially at every opportunity and he always believes the worst of Kitty. 

All in all, not one of Chesney's better efforts. Her earlier writing is darker, less humorous, the heroes useless and punchable, and the heroines useless and kickable.