Rating: 5/5

I first saw Shane MacGowan on ‘The Old Grey Whistle Test’ promoting the ‘Pogetry in Motion’ e.p. with The Pogues. I think the set included ‘The Body of an American’, ‘A Rainy Night in Soho’, ‘A Pair of Brown Eyes’ and ‘Streams of Whiskey’. I was hooked, the next day I bought the e.p. and before the end of the month I’d got both their l.p.’s ‘Red Roses for Me’ and ‘Rum Sodomy and the Lash’. That Autumn I was to attend by first concert, The Pogues played Leeds Uni, and I was a fifteen year old novice having a furtive pint of Guinness and hiding behind my enamel Pogues Shamrock badge.

After that following The Pogues was a great adventure, the single with The Dubliners, the contribution to the ‘Sid and Nancy’ soundtrack, the appearance in the film ‘Straight to Hell’ (or ‘Straight to Video’ as it became known) and then ‘Fairytale of New York’ when the underground secret society I was part of went overground and everyone became Pogues fans overnight. The gig in Leeds for the ‘Fall from Grace’ tour sold out before we could get hold of tickets and it was downhill all the way after that.

The next album failed to set the world alight with Shane taking a back seat and allowing the rest of the band to write and sing there own songs on the l.p. The upside was we got tickets for the concert that year, the down side being that it was pathetic. Although obviously drunk on the two previous occasions we had seen him he was now paralytic and incoherent. The following year ‘Hell’s Ditch’ was a similar collection of ill fitting songs and we opted not to go out to see The Pogues that Autumn.

Shorty after that Shane was sacked from The Pogues and they promoted their best of compilation by touring with the late Joe Strummer doing the honours as singer. We saw them at Manchester Apollo and it was great to see the Show, the Clash’s ‘Straight to Hell’ was my own favourite of the evening.

The Pogues continued with Spider Stacey stepping from behind his tin whistle to be front man but it really wasn’t going anywhere. Shane started recording again with The Popes and released two further albums which I thought very good but not up to the standard of The Pogues in their pomp. After that he appeared fleetingly as a comic turn in various music magazines generally falling out of taxis and I, like the remainder of his admirers, wrote him off completely by the time this book was published.

No doubt buoyed on by The Pogues reunion concerts and the editing of ‘Fairytale’ by Radio one making the news, I walked past a Book Shop last week with it in the window for £3. I thought I’d give it a punt, and I’m so glad that I did; what a marvellous book.

Written as a series of transcripts of conversations between Shane and long time partner, Victoria Clarke, it tells Shane’s story from childhood in Ireland, to adolescence in the London Punk scene through The Pogues and his dismissal. Rock biographies are generally quite boring but this is pepped up by MacGowan been inebriated throughout the conversations which give the stories a drunken bravado and shaggy dog quality very rarely successfully carried through to the written word. Two becomes four from one sentence to the next. Contradictions from one conversation to the next amuse rather than canker and Shane comes across as the amiable drunk we fell in love with the first time around. His dismissal of the last Pogue albums and he’s explanation of his audience is spot on ‘I think they put up with the crap, so they could hear the good stuff’.

It makes me wonder if the drunk in the local may be worth listening to in case his story is anything like as entertaining as this one. Anyway I must go and dig the record player out of the loft and look for my old Shamrock badge.