Rating: 5/5

Resistance fighters travel back through time to try to prevent a future where humans are subjugated by heartless machine creatures. No I'm not talking about The Terminator. In 1972 The Day of the Daleks was one of my earliest memories of the show (The Daemons was the first). I was five years old and I had no clue what was happening regarding plot. All I knew was that it had Daleks (previously viewed through fingers in the Peter Cushing movies) and a lot of people waving guns around. But it was only two or three years later that I'd remedy the situation by first learning to read and then by getting my hands on the Target novelisation by Terrance Dicks. I was pretty enthralled with this one at the time and even without the nostalgia there's still plenty for the older me to appreciate. Terrance Dicks adapted Louis Marks' script with a lot of obvious enthusiasm to improve and embellish, from the opening extra scene describing a meeting of the downtrodden but undefeated human guerrilla fighters of the 22nd century, to the numerous action scenes getting a much needed injection of flash-bang-wallop. What results is a more atmospheric portrayal of the Dalek ruled future and the ruin of war ravaged humanity. The sequence from the serial where the Doctor tries to evade capture using a balloon wheeled trike that barely ever got to jogging pace, pursued by Ogrons trying not to look like they are running on the spot, is replaced by an unrecognisable all out Mad Max trike chase. Most of all I enjoyed the early scenes where the three guerrillas first appear in our time, not in the bright light of dawn but in the dead of night, with Ogrons in close pursuit, getting into a three way shoot out with UNIT troops while the Doctor helps himself to wine and cheese on his ghost vigil. The plot is just about completely unchanged but Dicks just gives it all a good polish, even reinstating a few scenes that were planned but never made it into the show due to production issues, most notably the bookended time anomaly gag where the Doctor and Jo meet themselves for the second time.
Original artwork , features on script to novel, Terrance Dicks, Louis Marks and a new introduction by Gary Russell.