Rating: 3/5

Well, what do you know? This was one interesting read!

Gregor the Overlander is about a boy who falls down a rabbit hole and ends up in the Underland, the world under which is filled with giant cockroaches, bats, rats, and humans who immigrated there some centuries ago.
The Underland sounds very interesting, and I was naturally excited to learn more about this cool land of filth. As a kid I've wondered a lot about "what lives beyond the sewers"? But as an adult Gregor the Overlander lacked a certain magic for me. Or as my dear Caitlyn would say, it didn't have the "oomph" required for a book to truly wow me. Or at the very least satisfy me.

What I liked about the book:

● The idea of Underland and how it was written in a way that made me actually believe such a thing could happen and such a place could exist. (I kid you not, as I was reading it, I was really feeling like I did as a kid when I truly believed I could travel to Alice's Wonderland if I could just jump down a rabbit hole! )
● The book was entertaining and I finished it in one sitting.

What I didn't like about the book: 

● The trope of young boy ending up in a magical place and somehow being the chosen one who will bring salvation to an entire population of capable adults.
● The trope of the Chosen One never accepting his fate.
● The fact that the book was extremely predictable to a point where I felt like I was reading it for the second time. Or the thousands time!
● Mr. Chosen One the hero annoyed me to no end with his dumb righteousness and boring inner dialogue. 
● MC Chosen Pants thoughts in "quotation marks" annoyed me to no end and distracted me from my enjoyment of the book! Can y'all MCs stop thinking like you're talking? You're not having a conversation, you are thinking! This is the one thing I can't stand when reading. Complete laziness and lack of consideration for my sanity. 

Anyways, overall the book was good enough! It was just not that great. Maybe if I'd read it when I was a child I would've liked it better, but as it was Gregor the Overlander was an entertaining read and I do recommend it to people exploding with underworked imagination in need of something new to devour who also don't mind the points I mentioned.