Rating: 2/5

The more nihilistic side of Taosim—not for the uninitiated in Chinese philosophy.

  “What? How can you dislike Chuang Tzu!?”
 Honestly speaking, if this book had been my first of Chinese philosophy, I probably would have become obsessed with it. But what I like about it is the framework that it builds off, which is the Taoist tradition—that which became the basis for almost all Chinese thought. What I dislike is Chuang Tzu’s take on it, not Chinese mysticism in toto. Therefore, while there are some sections that I like, these are sections which explain ideas not particular to Chuang Tzu, and that other philosophers explain much better.

The great question Chinese philosophy tends to aim to answer is: how is one to cope with life and the world? He who manages to answer this question and act accordingly is deemed a Sage. Chuang Tzu is no different.

So, what is particular to Chuang Tzu? The main difference is that the Sage of Chuang Tzu is an asshole. The metaphysical view expounded is a sort of absolute relativism. Thus, Chuang Tzu’s Sage is a person who, aware of his smallness and the meaninglessness of all things and categorizations, is apathetic, cynical and nihilistic. On one occasion, a master plunges a man into a deep depression:

“After [the master helped him ‘achieve the highest understanding’], Lieh Tzu concluded that he had never really begun to learn anything. He went home and for three years did not go out. He replaced his wife at the stove, fed the pigs as though he were feeding people, and showed no preferences in the things he did. He got rid of the carving and polishing and returned to plainness, letting his body stand alone like a clod. In the midst of entanglement he remained sealed, and in this oneness he ended his life.” (p. 94)

And Chuang Tzu seems to suggest that this way of life is desirable. Being to some extent detached from worldly affairs is characteristic to Chinese mysticism, yet the relativism of Chuang Tzu is more akin to Meursault’s, from Albert Camus' The Stranger, even going so far as voiding the meaning of good and evil. This is yet another troubling point: the problem of moral relativism is that there is no real reason to do good—or evil, or anything, for that matter. In one passage, the issue is identified, yet not satisfactorily solved (Section 17: Autumn Floods). As a consequence, Chuang Tzu’s Sage is very cynical, not caring much for others and even advising disciples not to bother to prevent calamities, lest they get themselves into trouble. To top it all off, I sense the book emanates a subtle air of misanthropy: there are little praises of the natural and condemnations of the human here and there. It does not sit well with me. There are much richer and healthier forms of Chinese mysticism out there. 

As for the style, the book is short, yet often repetitive, using various formulations to illustrate, if not the same, very similar concepts. The language is often muddled, and it is often unclear when he is being ironic. There are many occasions where Confucius is referenced, yet it is unclear to me when he is being praised and when he is being mocked. This might be due to my lack of expertise and/or knowledge of the context, which is why this last criticism might be rather anachronic. Even so, this further proves my point that this is not a book for a beginner.

  “But it is highly up to interpretation!”
 Maybe. It is said in the introduction that these texts are not meant to be subjected to rational scrutiny but are meant to be ‘read and reread’. And herein lies the issue with mysticism: it has an element of the non-rational. In this sense, it acquires a certain haughtiness, and can be very easily used as a shield against rational argument. ‘The wise man not arguing with fools’ can also be (quite ironically) an expression of closed-mindedness. I do not deny that Chuang Tzu could be of help to many people taken on a superficial level, but if you do read it, and if you do like it, please remember: everything in moderation, even moderation. Take everything with mysticism, even mysticism.