Rating: 5/5

I have been reading Diana Palmer for years .This book has me coming back again and again. 
Indian reservation ,Heritage ,tribe adoption, casinos, little politics and a young girl that desperately needed someone to be on her side.
This has just enough of my reading boxes checked ,strong man ,loyal girl that loves him but he won't go there.
We have a variety of characters that are in this series coming and going .We touch on ex soldiers that have been crippled from battle with struggles to fit in .The struggles the Native Americans face everyday and the casinos that seem to prey on the Native Americans who want to work and support their families and tribe. But with casinos you also have a spike in crimes .A double edge sword.
The main male character is a Lawyer in the white mans world but his roots puts his whole tribe on his back with his determination to keep his blood pure Native American .He has framed his whole life on it ,even though he dates white women. Which brings us to the female main character. He basically saved her when she was young from abusive family member ,paid her schooling and her other needs. She is desperately in love with him and the writer pulls you into their feelings of him determined to not go there and her hearing him say pure blood but thinking you date white woman . The struggles between culture and expectations .The Native American mom that has a secret she has kept hidden and is scared to death to lose her son over it .A father in politics that is in the dark yet still loves the woman he did so wrong for his career. The wounded soldier that is using drink to numb his pain.
It flowed and I was shown a story and not just told. The best writers are those.that have you completely unaware that you are reading and not there . This writer is that for me .When I read her works sometimes I look up and check myself because I was in the story. World building and fleshed out were balanced out .We don't get pages of inner thoughts but we get what we need that allows you to see this town and its people . Its written so the other books blend with this book unlike some that write series but seem to change things that happened .
This writer is my go2 for my feels and has a permanent spot on my paperback shelf and digital shelf .