Rating: 1/5

The Back Story

Age 15 Josette sneaked from her house and went to a party. While there a boy slipped a drug into her drink and attempted to rape her. Enter police officer Brannon. He decided she was lying and because of his testimony, the would be rapist walked.

Seven years later Brannon and Josette are dating (very weird) and one night he discovers she was actually telling the truth about her assault. His response is to call her a whore and tell her she isn’t enough woman for him and never wants to see her again. What???

Two weeks later Josette is at a party where an old man is murdered. The police think he drank too much, fell into the water and drowned. She contacts the police to tell them the old man wasn’t drinking at all and that she saw Brannon’s best friend arguing with him. In court the attempted rape when she was 15 is brought up to discredit her as a witness. Because Brannon broke the law by failing to disclose pertinent information, an innocent man was sent to prison, and Josette was branded a liar and all but unemployable.

Two Years LaterThe man who went to prison has been killed and Josette and Brannon are thrown together to solve the case. So...one of the suspects is Brannon’s closest friend. The murdered man was Josette’s date to a party. Brannon and Josette dated. Josettle testified in a court case against Brannon’s friend. Is it just me or is there something wrong with these two investigating this murder? 

  ”We can’t change anything,” she said.
“I wish to God I could,” he said harshly. “I rushed to judgement about you. I’ve ruined your life.”
“I helped,” she returned without looking at him. “I deliberately left the house at night to go to what I knew would be a wild party”.

This book offends me on so many levels. I have the distinct impression that Diana Palmer is a misogynist. She defends Brannon’s failure to adequately protect the victim of a serious sexual assault with the excuse that his last case was that of a man who was sent to prison after a co-worker cried rape. She implies that women making false claims of sexual assault is common. 

I can’t see myself reading anything by Diana Palmer ever again. Half a star for the book's value as a target next time I go shooting.