Rating: 4/5

Very well-written historical fiction/romance set in Kansas a few years after the conclusion of the American Civil War. A plucky "Yank" teacher arrives in a primitive community of settlers who still live in mud huts ("soddies") in the prairie, braving wildfires, freezing winters, locusts, and the maddening winds. She is intent on teaching their children the basics of education and to heal the deep and long-lasting emotional wounds inflicted on them by the war.

Naturally, she encounters a lot of resistance, as the people in the community are still continuing the war in their own way, still aligning with their Confederate and Yankee alliances. Soon though, the community does rally around her and she finds happiness and a sense of family. There is also a romance brewing slowly between our heroine and the local doctor, a scarred, cynical man who does not believe in her high ideals.

The world building, the sense of history, the meticulous cast of secondary characters, and most of all, the wonderful characterization of the heroine, who is human and complex enough not to turn into a cardboard cut out Mary Sue, carried me through the entire 500 and so pages without a moment of boredom or frustration. There were a couple of scenes, one set during a blizzard, and one during a fire, that truly kept me on the edge of my seat. I was right there with the characters of the story, feeling their anxiety, life and death danger, sense of doom and insignificance when confronted with the terrible wrath of Mother Nature. Really neat stuff. This reads better as historical fiction than a romance, which frankly left me underwhelmed. But still very worthy of a read especially if you want to escape into another world during a heavily rainy day, which is exactly what I did.

In my humble opinion, Jeanne Williams accomplished here what Lavyrle Spencer tried to do in Years but fell short. If it wasn't for the over the top, melodramatic ending of the book, in which the author turns a villainous character into a cartoonish boogeyman and a final confrontation between him and the heroine into a B movie thriller, I would have given this a five star.