Rating: 3/5

Cadfael Shorts
A review of the Headline Book Publishing paperback (March 10, 2016) of the Headline hardcover original (September 22, 1988) collecting 3 short stories published earlier in the journal Winter's Crimes (1. in Vol 17 - 1985), (2. in Vol 11 - 1979), (3 in Vol 13 - 1981).

A Rare Benedictine isn't completely satisfactory as a Brother Cadfael prequel, but it is all we will get, so we have to settle for it. Only story #1 A Light on the Road to Woodstock gives us a glimpse of Cadfael ap Meilyr ap Dafydd (Welsh Cadfael son of Meilyr son of Dafydd) prior to his becoming a monk at Shrewsbury Abbey. 

Shortly after returning from a Normandy campaign for King Henry I, Cadfael continues his pledged service to Lord Roger Maduit. Events reveal that the story takes place at the time of the White Ship tragedy on November 25, 1120. Further circumstances reveal that Maduit is unscrupulous in his dealings and a disheartened Cadfael ends his service and chooses instead to follow a group of monks back to Shrewsbury, although we never see his actual entry into monkhood.

Stories #2 The Price of Light and #3 Eye Witness take place when Cadfael has already lived many years at Shrewsbury Abbey. #2 is dated during Christmas 1135 and involves a theft of silver candles from the Abbey. #3 is undated* and involves the theft of the Abbey's rents. Confusingly and in what seems a coincidence, there is a character named Alard in both stories #1 and #2 but they are not the same person (one is a scribe and the other is a silversmith). Ellis Peters either liked the name or had forgotten she had used it already. 

There is a passing mention in #2 of Cadfael learning his use of "poppy juice" from his time as a crusader in the Middle East. Again this is a rather slim and unsatisfactory background to his becoming a herbalist and healer at the Abbey. So we never get a full picture of Cadfael in his early years. There are of course flashbacks mentioned in the main series.

The front cover of the original Headline hardcover (1988). Image sourced from Goodreads.

The book contains about a dozen black &amp; white illustrations by Clifford Harper done in a period authentic style. The colour illustration on the cover is by the same artist.

Footnote
* While no specific date or year is given in the story, it is mentioned that it is during the time of Abbot Radulfus aka Ranulph aka Ralph, which puts it sometime between the years 1138 to 1148. See listing under Abbots of Shrewsbury.

Trivia and Links
None of the stories in A Rare Benedictine were adapted for the Cadfael TV series (1994-1998).

Ellis Peters was one of the pennames used by author Edith Pargeter (1913-1995), who was of Welsh ancestry. Aside from her own fiction and non-fiction works, she also became fluent in the Czech language and translated Czech works into English.