Rating: 2/5

I struggled to finish this book. It dragged on for about 500 pages longer than it felt were necessary, and rather than the intergalactic sci-fi the back of the cover led me to expect I got some sort of almost 20-yr-long bottle episode being used as a heavy-handed analogy for the author's take on organized religions, complete with hundreds of pages of navel gazing and unnecessarily pedantic semantics arguments. This book tried extremely hard to be deep, and in some ways it succeeded. But the moments of inspiration were sadly not set up well enough or explained thoroughly enough to come across smoothly. David Zindell is a genius as far as descriptions of environment goes. He can craft visual imagery like few others I've read. Unfortunately, this all falls down when it comes to the characterization and the plot. I found that many of the characters seemed to simply be symbols or avatars representing ideas the author wanted to espouse or analyze, to be utterly discarded after their use expired. This made their motivations and actions feel arbitrary to the point of losing any weight. Likewise, their interactions with each other simply seemed to be following a pattern that in itself was an analogy, rather than behaving like human beings. Everybody is cryptic, pretentious in that they like to proselytize to anyone who will listen, and generally cold and wooden to each other. They proclaim great friendships and love for each other but act more like robots programmed to say these things than feeling beings who have emotions and wants. This is especially true for the friendship that underlies the whole book and serves to be some sort of metaphor about the necessity for pain and love in tandem throughout life. This built toward a sort of climax, but so slowly and with such a meager payoff both in terms of action and the metaphysical depth the author was so clearly looking for, that it all fell flat and felt like it could've concluded hundreds of pages prior.

Another big issue I had with this book was that the society and world was pretty poorly-defined, despite individual scenes having a vividness to them that speaks to Zindell's talent with visual imagery yet again. We are dropped onto a planet (not Earth) that is mostly wilderness with primitive tribes eking out subsistence living and one massive, super-high-tech city. The citizens of the wilderness are not supposed to enter the city, and visa versa. The two civilizations are kept largely separate. We don't really ever get a good explanation of why this is, and this serves as an example of the sort of detail the author just never bothered to get around to because he was so preoccupied with the metaphysics discussion he was all fired up for. He clearly cares more about sculpting his characters' arguments and presentations to each other more than he cares about moving the plot or the reader's comprehension of any of the settings and characters that don't directly support whatever point he's making from page to page. While this does end up with his having some truly intricate and detailed metaphors, it leaves us feeling as though a painter has taken a massive canvas and squandered most of it in favor of only a tiny, heavily-detailed, claustrophobic portion of the whole. We end up wondering very basic things, like why in this high-tech city are folks reduced to pulling sleds or skating on ice roads for transport? Why is radio communication outlawed and central heating eschewed in favor of burning wood? How are the main characters seeing themselves as such good friends when they never spend much time together and every interaction we're shown between them by the author is negative? Everybody is trying to commune with some universal, mystical truth about the universe, but nobody seems to ever think of writing this truth down once they've done so; why? There's a species-wide obsession with turning into a god. Everybody seems to know for sure the main character's Dad turned into a god. But nobody ever defines what they mean by a god, what makes them so sure Mallory Ringess became one, or any of the context around these events; again, why? We are left with so little to hang our hats on that it's nearly impossible for me to suspend disbelief to go along with the author's use of the fictional words he's created to make his culture feel unique, as just one example. If we were given any definitions for bizarre words like "cark," "clade," "arhal," "infolater," "harijan," "multrum," "nimspinner," "holophonic," "Sulki grid," and "maggid," just to name a few, it might not make them seem less odd but would feel less like we're being intentionally left in the dark in this way and many others. Lastly, it felt as thought the author chose to simply bestow the main character with whatever traits were most convenient for each situation. At one point, more than halfway through the book we discover the character has had an eidetic memory the whole time. Why is this just mentioned now? Even if the author wanted to add it in retroactively, he didn't even bother to go back and add some context for it while editing, which feels disrespectful of the reader's intelligence. This happens several times, at one point apparently bestowing the main character with the ability to speed up or slow down time, at least subjectively. It all feels unbelievable without any context to speak of, and a little like the author loved his ideas so much he didn't feel it was necessary to give us the context to care about them. I'm not as enamored with his religious semantics arguments as he is, especially about fictional religions on faraway planets, and this was immensely frustrating for me.

I came into this book hoping for an interesting sci-fi book with layers of philosophical depth, per the snippet on the back cover. Unfortunately, what I got felt more like a metaphysics textbook or some epically long allegory about organized religion instead. In a universe where something mysterious is happening to the stars, an unexplained golden ring appears to be assembling itself in orbit, and folks can literally be rebuilt from death or old age to pristine youth, I was extremely frustrated that nobody seemed to ever leave the city (or even the three buildings in which they spend most of their time) or use any of the miraculous technologies in any way. I was further frustrated to see that the author chose to neglect the plot as an afterthought in favor of allegory and metaphor, ad nauseam. I can't recommend this to anybody; fans of the metaphysical discussions will still find this about 400 pages too long, and anybody looking for the sci-fi tale hinted at on the back cover will not find it within. I wrote down a quote that sums up the swing-and-miss attempt at depth and the arbitrariness of the characters' words and actions in one. I'll let it sum up this review by itself:

"To be a god must be... Nothing but pain."
"Eh? Why do you think that?"
"I... Do not know."