Rating: 5/5

The Riders were "unseen, patient, dogged faithful in all weathers and all worlds, waiting for something promised, something that was plainly their due..." 

When Fred Scully started out his new life in Ireland he was a rider. Scully, his wife Jennifer and their daughter Billie, all from Australia, traveled throughout Europe, where he would take on the grunt jobs to keep them alive while Jennifer explored herself, painting, writing, going to parties with her artsy friends. In one of their travels, they ended up in Ireland, where out exploring, they found a small house which used to belong to the caretaker of an old castle. Jennifer knew immediately that she had to have this place, so they bought it. All that was left to do was to go back to Australia, sell their current place, tidy up some loose ends &amp; then she &amp; Billie would be back while Scully got the place ready for their arrival. 

On the day that Jennifer and Billie were to arrive at the airport in Shannon, Scully goes to meet them. However, there's a problem...only Billie gets off the plane from Heathrow, where the Qantas plane from Australia landed before she switched planes to go to Ireland. Billie won't say a word; obviously she is traumatized by something. At his wits end, Scully tries to figure out where Jennifer might be and sets off traveling throughout Europe to find her. But the question is, does Jennifer want to be found?

This novel was incredible. It has been criticized for not tidying things up at the end, not putting together the loose ends that dangle waiting for answers. However, as we all know, many times some of the most pressing questions in life go unanswered. Personally, I don't think those questions needed to be answered because all in all, if you read it carefully, you'll realize that those points are irrelevant...redemption for Scully &amp; for Billie come in the realization that all that really matters is having the strength to go on. I very highly recommend this book. It is not a book full of warm fuzzies, indeed it is very dark and disturbing.

The writing is most excellent and the characterization is perfect. Highly, highly recommended.