Rating: 5/5

After a run of reading more modern books that have left me underwhelmed I thought it was time to remind myself of how great a novel can be. I had had this sitting on my shelf for a while but was feeling too tired to commit to 450 pages and the exertions of flipping back and forth to the notes explaining the history of some law that is referenced in passing. Fool!
This Penguin edition is fantastic; a very brief introduction (I only read the introduction after 
I’ve finished the book when you can understand what they are talking about and there is no risk of spoilers) and absolutely no notes bar a few footnotes. This meant the narrative spoke for itself and could be read without interruption and what a wonderful read it was. 
In terms of characterisation Balzac is akin to Dickens, Cousin Bette is populated by caricatures. There is the malicious, scheming eponymous spinster who is skinny, dark and sports a monobrow, her saintly cousin Adeline who is beauty personified and endlessly patient and forgiving, the greedy, cruel bewitching courtesan and the sexually incontinent baron among others. Yet Balzac has none of the moralising or sentimentality of Dickens. Characters suffer, characters cheat and fail morally and yet the author remains objective and does not offer any opprobrium on them. Instead it is left to the reader to pass judgment on their actions.
This book is described as a book about vengeance but I would argue it is more about the self-destructive nature of selfishness and greed. Despite being the eponymous character Cousin Bette does remarkably little to bring her cousin, and by association the Hulot family, down. She, in many ways, is a Iago. She has to do remarkably little to exploit the weaknesses in each character and once that faultline has been found she can observe them destroy themselves. 
 It is with discomfort that we read of husbands and fathers abandoning and impoverishing their families in the pursuit of sex. Baron Hulot, a handsome, charming man of renown brazenly parades his courtesans around town, paying for them to live in splendour while his family home is in genteel decay. Balzac’s description of the Baron’s home is wonderful.

  Cousin Bette, who was not impressed, as the newly rich ex-perfumer had been, by the signs of distress written on the worn chairs, the discoloured hangings, and the split silk. The furniture with which we live is in the same case as ourselves . Seeing ourselves every day, we come, like the Baron, to think ourselves little changed, still young, while other people see on our heads hair turning to chinchilla, V-shaped furrows on our foreheads, and great pumpkins in our bellies. These rooms were still lit for Cousin Bette by the Bengal lights of Imperial victories and shone with perennial splendour.

Like an addict he cannot give up these women and having spent his children’s inheritance, borrowed from everyone possible and even committed fraud against the state will watch his wife move into a garret and work for a living rather than give up his women. The bleakest moment is at the end, in his twilight years (he is over 80) penniless, shabby and looking his age, he still cannot resist the lure of female flesh and again abandons his family for a young kitchen maid – his prizes are no longer the beauties and courtesans but dumpy, plain uneducated serving girls as befits the reduction in his circumstances. 
The courtesans are no less lacking in empathy. They happily drain the coffers of their marks using enough of the flirt an withdrawal, kindness and coldness that today we would call it coercive control. 
Madame Marneffe has an addiction of her own; money. To me she also seemed to have a rage at the world, a need to take everything until she has destroyed it fully. She does this with the men who pay court to her. She will not stop tightening the screws until she has every last sou out of them and has nothing but contempt for the families she is fully aware she is destroying. What makes her so monstrous is her desire to inflict pain on people she has never met and have done her no ill, her greed is incidental (or at best secondary) to her malice and it often seems that money is the method with which she achieves her aims rather than the purpose.
While reading it I kept thinking how inconceivable it was that people would behave like this and then I thought about online scams where people are fleeced of huge amounts of money by the promise of an attractive object of their affection. I personally know of someone who gave her young children’s savings to a man she had never met in person but had believed she would set up home with him. At least the Baron knew what he was willing to sacrifice everything for. Similarly Madame Marneffe seemed just too cruel and manipulative to be credible, and then I watched The Puppet Master on Netflix and realised that there are people who can strip people of family, finances, autonomy and care not a jot.
A painful but wonderful read.