Rating: 3/5

2.5 😐😐 Stars
I’ve got three of these to get out, so these will be short. The Gold Scent Bottle is a historical romance available on KU that I one-clicked because I was expecting buckets of drama-llama that unfortunately never developed. Basically, I was anticipating Spicy Doritos but ended up with rice cakes… and we’re talking the lightly salted not the chocolate ones.

The blurb sets it up, Max was engaged to Felicity when he brought her home to meet his father the Earl… sadly for Max, the social climbing twat decided to upgrade to the male with the title, and married the dad. Unable to face his love turned new step-mommy, Max enlisted and left home. 

The book opens 4-years later with Max returning home, and running into Felicity. He’s bummed to realize he’s still peeved, and the new Lady Dalmore is putting out some come-hither vibes… fortunately, Max isn’t down with his dad’s sloppy seconds, so he leaves to drink/gamble the night away. Stuff happens, and Max catches Abigail (Gail) attempting to steal her gold scent bottle back (her bro lost at the tables). Knowing he must face his back-stabbing father and gold-digging step-mom, he proposes that she fake being his new fiancée in exchange for said bottle.

Now, if you love soapy-reads as much as I do… this SCREAMS delicious drama… but it doesn’t shake out that way. Mostly because nothing is really explored, and we just follow the characters around going about their business.

🔸Max is bitter for 75% of the book, but does nothing about it.
🔸Felicity is snarky, but in a snooty way.
🔸The dad is actually nice. He sees that his wife is a flirty biatch, but does nothing about it.
🔸Gail sorta-kinda likes Max, but shows no emotion.
🔸There’s no relationship development. No chemistry, no fighting, no sexy-time.
🔸No comeuppance for Felicity.
🔸Quick, bland apology from dad.
🔸No epilogue and the ending is rushed.

Bottom Line- This had the ingredients, but they were left in the pantry. They were all passive-aggressive and non-confrontational, so there wasn’t any passion or conflict. I needed something… dad and Max to duke it out… dad to call Felicity out on her harlot ways … Max to give her a verbal lashing… Gail to at least point out Felicity’s tarty ways when she gunning for her… Max and Gail to show some emotion… anything to spice up the blandness. The ending is rushed, and there’s no epilogue, so we have no idea what comes of the OW/dad/Max/Gail situation. (we really needed this) I agree with Carmen, the dad really needed to die, so we could see Max choose Gail and throw Felicity out on her ass.

Safety- Totally safe. When the 3-year-old daughter was mentioned in the first chapter, my soap-addled brain started jumping to conclusions, but that isn’t the case. Max and Felicity never slept together.