Rating: 4/5

The Mammoth Book of Arthurian Legends's best feature is that its text spans more than a century of writing. While the stories themselves are much older, the writings span from the mid 19th century to the late 20th century. This serves to highlight the distinct style of whichever writer you happen to be reading. A couple of quite famous writers make an appearance as well. The content of this compilation is also fairly broad. Many stories focus on other knights of the round table rather than Arthur himself. Other than that, there isn't much to say without delving into the specifics of each story. Overall, if you enjoy Arthurian legends then you would enjoy this. Otherwise, there is only one entry that transcends its subject ("The Passing of Arthur") to be great writing in general. Below I will highlight what I believe to be the best and worst of the bunch.

Best
The Knight With the Two Swords
The Winning of a Sword
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight
Sir Marrok the Wolf
The Marriage of Sir Gawayne
Sir Lanval
Sir Percivale of Wales
John, The Knight of the Lion
The Romance of Tristan and Iseult
- These entries represent the best of the quintessential Arthurian tale. They hit every beat and are a joy to read.

The Temptation of Lancelot
- This short entry is the funniest story by a large margin and had me laughing out loud.

Raven's Meat
- A great reprieve, this story is a surreal entry focusing on myth versus reality.

The Passing of Arthur
- A phenomenal poem that is worth reading regardless of whether or not you are a fan of Arthurian legends.

Worst
The Winning of Olwen
- While I can acknowledge its historical significance, this barely qualifies as a story. If you've read The Iliad then I am sure you recall that one of the early book’s sole focus is recounting Agamemnon's army and where they're from. This story is very similar.

The Carle of Carlisle
- While not a bad story, there are a few cringe-worthy moments that devalue the whole entry.

The Dog's Story
- This is the only entry that I would argue had no right to ever be included. It is a badly written fanfiction by someone with a bestiality kink.

The Isle of Avalon
- A depiction of its author answering the question "What really happened?", it's a little too on the nose for my taste.