Rating: 3/5

I really liked Lauren Royal's Jewel Series; all three books were loaded with fun historical tidbits, and enough adventure/danger/mystery to keep the characters from devolving into endless naval-gazing. So of course I picked up the next series—the Flower Series. 

The Hero: Ford Chase—last unwed Chase from the Jewel Series. Charles II awarded those who stayed with him through his exile with titles and estates. Ford was made Viscount Lakefield. Unfortunately the title comes with a run-down estate and no money, and he's way too busy geeking out on clockworks (really) to bother fixing up the place. 

The Heroine: Violet Ashcroft, daughter of the Earl of Trentingham, reckons she's going to die a virgin. She's got two beautiful sisters, and she's comparatively plain, so the only reason a man would court her is to get at her fabulous inheritance. What she looks forward to in life is gaining that inheritance so she can publish a book of philosophy. 

The situation: Ford gets saddled with his little niece, and while he loves her he's dying to get back to inventing the newest and best watch. Lady Trentingham arrives to visit with her young son Rowan (yes, all the Ashcroft kids have plant names—the dad is into vegetation) and Ford's niece Jewel (cuz of course a child born of the Jewel series…) is instantly in love. In an annoying, 10-year-old-girl-crush kinda way. Lady T sees opportunity knocking, in a match-making-mama kinda way. She proposes that the "children" have a regular play date—and then makes sure that she and the other two Ashcroft girls are busy so Violet has to accompany Rowan for his daily visits. 

The conflict: Apart from the usual guy-not-wanting-to-get-leg-shackled nonsense, the other issue is that Vi looks around at the ramshackle estate and figures that Ford's protestations of love are just a nice way of getting his hands on her money.

Yeah, that's about the size of it. See, I love a good romance—and this is a good one. But honestly, if there isn't something else in the story to keep me from getting annoyed with all the neurotic "how can I be sure he loves me and not my money/beauty/booger collection?", it's going to lose a point. With the Jewel series, the romances were wrapped around larger stories involving abduction, chasing bad guys, murder mysteries, but here, the story was all about the characters' angst. 

Upshot: Not a bad story—pretty good love scenes. And some interesting tidbits about scientists and philosophers of the Reformation era. I'll add a half star for that. 3.5 stars.