Rating: 5/5

Reviewed at Happily Ever After Romance

I will always be drawn into a story that involves a child who is over the moon about the chance to become a real cowboy, helped of course, by the stardust cowboy in who he firmly believes. That Jake’s stardust cowboy is completely fictional matters not one bit to this boy who is determined to take on the adventure of a lifetime and make a dream come true. Now, the adults around Jake aren’t quite as convinced this is a good idea – but Jake makes it hard to resist at least trying to make this young one’s dreams come true… if reluctantly on Riley’s part.

If you love a romance where the child steals scenes, then The Stardust Cowboy is perfect for you. Riley’s brother Chris was killed in an accident, he also owned half the ranch. When Riley discovers that his brother had a son, well, the honorable cowboy sets out to buy Jake’s half of the ranch, dealing with his mother, Dori. Things didn’t quite turn out as Riley had expected when Jake declares his intention to become a cowboy and wants to move to “his” ranch sooner than yesterday. Jake’s belief that the stardust cowboy intended for the ranch to be partly his, that his “friend” would help in any way possible to make Jake’s dreams come true is perhaps a child’s fantasy… but neither Riley nor Dori have the heart to tear Jake’s dream apart.

Take two people who have been deeply hurt by love in the past, mix them in close proximity, with a mother’s love and determination to give her child every chance to fulfill his dream… and you have Dori and Riley. I liked them both individually, but Riley really needed to get himself out of the past and see what was right in front of him. Dori had good reason to doubt that love could last but at least her heart was a bit more open to the possibility than the man she was starting to fall for. I loved watching them work through the past, often reluctantly, and begin to see a future that involved home, family, and love all wrapped up in one place… Jake’s half ranch.

*I received an e-ARC of this novel from Tule Publishing. The opinions expressed in this review are my own – good, bad, or indifferent. I was not financially compensated for this review and no expectation of a positive review was promised.*