Rating: 5/5

'You need not be bluffed by a thought!'

That's Dr Weekes's slightly angry voice in my head, and I hang on to it every time I feel like I'm slipping into that dreadful state.

I found this book in a list of best anti-anxiety books, 'goodreaded' it, and as a lot of people said it did help, I got it; but only when I started listening to it did I realize it was actually vintage. So there must be books with more recent developments of this theory out there. But, you see, 'Hope and help for your nerves' just sounded so much nicer than, for instance, 'Fuck anxiety'. And in the end I actually did find the retro language soothing: 'nervous illness' instead of 'panic attack' or, say, OCD.

I am bothered by this abstract from Wiki, though:
'Dr. Robert L. DuPont describes in his book "The Anxiety Cure" that in 1983, he asked her if she'd ever had panic disorder. She replied "Yes, I have had what you call panic attacks. In fact, I still have them. Sometimes they wake me at night." Dr. DuPont responded by saying he was sorry to hear that. He described Claire Weekes as looking at him in shock, and she responded "Save your sympathy for someone else. I don't need it or want it. What you call a panic attack is merely a few normal chemicals that are temporarily out of place in my brain. It is of no significance whatsoever to me!"'

The thought of nighttime panic as a lifelong companion is just too depressing, even if the panic becomes more controllable.

Back to the book now.

My major takeaway is this: when we live through something traumatizing, we worry that when this thing happens next, we will feel even worse. The reassuring thought is, we have probably already felt the worse we can feel about this situation. But we fear fear, and the more we try to suppress it, the stronger it gets. The same with depression: when we try to convince ourselves that we're fine but fear that we're not, it hits harder.

This, by the way, was very helpful in that I realized the reason for the despair we feel when our loved ones tell us to struggle with depression: we already struggle so much it's killing us, and we look to them for help, and they are telling us something quite impossible - so our hurt and anger is understandable. (I had felt very weird about feeling so offended by obviously well-meant advice).

  'Obsession is so often no more than this: no more than the inflexible working of a very tired mind in a sensitized frightened person.'

I've listened to the audiobook twice. It's Dr Claire herself speaking and I highly recommend getting the audio version (maybe in addition to the printed book if you prefer to have this written, too), because she is very insistent and I think her directions are thus harder to ignore than if you would be saying the same things to yourself in your own voice.

So, yes, this has helped enormously and I'm very grateful for this. I do hope you're not feeling terrified and unhappy, but if you do, there really is hope and help.