Rating: 5/5

So this is a re-read - I suggested it to a friend Judith, with whom I have recently started a reading group. We've called it Judith and Laura's Group for Women who like to DISCUSS books.

I think one of the most interesting aspects of this re-read was that the first half of the book, had several scenes and details, that I had not understood or noticed as I should have, the first time around. In the second half I saw a few differences - maybe because I focussed more closely as the climax approached. 

So - I really didn't see how Daphne threw herself at Edwin - that utterly delightful scene when they meet in the pine plantation - Daphne walking her dog, Prince and Edwin is bursting to tell someone about his infatuation with Leila. Daphne naturally advises caution and a concern about Cecilia's views on this. She and Daphne have been friends since boarding school in England. Towards the end Daphne is utterly distraught by Edwin's inability to tell Cecilia anything but like a good friend Daphne stays stumm, realising that she cannot intrude in her friends' marriage.

In the first half, however, a comic scene ensues as Daphne suggests tactics to oust Mrs Botts and her daughter Leila from Edwin's house. Daphne suggests re-painting or re-wiring as procedures to help evict the intruders and when Edwin fails to consider either of these options, she decides to sacrifice herself for the general good:

"There's only one thing to do," Daphne said. "If you won't have the decorators in, you'll have to have a houseguest turn up suddenly. Someone who'll be dreadfully in the way, in the bath all the time or on the phone for all hours, someone who'll use up all the milk, preferably someone who can bring a pet, a dog." They both looked at Prince.

Daphne develops her idea further and culminates with this particular suggestion:

"To get rid of these people, Leila's mother and Leila," Daphne was saying, "it is essential that you have an affair. You must fill them with disgust at your behaviour while your wife is away. You must do it for Cecilia."
"Yes, but who shall I have an affair with?" he asked with suitable gestures of despair.

There were several other smaller details I had missed - and like the above I certainly enjoyed myself reading them back into the novel second time around. I suppose I was so shocked, and yes "disgusted", by Edwin's behaviour on the first approach that I missed half the comedy intended by Jolley. 

The one thing that didn't change throughout both readings is how much I loathed Edwin. His sexual advances on Leila, his predatory imaginations over the possibilities with Daphne, the exposure to his sexual shenanigans, with the group he is part of - Paulette, Erica, Ida and others etc created a character intended by Jolley not as a caricature but as an actual possibility of the male psyche.

To this end, Jolley provides us with background. We are given glimpses into Edwin's childhood, his relationship with his mother, who is a single parent, a domestic; and we have glimpses of the early years in his marriage to Cecilia; their courtship in Cecilia's mother's garden in England. There is the voyage out to Australia, where the couple meet the other couples; and a certain lifestyle is set in motion. When we enter the plot, neither partner is happy with the marriage and Cecilia has taken a year's absence from her work as an ob-gyn and gone travelling with her friend Vorwickl, from Vienna, Austria.

The novel deals almost exclusively with Edwin's physical and emotional developments in relation to the young Lola-like figure of Leila whom we eventually find out is 20, to Edwin's 53. A small detail, I missed the first time, is that Cecilia's age is given as 15 years younger than Edwin, and this is quite important. If Cecilia is only 38 then she still has the option of bearing her own child and shouldn't have to rely on a surrogate.

As we reach the end, Edwin's dreams and expectations are quite predictably smashed. Cecilia's return is imminent and yet nothing, has been explained to her. She is returning earlier than expected due to Edwin's failure to return her phone calls. Mrs Botts and Leila have also arranged their departure, post haste to the airport. No need to mention the baby has also arrived sooner than expected. 

I suppose the only thing I could add at this point, after Edwin has had his severe comeuppance, is do I feel sorry for him? I wonder if any reader would commiserate with him? Has he learned something about himself? I'm not sure if that is the case; he is yearning desperately after Leila and the baby in the closing pages. He does understand his folly, how he has been duped by mother and daughter. Daphne focuses on the financial aspects, " . . . it makes me mad to think of all the money they have saved on rent." She understands that the emotional scourge is too painful to mention. 

Edwin's thoughts are: "A war would solve everything: World War Three. He held up his sparkling glass towards the light. "World War Three," he said aloud, putting aside his pacificism, which he had never declared in any case.

No I did not feel sorry for Edwin in any way. I enjoyed every shade and every level, and all of the variations of how he would suffer. And yet, at the same time, had he not enjoyed himself very much in the year that Cecilia was away?

I really like this photo. It's from The Turnstiles Theatre - and I think it captures some of the beauty of Leila's innocence. Something that the written word struggles to convey; even the best of writers cannot add what the photo above contains. And I think it helps to explain some of the beauty in Edwin's devotion and also his fall into love with Leila and her baby.

I have to add in some further thoughts. I think the hardest thing to admit to in this story are the ends a person might go to to deceive themselves. Edwin knows that he can't maintain the relationship with Leila; that it can only ever be a temporary arrangement and yet he manages to sustain an illusion in the face of every manipulation Mrs Botts carries out. It's surprisingly hard to focus on this, which is probably the point of Jolley's story; the extent to which we are prepared to adjust all the facts in order to pursue a deeper desire. Edwin Page's loneliness drives him into depths of ridiculousness; and this weakness, this need is perceived and pounced upon by Mrs Botts as something she can exploit and manipulate to her own ends. There is a strange moment when she bursts into tears. She has knitted a fine Christening gown for the baby and as she presents it to Edwin, she corrects Leila's comment about the little yellow shawls she likes; " . . . that's how they end up after many washings. Oh what am I saying." And she bursts into tears. It's the only point when we see the possible strain on Botts - and have to wonder about her background.

Secondly Jolley grooms us into loathing Edwin. She makes it absolutely clear that his passion is fuelled by all the inequalities between himself and Leila; not simply that she is younger, but also that she is dependent on him, to the extent that she submits to him sexually; so that she can provide her illegitimate and presumably unwanted child with a home - and parents. Edwin never considers if his sexual advances are welcomed by Leila. He never bothers to consider her thoughts or feelings; he is exclusively consumed by his own needs. His ability to protect and provide for Leila allow him to justify his sexual longings and emotional needs. And although there is Cecilia, his wife, albeit off travelling; the only way he can resolve this emotional and moral conundrum of what he needs versus what he has in his marriage, is to imagine Cecilia's plane vanishing - somewhere above the clouds, the whole thing could just go poof into the void!

The end - again the end - yes I admit, we feel for Edwin right at the end. It is so painful to suddenly be made to encounter all those guilts and shames that you have successfully suppressed for an age. Edwin knows Cecilia will arrive in a few hours; and the item which causes him the most pain, is that Leila doesn't seem to mind the parting. She returns of course, not for him, but for her baby -and in that moment Edwin has an epiphany. He realises she has sacrificed herself, to protect her only love, which is the child. It's almost as if his selfish neediness hidden in the guise of protection and benevolence have actually allowed something good to happen, if not for him, then at least for the baby. He sees this; and this is the light in the situation. He is actually redeemed in that moment at the end, when he sees Leila, desperate to have her child back in her arms. 

A novel where we can despise a character absolutely but then also feel the beauty of this same character's pathetic muddle is something quite rare and wonderful. I had to confess the whole arc of my feelings, which is something I also find hard to do.