Rating: 3/5

Most readers or casual observers of Jack London recognize his masterpiece The Call of the Wild and the adjoining tales about the Klondike. Others may also recognize The Sea Wolf or White Fang. South Sea Tales is a collection of eight stories thematically set in and around the South Pacific. 

As brutal and stark as his cold north stories, these short stories evoke the same primitive lusts and hungers but in a warmer setting. Also evident is London’s casual racism. This may have been simply a product of his time and place, but if a modern reader is particularly sensitive to racial slurs, especially the N word, then that reader may want to skip this collection.

The House of Mapuhi – may have inspired Steinbeck’s The Pearl and is also similar in style and voice to Hemingway or Conrad.

The Whaletooth – missionaries and cannibals on Fiji. When I was in Iraq, I found myself at Christmas time in Kirkuk. The air base hosted a very nice Christmas dinner and talent show of sorts. A sight and sound I will never forget, and I am sure remains with all of the folks there that night, was the contingent of Fijians who arrived to sing. The shortest of them was six feet tall and they were all huge, dark, barrel chested men with corded muscles standing out on their arms. Dressed simply in brown work clothes, they entered in s straight line and formed up in front of the dining facility. With a brief queue, they broke into a Christmas song but sang in their native tongue. The combined baritone of the group made the ground vibrate and I worried about the integrity of the windows. They may have sung two or three songs, all in the same timbre, accepted with bright smiles our standing ovation, and quietly filed out in a single line. Very, very impressive. Reading this story, with a scene of a giant Fijian swinging a fatal war club, I could not help thinking of our gentle giant visitors and their beautiful performance.

Mauki – a particularly brutal story about the peculiar institution. All the classic London themes are here, somewhat evocative of his short story, “The Mexican”.

"Yah! Yah! Yah!" – colonial brutality and race relations in the South Seas, London as racist? Maybe, or maybe not, this is somewhat sympathetic to the islanders.

The Heathen – tale of bad weather and an odd couple that results. London may have been a racist, but here is another story where the islander demonstrates more humility and virtue than the westerners and / or the Christians. Was London using the unreliable narrator or was he a Nietzchian genocidalist?

The Terrible Solomons – This also could have been titled Guadalcanal Diary of a Different Sort or Corporate Recruiting Gone Wrong. Here is one where London demonstrates that he may have been, after all, a racist. Something also to consider about London was his penchant for literary violence. I read The Iron Heel, a carbon copy, Polaroid negative take on the dystopian genre as London was also a radical socialist. Many of his apologists want us to remember the rugged, inspirational and lovable tale of Buck in Call of the Wild, but want the serious, modern western reader to forget about Wolf Larson and may not even know about The Terrible Solomons. A must read for a true London student and one to even the score for his objective biographers.

The Inevitable White Man – Not for the racially sensitive as London drops the N word as often as the F bomb is dropped in The Big Lebowski. Some critics will say that here London shows his true stripes, still others may show that London accurately documented a brutal tale set in a harsh time and place. There is no mistake, though, about his philosophic leanings.

The Seed of McCoy – The editors, in my humble opinion, saved the best for last. This one is the least violent story of the collection and the one most reminiscent of Joseph Conrad, particularly Youth. This is a simple sailing the seas story with some twists. Go to a globe and spin it to have the Pacific Ocean facing you. The vast blue side of the globe is spotted with little dots of brown and green and one of them, almost in the middle of the blue between the Chilean coast and the eastern coast of Australia and almost due south of distant Hawaii is tiny Pitcairn Island. Yes, the same island populated by the HMS Bounty mutineers. Our adventure begins here and London tells a gem from there. 

For London fans.