This book is confused throughout. I thought I would agree with Reiff's hypothesis more than I did, however I often struggled to understand who he was saying was in the wrong or what he was criticising. One second he is pointing to the humanitarian ideology (an interesting concept i have seen elucidated best by him), then the globalists, then the business model of NGOs and the list goes on. This leads to a confusing indictment of almost every actor in the conflicts of the 1990s who experienced the aid caravan of the 'international community' (a concept he rightly criticises). 

I agree with Reiff's complaint that describing political crises such as Rwanda or Sarajevo as humanitarian emergencies simplifies them into perpetrator and victim narratives which are not helpful in understanding the complex dynamics of conflict. I think this is a useful take away. A book more clearly structured around this concept would be enlightening and useful, but these interesting ideas are buried in waffle. 

The confusion that runs through this book extends to his conclusion. IN discussing neo-colonial relationships in humanitarian military intervention he castigates Chomsky and DeBray for their view of Western powers desire to colonize. This seems like a gross simplification of the arguments made by Chomsky (I have not read DeBray). While Chomsky is not to my taste it seems that his arguments that humanitarian intervention is often in line with geo-political objectives of Western powers is not contradicted by anything Reiff says. Reiff even argues that the coming together of humanitarian intervention and US military aims in Afghanistan was of great benefit to the US. While many Wester states have been very reluctant to intervene in conflicts, when they have they have often done so with strategic objectives alongside their humanitarian objectives. Often these strategic objectives move to the forefront as humanitarian objectives become harder to achieve. To cite two of the case studies in his book French intervention in Rwanda and US intervention in Afghnaistan were not purely humanitarian interventions but also part of these countries geo-political strategies. He even makes comparisons between imperial motivations and western aid throughout the book. 

While there are interesting ideas and concepts in this book it has not aged well and is not easy to read. I wouldn't recommend it to any apart from the most specialist readers.