Rating: 4/5

Cue spoiler-free review!

Yuki is only twelve when her mother commits suicide. Her father almost immediately remarries, to a woman in his office named Hanae. Yuki knows that her father was having an affair with Hanae before her mother's death, but keeps her mouth shut, instead deciding to honor her mother's memory by going on and living her life, as she had promised her mother years ago.

The novel is a collection of snippets from Yuki's life, from the time she's twelve and discovers her mother on the kitchen floor to the time she's nineteen. We see Hanae trying to erase Shizuko's memory in any way possible, Yuki fighting to stay in contact with her mother's relatives even against Hanae's direct orders, and her father's inability to say no to his new wife, even to the point that it causes pain for Yuki. Such a tearjerking novel, about the deep bond between a mother and her daughter, that is never broken despite death and a father and stepmother's attempts to pretend as if Shizuko never existed.

I first picked up this novel when I was in high school, but I remember not really being very interested in it at the time. I decided to give it another chance and oh, my, gosh, I'm so glad I did. Yuki is such a real, empathetic character that she feels as if she could be one of my students (at least in the beginning of the novel while she's still in grade school lol, cause I teach elementary school) and I want to just give her a big old hug and tell her everything's going to be okay. This novel gives us a good taste of the real Japan, of the Japanese tendency to talk in circles rather than be blunt, making Yuki's straightforward attitude even more refreshing. All terms and locations are defined in the glossary in the back, but enough context is given in the moment that there's no need to stop reading to look something up.

What a beautiful, heartwrenching story. The reason this doesn't get five stars is because it was Yuki's story, and while we did spend some time with her maternal grandmother in a few chapters, the epilogue was from her grandmother's point of view and didn't even mention Yuki, which was rather disappointing.

This book has no explicit content, but I don't think it would be very appropriate for children, as the subject matter is rather mature and a child might get bored of this book or it might go over their head. However, I would recommend this book to a teenager or an adult looking for a well-written chracter-driven story that is impossible to put down once you've started.