Rating: 3/5

This dated book is the brainchild of the anti-psychiatry movement which was perhaps most notably spearheaded by the innovative British psychiatrist R.D. Laing. Throughout it bears the obviously telling voices of a series of bipolar rants.

Personally, I've no longer much pride in my own such misplaced enthusiasms from back in my youth. I say thank heaven for my meds, Kate.

And, yes, for my so-humanly benighted doctors!

I've got news for you, Kate, my poor embattled and bedeviled late friend: It's not a Trip, that "Looney bin." It's really justified and absolutely necessary if you want to finally wake up - far beyond the land of your devils. Take Your Meds.

Your "devils" are in fact a mere symptom of a much deeper problem. Because you see, your doctors are THEMSELVES as wounded as you. NONE of us is well: It's called shared sin:

The wounded surgeon plies the steel
That questions the distempered part.
Beneath the bleeding hands we feel
The sharp compassion of the healer's art
Resolving the enigma of the fever chart.

Now, I know you had no time for the doctor's "sharp compassion... ."

You believed all along in the strength of your OTHER tormentors: your Technicolor gruesome dreams. You would have been wiser far to take your meds and withstand them.

Some dreams lead you nowhere. They're mere symbols, personified by our minds as friendly demons. You're getting nowhere by being angry when they're taken away. Only digging the hole that spawned them deeper.

Such crazy truculence is not kid's stuff. It can kill. And worse, it can give you a weirdly exalted love of flying high in your distended ego. 'Pride goes before a fall' means what it says.

These days I tell people in their emotional enthusiasm: don't go there!

Reality is the best teacher, Kate.

Find it, wherever you are now...

You know, there's a Great new Apple TV Series that's gonna start streaming on YouTube in January, with the legendary Harrison Ford as a soul-scarred psychiatrist who is trying to fix the world, one patient at a time!

You can take it from Han Solo, friends - find a good one and STICK to him.

Or risk drowning in the confusion of a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World! 

I'm not joking.

For as Frank Sinatra said, you must now:

Put your dreams away
For another day
And (love) will take their place
In your heart!
Wishing on a star
Never got you far -
So NOW it’s time to make
A New Start.