Rating: 1/5

What's the point?

The Book of Merlyn, published posthumously, was T.H White's "True" ending to the otherwise beautiful Once and Future King. Having finished Once and Future King just a few days earlier, I was touched by the elegaic, bittersweet note upon which it ended. Once and Future King may be the finest fantasy novel ever written, and its final page is consequently one of the loveliest parting sentiments given to its eponymous hero.

The Book of Merlyn takes place during the night prior to Arthur's final confrontation with Mordred. Merlyn shows up, something like forty years too late, with his whole menagerie of animal-philosophers in order to drag the King through one last sermon on the nature of man, the inherent wickedness in the heart of man, the inevitability of war and the necessity of failure.

And Merlyn is a massive misanthrope. He comes off like Jean Paul Sartre and Nietzsche rolled into one cantankerous, bearded prat. He is professorial and crotchety, long-winded and without compassion. He isn't the Merlyn I remember, or the Merlyn Arthur remembers, that clumsy old man given to abstract idealism and pontification, the wise old mentor who hated violence and urged Arthur to follow his heart.

And this is what troubles me the most about The Book of Merlyn. That night belonged to Arthur. So little of Arthur's life belonged to him. As a child, he was dragged along the currents of his fate by Merlyn and Sir Ector and Morgause. As a King, he was devoted to his Table, to the ideals of Right over Might, to the virtue of Justice. He was a good friend to Lancelot, and a loving husband, and a forgiving king. And he was never given a moment's peace.

That night was to be his own. He'd done plenty of his own ruminations. Once and Future King describes Arthur in his silence, going over the familiar circles of his thoughts, contemplating war, and life, and love and misery and duty, and all these things that had been taught to him, these concepts with which he had grappled and struggled. Merlyn had always taught Arthur to think for himself--so what business now does Merlyn have, returning at the dusk of Arthur's life to give him some nihilist lecture on original sin and the futility of human effort?

Arthur deserved better. And the readers deserve better. I don't know what T.H White was thinking with this unfinished manuscript, but The Book of Merlyn is a wholly inappropriate ending to the Once and Future King.

The Once and Future King belongs to Arthur, and to Lancelot, and Guinevere and Mordred and the rest of the table. It is a story of humans doing their very best, and sometimes failing, and sometimes not, but trying nonetheless to be good and decent people. Arthur's lessons are his own. Life, experience and his own ambitions taught him more about humanity than Merlyn ever could.

The Once and Future King was a tragedy; The Book of Merlyn, a travesty. Skip it.