Rating: 5/5

I have read this beloved cookbook so many times that as I skim through favourite bits they almost feel like my own well-worn stories. I associate this book, entirely, with my first year in England. I had not long been married, and I was pregnant. I knew almost no one, but I was lucky in my next-door neighbours. We lived side by side in a Victorian semi-detached cottage, divided in the front garden by a red rose hedge. The two young daughters of the neighbouring family had the long blonde hair and pink cheeks of little fairy princesses, and they seemed so sweet that I was delighted to be having a baby daughter myself. Marilyn, the mother, had an extensive collection of paperback novels that she was willing to share and I remember gorging on the novels of Mary Wesley, Joanna Trollope and Rosamund Pilcher. For an idyllic two months I had nothing to do but read, cook, take walks and contemplate my approaching motherhood. I'm sure not everyone would enjoy this state of solitary suspension, but I loved it. I probably would have felt quite alone if I didn't have all of these fictional friends, but I did -- and I also had Colwin's cookbooks, which I cooked from extensively.

I love the way Colwin writes, and her writing transports me to a world which feels safe, cosy and civilized. This is an example of a scene she creates: 
"I had my first taste of black bean soup on a cold winter Saturday when I was sixteen years old. A friend, home for the holidays from a very glamorous college, gave a lunch party and invited me. Seated at her table, I felt that I -- mired in high school and barely passing geometry -- had died and entered a heaven in which people played the cello, stayed up at night discussing Virginia Woolf, saw plays by Jean-Paul Sartre, and went to Paris for their junior years abroad. But it was the black bean soup that changed my life."

We agree, entirely, on a philosophy of food and cooking. We also have many of the same comfort foods: black bean soup, fried chicken, roast chicken, biscuits, gingerbread, apple pie and rice pudding. I have bought nearly every cookbook she ever recommended, although I've never loved any of them as much as I love hers.