Rating: 4/5

In November and December of 1941, Rommel's Axis Panzer Army Afrika (about 2/3 Italian) battled it out with the British Imperial 8th Army in a battle now remembered s "Operation Crusader". In that battle Robert "Bob" Crisp, famous as a Cricket player for South Africa in the 30s, commanded a tank, and then a Squadron of them- driving from just above Bardia on the Coast to several crossing of the Sidi Rezegh ridge, until a sudden surprise ending. This is tank war without GPS locations, Identification Friend or Foe electronics, without clear Radio nets, and with dodgy 1940s technology for living in the Desert. It's just a daily tick tock of the battle- as the Brits get to know their new American-Made M3 "Honey" light tanks- and fight confusion and the Germans at the same time.

As Crisp points out several times- their speedy and reliable steeds had mediocre armour and a pop-gun like 37mm "Anti-Tank Gun"- that had been passed by in 1939 by German Tank Armour on their Medium Mk III and Mk IVs - that were now the Mainstay of the Afrika Korps Panzer Regiments. So the "Honeys" (the US Called them Stuarts-after the ACW General) had to be creative if they wanted to actually knock out a Panzer. And they had to stay away from the Germans' 50mm or 75mm guns that were much more powerful. And then there were the dug in 88s, that could "Brew Up" a tank from thousands of yards away.... It is really compelling reading as the seemingly casual Brits and Colonials (South Africans and New Zealanders) face random death in the desert.

There are adult themes and some graphic injury descriptions, so this is best read by Junior readers over about 12. For the Gamer/Modeller/Military Enthusiast, this is a really great resource. While it's mainly background material for understanding the 8th Army/Afrika Korps struggle, there are more than enough days' that can be used to develop Scenarios and Dioramas. In fact I could see a club making this into a BattleGroup/Flames of War/Bolt Action/Angriff campaign all on its own merits. Read this book- it's part of the WWII Memoir Canon.....