Rating: 3/5

This is a second volume of either duology or trilogy – the difference is that original authors in 1933-1934 wrote only two, but way later, in 2011, another author added the third volume, The Terrans of Beta, which, according to reviews here is a disappointment. Therefore, I plan to stop on this one. The first book, When Worlds Collide, was a part of the monthly reading for May 2022 at  The Evolution of Science Fiction group, and I and several other members decided to continue the series. My review of the first book can be read here.

The first book was an early post-apoc SF, this one tries another trope – a human colony on a new world. As it is common for the especially older SF, the planet is quite similar to Earth, air is breathable, plants are edible, and even the long-dead earlier inhabitants (about which we were hinted in the first book) were surprisingly human-like.

The main character is still Tony Drake, and there are other characters from the first book. Soon after appearing on a new planet a hundred of survived humans try vainly to pick anyone else on radio, start to discover artifacts of the long-gone race and one day even hear the sound of an incoming plane, but fail to see it. Are they the only survivors? What if there are others, who don’t want to share a planet with ‘our’ folk?

The story has some unexpected turns, even if generally it is a good old pulp. There are more pieces of sexism or racism, which sound not only cringy but strange: e.g. there is a young woman more than once classified as a moron, who, unlike the majority of humanity first is able to get a free ride on a ship, then behaves quite reasonably, but the opinion about her doesn’t really change. Also, the authors constantly worry that everyone wants to get “our women”.

The last chapter of the book sounds as if the authors got info that the series will be stopped, so instead of an action-dialogue sequence, there is a quick outline of who does what, quite unlike the rest of the book.
It was an interesting 1930s SF, nothing deep or literary, but a good old adventure with attempts to imagine how a bright scientific future should look like.