Rating: 1/5

What killed this story for me as how easily the H and h both got over the tragic death of their baby daughter (a careless babysitter left her in the bath while she talked to her boyfriend and the baby drowned, HORRIBLE!!! And the crappy girl wasn't even charged!! I'd have seen to it that she spent time in jail, hopefully in a cell with a tough woman looking for a "bitch".) Neither ever visits the cemetery, has moments where memory really hurts (just token references here) and when the h FINALLY wants to discuss their loss, the H cuts her off by saying it's all in the past! Shows how much depth of feeling he has! Hope when his time comes, they dance on his grave!

It was a case of marrying too soon (based on sex attraction), with the h too young, the H spending too much time at work, the h going to too many parties without the H (he always had to work), he accused her of being self-centered and shallow, she accused him of being a neglectful workaholic, and neither seemed to take any time from working, partying, arguing and f--king to spend any time with their baby! in my opinion, the kid was better off dead than with these two for parents!

The whole story is silly, with the H and h separated for several years, but neither in a hurry to divorce legally, though they've both moved on with other people. (In the h's case, she has a fiancé who she's stringing along, planning to marry one of these days, but not ready to set a definite date, or sleep with him. In the H's case, he's sleeping with a woman who he hasn't made any commitment to at all, taking a "whatever" attitude. Naturally, they're both jealous of OM and OW, and the H uses his position as the new boss to have the OM transferred elsewhere!

The h was glad to be rid of him, as he was getting tiresome. (Imagine a fiancé wanting you to set a wedding date and show at least a little interest in making love! Horrible man!) She also neglected to tell him she was still legally married! Oops! Just a minor detail!

Just too ridiculous! I never should have read it through! Be smarter than me and don't bother with this one!