Rating: 3/5

I learned about Jim Corbett from the podcast "Future Ecologies," which is currently putting out an incredible series about his thought and life. I was especially drawn to the podcast's description of his mystical, heterodox take on Christianity, which gave him a moral framework that called upon him to smuggle Central American refugees into the US during the 1980s whom had been denied refugee status by the Reagan administration. I had to learn more about him, so I picked this book up. His interpretation of Christianity dismisses the common form of the religion as a cynical, self-interested negotiation: be good and get paradise in return. Instead, his vision of Christianity is based on the unity of all creation and the act of "communion," or living in total reliance on/harmony with nature, unmediated by any of the comforts of the modern world. He suggests herding with goats through the desert as the most accessible form of communion that allows one to experience the immensity, presence, and unity of God's creation. The details he gives on how to survive with goats in the desert were the parts of the book I found the most interesting. Experiences like goatwalking are necessary to renew the covenant between humans and God and continually remind humans of the importance of having a land ethic given our condition of being alienated from the planet by industrialization. 

I think I read this book looking for a personal spiritual breakthrough. I read much of it by lantern light in a tent in Wisconsin with my 2 year old son asleep next to me. The tent was about 20 feet away from my car, which was filled with all of the comforts of home: children's books, a cooler, a box of cereal, a coffee maker, etc. I think Jim Corbett would see my attempt at communion as a failure because of my constant ability to fall back on the comforts of civilization. In turn, I can't fully embrace Jim Corbett's vision because of how fundamentally inaccessible his communion is to 99% of humanity. Does that mean we are unable to access the correct ecological consciousness and moral framework necessary to save humanity from ecological collapse? I really hope not.