Rating: 3/5

3.5 Stars

No Voodoo and No River. 

 As usual with my reviews, please first read the publisher’s blurb/summary of the book. Thank you. 

Again, uneven pacing and dialogue. This could have been better.

A nice romance here, Elvis meets the love of his life.

Dan Wesson revolver, carried by Elvis 

Full size image here 

Pike's Colt Python

Full size image here 

Notes and Quotes:

7.0% Short sentences. Cornball humour. Condescending arrogance. By-the-numbers plot development. Zzzzzzz.

24.0% Craig's had settled down now, and the pacing and prose are fine. A bit more complexity in the plot and characters. Honestly, I find the sweet little romance more fun than the detection. "Studly Do-Right" cute.

So we watched The Next Generation (Star Trek). It was the one where you follow the android, Data, through a twenty-four-hour period in his life, most of which is spent attempting to comprehend the vagaries of the humans around him. The fun comes in watching the logical, emotionless Data try to make sense of the human condition, which is akin to trying to make sense of the senseless. He never quite gets it, but he always keeps trying, writing endless programs for his android brain, trying to make the calculus of human behavior add up. When you think about it, that is not so different from what I do.
-
Maybe Jimmie Ray had finally realized that he was in over his head and had called for help. That was possible. A lot of things are possible until you're dead.
-
...somewhere near his final moment a young woman had called and said that she loved him. I wondered if he had played back the message. Jimmie Ray Rebenack was just the kind of guy who would have missed the message, or, if he'd heard it, wouldn't have listened. Guys like Jimmie Ray never quite learn that love doesn't visit often, and that even when it comes, it can always change its mind and walk away. You never know.
-
Jodi Taylor blinked hard several times and had more of the scotch. The cat crept out onto the deck and sat downwind, barely visible in the dark. Watching. I often consider, Does he wonder at the human heart?
-
The Polara and the Cadillac were at the foot of the building, along with a couple of two-and-a-half-ton trucks. Both of the trucks were idling, their exhausts breathing white plumes into the damp air like waiting beasts. Pike and I slipped off the road and into the sawgrass. I said, "Pod people." Pike looked at me. "It's like the nursery Kevin McCarthy discovers in Invasion of the Body Snatchers. The one where the pod people are growing more pods and loading them onto trucks to be shipped all over the country." Pike shook his head and turned back to the building. "You're something."

Robert Crais

Full size image here
There are at least two of Robert's works that he wrote from the heart, with visible love and wonder and care, my very favourites:

1. The Man Who Knew Dick Bong
My review of the collection of short stories by authors honouring Marlowe: Raymond Chandler's Philip Marlowe

2. Suspect about the detective, Scott, and his dog, Maggie. Robert took the 2 month dog handling course at LAPD before writing this book, and he told me personally how much he loved it. I could see how special this experience was to him.
My review of Suspect

.