Rating: 4/5

Although I’d never heard of Warwick Deeping, I was particularly struck by his anxious demeanour on the picture of him included in the 1937 set of Wills’ cigarette cards featuring Famous British Authors. 

I also found his name especially striking - and imagined that he might be the author of hard-boiled detective novels in the style of Raymond Chandler. 

I found this not to be the case when I happened upon a vintage copy of his novel, “Sorrell and Son”, in a charity shop in Ipswich. I was instantly charmed by the picture on the front cover – always a treat because most of my second-hand, hard-back books have long lost their dust jackets. 

My copy dating from 1940 is the 35th reprint since it was first published 15 years earlier in 1925. This shows the phenomenal success of the book in the two decades between the World Wars. 

It’s very clearly a novel of that time – and it follows a theme that features repeatedly in books written by authors in the 1920s and 1930s. It’s about a young man who returns from the trenches and struggles to adjust to everyday life in a world where everything seems displaced and disorientating. 

Warwick Deeping explores this theme through the relationship between a returning, working-class war hero, Stephen Sorrell, and his young son, Kit. As the novel progressed, I grew increasingly anxious that the struggles and unfairnesses of life would eventually overwhelm them. 

The more the father made sacrifices for his son, to give him every opportunity he’d never had himself, the more I feared it would all go wrong and the son would turn out, in typical pot-boiler fashion, the viciously ungrateful child from hell. 

Yet despite the many blows and set-backs father and son come up against, hard work and decency finally pay off. No wonder readers lapped this up in the tough years of depression and disillusionment after the First World War. 

A novel that could so easily have teetered over into sentimentality actually won me over with its engaging honesty and freshness. Perhaps it was because it reminded me of my own grandfather who struggled to adapt after traumatic war experiences he would rarely talk about. In any case, I found Warwick Deeping resonated with me in a way I hadn’t expected and I’m very much looking forward to finding other books by him to explore.