Rating: 5/5

This book is for those who enjoy western history. The author, Dee Brown, a celebrated writer of fiction and nonfiction, wrote more than 25 books on the American west. He died at 94 and has been described as writing until the end of his life. I intend to read many more of his books. 

As a side thought, and enticement to read this book, let me mention his most celebrated book that quite likely YOU may have read. It is widely-acclaimed book titled "Bury Your Heart at Wounded Knee," which details western expansionism into Native American lands from the view of Native Americans. This book was more heartbreaking than entertaining or shall I say than "a joy to read." I read it in college. It was not burdensome to read, it did not bury readers with facts; but, it was sad, vivid, and a relentlessly modern story as far as its impact upon people of Pine Ridge, Native American culture, and on how Manifest Destiny into other cultures brings devastation in spite up progress that can uplift groups of people. I read this book almost 50 years ago; and yet, I still can recall its impact upon me, which was a deeper awareness of how historical accounts told from different perspectives affect societies. That was the purpose and outcome of this book. Brown wanted to tell a story from the point of view, which, also changes the story of how women shaped the Old West. As this book demonstrates, the story of pioneer women differs depending on who is telling the story. I have read historical nonfiction books describing frontiersmen, frontier towns, Gold Rush era, outlaws, Indian wars, and covered wagon travels on the Oregon Trail, and though these were factually presented they left parts---those parts being the female perspective. These stories provided factual accounts of westward expansion and development, but, all too often, left out details of events and daily life from the viewpoint of women in the development of the west. This story gives us a more complete understanding of how the west was settled by telling pioneer women stories about women in the Old West and highlighting their contributions.

Some of the women in book I was familiar, but most were unfamiliar names and stories. Some pioneer women stories included were as follows: Frances Grummond, whose husband was killed in the Fetterman Massacre; Margaret Carrington who comforted Frances after the death of her husband and whose husband marries Frances Grummond some years after Margaret's death; 13 year-old Virginia Reed who was in the Donner Party; Julia Bulette the prototype of a fancy woman in the wild west; Flora Pearson Engle who joined an expedition of prospective brides headed for Washington Territory; Dame Shirley who read Shakespeare and Shelley along the Oregon Trail; Josephine Meeker who wanted to school the Ute children but sadly was captured after being rescued and suffered again while telling her story; Jane Barnes the barmaid from England who traveled to Oregon with a gentleman and now holds the title of first white woman to set foot on the Northwest coast; Ann Eliza Young one of Brigham's wives who divorced him; Loreta Velasquez who fought in Civil War disguised as male then went west to find a rich husband; Janette Riker who lived through a Montana winter alone in a covered wagon. There are many other interesting accounts of pioneer women besides these, particularly those who are remembered as suffregettes and members of Wyoming Tea Party. Reading this book will describe specific female roles or events during this time framek (1850-1900), such as the female shortage in the west, schoolmarms, lodging along the journey (most seem quite unbearable by today's standards and even by western travelers at this time), Wyoming Tea Party, ladies of easy virtue, Army wives, women's diversions and cultural organizations, ranch parties. Oh, and the infamous Carry Nation who smashed up saloons, knocked cigars and cigarettes out of the mouths of males, she justified by her divine message to abolish masculine frivolity and use of alcohol. 

History, in my opinion is boring, if not presented in the "right" way. What's the right way? The right way is presenting facts as a story, organizing them in a way that helps reader visualize an event, and presenting historical stories in a way that builds upon previous stories. Dee Brown presents the oral histories of "women of the old west" in this way and did an exceptional job of writing down oral histories in a way that kept me intrigued rather than burdened by cumbersome details. There were enough details to make the stories real, but not so many that a casual reader of history becomes bored.

This book upends common assumptions of pioneer women made by those of us who grew up watching westerns. I was one of those who grew up on Hollywood westerns; and though I loved them, I concede these westerns missed the mark as far as portraying an accurate picture of western women in 1850-1900. I find it amusing now as I reflect upon the naivety of movie-goers in the 50s and 60s. They were so easily persuaded that Hollywood portrayals of pioneer women were accurate. Haha, jokes on me, I was one of these naive movie-goers. My excuse is that I was hoodwinked by Hollywood. It took decades to repair the damage in my case and to acknowledge that western movies were way off the mark as far as what pioneer women looked like and what their contributions were. 

Brown's re-examination of pioneer women sets the record straight (or at least debunks most of what I knew about pioneer women) with a compilation of stories describing varied roles and experiences of women in western territories in 1850-1900. He introduces book with the question "who was the western woman?" He, then, describes a common stereotypical image of sunbonnet-clad woman holding babe in arms and hand of small child. I have seen this depiction in history books, buildings, museums, paintings, and bronze statues such as the one in the Pioneer Woman Museum in Oklahoma, and in each of the 12 states, along the National Old Trails Road. These beautiful statues intended to honor the character and tenacity of pioneer women, which, of course, they do because all pioneer would have had tenacity and character, regardless of their role or contribution; but Madonna statues suggest pioneer women's only contributions were that of mother and homemaker, when in fact they had many other roles, such as schoolmarms, shop owners, boarding house owners, stagecoach drivers, army wives, missionaries, laundresses, cooks, activists, entrepreneurs, ranchers, farmers, theatre performers, brothel workers, and outlaws. 

The sunbonnets they wore were as varied as their reasons for traveling west. The pioneer woman may have worn a bright or dull bonnet, or one designed in Paris. Her clothing may have come from French millinery or East Coast fashion shops. She may have worn a cotton dress with pantaloons or a voluminous hoop skirt, a rainbow-colored petticoat, or the latest East Coast fashion. Pioneer women were sometimes rich, sometimes poor; but most, at least, had enough money to pay for their journey. Indeed, some were looking for a husband, and thus this became the depiction and subsequent Madonna on the Trail statues; but others were looking for adventure or get-rich quick opportunities.

During early periods of western migration, women were scarce so there were enticements to convince women to travel to the territories such as to finding a husband or job teaching. So scarce were women that in 1841 the largest wagon company journeying to the Pacific Coast had one woman. Also, in 1841 a similar party traveling from Missouri River to CA had two women. One historical estimate describes the scarcity of women in this way: the number of women who traveled westward in 1849 was 10 per cent of 50,000 emigrants---roughly 5,000 women, 2,500 children, 42,500 men.

Business owners and real estate gamblers knew women were needed if their gambles were to pay off. So, savvy businessmen began enticing young women with free travel, promises to find a husband, and descriptions of rich country filled with opportunities. The enticements worked and more and more women traveled to western territories in a variety of ways. Some suffered through covered wagon journeys, others traveled by stagecoach, and some rode horseback across wilderness trails. Some went all the way to Panama rather than take the more dangerous journey through Indian country. I had never read stories of women who had traveled by boat to Panama on their way to California, and then by horseback to their destination, so I was enlightened by these stories. Of course, our grade school history books described the Mormon women, who pushed hand carts through the wilderness. There is a personal story describing this as well. This event still seems ridiculous to me!

The common thread experienced by all pioneer women was, likely, their dread of Indians, wild animals; and if they were lucky, that they had escaped danger or death numerous times before arriving at their destination. 

After reading this book, I have a more nuanced vision of what pioneer women looked like and better understanding of their varied roles and contributions. The stereotypical image I grew up is not factually accurate. The bronze statues created to honor pioneer women certainly honors the contributions of pioneer homemakers, but it does not represent the many other contributions of pioneer women. It represents those who moved into the wilderness and maintained homes for their families that became the foundation of early western communities, and who, rather heroically, in my mind, birthed and nursed their children without benefit of doctors or even medicines and schooled their children despite having only a few books. There were other heroic and notable pioneer women who shaped the west whose contributions are not well-represented by a sunbonnet-clad pioneer woman with children. Some became missionaries with hopes of converting the Indians to Christianity and setting up schools for Indian children. Some had lived a pampered lifestyle in the eastern cities and thus had to learn how to be independent by learning how to cook, sew, harvest and preserve food, shoot a gun, drive a buggy, haul water, and chop wood. Some became ranchers, stagecoach drivers, social activists, and a few became outlaws. 

Whether she wore a sunbonnet or high fashion hat, a fancy dress or plain dress, these women who traveled out west were courageous, strong, industrious, and creative women who left their mark on the west. They influenced and shaped the west. They were not of the same ilk, but they were all courageous. Personally, I like the Madonna statues of a sunbonnet-clad woman with her children because the contributions made by these pioneer wives and mothers are highly undervalued; but an updated history, or pictorial collage, that shows the many contributions and roles of pioneer women sure will enhance understanding of pioneer women history.