Rating: 4/5

Read: 18Jan26,

3.8 Stars. A nice enough story that gently ambles along with almost no angst. 

Beautiful Claudia (26) lives with her great-uncle and her mom, and keeps uncle's big house running smoothly. She used to work in hospital path lab but prefers to be at home in the country and hasnt been able to find a job nearer home. She meets Thomas, a heart specialist, when he comes to review her uncle's heart condition and is a tad annoyed with him at their meetcute because he doesnt tell her he is a doctor. He thinks she's beautiful to look at, but doesnt spare her much of a thought in the first couple of visits, where he sees her dressed in horrid old clothing doing housework and gardening. He likes her, but when he leaves he doesnt give her much thought. Thomas (39), a RBB, is devoted to his work and set in his ways, and has no intention of marrying and is happy with his mostly solitary life. She thinks of him a little as she had quickly decided he is a nice man and he was handsome too. 

When her uncle dies suddenly of a heart attack, an unknown distant cousin inherits the house, and it turns out the shares uncle left for Claudia and her mother are worth nothing due to the company suddenly going bust. The mean cousin throws them out, but luckily the local doc sweeps in to partially save the day by marrying Claudia's mum and giving her a home. 

However he also takes in their servants who were also thrown out, so doesnt really have room for Claudia, who swiftly finds herself a horrid thankless job at an old persons home which gives her a room to live in. 

She cheerily accetps her fate and is determined to ensure her mom is happy. She meets the doc again at her mum's wedding, where this time he notices her enough to insist on giving her a lift back to her place of work and high handedly arranged a date with her asap, saying that h'd like to get to know her better and he hopes she feels the same way. 

SPOILERS AHEAD

They have a very pleasant date, and a couple of days later he turns up again and asks her to marry him. (I like to think that offpage his subconscious is frantic knowing it doesnt want him to be without her and so he hotfoots it over there to propose, whilst telling himself it's a practical arrangement!) He offers her a MOC, saying he enjoys her company and would like a marriage based on friendship etc... She also would like to marry someone and build a life and doesnt like her job, and his offer seems sensible, plus she likes him as a friend, so she agrees.

After marriage things amble along quite pleasantly, and though the doc is bury with work, Claudia is mostly happy. and the only fly in the ointment is when some other woman who had wanted to marry him turns up and is mightily annoyed at his sudden marriage, but claudia and thomas have fairly good communication and they laugh it off. She does feel not quite at home in his house because his devoted servant is a bit prickly with her and she has to tread carefully. 

The book doesnt have much depth of plot as some other betty novels, and it shows her briefly meeting his colleagues at a work party, and also her winning over Thomas's slightly difficult houseman/butler/cook after she and thomas nurse him together through a nasty flu.

It's thomas who realises first one day that he has fallen in love, and this worries him because she seems not to feel the same way and he doesnt want to frighten her off. In trying to give her space, he withdraws a bit, worried his passion might frighten her off, and she feels confused by his sudden coolness and sudden working all hours. 

When he goes away for work for a few days, Claudia realises she;s fallen in love with Thomas and decides she cant show her feeling to him as he only wanted a friendly MOC. Then the nasty OW wannabe turns up to cause trouble, tellign Claudia that Thomas has gone away with his gorgeous nurse and implying that they are having an affair. Claudia cant help but call his office, where a secretary confirms that indeed the nurse is not at work and is never at work whenever Thomas goes away for work. 

ENDING SPOILERS

When Thomas phones her that evening, she is too upset and angry to even speak to him and is very breif with him. He had called to say that he needs to stay away a couple of days longer, but to her shock he suddenly turns up the next morning. He says she could tell something was wrong on the phone. (How sweet that he comes back right away!) She asks him about the nurse and he is angry that she thinks he would have an affair. he angrily leaves for work. He's mad because he hoped they were gorwing closer, but now it looks like she doesnt trust him at all thus he thinks she cant have any feelings for him. She is so upset that he's mad at her that she phones him at work to try to talk to him, but he tells his secretary to inform her he doesnt want to talk. SHe is even more upset. She has to get away, so she takes the car and drives intot he countryside to a country cottage they are renovating,w here she had hoped to be happy with him. She is away the hwole day, and ends up falling asleep there. 

When he comes home, his servant tells her he is worried about the missus who has driven off for hours and hours. Thomas figures out where she has gone and goes after her, driving fast. She wakes up and sees him and says "Darling thomas," and he is so pleased that he confesses his love. Kisses. HEA. The ending was satisfactory enough. 

CONCLUSION

The book didn't have much tension and drama and probably 3.9 is too high a rating for it, and yet there was nothing wrong with it either. It was just an easy-going kind of tale. It didn't have that many of the really cozy feelgood moments either because it didn't have the contrast of the "ignored new bride" trope we sometimes get in a betty MOC tale where she has to win people over and earn her happy cozy moments. It was all just a bit too easy for the beautiful, confident, well-liked and charming Claudia. Both MCs were likable enough, but the story lacked that extra punch. I'm not sure I would re-read this because there just wasnt enough going on in terms of plot or in terms of emotions.