Rating: 4/5

"In hard moments you can either laugh or cry but it’s better to laugh." 
Collie from the first book in the series is best friends with Laura and makes an appearance a few times in this book. 
Laura realizes what’s most important to her is family and gives up her dream job in California to stay in Texas. Her dad is there, her ancestors were and left traces such as the church they built, and Graham and his aunts are there. 
Religion mentioned as far as her reading the Bible and praying for a miracle. Clean, some funny parts.

“Walking to the couch, I sank into the cushions, wrapping the afghan around me. It smelled like Mom...[Oh how] I missed her. No matter how much time went by, I continued to miss her. Not so much every moment of the day now, but in quiet moments the pain was intense. Even at 36 years old, all grown up and independent, without her I felt like an orphan in the universe. Pulling the afghan up to my face, I drank in the soft scent, closing my eyes. My thoughts began to drift into calm, quiet water.” Ch 4

“They were two parts of one person. Bonded through 60 years of army towns, four children, countless tours of duty that took him far away yet never separated them. And now, here we stood. Mom gone, dad asleep on the sofa in three day old clothes, and me wondering why I'd never realized that my parents were in love. Maybe I'd never thought about what love really meant. Maybe it wasn't about fighting to preserve yourself, or your space, or your me time. Maybe it was about wanting someone so much you fell in all the way, head first, every bit. About caring for someone else so much that you wanted that person's happiness more than you wanted your own. About not being able to imagine how you would breathe in a world you didn't inhabit together... Oh Mom, I whispered into the dim silent air, feeling the tingling of tears that so often came when I thought of her. I wish you were here. I wish you could tell me what to do now. Everything is falling apart...Mom was the glue that held the whole spoiled self-centered bunch of us together. Mom took care of the holidays, and the birthday cards and gatherings full of food and grandkids. She gave [us] advice on love and marriage while we laughed behind our hands and called her ideas old fashioned. We never considered that just maybe she understood all of it better than we did. Now we were like planets with no sun to orbit, drifting in space.” Ch 11