Rating: 4/5

vs 

    
  

While reading this book I was surprized to find how similar it is to Anne of Green Gables. Well, Rebecca came first. Damn. In many ways it is the better book, but Anne is less preachy. This article compares the two books at length, and that comparison reveals much regarding the differences between American and Canadian culture. http://canadianicon.org/table-of-cont...

"Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm opens with eleven-year-old Rebecca Rowena Randall’s journey by stagecoach from her family’s farm to her aunts’ house in the Maine village of Riverboro. Rebecca’s father has been dead for three years and her mother is unable to cope with the financial burden of raising seven children. Miranda and Jane Sawyer, her mother’s spinster sisters, have offered to take the eldest child, a dull, sensible girl, into their home, but Mrs. Randall instead sends them Rebecca, "a thing of fire and spirit". Rebecca, who declares, "I haven’t done anything but put babies to bed at night and take them up in the morning for years and years," thus finds her life abruptly changed (Wiggin 1917: 27, 12).

In Anne of Green Gables elderly Marilla and Matthew Cuthbert, sister and brother, of Avonlea, Prince Edward Island, send to an orphanage for a boy to help them on their farm. When Matthew goes to the train station in his buggy to pick up the boy, he finds that they have been sent instead eleven-year-old Anne Shirley, "full of spirit and vivacity," who has spent her childhood looking after babies in foster families (Montgomery 1968: 8).

The two girls present a similar appearance as they embark on their journeys to their new homes. Wiggin writes of Rebecca:
The buff calico was faded, but scrupulously clean and starched within an inch of its life … the head looked small to bear the weight of dark hair that hung in a thich braid to her waist. She wore an odd little vizored cap …. Her face was without color and sharp outline (9-10).

Anne is described as:
…. garbed in a very short, very tight, very ugly dress of yellowish gray wincey …. She wore a faded brown sailor hat and beneath the hat, extending down her back, were two braids of very thick decidedly red hair. Her face was small, white and thin … "
 
Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm, 1917 film

Anne of Green Gables, book illustration