Rating: 5/5

I smile every time I read the first pages of Master and Commander knowing that hours, days of pure reading joy lie ahead.
 
In the music-room in the Governor’s House at Port Mahon, the triumphant first movement of Locatelli’s C major quartet is coming to a resolution. A Royal Navy lieutenant conducts from his audience seat. Beside him, a small dark man, also intent on the music whispers: 'If you really must beat the measure, sir, let me entreat you to do so in time and not half a beat ahead.'For a moment Jack felt the strongest inclination to snatch up his little gilt chair and beat the white-faced man down with it; but he gave way with a tolerable show of civility...He was profoundly dissatisfied with himself, and with the man in the black coat, and with the service. And with the velvet softness of the April night and the choir of nightingales in the orange-trees and the host of stars hanging so low as almost to touch the palms.Jack Aubrey gets happy news of a promotion and command of the brig Sophie, he and Dr. Stephen Maturin (the small dark man at the concert) offer each other handsome apologies and the two sail off for the first of 20 books that tell the story of a friendship that will outlast wars, competition in love, vast differences in personality and beliefs; but held together by deep mutual respect, humor, and a love of music.

People who get bogged down with this book generally do so because of the incredibly complex, completely accurate descriptions of ship’s rigging, sails, maneuvers, how to fire a great gun, intricate battle scenes, etc. The only way for a landlubber to get through it is to go lightly through the more nautical sections letting go of the urge to understand everything instantly. Now on my fifth or sixth cruise with Jack and Stephen I am becoming a pragmatical sea dog and I glory in knowing all about the uses of cross catharpins. But some landlubbers never learn larboard from starboard and still enjoy the books. 

The other thing that confuses people is that they expect a standard plot. No. This is a voyage and the story of ninety souls all crowded together in a little wooden world in the middle of a war, sailing about the Mediterranean looking for trouble. Human interplay is the essence. As O’Brian himself explained the closed environment of a ship at sea, at sail, proceeding for months, perhaps for years has a magnifying hothouse effect upon human relations.

At the novel's center there is Jack Aubrey, a professional seaman through and through. Jack has been at sea since the age of twelve. He has in fact spent more of his life afloat than ashore and is as comfortable in the high rigging as another man might be in his living room. The Sophie is his first command, but he already has strong views—a strict, ordered, regulated world is essential—literally a matter of life and death; so is training. Aubrey is convinced of the importance of accurate, rapid gunnery. The Sophie’s crew have far to go before they are more of a danger to the enemy than to themselves. Discipline and endless practice unite the crew so that they know what to do no matter what the weather, even in the heat and confusion of battle. 

Going into battle is what Jack loves the most. Jack was a big man at any time, but now he seemed to be at least twice his usual size; his eyes were shining in an extraordinary manner, as blue as the sea, and a continuous smile showed a gleam across the lively scarlet of his face...Stephen, looking at them curiously, saw the same extraordinary animation had seized upon James Dillon--indeed the whole crew was filled with a strange ebullience.Stephen Maturin is altogether different, but he’s given equal weight with Aubrey in this and later volumes—and that’s one of the reasons the series never goes stale. Maturin is brilliant, impatient, an obsessive naturalist, a gifted physician, a polyglot; yet when we first meet him Stephen is a broken man. Half Irish, half Catalan, Stephen was caught up in the cause of the United Irishmen who rose up against England in 1798, only to grow horrified at the carnage, the incompetence, the traitors and tale-bearers.I have had such a sickening of men in masses, and of causes, that I would not cross this room to reform parliament or prevent the union or to bring about the millennium. I speak only for myself, mind - it is my own truth alone - but man as part of a movement or a crowd is indifferent to me. He is inhuman. And I have nothing to do with nations, or nationalism. The only feelings I have - for what they are - are for men as individuals; my loyalties, such as they may be, are to private persons alone.Stephen, as it turns out, knows one other member of the crew, the first lieutenant, James Dillon, an Irishman, a secret Catholic who has also been involved with the nationalist movement. But Dillon, as a British naval officer, must hide this background or face dismissal--or even treason charges. Dillon is a wonderful character, tormented, cursed with intense pride, rigid ideals and mixed loyalties; he is jealous of Jack Aubrey, doubts Jack’s courage and blows hot and cold in a way that deeply distresses his straightforward Captain.

What I noticed most this time around was how very funny O’Brian can be, though his wit is often dry and sometimes so erudite that it take more than one read—or access to the internet to get the jokes.

The Sophie’s first job is to escort a sluggish convoy of merchant ships from Minorca to Sardinia:Two bells in the morning watch found the Sophie sailing steadily eastward along the thirty-ninth parallel with the wind just abaft her beam; she was heeling no more than two strakes under her topgallantsails, and she could have set her royals, if the amorphous heap of merchantmen under her lee had not determined to travel very slowly until the full daylight, no doubt for fear of tripping over the lines of longitude.Then there are those wonderful moments when Stephen or Jack play off each other:A dark form drifted from the sombre cliff-face on the starboard beam – an enormous pointed wingspan: as ominous as fate. Stephen gave a swinish grunt, snatched the telescope from under Jack’s arm, elbowed him out of the way and squatted at the rail, resting his glass on it and focusing with great intensity.

‘A bearded vulture! It is a bearded vulture!’ he cried.

‘A young bearded vulture.’

‘Well,’ said Jack instantly – not a second’s hesitation ‘I dare say he forgot to shave this morning.’Each time I read the twenty novels in Patrick OBrian’s epic I find new dimensions in them. Whether you read for character, adventure, history, magnificent description, new realms of erudition, humor--or just the pleasure of good story-telling you'll find delight in these books.

Content Rating PG: Quite a bit of blasphemous and crude language; sexual references (including a passing reference to a situation involving a goat); lots of lost limbs and other battle gore. All of this gets toned down slightly in later books.