Rating: 3/5

The author Chester Himes of the book Yesterday will make you cry, takes you to a dark setting which is a prison. "He had celled with the other newcomers up on 5th-K, the top range of the I&amp;K cell block, a very old block with small, grimy, and very cold cells" I like how he goes into detail when describing the setting because you can really picture it and you feel like you are part of the setting. This story shows the struggle of one man's journey through prison.

The main characters in the story were Jimmy and Rico. For me Rico was likeable but not so much Jimmy. "Where there had been hurts; now there were only shocks. Before, each moment had been all past, hurting with a deep ache of remorse; or all future, hideous with the thought of twenty years." These were Jimmy's thoughts and to me I thought he was dwelling on the past too much and being sad all the time when he was the one who got himself into the trouble. On the other hand, I liked Rico because he was very reckless and careless about everything and he always stood up for himself even when that put him in dangerous positions at times. "His eyes became wild and feverish, his face became flushed, and his whole mouth twisted into a sneer. Where I come from, when you win, you put your money in, turn your hand over and take the pot." This shows that Rico likes to prove everyone wrong because all the convicts were trying to leave him with no money while they were playing cards.

Although the book had great description and setting, it was not what I had expected. I rated this three stars because through the book I found myself getting bored really fast especially in the beginning when Jimmy was reflecting on what he did. Based on the illustration on the front cover and the title, I thought it would be more about discrimination between African Americans and whites in prison but it was the complete opposite which was a disappointment for me. I feel like there are more interesting books out there to read.

The ending of the book get more interesting which is the only thing that keeps the reader engaged. A lot of things happen between Rico and Jimmy that weren't expected and that are very shocking.