Rating: 3/5

This is a sequel to Altered Carbon. Even though this is a different type of book I recommend reading the first novel before jumping into this one. In this one we flash forward many years and Tak is fighting in a war. Someone comes up to him with a proposition that he knows where a Martian craft is and this would be a huge payoff for them. They assemble a team to retrieve this craft.

I liked this book but not as much as the first one. Like I said this is a different type of book and I believe that affected my enjoyment. This is a science fiction book mixed in with a military operations genre novel. The first book was a film noir set in a futuristic society. It was grim and gritty and I absolutely loved the atmosphere of the first book. I was hoping for more of that so I was a little disappointed it never happened. As for the story of this particular book it works and it was a nice read. You do have the grittiness(not on the same level as the first book) of a war in the background as our characters put their plan into motion. I did like the characters also as we get a varied cast on our team. The science fiction is on point too as at times it somewhat reminded me of The Expanse series which I love. With all these aspects I should have enjoyed this more but this book never truly grabbed me. And once again this might lay at my feet as I was expecting something different.

I liked this book with its different characters and sci-fi plot. It was worth a read but I definitely enjoyed the first book more. I thought the first book was unlike anything that I have read before. This was not the case with this one. For me it was science fiction and military that was likeable but which other books have done better. I am glad that I read it though before I start the second season of the television series. I am not sure if they will follow this particular story line and a part of me is hoping that they do not. I would like to see more of the rich atmosphere and setting that was in the first book and I am hoping the next book in this series gets back to that.