Rating: 3/5

The word anthology comes to us from the Greek. It means a collection of writings, originally poetry and is formed from a Greek root meaning "to pick (flowers). This word is especially appropriate since gathering flowers could be something of a hit or miss task. For every perfect rose, there are one or two dandelions which could be discarded. And so it is with literary anthologies; they are no composed of works equal in majesty. I guess that is to be expected since the Egyptian mystery story is a genre that does not suffer from overpopulation. With a smaller corpus to choose from, the editor has to be discerning enough to pick the best while at the same time choosing enough to make the book worthwhile, especially if it is given a title like "the mammoth book...". Mike Ashley, the editor of other collections in the Mammoth Book series, does a good job in compiling this anthology. He manages to include the most popular Egyptian mysteries (even if the characters are more used to appearing in novels) while introducing us to authors who are breaking away from their usual occupations, periods or genres.

However, there are some problems here. The most annoying for me was an inconsistency in spelling - perhaps this is not unusual in dealing with different authors writing stories in which English would not be the foundation Most readers would have only a limited (if not superficial) knowledge of Egyptian culture, so variants in spelling the names of gods or institutions would not help the reader to create a comprehensive picture of the times. A glossary would also have been helpful since some of the authors presume a knowledge greater than that possessed by the reader. Just sorting out the names of the Egyptian gods and their responsibilities would have been helpful. Granted a short-story format does not lend itself to great explanations, this collection would have profited from a "who's who" at the very least.

I think anthologies are helpful in assisting a reader to determine what he would read next. In that it introduces one to a number of characters who appear in multiple stories or novels, this beek serves its purpose very will.