Rating: 4/5

The most astonishing aspect of this volume, which, as an entry in the World Landmark series, was meant for a primarily a young adult audience, is that it was written by an eyewitness to history, who actually met the subject and saw much of what he writes about. This has been the case for several of the last few in this series I have read, and it makes all the difference. Not only does it cover the material in a detailed and engaging manner, it also humanizes the often-tragic events on a personal level in a way that is difficult for someone who didn't experience them firsthand.

Speaking of human: the subject of this very capable history/biography lacked pretty much everything that makes one human; think on the order of clinical psychopathy. I'm not even going to use his name herein, opting instead to refer to him as H. The story of his degenerate life illustrates a case where everything that could go wrong with someone did go wrong. Unfortunately, whether the cause of his malevolence was genetics, environment, abuse, disease, or something else entirely will never be known.

Somewhat surprisingly, the book doesn't talk too much about his early life. His father Alois H. was the illegitimate child of Maria Anna Schicklgruber, so H.'s father initially bore her surname, but later took on the name of his stepfather, surname HEIDLER, but throughout his life used alternate spellings, including Hiedler, Huttler, or Huettler, which is based on the German term Hutte, meaning "one who lives in a hut." The identity of Alois's father is entirely unknown. Some have theorized that Alois's mother was employed by a wealthy Jewish family in Graz, and that their nineteen year old son fathered him, but for a variety of reasons, historians discount this theory. No one knows what his ancestry was, so claims that H. was of Jewish ancestry are unfounded.

H. was born into a fairly large family, in 1889; he was the fourth child of Alois and his third wife Klara. Three of the six siblings died in infancy, but Alois also had two children from his previous marriage living with them. The family moved around quite a lot, eventually settling in Austria, where H. attended the local public primary school. Famously a poor student and a discipline problem from early childhood, H.'s constant misbehavior led to serious conflict with his father, who reportedly beat him on account of his refusal to conform to the school's rigid discipline standards. H. reportedly also fell into an even deeper depression after the death of a younger brother, when he became even more withdrawn and quarrelsome, with both his teachers and his father.

Another bone of contention, as the author notes, was H.'s desire to become an artist, which his father vehemently opposed. H. self-reported that he intentionally did poorly in school (which is questionable, as it may just be an attempt to account for his longstanding poor academic performance) hoping that his father would give up on aspirations for his son to follow in his footsteps and become a civil servant, as Alois had made a fairly decent living working in the customs bureau. Alois died in 1903, when H. was only thirteen. Now there was no one to keep him in check, and his mother allowed him to drop out of his long-hated public school, but he later enrolled in another. He did actually pass the final exam in 1905, but had to repeat it, so he wasn't technically a dropout.

What his early life clearly demonstrates is that H. displayed at an early age psychopathic and narcissistic tendencies which would lead to one of the greatest travesties in human history. H. chose to drop out of school, but blamed many of his teachers for his failings even then, calling them mad and claiming that many "ended their lives as lunatics." As the eyewitness author notes, correctly as far as history can determine, H. was "always looking for a scapegoat," even in childhood, which is a trait highly indicative of narcissism, quite possibly narcissistic personality disorder, which prodigiously manifested in his early childhood. Whatever the cause, it set the stage for what was to come.

Another clearly narcissistic trait was that H. believed himself to be superior to everyone else, and in particular, that he was too good for work, never wanting to start at the bottom where others would be in a superior position: he never held a steady job, as he was unwilling to start at the bottom and work his way up. As a result, which is all too common in the present-day, he lived off his mother for three years after leaving school, choosing to spend evenings at the opera, roaming the streets, and developing a deep resentment for those around him.

Despite his abject laziness, it is clear that he was NOT stupid: quite the opposite, he was self-taught in those areas in which he excelled and didn't have to work very hard, especially history, classical mythology, and, in particular, politics, especially the writings of those who saw Germans as some kind of master race who should rule the world. This was not H.'s own invention, as many often assume; it was a commonly-held belief at the time, propagated by the humiliating Treaty of Versailles which wrought harsh punishments on Germany at the close of WWI. H. read numerous books about ancient history and political thought, which heavily influenced him, as he modeled much of his visual propaganda on ancient Roman precedents.

His probable personality disorder and psychopathology manifested to a greater extent in his mid-teens, according to acquaintances: they often reported that he was singularly intense, and never took anything "lightly." He reportedly often flew into "sudden bursts of hysterical anger" when anyone dared to disagree with him or point out errors or flaws in his arguments. At odds with the world, resentful and envious of anyone doing better than him, H. resembled a psychologically unstable "emo kid" who bore all the hallmarks we see in school shooters in the present-day: he was a loner, not unintelligent, but clearly thought even in his formative years that he was being wronged by the world, and everyone in it. As he could never take responsibility for his own actions or failures, he always needed a scapegoat: someone else needed to be blamed.

Two terrible blows seemed to be a turning point in his young life: first and foremost, which probably shaped the course of history, H. flunked the entrance exam at the Vienna Academy of Fine Arts, TWICE, ending his aspirations of becoming a professional artist: his sub-par drawings apparently didn't pass muster and he was rejected... which essentially proved his father right. That almost certainly inflicted a devastating narcissistic injury, which was shortly followed by the second, a personal tragedy, the death of his mother from cancer. It's unclear how much he actually cared about her death, but she was the person on whom he had been living his parasitic lifestyle for years, which meant that for the first time in his life, he was on his own and was going to have to fend for himself. He wrote: "her death meant an end to all my high-flown plans." This pretty much illustrates how little he thought of her as a person - blames the death of his mother for derailing his life's ambitions. Dead mom's to blame... it's her fault. Just... wow.

This dude was a ticking time bomb, and it was thermonuclear.

For some reason he decided to move to Vienna, a stunning, picturesque capital of empire, the jewel of the Hapsburg dynasty... which he hated and where he was miserable, although it offered decent citizens willing to work for an honest day's wage an astounding quality of life attainable in few other places in Europe, replete with music, great food, good fellowship, often at coffee houses, and ample economic opportunity. But for a slacker who preferred to subsist on odd jobs to avoid a real job with responsibility where he would have someone telling him what to do, H. lived like a vagabond, in and out of flophouses, becoming ever more despondent... and envious.

Still without a steady job or routine to take his mind off his machinations, H. continued to read extensively. And what did he learn from all the books he was admittedly devouring? A warped and twisted world view that idolized conquest and conquerors. War was good, not something to be avoided, because peace made men weak and "soft." To the victor go the spoils, so, mass slaughter was preferable to peace and prosperity. Great. He also further solidified the idea that Germans were superior to all other people, although most Germans would have crossed the street to avoid the likes of him, shabbily dressed, hair long, unkempt and unwashed, a man no doubt seriously lacking in personal hygiene, living in and out of flophouses, who probably resembled nothing more than a bum.

He also realized from his reading the power of oratory. He wrote, in fact that "the power that has always started the great religions and political avalanches... has been the magic of the spoken word, and that alone." He also saw the power of propaganda, specifically that the bigger the lie, the more readily people believe it, and how the use of terror was effective in keeping sheeple in line. It was during this time that he also reportedly developed an ardent hatred of Jews, probably because they were wealthy and he was dirt poor. He had also long displayed another narcissistic trait, entitlement: he thought he was better than they were and by virtue of his "superior" birth, he deserved to just take whatever he wanted from those he considered inferior, which was everyone. He moved to Munich at age 24, he claimed, because he couldn't stand what we would term miscegenation, race-mixing, in cosmopolitan Vienna, preferring instead conservative Germans in Bavaria. In truth, he probably couldn't stand to see those he considered inferior doing better than him.

Enter the Great War: H. was a decent soldier, but even here there are notable problems. It's significant that his path to promotion in the army was slow, as the author notes: in four years he was only promoted from private to corporal. Something was clearly off, like cops who can't get promoted - either his temper, the fact that everyone hated him, his probable insubordination, or that his superiors realized that he was a loose cannon who couldn't be trusted with authority led to his being denied promotion for much of the time he served in the army. Of course, he blamed his superiors for not acknowledging his military genius.

Nor was it Germany's fault that they lost the war, which they didn't really lose: Germany was sabotaged by Jews and Communist slackers. H.'s incessant finger-pointing and deflection of blame (after all, he was a soldier on the losing side) is an early signpost as to why HE eventually lost: he was utterly delusional, to the point of his own destruction. Acknowledging the mistakes of the past would have stood him in better stead in terms of not repeating them, but a classic narcissist will never admit their own failings. This set H. on a collision course with the powers that be: he decided to go into politics to fix things. He still had a problem, however - he was a lazy, unskilled, ill-educated vagrant with no training, skills, education, family connections, or probable prospects. Not a fitting start to entering the shark tank that is politics.

His unlikely success does speak to his resolve to get what he wanted, by whatever means possible, legitimate or otherwise. To everyone's astonishment, H. proved that he could actually rally support, particularly by means of his electric oratory, which he essentially learned of by accident. The author reports that he heard some of these speeches firsthand, which took on the tenor of a religious revival (but not in a good way: think Jim Jones or David Koresh).

Not all was wine and roses, however: it seemed that, at least initially, all H. could attract were what many considered to be a rag-tag group of ne'er-do-wells, including some of those whom Walter Cronkite, famous American news anchor and war correspondent present at the Nuremberg trials, would go on to describe as "the architects of the Holocaust." Even back in the early 20s, well before his rise to power, these early supporters included Hermann Goering, a fairly accomplished fighter pilot during WWI, but also a notorious drug addict; Dietrich Eckart, another drunk, a sometimes-poet who had once been confined to a mental institution; Alfred Rosenberg, a former student at the University of Moscow, whose ostensible coin toss led him to become a Nazi rather than a Bolshevik (for obvious reason, he didn't last long in H.'s movement); and "bespectacled chicken farmer" Heinrich Himmler.

There were certainly others. The author knew some of them personally, which lends tremendous value to this volume in particular. For example, the infamous Julius Streicher, a former school teacher, became known as the Jew-Baiter of Nuremberg, where he was famously put on trial along with other war criminals after the war. The author notes, "I used to see him striding the streets of that ancient town brandishing a whip, which he used freely on Jews." Probably a riding crop, with which some of them are seen in photos. Modern-day fasces? Pretty weird.

Some additional events include the famous Beer Hall Putsch, where H. cornered three opposition leaders and forced them at gunpoint to join his "revolution," which led to a failed attempt to overthrow the government and his speedy retreat from the actual fighting. His involvement, which entailed jumping on top of a table at a beer hall and firing his pistol in the air was sufficient to earn him imprisonment for treason. It was widely whispered that many did agree with his views, however, which is the only reason he escaped execution, and was only issued a five-year prison sentence, of which he actually served only a year. It was during this time that he wrote his famous Mein Kampf (meaning My Struggle - ever the braggart) while in prison, which solidified his views and served as a self-aggrandizing propaganda piece, bringing his warped ideology to a much larger audience, as well as making him a millionaire.

Another seriously twisted episode in his demonic life was when his half-sister brought her two daughters to Munich, where they lived at his residence after she became his housekeeper in 1925. Then-39-year-old H. fell in love with his niece, Geli, nineteen years his junior. HIS NIECE. What's also significant here is that at nearly forty years old, H. had quite possibly never had a relationship with a woman. The one with his niece, which was apparently mutually affectionate at the outset, was widely criticized by even his closest advisors and confidants. The exact nature of their relationship is uncertain, but it has been the topic of much debate. It's often implied that he was intimate with her, which may have been, but it's never been substantiated.

It has been noted that H. created a public image of celibacy, to bolster his persona as one completely devoted to his political mission, but that almost certainly wasn't entirely the case. His relationship with Eva Braun lasted 14 years, but there's also evidence that he had other relationships as well. It's perhaps not surprising that things didn't typically end well, as at least two ended in suicide, with a third reportedly dying of complications eight years after a suicide attempt, and a fourth also attempting suicide. Damn.

Perhaps it's a good thing that for most of his young life, at least, H. reportedly eschewed any physical contact with women as a young man, especially while living in Vienna, as he was fearful of contracting an STD. Even when he was a soldier during the war, when the frequent topic of sex came up among his comrades, he reportedly stated when asked if he had ever "loved" a girl, he replied that he "never had time for anything like that, and I'll never get around to it." Even later in life, he avoided female company, to the degree that the wife of his propaganda chief, Gobbles, invited him to parties so that he could meet women, but he reportedly showed no interest.

It was later claimed by associates that when he DID get around to it, he preferred dumb bimbos, essentially, who didn't have the mental capacity to challenge or question him, or have the courage to prevent him from doing basically whatever he wanted, in or outside the relationship. When asked by his secretary why he had never married, he reportedly stated, as to his wartime comrades, "I wouldn't have been able to give enough time to a wife." When asked why he never wanted children, he told her that they would have had a very difficult time, being the children of a figure as grandiose as he, as they would have been expected to "possess the same gifts as their famous parents, and they can't be forgiven for being mediocre."

Well, then.

Back to poor Geli: not surprisingly, on account of all his psychopathology, things started to go south pretty quickly. H. was insanely jealous, controlling, and suspicious of his 20-year-old niece, and his behavior quickly escalated to physical violence. When she had had enough of the abuse, and wanted to return to Vienna to resume her vocal instruction, as she had aspirations of becoming an opera singer, H. refused to let her go, essentially imprisoning her in his Munich apartment. A day after they were seen shouting from the street, she was found dead in the apartment, shot through the heart with his pistol.

It's generally accepted by most that she committed suicide, but not all: some claim that he had her killed because she had defied him, and he knew that there was no way to keep her imprisoned and under his control forever. Thus, he preferred her dead to the thought that he could not possess her, or that someone else eventually would. It kind of makes sense, but his surprising behavior after the fact casts doubt that he ordered it: he was utterly despondent, reportedly beyond consoling, and went into deep mourning after her death, which remained a source of pain throughout his life.

I don't want to rehash this guy's whole life story, as I think his rise to power is the most interesting and revealing aspect of his deviant life. What makes this volume unique, and definitely worth reading, are the eyewitness accounts of the author, who was a reporter and was on hand for many of the events he describes. WWII is without doubt one of the most tragic episodes in human history, and, as despicable as the various figures are who were responsible, it's important to know about them to avoid such events happening again, including the rise of another charismatic but thoroughly evil figurehead bent on world domination.