Rating: 3/5

The Romance of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table is a Chivalric romance; an abridgement by Alfred W. Pollard in 1917. It is based on the prose reworking of legends and folklore written by Sir Thomas Malory in the 15th century, in Middle English. They feature King Arthur, Guinevere, Lancelot, Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table. Malory used material from various sources to write his “Le Morte d’Arthur” (The Death of Arthur) using the Anglo-Norman French dialect of Old Norman that was used in England. Nowadays it is usually Malory’s tales which are themselves used as source material for Arthurian literature.

It is impossible to know how Arthurian literature first began. Malory did not invent the stories we know; he translated and compiled many of them from 13th-century French prose as well as various English sources and poems. In fact one source might have gone back as far as a 5th century Roman military manual!

Chrétien de Troyes is thought to be a main source too, writing about Arthur in the late 12th century. Malory himself, in his text, refers to drawing it from a singular “Freynshe booke”, in addition to also unspecified “other bookis”, but then stories about Arthur and his court had been popular in Wales before the 11th century. Most of the many retellings of the Arthurian legends are now based on Malory’s “Le Morte D’Arthur”, perhaps because he wrote in Middle English, rather than Old English. In the main this formed the basis for Modern English spelling, although our pronunciation has changed considerably since that time. Nevertheless, the language is similar enough to modern day English for more people to understand.

“Le Morte D’Arthur” was apparently written in prison at the end of the medieval English era, and was completed in 1469 or 1470 (“the ninth year of the reign of King Edward IV”), according to a note at the end of the book. Malory’s original title seemed to be “The hoole booke of kyng Arthur &amp; of his noble knyghtes of the rounde table”; with “Le Morte D’Arthur” just being the title of the end section. William Caxton was the first to publish it, in 1485, and it was one of the first books ever to be printed. Yet Sir Thomas Malory’s identity has never been established; there were at least six historical figures with the name of “Sir Thomas Malory” (in various spellings) during the late 15th century.

This all adds to the romance and mystery, of course.

Many scholarly studies and history books have been written about this, but generally people are more interested in the stories themselves - and wonder which edition to read. Arthur W. Pollard’s text from 1917 is straightforward and enjoyable. This edition from 1977 has over 500 pages and includes a glossary at the end. The language is quaint but readable. The author says:

“There is much repetition in “Le Morte D’Arthur” as Malory left it … I have tried to clear away some of the underwoods that the great trees may be better seen … In attempting it I have introduced, I think, not more than a hundred words of my own, but in certain places I have taken over the readings devised half a century ago for the well-known Globe edition by Edward Strachey, which has [had] some twenty editions and has probably brought Malory more readers than all other texts put together.”

I am not sure how many editions Alfred W. Pollard’s ran to; perhaps about the same. However this one is a nice one; a solid hardback illustrated with 16 full page watercolour plates and 16 black and white pen and ink drawings. They are all by Arthur Rackham, the doyen of golden age book illustrations of folk and fairy tales. The book is larger than the average hardback novel, and the print size is also larger than a normal font size (although not enough to qualify as “Clear” or “Large” Print.)

"How Galahad drew out the sword from the floating stone at Camelot."

However, there may be better ones to try, if these two features are not relevant to you. The reason for this is that The Romance of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table was published before the groundbreaking discovery of the famous “Winchester Manuscript”.

At Winchester College in June 1934, during the cataloguing of the college’s library, assistant headmaster Walter Fraser Oakeshott discovered a previously unknown manuscript copy of “Le Morte D’Arthur”. It looked as though what Caxton had published in 1485 was not exactly what Malory had written! The “Winchester Manuscript” is now in the British Library. Walter Fraser Oakeshott was to write about this in his “The Finding of the Manuscript” in 1963, describing his realisation that “this indeed was Malory [and there was] startling evidence of revision” in the Caxton edition.

The Malory scholar Eugène Vinaver also examined the manuscript shortly after its discovery and reached similar conclusions. The manuscript is now generally believed to be closer to Malory’s original and does not have the book and chapter divisions for which Caxton takes credit in his preface. It also uses red ink quite extensively.

However for the purposes of authenticity, it is the fact that the chapter and individual long page headings used in this abridgement are not by Malory, but almost certainly inserted by Caxton. The overall sections are titled:

Of King Arthur
Of Sir Gareth
Of Sir Tristram
Of Sir Launcelot and Dame Elaine
Of Sir Galahad and the Quest of the Holy Grail
Of Launcelot, Guenever, and King Arthur

Bearing this in mind, I think this is a perfectly acceptable and comprehensive rendering of the Arthurian legends, for those who wish to read a good edition but are not purists.