Rating: 5/5

One of Shakespeare's most popular comic plays though a figment of the imagination an illusion, a delusion in actuality that's the pity... such a delectable world to inhabit. Essentially a love story between two couples, a thin plot device in a mythical Athens which never was . Lysander loves his girlfriend Hermia (they want to marry). However her father Egeus, does not consent, prefers the groom to be more prominent admittedly a common story. Threatening Hermia with death or being forced to become a nun. With the help of the city's ruthless ruler and a fierce warrior
 his friend Theseus, the Duke of Athens it's the silly law... Fathers had this right then to choose their children's mates. Egeus, wants his daughter to marry Demetrius. Why? Never quite explained. Maybe the tyrant doesn't like the color of the man's hair. Also the narrative involves Helena, Hermia's best friend, she loves Demetrius, which is not reciprocated, that's the rub .The strange part is the men and women have little differences between themselves. Shakespeare is making a point about love (All four are rather interchangeable). Nonetheless the impetuous eager lovers decide to elope, hide in the nearby woods overnight and flee to one of the boys wealthy widow aunt's home. Far from the city's authority but they miscalculate just a trifle. Hermia confided to Helena about the plan, she unwisely tells the jealous Demetrius, he follows the couple and Helena follows him. Back in Athens the Duke Theseus is busy preparing a wedding feast, Hippolytata the amazon warrior leader he defeated in battle. A little weird ? First you want to kill each other then get married, love, hate are this close... She will soon become his bride. Also six tradesman are secretly putting on a play to surprise the royals (yes a play within a play). Pyramus and Thisbe, a Romeo and Juliet type of work you can guess about the quality. Where are they going to rehearse , the eerie woods of course. Still this intoxicating forest has a secret, it's haunted by unseen spirits, including Oberon the King of the Fairies and Titania the Queen, they reign here, this dark fairyland by night. Puck, a mischievous hobgoblin does all their dirty or funny pranks depending on your point of view..Puck enjoys his job...very much so. Everybody arrives the lovers quarrel, Bottom the Malaprop weaver acquires the head of an ass, thanks to Puck, scaring his timid friends away."Lord what fools these mortals be!"Says the mischievous whirlwind Puck as a magic flower makes the lovers change partners, their affections seem quiet fickle."The course of true love never did run smooth"! Remarks Lysander . Enchanting fable, a dream, a poem, an incantation , funny too and has valuable lessons about the human condition. Delightful...a bit of whimsy...