Rating: 5/5

Takeshi Kovacs is back in black (literally) and badasserer than ever. 

Also back is narrator Todd Mclaren who gave a solid audio performance. I can't imagine anyone else as the voice of Kovacs. I don't know how I'd like him for other books but he has been a good fit for this series so far.

This book pretty much reads as a standalone. You don't need to read the first book at all to enjoy this and pick up what's going on. It's a completely different story. Completely different sub genre even. 

Where Altered Carbon has been described as Hardboiled/Noir Cyberpunk, this book is more Military Sci-Fi/Cyberpunk with a hint of Space Opera. In many ways Broken Angels reminds me a lot of Alastair Reynolds Revelation Space books. There's a derelict spaceship, an extinct avian alien culture with bits of alien tech strewn across the galaxy. There's the question of what happened to them? There's the concept of immortality by digitizing consciousness.

Yep - if you took Alastair Reynolds and overdosed him on testosterone and jacked him up on tetrameth (add a lot of swearing and two overly long sex scenes) you would get Broken Angels. Where Reynolds would use understated hints of violence and build to a crescendo to get the blood pumping - the first hint of violence Morgan gives you is when you're ducking the body parts after your buddy's been hit with explosive plasma rounds or when you're wearing the goup that used to be your partner.

This story is set some 30 years after the events of Altered Carbon on the war ravaged planet Sanction IV. Kovacs has hired himself out to the side with the most attractive fringe benefits and afterlife policy. hooking up with the mercenary company Carera's Wedge, the Protectorates heavy hitters, where they stick him in a combat sleeve with state of the art military Neurochem and lets not forget the Wedge special - Wolf Splice Gene, earning Kovacs the nickname Wedge Wolf.

Of course, the only person Kovacs really works for is Kovacs and when he gets the offer of a lifetime to help stake a claim on the alien artefact find of the millenium, he's not adverse to taking his dual Kalashnikov pistols and going AWOL. The mission, too big to do on his own, requires a crack team. But a team of specialists who aren't otherwise occupied in the war are in short supply among the living. Kovacs will have to call on the dead, paying a visit to the Soul Market, where the countless cortical stacks, scavenged from the battlefield and freshly peeled from the spines of warriors and civilians alike, are sold by the kilo. Ghosts hired to root around in haunted remains of an alien civilization. 

But aliens have there own ghosts too.

5 stars.

Altered Carbon Review
Revelation Space Review