Rating: 4/5

This second book of the Sun Wolf and Starhawk series follows Sun Wolf as he embarks on a new career as a wizard, and strongly suggests that he would have been better off simply retiring to a farm instead. Thanks to the efforts of Altiokis, the villain of the previous book, to suppress magical competition, the Middle Kingdoms are short on wizards, which is a problem for Sun Wolf, who is hoping to find somebody to teach him magic. The book opens with this search for a teacher leading him to the far south, where he finds a rather unpleasant woman who is at least half a charlatan, as well as a hypocrite, and yet is easily the best prospective teacher he’s found. In part, this is due to the legacy of the titular witches (part of a magical dynasty who ruled a nearby, now-abandoned city): unfortunately, said witches turn out to have been pretty legitimately evil, as bad as Altiokis in some ways. All this doesn’t exactly put a good light on wizardry: indeed, in this book one is almost tempted to sympathize with Hambly’s usual anti-magic religious figures. Sun Wolf, however, is too stubborn to be pushed aside from his quest for magical knowledge by the anger and disgust he feels at his fellow-wizards: instead, what pushes him aside are the occasions in which he, and sometimes Starhawk too, are being arrested, beaten up, or otherwise mistreated as part of the mystery that forms the other plotline, and which eventually merges, in a rather unpleasant way, with the legacy of the witches. (Unfortunately, Hambly gives a good chunk of the solution away pretty early, in a way that makes you wonder why Sun Wolf didn’t pick up on it: it’s always a bit unfortunate when you feel that you are smarter than the characters in the book.) In fact, though Hambly often has her heroes and heroines suffer, what Sun Wolf and, to a lesser extent, Starhawk go through in this book is pretty extreme. In this case, though, it's clearly for a reason: both of them, but Sun Wolf in particular, are expiating the many sins they committed during their long careers as mercenaries. Making it extra harrowing is that Sun Wolf is smart enough to see the connections: he’s not just suffering physically, but also undergoing a series of increasingly uncomfortable revelations about his past life. This culminates in a really quite powerful scene in which, having been broken (by a threat to Starhawk) and forced to confess to something he didn’t do, he recalls the many times when he was the one doing the breaking. Still, it’s not enough to satisfy karma, so though in the end he and Starhawk do manage to save the day, they end the book once again on the move and encouraged not to come back, with Sun Wolf not much better of a wizard than he was when it started, though richer by a set of magical tomes. The important question of the book, though, is not whether Sun Wolf can be a wizard, but whether, after all the things he has done, he can be a good person. Hambly has clearly weighted the scales a bit (especially with the children: they aren't as bad as they might have been, but there's little in Sun Wolf's past life to suggest that he would make a good father), but the fact that Sun Wolf knows that it’s a question makes him an interesting enough character to support a much worse book than this one.