Rating: 5/5

Notre Dame, the grand cathedral at the heart of Paris, gave Victor Hugo’s 1831 novel its original title. We in the Anglosphere know the book as The Hunchback of Notre Dame, and tend to focus on the character of Quasimodo, the bell-ringer whose physical deformities conceal a brave and kind heart. The reason for the confusion of titles is quite simple: the book’s English translator, working in a time when literary Gothicism was highly popular, simply retitled the novel for its first English-language publication in 1833, figuring no doubt that a book named after a hunchback would sell more copies than a book named after a cathedral.

As titles go, however, Notre Dame de Paris is truer to the spirit of what Hugo wanted his novel to provide – a grand, epic look at life in medieval Paris, unified around the cathedral that has been overlooking Parisian life from the Île de la Cité ever since its completion in 1345. The novel’s action takes place during the late-15th-century reign of King Louis XI, at a time when Notre Dame was just over a century old. By 1831, however, Notre Dame was showing her age; she had suffered significant damage from anti-clerical rioters during the French Revolution, and Hugo was concerned that many of Paris’s treasures of Gothic architecture might be permitted to crumble into dust. 

It is for that reason that Hugo includes in the novel extensive passages like this one in support and defense of Gothic masterpieces like Notre Dame: “[T]hree kinds of ravages nowadays disfigure Gothic architecture: wrinkles and warts on the skin – these are the work of Time; wounds, contusions, fractures, from brutal violence – these are the work of revolutions from Luther to Mirabeau; mutilations, amputations, dislocations of limbs, restorations -- this is the barbarous Greek and Roman work of professors.” Read this book as Notre Dame de Paris, looking at all the characters in terms of how their lives relate to the life of the cathedral – rather than focusing solely on one (albeit undeniably interesting) character – and you will suddenly find that you are reading an entirely different, and much richer, novel.

You’ll still get to spend time with the same unforgettable characters, of course. Pierre Gringoire, the aspiring poet, may reflect Hugo’s own belief in the power of words and literature to bring about positive change. There is pathos in Gringoire’s hopeless love for the Romani (“Gypsy”) woman Esmeralda; Hugo, whose liberal and reformist frame of mind made him sympathize with all who suffered oppression, focuses on the anti-“Gypsy” prejudice among the people of medieval Paris, as when the character of Gervaise says that the Romani people’s “teeth are long enough to eat little children. And I would not be surprised if La Esmeralda were to pick a bit now and then, though she has such a small, pretty mouth. Her white goat plays so many marvelous tricks that there must be something wrong at bottom.” I’ve never seen this person do anything wrong, but she simply must be doing some awful thing, because it suits me to think so. Hugo captures the nature of prejudice in a single line of dialogue.

It is Esmeralda’s fate to be beautiful, and – paradoxically – her misfortune to be loved. She is loved by Gringoire, whom she marries to save him from the wrath of the Truands, the professional criminals whose “Court of Miracles” Gringoire accidentally wanders into; but she is indifferent to his love, and regards him only as a rather feckless friend. She is loved by Quasimodo the bell-ringer, who rescues her from execution in one of the novel’s most famous passages; and the feelings of pity that prompt her to bring water to Quasimodo during his public punishment in front of the church become feelings of appreciation and respect once he has saved her from execution. Most ominously, Esmeralda is loved – or, more accurately, lusted after – by the arch-deacon Frollo, a powerful church official whose vows of chastity go out the stain-glassed window once he has seen Esmeralda dance. 

A lifetime of repressed or suppressed lust seethes within Frollo, who at one point in the novel tells Esmeralda that her “superhuman beauty…can come only from heaven or from hell” and concludes, unsurprisingly, that “I perceived the demon’s trap, and had no further doubt that you were from hell, and had come for my perdition.” A lust-racked man blames an innocent woman for the fact that he lusts after her, and intends to destroy her if he cannot have her. So little has changed since 1831, or since 1470, or since the first time a woman said “no” to a man who desired her without loving her.

But what of Esmeralda herself? She has a heart; whom does she love? Tragically, Esmeralda has given her heart to Captain Phoebus de Chateaupers. A bold cavalryman and leader of archers, Phoebus is a veritable Apollo for good looks and gallantry; but he is doubly well-named in that he is a false god whose reality belies his quasi-divine appearance. And Esmeralda’s idolatry for Phoebus betrays her at one crucial point in the novel.

Hugo’s dedication to the liberal, democratic spirit of la République française emerges in his portrayal of King Louis XI. Known historically as le rusé (“the Cunning”) and l’universelle aragne (“the Universal Spider”), King Louis emerges as a capricious figure, granting clemency and ordering executions as the whims of the moment move him. Esmeralda, rescued from execution by Quasimodo, enjoys the benefits of sanctuary within Notre Dame, but the king orders that “The witch must be hanged” and subsequently asks the Virgin Mary to forgive him for violating the sanctuary of her cathedral, asking that she “Forgive me then for this time, our Lady of Paris!” and assuring her that “I will never do so again, and I will give you a beautiful statue of silver, just like the one I gave last year to our Lady of Ecouys. Amen!” Thus, with a Judas Iscariot-like bribe of silver, the King of France is prepared to deliver an innocent woman over to the gallows. In the time when Notre Dame de Paris was published, the corrupt post-Napoleonic Bourbon dynasty had just been replaced by a constitutional monarchy; and in his portrayal of the King, Hugo makes clear his support for the spirit of Liberté, égalité, fraternité. 

In a novel filled with torture and brutality, some measure of justice is achieved; the cruel and hypocritical Frollo gets his comeuppance, and Gringoire’s belief that the power of words can outlast the power of physical force and compulsion gets some measure of vindication. But the cost in innocent human life, by novel’s end, is high; and with the novel’s final image, the reader is reminded in a moving way of Quasimodo’s pure, uncorrupted, hopeless love for the beautiful Esmeralda. Small wonder that Quasimodo has made such an impression upon generations of readers, or that he has been portrayed so memorably on screen by actors like Lon Chaney, Charles Laughton, Anthony Quinn, Anthony Hopkins, Tom Hulce, and Mandy Patinkin.

I read Notre Dame de Paris on a trip to Paris in 2006. My bookmark for the novel is a boarding pass for the flight home (Air France 5870, Paris to Detroit; courteous flight attendants, good wine with dinner). My impressions of Paris now are the same as my impressions of Paris back in 2006, as I walked the battlements of Notre Dame and looked out, from a gargoyle’s-eye view, upon la ville lumière, the City of Lights. Hugo’s Notre Dame de Paris captures in 1831 what people all over the world know about Paris today — that for all the tragedies and traumas that Paris has suffered over its long history, the spirit of Paris lives on, imperishable.