Rating: 3/5

Glutton for punishment that I am, I finally broke down and picked up the third of the Freddie Montgomery novels. (Don't be so damn coy, Banville and "Morrow": We all know it's Freddie from about page 1.) Oh well, Mommy always did make me finish everything on my plate.

This entry is somewhat more palatable than the previous two simply because we're somewhat less confronted by the fact that Freddie is far from being equal to his crimes (participating in art fraud is somewhat more in character than wimping his way through a murder): he's a total nebbish or, better (as I will argue) a wanker, although admittedly one with an unusual gift for not only words but self-reflection. In fact, one's appreciation of the novel hinges entirely on the degree to which one is charmed by those words and that self-reflection. Or perhaps one's appreciation of Banville's literary production hinges on this: having also read his *Untouchable*, I begin to wonder whether all of his protagonists are art-loving wankers. Those who are intrigued by a Humbert Humbert and charmed by his words and thoughts will be pleased here too, although Freddie's prose, although eloquent to a fault, lacks Humbert Nabokov's extravagant musicality. 

The object of the Freddie's erotic obsession is, unlike Humbert Nabokov's, of legal age, for which I guess we should be thankful. Unfortunately, it's here that, in my opinion at least, the novel overplays its hand. For the object of the obsession is nothing more than a collection of visual stimuli (which of course eventually get translated into tactile stimuli) and is, as a character, a cipher. (Well, okay, she ends up displaying a masochistic streak. Let's not act all surprised now.) As with every erotic obsession since man started to walk on two (and a half) legs, the obsession tells us nothing about its object and always everything about its subject. Thus she ends up being (even) less interesting than the paintings Freddie Montgomery ("Morrow") has agreed to examine, although his descriptions of the paintings themselves, which intersperse the narrative, become increasingly preoccupied with her -- or rather, his obsession with her. Add to this the frequent apostrophizing to someone who doesn't even have a name (she's simply "A"), and the result is one obsessive but ultimately masturbatory fantasy. To his credit, Freddie does seem to realize this at some level of consciousness.

There are a few pointless teases in the plot, wouldn't you know, no doubt the dues Banville has to pay to be a member of good standing in the PoMo Lit club. But since they're teases, I guess I shouldn't spoil them for you.

Awfully fine writing though -- rather a necessity in a novel in which the only real action is inaction, namely, the main character's self-examination -- and the workings of Freddie's mind are fascinating, although perhaps only in small doses. Five stars for Banville's intellect; four for his clever inhabiting of the Nabokovian mindset -- but only three for this novel.