Rating: 5/5

After numerous rereadings I still think this is the best analysis, parody, commentary and tribute to 'The Wasteland' that has been written. And given the mountains of critical 'writing' piled on that poem that is an extravagant claim.

The standard critical approach to 'The Wasteland' is to cast the reader as a detective who must hunt for the clues which will give the poem coherence; the irony being the only coherence the poem has to offer is the reader's search for it. 

Rowsom's comic performs this search for meaning in grainy panels as the detective/reader threads the grim streets of Waste Land London looking for answers to a baffling case. Along the way he encounters most of the characters in the poem in a stream of verbal and visual puns, allusions, and references some of which are laugh out loud funny. The cast includes most of the modernist writers, mostly as extras crowding in seedy bars though at one point Yeats appears as the mandolin player doing a bad version of Cole porter's 'Let's fall in love'. 

So Chris Marlowe, who may be a refugee from a Chandler novel or a decadent Renaissance poet down on his luck, suffering the obligatory attack of intertexuality, over blown similes, drunkenness and general incompetence (the latter characterised neither of his namesakes) sets out to find the murderer of his partner, who was gunned down in Rats Alley in the prologue. He finds himself in the poem, Shanghied to London, trying to make sense of a case which may or may not involve the Holy Grail. 

At the end of the case, whose solution is no solution, (which would have delighted Chandler), a frustrated Marlowe does what readers of the poem have wanted to do for generations: he holds up T.S. Eliot at gun point and demands answers! Eliot, of course, responds to his questions by quoting the notes from the poem until they are interrupted by a dismissive Ezra Pound. 

The comic comes with its own end notes, which are as pointless as Eliot's, but much more entertaining.

 (Apparently trouble with Eliot's estate led to a revised version: this review is for the original.)