Rating: 5/5

A revelation. In the early 1920s, Ben Hecht (author of "The Front Page," among other plays and novels) wrote a daily column for the Chicago Daily News about life in the city; 64 are selected here. He's a marvelous writer. The columns evoke urban (and occasionally suburban) living in a vanished time, but often are also startling contemporary. The flavor of 1920s Chicago is so rich, you feel that you're there. The book has changed the way I look at people on the train and on the street, and even the buildings: I am trying to peer beneath the surface, to see them through Hecht's curious journalist's eyes.

The vignettes range from humorous, Damon Runyonesque character sketches to modernist meditations on life, art, urban living...his range is vast. He muses on the interior lives of the people on the street; evokes the atmosphere of lonely late-night walks; spins mood pieces about rain, the lake, and reflections on wet pavement; describes music and theater; puts himself in the mind of an escaped convict in hiding; he chats with a dimestore salesgirl about the people who buy 10-cent wedding rings. In one column, he wonders irritably why he is even attending a vaudeville concert, then become enthralled by the unprepossessing but unexpectedly brilliant violinist, and vows to stay for all three shows; but then he decides to just go home. It's amazing. 

An excerpt from my favorite piece, and one of the more lyrical entries, "Ornament": "Ornaments change, and perhaps not for the best.... One by one the charming blunders of the past have been set to rights. Highways are no longer the casual folderols of adventure, but the reposeful and efficient arteries of traffic. The roofs of the town are no longer a rumble of idiotic hats cocked at a devil-may-care angle. Windows no longer wink lopsidedly at one another. Doorways and chimneys, railings and lanterns have changed.... Towns once were like improvised little melodramas. men once wore their backgrounds as they wore their clothes--to fit their moods. A cap and feather, a gable and a latticed window for romance. A glove and rapier, a turret and a postern gate for adventure. And for our immemorial friend Routine a humpty-dumpty jumble of alleys, feather pens, cobblestones, echoing stairways and bouncing milk carts. These things have all been properly corrected. Today the city frowns from one end to the other like a highly efficient and insanely practical platitude. Mood has given way to mode." The piece develops into a paean to taxicabs and the mysterious lives of the people ensconced within: "A teasing procession for the eye and the thought."

This selection made me want more (the other 400+ columns are uncollected).