Rating: 5/5

Moonfall, Tamara Thorne, 1996

My favorite quote: “Midnight. A dark, moonless shroud of midnight that closed in around Minerva Payne, starving her lungs, chilling her soul with its blackness.”

Notable characters: Sara Hawthorne, a woman returning home; Minerva Payne, a mysterious local with mysterious abilities; St. Gertrude’s, aka, St. Gruesome’s, a girl’s school run by sinister nuns; and, of course, Moonfall itself, a picturesque community that really gets into the Halloween spirit (I know those last two aren’t TECHNICALLY characters, but in this case, they are -- Tamara Thorne has a way of making places as real as the people)

Most memorable scene: The shower scene. Spooky stuff …

Greatest strengths: Atmosphere first, because no one paints a spooky picture like Tamara Thorne, and in Moonfall, she’s in fine, fine form. Running a close second to that, however, is the character development -- another of Tamara Thorne’s strengths

Standout achievements: The Halloween vibe it gives off. Seriously. Moonfall is THE perfect Halloween read. It makes me long for the Octobers of my childhood

Fun Facts: Because Moonfall was such an influence on me as a young, budding writer, I wanted to pay homage to it in my own work. That said, Gremory Jones, my demon salesman in Dream Reaper, hails from the town of Moonfall — with Tamara Thorne’s permission, of course. Also, in my paranormal murder mystery, Sleep Savannah Sleep, my main character, Jason Crandall, is seen reading Moonfall

Other media: N/A

What it taught me: No other author has taught me more about creating atmosphere than Tamara Thorne, and Moonfall is a solid example of her abilities

How it inspired me: For me, Moonfall is the book that started it all. For the longer version of that story, see below

Additional thoughts: Moonfall is the first Tamara Thorne novel I read. I saw it on a shelf in the library when I was in my late teens. It sounds odd — almost supernatural — to admit that it was the name “Tamara Thorne” that jumped out at me and not the title Moonfall, but it’s the truth. I checked the book out, loved it, and continued looking for more. I found Tamara Thorne online and since there wasn’t really any social media at that time, I just kind of stalked her website. Fast forward a few years. I got my first book published and realized I didn’t even know any other people in my field. So I set out to meet other authors. By now, Facebook was a thing, so I immediately friended Tamara Thorne there and private messaged her, asking if she’d be interested in doing a interview on my blog. She said yes, one thing led to another, and currently, she is my collaborator of 10 years and counting. As Thorne &amp; Cross, we are simultaneously working on our 9th and 10th novels together, and this, to me, is proof that dreams come true and that you should always, always meet your heroes

Hit or miss: Hit

Haunt me: alistaircross.com

Read Moonfall: https://tinyurl.com/4e7a7wrf