Rating: 3/5

Lord of Lightning was originally published in 1990 and published by Loveswept. Open Road Media has re-released the book in digital format and given it a new updated cover.
I received this book from the publisher and Netgalley. 

Lise is a school teacher in a small village. One afternoon she runs into Stephen, literally, when her shopping cart developed a mind of it's own. There was an instant attraction and sparks flew, again quite literally. There was something about Stephen that was a little different.
When Lise gets wind of rumors that Stephen, new to the community, is maybe an alien from outer space, Lise decides to pay the man a visit and welcome him to the community and warn him about the rumors he has been a victim of.

When Lise located Stephen's out of the way home, she discovers some strange things located there. Before she can fully digest what her eyes are seeing, she has a bad fall and Stephen finds her and takes care of her.
Both of them are physically attracted to each other. Stephen is at times almost too aggressive in his pursuit. Then at other times he is the perfect gentleman.
Lise doesn't know quite what to make of him, but she does know he makes her feel like she has never felt before.

As they get to know each other a bit, Lise learns that Stephen does indeed have some really odd secrets. Will those secrets prevent them from having a long term relationship?

This book is part contemporary romance, part science fiction, with a touch of paranormal.
The plot doesn't really gel together to well at times, and the premise is really out there. The author does have an imagination, I can say that much. The author does keep us guessing about Stephen's true nature. Is he just a man doing a job or is he actually from another planet?
All questions are answered in the end, but it was a little rushed through. The HEA was also a bit of a let down. I didn't feel satisfied with the arrangement. 
Having said that, I did enjoy the nostalgia in the book. There were references to things from the 80's , like TV shows and movies, but also the language used by Lise's students. Remember "that's so rad"? Funny. That's one of the things that makes these books fun to pick up and read again after so much time. This one a unique. I give this one a C.