Rating: 4/5

4 Stars. I've added below a quick review of the 20 entries in this great 1961 collection of early James M. Cain. It includes sketches and dialogues, short stories, and serials. But really, all of them are short stories. There's an excellent introduction by Roy Hoopes - he discusses Cain's development as a writer and places the stories in the context of his later blockbusters such as 'Mildred Pierce.' Less than half are mysteries, my favourites, but they're all worth reading. Each of them features a Cain twist, the surprises in life that make things interesting. Some of his writing takes getting used to; it often focuses on rural American characters and their style of speaking and vocabulary from the 1920s and 30s in the depression. And a few other themes show up, like how people can develop a guilty conscience after a serious crime, and how they handle difficult situations especially where love is involved. He often shows the worst in people, occasionally the best. Six of the 20 have their own GR entries and I review them separately there.

1) 'The Robbery.' 3 Stars. Four pages; we follow the thinking of a man who opens his door to another tenant in his building. His visitor is polite as he meanders toward his reason for the visit. Best to summarize it as: our apartment was broken into and we were robbed. I think you did it!

2) 'Vanishing Act.' 3 Stars. Again four pages. Not a mystery, just a slice of life. Mr. Needles and Mr. Kemper are having a rambling conversation in a community park about a story in the paper on a former soldier who is shrinking as he ages. You'll enjoy the way Cain portrays friendly interactions as the two bounce from one subject to another.

3) 'Dreamland.' 4 Stars. Again four pages. An amusing slice of life. Before the telephone became more economical, there was a period in the 1920s and 30s when people recorded personal messages on a phonograph record and sent it to friends or family. Sometimes singing, sometimes talking. Here a nervous young man attempts to make a date that way. He wants a young woman to go dancing with him at Dreamland.

4) 'Joy Ride.' 4 Stars. Another 4-pager - several early stories must have been written to the original magazine publisher's length requirements. Not as much a mystery or crime story, but there is some of that, as a litany of 'what stupid things we do when we're drunk.' Two sons of a road contractor feel their father is underpaying them and decide to steal his horse and buggy to take a bender in Washington. Things go awry on their drunken return.

5) 'Queen of Love and Beauty.' 3 Stars. I wonder what Cain got paid by the magazine for these 4-page short fictions? Cain opens with "Down in the country .." just as he did with the previous item. The unwitting lead is Burt Lucas; he'd been drummed out of town a few years ago for stealing a car and wrecking it. Now he's back and has entered a local horse-riding tournament which features the winners' right to choose the belle of the ball, so to speak. What should the community do if he wins?

6) 'Santa Claus, M.D.' 5 Stars. A wonderful short story, again just 4 pages - these really are a more recent phenomenon called flash fiction (short stories of 1,000 words or less). Mr. Hartman is the new principal of a school in a rural small town, and he too appears to be more modern than the 1920s. A science teacher, he began to teach the upper grades "all about how the animals had little ones." In rural America, the kids already knew that but, when he told the Christmas assembly that there wasn't a Santa Claus, all hell broke loose. He got fired but then quickly re-hired! Why you ask?

7) 'Gold Letters, Hand-Painted.' 5 Stars. Again, an amusing 4-page story about one of the ways boys became men in 1920s, small town America. Don't worry, it's nothing serious. A young man, Robert B. Plummer Jr., travelled to the big city of Wilmington, Delaware and got himself a blue and gold shaving mug with his own name hand-painted on it. And then put it on the shelf at the local barber shop. Everyone had to see it. But for Bob, things didn't go as planned.

8) 'It Breathed.' 4 Stars. Another 4-pager. With supernatural aspects - rare for Cain. It's a war story from near the end of WW1 when the American Expeditionary Force was in Europe. A group of four men are serving as lookouts but one of them, Foley, has fallen ill with flu. That negatively impacts the length of off-shift rest time for the others. Katz complains and adds that he can't stand lookout after midnight. He says, "You know this whole thing is alive .. and it breathes." The narrator is baffled as to what his partner is talking about. The tale reminded me of an Agatha Christie horror story (yes, she did some good ones!).

9) 'The Hero.' 3 Stars. A 16-pager. We are flies on the wall at a confidential meeting of the commissioners of a small community [the elected council]. A volunteer firefighter has died at a fire. The town has two fire brigades - the Water Witches and Semper Fidelis ['always faithful']. But instead of dousing the fire, Scotty Aker of the second had started a water fight with the first. That's when a heavy section of burning timber fell and killed him. Is Scotty a hero who deserves a pension? Do they have the money anyway? The committee knows that whatever decision they make, one of the brigades will be upset. It's politics and they even try to throw blame on the local Rotary Club! Eventually they reach a decision; can you guess it? [Note: other fraternal organizations mentioned include the Odd Fellows, The Junior League / Order, and the Heptasophs ('seven wise people'). Second note #2: in Cain's inimitable way, the conversations ramble all over the place. At one point, a commissioner tries to justify the lynching of a 'n....r.' Of it's time but so upsetting. I took a star off.]

10) 'Theological Interlude.' 5 Stars. Read it and laugh. An indictment, I think intentional but it's difficult to understand what Cain was really saying below the surface, if anything, of religious practices in the 1920s in rural and poor America. It's 14 pages. Hal and Laura Nation, with her brother Mr. Barlow, are discussing their 16-year-old daughter Eva's near death experience. She caught typhoid fever [today there are excellent vaccines and antibiotics] and 'died.' Her heart appears to have stopped and she claimed to have been in heaven. The three debate this as well as Eva's more recent running off with a married preacher. Hell and ghosts are in there too. To the latter Mrs. Nation says, "I ain't never said I believed in ghosts." They conclude that Eva had to have been in heaven. Mr. Nation closes with, "Stands to reason." I roared. [Note: there's a smaller reference to lynching. No deduction this time but it amazes me how people could be so nonchalant about such a terrible crime against an individual and humanity too. But I am 99% sure Cain was describing rural whites as he found them.]

11) 'Pastorale.' 4 Stars. See my single story review elsewhere on GR.

12) 'The Taking of Montfaucon.' 3 Stars. See my single story review elsewhere on GR.

13) 'The Baby in the Icebox.' 4 Stars. See my single story review elsewhere on GR.

14) 'The Birthday Party. 4 Stars. There's an adage that boys as they enter their teenage years are often not as mature as girls. Burwell Hope fits the bill. He's been invited to Marjorie Lucas' birthday party; she's a classmate but he says she has "The face that only a mother could love." Don't we sometimes say such cruel things. And the other guys going are "sissies." He does enjoy swimming and, to avoid Red the ice cream truck guy to whom he owes a dime, he goes to the local pond where to his amazement Marjorie turns up! She's a great diver and he begins to enjoy her company. Before you get too invested in this boy meets girl story, should I remind you that Cain loves sudden twists?

15) 'Dead Man.' 4 Stars. See my single story review elsewhere on GR.

16) 'Brush Fire.' 4 Stars. See my single story review elsewhere on GR.

17) 'Coal Black.' 5 Stars. A romance in a coal mine! With a touch of terror thrown in. Lonnie is a 19-year-old coal miner; he likes his job. One day he's down in the mine and there's a real surprise - a young woman appears! She had been hiding in one of the cars and the train suddenly moved and took her deep below. Now she can't find her way out. Scared, she begs for his help. But Lonnie informs her, and us, that a woman in a coal mine means bad luck. The other miners are a afraid that her presence portends a cave-in. Lonnie says she shouldn't be seen by them. Some think the mine is already haunted. Will the two of them make it out?

18) 'The Girl in the Storm.' 4 Stars. Another tough situation which could lead to romance. But it's a different twist from Cain this time. Jack Schwab has been riding the rails in the depression and wakes up in Hidalgo, California - in the middle of a terrible flood and rain storm. He barely escapes from drowning and finds refuge in a half-finished home. Then he sees a car on the near-by road stall in the flood waters and he rescues the driver. Glory be, it's a young woman, Flora Hilton, who has dry matches for a fire. Soon they find food. Both of them are sure to survive but .. 

19) 'Joy Ride to Glory.' 5 Stars. A crime story. With very tense moments and another surprise. Fear is one of Cain's specialties. The question comes down to, 'Is Red Conley dead, or is he alive?' Red is in jail for a month or so for stealing 6 tires and today he's unloading meat and supplies for the prison along with a lifer named Bugs Calenso. That's when a guard slips up and the two of them escape as stowaways in the delivery truck. Red didn't really want to escape but Bugs holds him at gun point while committing a string of gruesome killings. Does Red survive all of this? It's 11 pages of suspense.
 
20) 'Money and the Woman / (AKA) The Embezzler.' X Stars (still reading). See my single story review elsewhere on GR. (Ja2025)