Rating: 3/5

“What virtuous woman thought of her feelings?—It was her duty to love and obey the man chosen by her parents and relations, who were qualified by their experience to judge better for her, than she could for herself.”

Important? Yes. Enjoyable? Partially, but there is a reason Mary Wollstonecraft is better known for A Vindication of the Rights of Woman than for these novels. 

Mary
This felt very young (written at 18 while she was a governess), but with some sweet romantic bits.

She draws a clear line between marriage, 
“I will work, she cried, do any thing rather than be a slave.”
and romantic love
“When passion first enters the heart, it is only a return of affection that is sought after, and every other remembrance and wish is blotted out.”

The Wrongs of Woman
Sadly, what we have is unfinished due to the author’s death. (I actually found myself wanting to suggest revisions, like cut the heck out of the beginning; nix the flashback and tell the story in chronological order for drama and the suspense of wondering what had happened to her.)

I enjoyed the threesome of Maria, her savior Jemima, and new love Darnford, and the latter two had some great lines:
Jemima: “I began to consider the rich and poor as natural enemies, and became a thief from principle.”
Darnford: “…till the rich will give more than a part of their wealth, till they will give time and attention to the wants of the distressed, never let them boast of charity. Let them open their hearts, and not their purses, and employ their minds in the service, if they are really actuated by humanity; or charitable institutions will always be the prey of the lowest order of knaves.”

Some of the writing is beautiful. (I mean, I didn’t realize there were so many ways to say my husband is a worthless dog!) But the intent is clearly to advocate for women’s much-needed rights. 

“I wish my country to approve of my conduct; but, if laws exist, made by the strong to oppress the weak, I appeal to my own sense of justice, and declare that I will not live with the individual, who has violated every moral obligation which binds man to man.”