The girl: Lady Barbara Carr might be an Earl's daughter, but her father likes the gambling tables too much and the family is in rather dire financial straights. She's got to marry a man with money and the only prospective bridegroom on her side of the pond is a notorious rake. Things are looking fairly grim for Barbara until a new arrival from the colonies hits the social scene. 

The guy: Alan Maxwell comes to England with his father, who plans to settle in England and enjoy the huge inheritance he got from a distant relative. Alan plans to return home and run the family's Virginia plantation, but pops is worried about his son's rebel activities and the likelihood of him getting hanged for treason. He figures having powerful in-laws like the Earl and Countess of Bridgewater might come in handy in a pinch, so a marriage bargain is made. Pops thinks he's twisting Alan's arm by giving him the carrot of the plantation, but Alan's hot to get into Lady Barbara's drawers (no, I am not kidding), so he goes along with the plan and our pair sets sail for Virginia. 

Aaaah, romance. Not.

Alan and Barbara get along well enough in the marriage bed, but outside of it there's plenty of conflict. He's hot for independence, and Barbara is hot under the collar since her husband is off fighting battles. She's home taking care of the plantation and he's off playing soldier and whining 'cause he's not had a woman in two years (boo hiss, where that takes the storyline). She manages to keep the plantation intact from the dastardly Benedict Arnold and troops (lol at that bit of blackmail), and he comes home not too fond of her independent attitude and he tells her this: "What you need is another baby."

I just remembered another list I need to put this book on.

I do like a good historical romance on occasion, but there has to be some sexual chemistry and true love going on. All I got here was sex, and rather boring sex at that. We know they're "in love" because we're told they're in love. Fans of Wolf's Dark Ages trilogy looking for a good historical should keep on looking because they aren't going to get that here. The Revolutionary war is more of a backdrop for some conflict (boring conflict) and a reason to keep them separated. Barbara's initiation into plantation life (which had real storyline potential - an earl's daughter dealing with slaves?), was more or less brushed under the carpet. And if I heard about Barbara's slender neck/back/arms one more time the book would have flown. Meh.