Rating: 4/5

"Blemishes on the beauty of a person one loves are like grace notes adding something to a piece of music." 

Have I mentioned before that I am completely wild about the Poldark series?! Well, I am! I am much like that slightly annoying, lovesick friend that won’t stop raving about her latest crush. In my case, the love affair is with a bunch of books written by the gifted author, Winston Graham. I know, embarrassing, right? A woman of my age carrying on in such an unseemly manner… Fortunately, dear Goodreads friend, you don’t have to live with me and put up with this on a daily basis! You can scroll right past my review if you like and I’ll never be the wiser ;)

Anyway, back to the book itself. This one is the fifth in the Poldark series, and it does not disappointment. I will say from the outset, it was just a wee bit slower in the first portion of the book than perhaps the previous installments – but that’s ok! They can’t all be 5-star reads, or you might start to question my ability to fairly assess their worth. In The Black Moon, we are introduced to some new and vibrant characters as well as another odious villain to loathe. It would be difficult to brand a bigger creep than George Warleggan, however. He continues down the path towards hell in this book as well. A sweet romance leads to a messy entanglement between two battling families. The war in Europe continues to seethe, while French émigrés concoct a plan to make a landing on their home soil with an attempt to end the revolution. A baby is born under the black moon and a chilling prophecy is uttered: "Good seldom comes to a child born under a black moon. I only know two and they both came to bad ends!" It remains to be seen whether said prophecy will be fulfilled. 

The characterizations are impeccable, as I’ve come to expect from Mr. Graham. As noted above, the pace is a tad slower (but not dragging) in the first part of the book; but once the story ignites, the pace is swift and exciting. Yes, a tissue may be required in at least one scene. I love my favorites and I love to hate the scoundrels. These books are a pure joy to read. I can’t recommend them more highly to anyone that appreciates excellent and entertaining historical fiction. 

"How I love a strong man!"