Rating: 2/5

Having enjoyed some of Eleanor Moran's early novels I bought A Daughter's Secret hoping for more enjoyable reading. No, it was thoroughly awful. The main protagonist, psychotherapist Mia, 'works' with her patient, Gemma, 'work' being the operative word. If Moran gave this phrase to Mia once, she gave it a hundred times. It is worked in where ever possible, as if Moran had learnt this is an expression that would give Mia some gravitas as an expert. Unfortunately, Mia's behaviour undermines her depiction as a person of trust and ability. On the positive side, Mia's relationship with her father, her mother and her best friend from teenager-hood are developed well to illustrate the foundation for her angst, limitations and ability to empathise with a teenager 'hooked' on her father's image of himself. It is this that encouraged me, together with my pleasure in the early novels, to try again with Too Close For Comfort. 

This novel was another disappointment. Mia is invited by her 'best friend' Lysette to visit after Sarah (often described as Lysette's best friend, leading to Mia's discomfort) is believed to have committed suicide. As in Mia's earlier work, she becomes associated with the police investigation, while attempting to provide assistance to the family, friends and community left behind. The chapters describing Mia's work, her relationships with Lysette and her fiancé are interspersed with excerpts from Sarah's diary. 

As the solution is dealt with so briefly it is apparent that it is Mia's relationships that are pivotal to the novel. So it is there that I looked for positive features to add to this review. Unfortunately, Mia became more annoying as the plot proceeded. What is most annoying is that somewhere in Mia there is an interesting character who could be the focus of a novel that shows Moran's earlier promise. I hope that, having found a character that some readers have found engaging, Moran develops her and her next story with some of the panache she showed in her earlier work.