Rating: 5/5

This is one of those books that when I put it down, I don’t stop thinking about it for days. I will be thinking about this book for a long time. I discovered Bonhoeffer in college when my roommate had some of his writings on our bookcase. Since I have had a strong interest in the Third Reich for many years, I promised myself in college that I would read more about him. I received a CD in college don’t know where the guy got it from with the outline of his story on it. Recently something happened to make me remember that promise to myself so long ago. I don’t remember what happened but suddenly I knew I needed to read about Bonhoeffer. I searched the library and found this book. I wanted to start with a novel because I know that novelist right stories and embellish them or expand them, so I wanted some refresher on events so that when I picked up an academic discussion, I would know which of the events or characters have been embellished. Since I was familiar with a time in the place in the setting, I thought this might be a wise idea. Apparently, I picked up the best novel. Not the first in so much as being written but certainly one of the best books I’ve ever read. I have been reading books for a long time and I have read super books and I have read ones that didn’t quite grabbed me, but this one had me from the first page. Maybe it was the audio narration, but I don’t think so. I think it was just the subject matter and the way it was treated. I finish this book in four sittings Because every time I picked up the book I couldn’t put it down. It has been a very long time since I read a book that I couldn’t put down. I spent the entire day today finishing it because I thought I need to do something else or I need to read another book. This author brings this story to life in so many ways. She made Bonhoeffer seemed like a person with feelings and conflicts and that is really hard to do in a character. At least I need to learn more about how to do that in my own writing. I tell you it takes a lot of patience to write something like this. Unless you’ve got More than one person working on a scene at one time I can’t even imagine how long it took her to write this book. I don’t know if Bonhoeffer made this point in any of his letters that is my next project, but she kept saying that it was hard to write the books that he did write and it took a long time to finish them. I said I understand that feeling. There was so many interesting things in the book from philosophy to characters that I will be interested to know how these stories were expanded. The one character that I thought might be fictional and then later found out he was was the SS officer who just kept appearing time after time. And I thought you know I don’t really think that that would happen in real life although truth is stranger than fiction so who knows. He shows up in England and then right before the last scene he shows up again with this Mozart mass in c minor manuscript. Now I like Mozart. I actually chose Mozart for a theme piece in my latest novel called shadows in the outfield. And so I always wonder why people choose Mozart. The mass and C minor is not easy by any means and I would never attempt it on the piano with the arrangement that exists for it. I just don’t want to work that hard. At least not on that kind of piece. I much rather enjoy it than play it. I will have to go listen to it now. I found a couple of books that I thought might be interesting too from the bibliography and also in the story when Bonhoeffer recommends Books by people that I whose names I recognized. I like to find a good book. And I’ve always been curious about some of the philosophers so this was a great motivator for other explorations. I didn’t quite understand however why the death scene was so short. Perhaps she had been building it up though when she discussed his feelings about death and they kept reoccurring. That’s another part of the story. I will be interested to find out about in my further research. I will be researching Bonhoeffer because I’ve always been interested in doing that and I think it’s very intriguing that I Can’t remember the event at least a month ago that spurred me on to picking up the story kind of where I left off.

There were some parts that I thought were a little overdramatic, but part of that might’ve been because of the audio narration. The narrator for this book is excellent to begin with. I have read more books narrated by this man Who narrates through the national library service. He can be a little dramatic sometimes, but I don’t think that in the time and place this was set in the third right that anything is overdramatic. So maybe it wasn’t so dramatic as I think it was. I will be reading this book for days and I will be taking more of the books out of the bibliography and reading them. I did discover in the bibliography that I have two additional books in it, and I have read other books that were mentioned in the bibliography.

Another off shoot of this is that I started reading the cost of discipleship. The character Maria makes a very interesting point about theology and I don’t know where it started, but I found it very true. She said, and I paraphrase theology is the intellectual pursuit of matters that should be Part of faith. Seems like sometimes theology is complicated when faith is very simple. In this event, I find the first Books theology very simple to understand and that maybe because I’ve been steeped in Protestant faith for most of my life so I understand that although sometimes the cost of discipleship gets a little pedantic. Perhaps that’s the translation. I’d like to see it in the original language, but that’s for another time in place I think. Honestly, sometimes I think I found my soulmate at least from the characterization of Bonhoeffer by this author. Another place in time. I can’t quite say that the book is interesting. I think my experience of it is deeper than that. I am sure that I will be going back and reading chapters over again, especially when I discover which parts have been dramatized and which parts have not Been dramatized. Anyway, I could just go on with this forever you know. I’m sure I’ll be learning a lot from this time forward. RIP my new soulmate :-)