Rating: 4/5

Georges Simenon's Maigret is one of my "sure things". The idea of gravitating towards "sure things" is from Robin: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

Maigret's character is so well outlined, so well colored, narrated and developed that you will instantly forget that Maigret is fictional. He is very determined in solving this case:

Police Department, Quai des Orfèvres in Paris, France. Santoni, a new member of Maigret's team, answers the phone. It is Inspector Neveu with the 3ème Arrondissement. Neveu urgently needs to talk to Maigret. A man was found dead. He was stabbed. His name was Louis Thouret. Why is Louis wearing yellow shoes? When he left this morning for work he was wearing his black shoes; and according to his spouse he does not own yellow shoes. And why was he not at work in the first place? And why is he wearing a very red tie?

Maigret starts to investigate with the help of Lucas, Santoni, Janvier, Lapointe and Neveu. And on his own.

Maigret is preoccupied. One night Maigret and Madame Maigret are walking down the boulevards after cinema and Madame Maigret is asking her husband whether he was in a bad mood because he did not say a single word to her the whole evening. 

Madame Maigret: - Tu as beaucoup de travail ? / Do you have a lot of work?

Maigret: - Je ne sais pas encore. / I do not know yet.

One day Maigret is having the third interrogation in a row. He is so determined and focussed on solving this case that he entirely has lost track of time. It is probably (late) evening.
While Maigret is waiting for the delivery of food and beverages from the nearby Brasserie he calls his wife to let her know that he won't be home for lunch:

- Je ne rentrerai pas déjeuner.
- Je commençais à m'en douter. Tu sais l'heure qu'il est? 
- Non. Cela n'a pas d'importance.
Elle éclata de rire, et il ne sut pas pourquoi.

Maigret: I won’t be home for lunch.
Madame Maigret: I was beginning to suspect that. Do you know what time it is?
Maigret: No. It doesn’t matter.
She burst out laughing, and he didn’t know why.

Maigret is my favorite inspector (besides Maresciallo Guarnaccia by Magdalen Nabb maybe). Maigret novels are a "sure thing" (to me). I like his wife and Janvier, Lapointe etc. The quality of Georges Simenon's writing is good and consistent.

Georges Simenon wrote 75 Maigret novels:
https://www.trussel.com/maig/cheklist...

But it is not necessary to follow the chronological order. You could start with reading #41. I liked reading it so much and finished it on the same day as I started reading it.