Rating: 4/5

UPDATE….( below the 💕). 
WE JUST SECONDS AGO HAD A - FELT - EARTHQUAKE…

Review soon .... This would make a great book choice pick. I'd rather jump right into a book-discussion -than write a review -- haha, but it doesn't work that way --does it?/!

I love Michael Cunningham --His writing of "The Snow Queen" was luminous and and compassionate. "The Hours" &gt; brilliant. "A Wild Swan" &gt; a beauty. "By Nightfall" &gt; I felt a ton of empathy for it.
And now .... "A Home at the End of the World"..... another book that examines American culture in the 60's thru 80's - portraying bonds of family, friendship, love, sex, loss, death, grief, loneliness. &gt;&gt; and the startling ways tragedy affects us all --
I'm still thinking about this book -- (not without flaws in my opinion) -- but definitely thought-provoking, well written, very engaging, with characters who individually are well developed yet their relationships together are less so. 

I'll add to this review later -- but why can't we just start the discussion? lol ...
Oh, right -- because it would be filled with spoilers! 
I recommend it -- 'for' the opportunity to explore one's own thoughts!!
💕

UPDATE:

The blurb: …..[and, wow? There is a film?]….who has seen it? I’m interested!
 “There’s Jonathan, lonely, introspective, and unsure of himself; and Bobby, hip, dark, and inarticulate. In New York after college, Bobby moved in with Jonathan and his roommate Clare, a veteran of the city’s erotic wars. Bobby and Clare fall in love, scuttling the plans of Jonathan, who is gay, to father Clare’s child. 
Then, when Clare and Bobby have a baby, the three moved to a small house upstate to raise ‘their’ child together and, with an odd friend, Alice, create a new kind of family”.

I included the above blurred because it’s a pretty clear description of the basics and why reinvent the wheel? 

The rest of this review will be my thoughts and feelings.
 I’ll include some excerpts.

The first question I asked myself after finishing this book…was….if I had to choose, who did I feel this story belonged to most?
Jonathan? His mother, Alice? Bobby? (Jonathan‘s friend since middle school), Clare? or…..even Erich? (a gay man - Jonathan’s sexual partner- a character who became more poignant to us towards the end of the novel— but was not one of the narrative voices) 

I could make an argument….for this novel being a tribute to Erich. —the least visible character until much further in the book…but an important character. 
But..
I’d say this novel most belongs to Bobby. 
A slight spoiler — but it means nothing without reading more to go along with this fact: Bobby literally had the most loss: a brother, a mother, a father. 
I personally know how penetrating, deeply life altering it is after the loss of one parent as a child…(but two? and a very beloved older sibling?) 
Bobby lost all his immediate family [not all at once]—before he was out of his teens. 
Bobby’s older brother, Carleton, introduced drugs to Bobby at age nine - and even unintentionally sex: ‘not cool’, but Carleton was Bobby’s hero. He followed his older brother around like a loved puppy dog….hanging out at a nearby cemetery.

As Bobby grew older — he was still always following others around — but there was a purity about him. He simply was looking for love — wanted desperately ‘to’ love and ‘be’ loved. 
Ok….so as embarrassing as this is — I related to Bobby. 

Bobby ….unintentionally….latches onto to another family. I relate to this aspect too — I did the same. (Renee or Lisi - if you are reading this - you’re shaking your heads remembering our growing years). I practically lived at Renee’s house daily — and Lisi’s pretty often too. 

When you’re a young kid with so little at your own home….nobody cooking, nobody around, little expectations, it’s very easy to fall in love with a family that seems to have some semblance of order, and delicious home cooked dinners. At its deepest core — a desired for love is the driving force. 

My little personal share:
My childhood favorite meals were at Renee’s house. Renee’s, mom, Helen, (Holocaust survivor), was the ‘best’ cook. Her husband, Mel, was too —-so that even on my 40th birthday— ‘years’ later — Renee, and her mom (arranged with my husband, Paul) — a surprise party for me at Renee’‘s house in San Francisco. They made all my favorite foods that I grew up with… Stuffed cabbage, carrot pudding (it’s a non-frosting carrot cake - served warm made in a round ring) served with our meal with roasted chicken, and the stuffed cabbage). 
I knew what it felt like to fall in love — deeply— with my friends and their entire families. 

So…. when Alice, teaches Bobby how to cook while he was still in High School in their Cleveland home, (which changed the dynamics of Jonathan’s relationship with Bobby) …I was very curious to know how the revolving doors of the years moving on were going to go. 
I enjoyed where Cunningham took this novel — into New York. I especially loved the beginning, though, when in Cleveland.

Parts of the middle section when Clare came on board were a little draggy for me. (not all)….but I admit, she was my least favorite character. Not only because of her choices….I just didn’t find her all that interesting. 
However….this is a GOOD BOOK. I’m glad I read it — and it was the type I was in the mood for. 

There are ‘many’ ways to view this novel. MANY!
Credit to Michael Cunningham— he has given us a lot of worthy juice to chat about. 

A couple insignificant FLAWS:
…..The first tiny flaw ( soooo silly)….but it ‘is’ a flaw….lol. The card game Hearts is not played with 2 people — I loved the game years ago —(probably still would)… but the card game takes 3 or best 4 people.
So….when Alice played hearts with her son Jonathan— I was thinking, how?….lol
Fun flaw? 

Next — insignificant flaw—IMO
…..Ned, Alice’s husband, was ‘mostly’ absent in this story — so that when he died later on — I felt too much time was spent of his death. 

Now for the good parts….hah…you mean the rest wasn’t any good?

Even though this book was written years ago — and ‘might’ seem outdated — absolutely nothing is shocking — it’s a terrific character study….and the writing flows seamlessly. 
It’s filled with psychological nuance. 

EACH READER will have to decide who they are rooting for - or who they like - or don’t like - and think about moral quandaries —
All the characters are flawed — but personally I was rooting for them. 

A FEW EXCERPTS (always out of context — but I hope it gives others a taste the books beauty, intimacy, sadness, and love. 

Jonathan:
 “I learned that Bobby found sitting silently beside me just as amusing as he did listening to me talk”. 
 “We spent every day together. It was the kind of reckless overnight friendship particular to those who are young, lonely, and ambitious. Gradually, item by item, Bobby brought over his records, his posters, his clothes. We spent just enough time at his house for me to know what he was escaping from; a stale sour smell of soiled laundry and old food, a father who crept with drunken caution from room to room. Bobby slept in a sleeping bag on my floor. In the dark, I lay listening to the sound of his breath. He moaned sometimes in his dreams”. 
They shared a lot of dope together. 

Alice… 
 “Sometimes in those days I thought of Wendy from Peter Pan—an island mother to a troop of lost boys. I didn’t make an outright fool of myself. I didn’t buy gauzy skirts or Indian jewelry or sandals from Mexico. I didn’t let my hair grow long and wild. But there was a different feeling now. I had a new secret, a better one. Previously, my only secret had been the facts that I feared sex and could not summon any interest in getting to know our neighbors. I felt frail and thin to the point of translucence, an insubstantial figure who got headaches from the cold and sinus infections from the heat. But this new secret was buoying, exhilarating—I would be the scandal of the neighborhood if I was found out. The secret warmed me as they passed along the isles of the supermarket. I was a mother who got stoned with her son”. 

Clare:
 “In a sense I liked the way I was aging. I’d invented a life of my own. I wasn’t a prim careerist living with two cats in a townhouse full of ancient maps. I wasn’t a drunk drifting from binges to purges and back again. I was proud of that. But still, I expected by this time of life to have developed a more general sense of pride in my larger self. I’d thought I’d be able to say, if somebody asked me, just exactly what I was doing in the world”. 

Bobby:
 “I’d made a kind of love with Jonathan because he wanted to, and because I’d loved him. I’d have orgasms that passed through me like spirits of people more devoted to the body than I was”. 
I didn’t feel what others called desire. Something was missing for me. I felt love… the strain and heat of it, the animal comfort mixed up with human fear. I loved all of the Glovers— for Sammi at the Bakery, for Dylan when he sang Blue Baby. But nothing built up in his groin. 

This is a novel that has us (readers) feel as if we are really there with everyone. 

It had flaws - the characters had flaws — but it also dazzled my heart and thoughts. It’s emotionally genuine — with all the components that make for a great fiction story,

4.5 rating.