Rating: 4/5

Muckraking biography of Roy Cohn, the notorious Red-hunter turned New York power broker whose life casts a troubling shadow over postwar America. Von Hoffman, an investigative journalist, has little nice to say about Cohn, which is understandable based on the evidence offered. Son of a Jewish judge and an overbearing mother, he entered law and soon emerged as a ruthlessly ambitious prosecutor. Thus he gained fame helping to prosecute Cold War spies William Remington and Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, earning public notoriety in his mid-20s. Which catapulted him to even more notoriety as Joseph McCarthy's right-hand man, both fueling his investigations and causing his mentor's downfall (through his reckless friendship with David Schine). Cohn emerged unscathed, becoming a high-powered lawyer and kingmaker in New York City, a celebrity who more often inspired scorn than admiration, fear rather than respect...but who always managed to come out on top. Von Hoffman recounts with relish Cohn's dirty dealings with judges and politicians, mobsters and corporate clients, spiced with occasional acts of goodwill and generosity towards friends and clients, and brutally exposes his subject as a self-hating Jew and closeted gay man who never admitted his sexuality. The latter, in particular, becomes a major strand in the book's narrative: Cohn carried on a covert sex life even as he and McCarthy purged "pansies" from the government in the '50s, as he fronted and funded homophobic conservative groups in the '70s and '80s, even as AIDS sent him to an early grave. The self-hatred makes him a compelling dramatic subject, but the utter brutality of it - his overcompensating for internalized homophobia by smashing anyone less terrified than he - makes it difficult to sympathize. Hated and hypocritical as he was, he remained powerful until just before his death, with a bare-knuckle, take-no-prisoners style that made him hard to defeat. That Cohn managed to get away with so much for so long provides a deeply troubling indictment of New York society (only towards the end of his life was he disbarred and made a pariah); that his protege currently sits in the White House, lacking any of Cohn's charm, intellect or shrewdness while possessing all of his nastiest, most repellent traits, is even more disturbing.