Rating: 5/5

THE PURPOSE OF LIFE IS TO LIVE IT.
Eleanor Roosevelt

Eleanor Roosevelt, her naivety notwithstanding, has said it all. Life is for forthright action and not for mucking about in Dark Knowledge.

Is this why Dante, for example, is so universal? We are in the Middle of a Deep, Dark Wood of self-torment. And not in the Freedom of Forthright Action, as Roosevelt was. Doctor Faustus is damned by his if-only's.

Doctor Faustus has sold his soul to the Devil, purportedly for Knowledge, but all that he has gained from it (along with a buck fifty) will only buy him a cheap cup of coffee. Dark and diabolical knowledge ends only in the self-recrimination of emptiness:

And the End is in that desperate last, angst-ridden night on earth when Faustus manages only the strangled cry: "Lente, lente currite Noctis Equi!" 

 Enjoyment only enjoys dust at the end.

Is that ALL, Faustus perplexedly wonders (like Peggy Lee), there IS?

Certainly not. NOT if you bypass the Pleasure Principle. Proust made the Regaining of one’s Past the key to his life, work and peace of mind. It WORKED for him. 

For he wanted knowledge - not of Dark Power for Himself - but of Freedom from Himself. THAT's the REAL Secret.

You see him in the late photos, finally released from the self-imposed prison of his hermetically sealed flat, FULFILLED in his fame and in his release from his inner devils. 

FREED AT LAST - Eternally!

Just so, we must all try to OWN our own past and overcome it In forthright, inspired action. As with Eleanor Roosevelt's fight for social justice. We MUST be free of the Deep, Dark Dungeon of Remembered Desire.

A Remembrance of Things Past is one key to our safe exit.

Once we see it all coming back plainly, as Proust did, we can RECOVER OUR NOW PLAYED-OUT LIFE. 

No kidding. Imagine the Freedom of Life without Doublethink!

They say had Marlowe lived longer, he woulda equaled Shakespeare! I have my doubts.

But reading this play can help restore OUR life - if only as a Caveat Lector.

There is always SOMETHING buried in our past that we’re continually Forgetting to Remember! Re-owned, it can be our Treasure Buried in a Field.

Cause it can give us NEW LIFE.

Marlowe was a searcher like us. But he saw his Value in Living and Grasping Each Moment as his Last. It’s bad advice for us to call our own.

If you live your life, not in grasping - but for others, when you get to the final hours of your life, you will not cry out with the doomed Dr Faustus, in his last minutes:

Gallop SLOWLY, O ye Horses of the Night!

For you will have lived your life FULLY -

And will be HAPPY to Finally - at long last - Sleep in Endless Peace:

Unlike poor Marlowe and Faustus.