Rating: 4/5

My introduction to Colette’s writing and I’m very keen to read more. I think her prose is stunning - it’s very clean and tight, yet opulent. This helped transport me to the decadent world of high society in Gigi and The Cat. “During the most ambiguous hour of the short night, he rested in that provisional tomb where the living exile sighs, weeps, fights and succumbs, and from which he rises, unremembering, with the day” - ugh, stunning!

Gigi
I found the heroine of this story to be absolutely charming and endearing, albeit perhaps leaning towards an early “manic pixie dream girl” vibe in regard to “breaking” the spell of Tonton’s long string of toxic relationships with women. I wouldn’t have thought so to be honest if it wasn’t for the underlying edginess I felt in regard to the way Gigi was groomed for a courtesan life, as Tonton references her age often. Even when trying to consider the different context of the period, there was still something that made me twitch seeing Gigi so against the marriage initially, her not being allowed to make other female friends and the way she is so concerned about being covered in the tabloids like his previous lovers. Also, the fact that she previously calls him “Tonton”, although I’ve also seen some mention that this is a play on his name as opposed to her viewing him as an uncle figure (I hope so!). In addition, Gigi being surrounded by female figures who are essentially training her to become the perfect courtesan juxtaposed with her endearing childish traits. Nonetheless, beautiful prose, but at times could be an uncomfortable read.

The Cat
This novella frustrated me- but that’s a compliment. At first, I bought into the scene of young and out-of-touch lovers about to become married, where one perhaps is weirdly obsessed with his cat. I thought perhaps this was going to be a novella on growth in the same way Gigi was, and letting go of childhood as we have to embrace the unknown (Saha being some symbol of his comfortable childhood he is eager to hold on to, Camille being the modern and unknown). Did not expect this to take on a darker theme but enjoyed it that more as a result. I liked the ever growing creepy undertone, particularly the ambiguity of the ending. Saha was definitely my favourite character in this, and whilst at first I thought Camille was jarring (which admittedly she remains being so), I became washed over with sympathy throughout, which made things complicated once she does what she did to Saha. Loved the complexity of Camille, and the descriptions of her and Paris.

Loved the exploration of Alain, as I had just assumed he would be a superficial, entitled guy who fundamentally loves his pet. Seems somewhat charming enough. However, seeing the way he constantly criticises Camille, the discomfort I felt whenever he hyperfixated on her looks, his prudishness and downright lack of self-awareness made my blood BOIL! The part where he returns to his childhood home to get coddled by the entirety of the household whilst for a different character could be seen as endearing, I found weirdly chilling. Clearly, this was somebody who had married for the sake of doing so, but fundamentally was still a child. Spooky stuff.

I have proper beef with Alain, if I see him, it’s on sight. Even if he likes animals.