Rating: 3/5

I've bounced around in John Farrow's catalogue so I therefore don't have a feel for how linear the development of his great Emile Cinq-Mars (ECM) character has been. "Ice Lake" is the 2nd of a pretty long series and at least one of the issues I've had with the series doesn't appear to have shown up yet.

Cinq-Mars is a detective in Montreal, locally famous for his detection skills, clearance rates, and very unique approach to his job. Ice Lake begins in the year 1999 with ECM and his partner killing time ice fishing while waiting for a meeting with an anonymous source. In a nearby hut a fellow fisherman discovers the body of a man beneath the ice, and thus the mystery begins. He'd been shot, but where/when/how and, besides that, he was much larger than the hole in the ice so how the heck did he get under it? 

In a nearby town a young Mohawk woman, Lucy, is working for a pharma company that's trying to develop drugs to treat AIDS, which at that time was a full blown plague on some segments of the population. Her role isn't exactly legal, as one responsibility she has is to travel down to NYC to "test" unapproved AIDS drugs on infected people. Her clandestine work is successful (to the extent that she is nicknamed "St. Lucy" by her human guinea pigs) until it isn't and a whole bunch of her test subjects die. All this is background and it's all tied together, but ECM slowly unravels it as it becomes apparent there are some truly nasty people from the business world and local criminal gangs involved in an enterprise that resulted in a guy getting shot and hidden under a couple feet of ice.

Ice Lake seemed to drag a bit in the middle. A couple subplots of ECM's father's impending death and the dissatisfaction of his partner's wife with the job's responsibilities and time demands tended to slow the pace of the story, though they were important from a character development standpoint. ECM's work, as in all the novels in the series, was top shelf and unlike in later stories he at least exposes his thinking as he proceeds. All in all, a decent read in a strong series.