Rating: 3/5

A decent conceit, and buoyed by solid if surprisingly generic prose, by Silverberg's standards, but undone by a lack of imagination in the (limited) plot development. In such a short work there's little room to move, of course, but still - there's one major twist element in this story, and it is bone-headed and undercuts the hitherto compelling story (discussed in detail below; no spoilers in this paragraph). It feels like Silverberg tossed this off on autopilot in a couple of sittings, and didn't bother to go back and punch it up. Hell, he probably winged the whole thing. His strengths as a storyteller shine through, but the lack of development in the ideas department lets everything down. 2.5/5.

---------SPOILERS FOLLOW-------------

The story is that a time-travelling historian has wound up hitchhiking in the mind of the Prince of Atlantis 18,000 BP. There's some good tension around whether the Prince will detect the passenger, and/or whether the historian will reveal himself to the Prince. But the central mystery concerns the Atlantans' inexplicably advanced technology, and some ceremonies that imply that each King retains the memories of every previous King. The obvious solution to this is that the Atlantans have the same mind-projection technology as the historian, and possibly even that rogue historians have hijacked the Atlantan empire and are steering it towards their own goals. That scenario provides you with so much scope for conflict - when the historian finds out, does he confront the Prince? Does he fight back against the conspiracy in order to ensure that Atlantis is destroyed, as per history? The story practically writes itself.

Instead, Silverberg just has the Atlantans all be aliens. Literal extra-terrestrials who flew to Earth when their home star went nova, and founded Atlantis. Alien beings from another planet with completely different elements and minerals available, with a completely different common ancestor of all life, almost certainly using different nucleotide base pairs than Terran life, probably lacking mitochondria, evolving under different radiation levels in strange continents and climates, but still literally identically human in every conceivable way, down to the capacity to interbreed with actual humans (implied). 

This idea (a) is boring, (b) unnecessarily multiplies the impossible elements of the story, and (c) shows a flagrant disregard for the most basic principles of biology. How does Silverberg think evolution works, I wonder? 

Anyway I've tried not to be too harsh on this story because of this, but jeez, what a dunderheaded twist.