Rating: 5/5

Once again, as always, a book that exceeded all expectations I had. It’s such a shame “Yesterday Will Make You Cry” is relatively unknown today. NYRB…..where are you?!

I’ve read some other reviews and agree that the first portion of the novel is fragmented and jumps around a lot but to me it totally works and I thought it a really compelling way of showing Jimmy’s mindset as he settles into prison life. He can’t think straight, he can’t focus or feel much of anything, he’s still kind of stunned and every day is the same as all the others. A monotonous existence. The only things that stand out to him, the only things worth noting are the incidents - the killings, flirtations, fights, beatings, odd conversations and one stalker-type situation which is so unexpectedly unsettling I got chills. I’d give the book 5 stars for the first 100 pages alone, but then there’s the prison fire, a literal hellscape - disturbing and lurid and riveting.

I love the way Himes writes and the way he gets you inside Jimmy’s head and pulls you down with him, the way you start feeling like you’re going crazy because he’s trapped, so you’re trapped, not only in a prison but in his mind and body and way of thinking. He’s not the most likable character, but there’s a lot of history Himes goes into about his childhood, his family, growing up, that explains why Jimmy is the way he is, which made me feel for him a lot more. Not that I agree with everything he does, but Himes made me understand. 

A standout scene for me is Jimmy’s first experience being sent to the hole, waiting in nothing but complete darkness with nothing to do but think and sleep and listen to other convicts speak from elsewhere in the room, and they read like voices inside his head. 

The the last section of the novel presents a new character, Rico, who brings out a side of Jimmy we haven’t seen up until that point, and this final chapter was the most touching and interesting for me. The tone changes a bit, but after all the horror before it’s a nice change of pace. The life and death of a short lived relationship. The happy parts of their relationship where they get drunk and laugh at everything, forgetting anyone else exists were some of my favorite moments of the book. My ONLY slight complaint was how often Rico called Jimmy “Puggy Wuggy”. But everyone has their faults…

It was shocking how openly Himes spoke about gay relationships and characters considering this was written in the 1950’s. I was not expecting that to be a main focus of the story at all, but I’m glad it was. 

Anyway, this review really isn’t doing justice to the book but it’s definitely one of my favorite reads of 2021 and I highly recommend!