Rating: 3/5

There are two topics that are both sensitive and ‘dangerous’ to discuss both in our everyday lives and in an online forum – politics and religion. I refuse to get into discourse on either subject even with the majority of close friends and family members. I have to know someone quite well and trust him or her implicitly before engaging in real life conversations. Therefore, this review is not going to contain much substance. Not just because I would like to avoid debate, but also due to the fact that I am not even close to being informed enough to take on the Bible and any controversial writings that follow it. 

I have not read the Bible. I am familiar with many of the stories, however. I am not a religious person, but I am inquisitive and like to inform myself about the beliefs of others. I have been very curious about Saramago’s novel for quite some time and couldn’t quite get the idea out of my head that I needed to read this. So I made it a goal for 2021 and knocked it off early. I’m very glad I did. First of all, I found that it confirmed some of my own ideas about Jesus as well as the poor image of women that has been promoted by a number of world religions (something that irks me to no end!) Jesus is portrayed here as a human being with questions, doubts, and desires. Many of the gospel stories that we know are told from a very different perspective. I nearly started to count the number of times Saramago reminds us, with irony of course, the way women were perceived. Here are a couple of examples, which I imagine the author writing at his desk with tongue in cheek:

“Unlike Joseph her husband, Mary is neither upright nor pious, but she is not to blame for this, the blame lies with the language she speaks if not with the men who invented it, because that language has no feminine form for the words upright and pious.”

“Which part of woman’s nature is demonic and which divine and what kind of humanity they have… I was talking about women, who generate beings such as ourselves and who may be responsible, perhaps unknowingly, for this duality in our nature, which is base and yet so noble, virtuous and yet so wicked, tranquil and yet so troubled, meek and yet so rebellious.”

That’s as far as I go down this road. I have a lot of thoughts swirling around in my head and they’re likely to stay there, simmering. This is my first experience with Saramago. I’ll just finish up with a couple brief reflections on the writing. First of all, it was dense. Dense in subject matter especially! I often wanted to set this down and escape to something much lighter. Paragraphs are very lengthy, often going on for pages at a time. Anyone that resents a lack of quotation marks should be warned in advance. I don’t have a problem with this. In fact, after the first couple of chapters I grasped the flow of dialogue. The prose itself is tightly written and obviously skilled. There is no denying that Saramago was a master at his craft. However, I need to choose a different sort of novel altogether when I next pick him up, and I need to do so before long. I think we might have a bright future; but I’ve had my fill of anything remotely theological for quite some time, even if it does stand popular belief on its head. 

“… we refrain from asking a question because we are unprepared or simply too afraid to hear the answer. And when finally we summon the courage to ask, no answer is forthcoming…”