Rating: 4/5

I've heard that HARDCASTLE was Raymond Carver's favorite book. It is a fairly straightforward story. Bill Music, a Virginia farm boy who went off to Chicago to electrician's school, has fallen on hard times during the Depression and has failed to find work, so is headed home to his family farm in Virginia via foot and freight car. He is passing through the mining country of Switch County, Kentucky and seeks overnight shelter in a stranger's haystack and a bit of food from the stranger's garden. This overnight stay changes the whole course of Music's life, and a theme of the book, which philosopher's could argue till the cows come home, is that Music's life was "chosen" by fate and that he had very little "agency," as the academics say, in the events that transpired.

The story is in clear prose and in dialect form that probably represents the speech of Kentucky mountain people circa 1930's, at least to some degree. I'll leave that up to a linguist and dialect expert to decide. The tale probably could serve as a template for various mining strikes and efforts to unionize miners by "syndicalists" in the early 1900's. 

Yount does give the tale a few twists, as the man whose haystack Music squats in, one Regus Patco Bone, is a former miner, as was his late father, but is working as a mine guard--about the equivalent of a former armed robber becoming a cop assigned to the robbery division. Music and Regus develop a quick friendship and Music is given the chance to hire on as Regus's partner helping to guard the Hardcastle mine, owned by a typical, tight-fisted old bastard named Hardcastle. The mine guard job basically consists of patrolling the outside of the mine areas and be on the lookout for outside agitators (union organizers) who may try to inveigle the minors into organizing and striking just for the sake of a living wage.

I won't say much more about the story so that I don't give away any "spoilers." I see this book is listed among a giant list of "Darkest Books." I take issue with that term "dark" because some awful things do end up happening but the term "darkness" seems to imply that these are unnatural occurrences. What transpires is the sort of violence that seems to have been transpiring since Homo Sapiens, or maybe all of his progenitors, began to walk upright.

I'll confess that this was my 2nd time trying to read this book. I had tried maybe 10 years before and found it too dull and just stopped reading maybe 100 pages into it. It IS a slow-moving book but not extremely so. The story actually moves along at a decent pace compared to many novels I've read.

The book's strength's include that it is readable and tells a story that you can lose yourself in. One could read this book as a history book if the dialogue and extraneous parts of the tale were taken out. Its major weakness, in my view, is that sometimes it stinks of the "MFA syndrome," where the writer appears to be trying too hard, at times, to make the characters more introspective than they probably would have been in real life. It is the story that carries this book and makes it rise above the mediocre. And despite the occasional suspect introspection, the story is quite believable. The mixed reviews it's gotten here demonstrate the immense variety of readers' tastes, not the merits of the actual novel.