Rating: 5/5

A SOCIOLOGIST LOOKS AT PSYCHOLOGICAL REASONS FOR MALE/FEMALE DIFFERENCES

Lillian Rubin (1924-2014) was a professor of sociology at Queens College (CUNY). She wrote in the first chapter of this 1983 book, “‘I love you.’ … Once, not so long ago, we heard those words and thought about forever. Once, they… meant that we would marry and live happily ever after. Now, we’re not so sure… the dream of that earlier time seemed a simpler one. Women and men each had a place---a clearly defined, highly specific set of roles and responsibilities that each would fulfill. She’d take care of home and hearth; he’d provide it. She’d raise the children; he’d support them… her needs for achievement … would be met vicariously through his accomplishments or those of the children. It seemed fair then---a tidy division of labor… It was, after all… in the nature of women and men---what they expected of themselves, what they expected of each other. Now, we’re not so sure.” (Pg. 1)

She continues, “as the world changed, it became clear that the old dream didn’t work so well for most people most of the time. Marriages staggered under the burden of these role definitions… Most women simply couldn’t give themselves and their needs away so readily… The men faced an equally difficult set of tasks… In an economy that is almost always short on jobs… making it in the world of work is no less problematic---especially when a man’s accomplishments are supposed to do for two.” (Pg. 2)

She adds, “The new dream, then, is not a simple one… We know that the old ways are not for us, but have no clear picture yet of what the new ones will be. We know there’s a new version of masculinity and femininity, but can’t figure out how it fits each of us… We talk about equality between women and men, then ask ourselves: What does it mean? We say we want intimacy, companionship, sharing, but don’t always know just what we’re looking for… We go to therapists to work on our relationships, but can’t say what we really want from each other.” (Pg/ 8-9)

She goes on, “For over a decade, feminist scholars of both genders have labored to put before us a new vision of the nature of men and women and of the differences between us… the old questions bedevil us with haunting persistence. We… [are] unable to understand why what we believe doesn’t always match what we see; why despite our best efforts at nonsexist childrearing, our daughters are still preoccupied with dolls, our sons with trucks… Over the last fifteen years, I have watched as women and men (my husband and I among them) struggle to change… And always the questions loom: Why? Why is it so hard? Does it have to be this way?’” (Pg. 9-10)

She explains, “I am concerned here not just to spotlight the present realities… but to explain them as well. The central task I have set for myself is to show how certain characteristics of male and female personality come into being, why they persist, and how they affect the most basic issues of our relations with each other… I depart from traditional socialization theorists in that I believe we must look beyond learning theories or theories of role modeling to understand the pervasiveness and persistence of these characteristic differences between us… Instead, I will insist that while certain developmental imperatives exist for children of both genders… the tasks that confront a girl and a boy are quite different, resulting in different patterns of personality for each of them. These are the differences which, on the one hand, are at least partly responsible for the attraction between men and women and, on the other, create so many of the problems that exist between us.” (Pg. 12)

She continues, “My argument, then, is that the large social changes of our time affect us all… Our class situation will define the ways in which we approach these changes, and… it will limit the solutions that are possible for us… the hunger for something different in our relationships is profound and widespread… On the pages that follow I shall present the experiences of people living in committed relationships… The question that guided this work throughout was: Why is it that change comes with such difficulty? It’s in pursuit of the answer that we look first at people who… are in the vanguard of the struggle for change yet who have found that---even when determination is high, even when good intentions are beyond question---changing old ways of doing and being is hard indeed.” (Pg. 14-15)

She recalls about her own marriage, “we agreed that the time had come for him to change careers, to try to make his way as a writer. We knew he would earn little money for a while, maybe forever… After a month or two of exquisite, never-before-experienced relief, my husband fell into a 6-month long depression, and I into an equally long struggle with my anger… for the first time, I was in the position that men know so well… Now it was no longer voluntary but necessary to pay for the bread and the rent. And I hated it… He struggled with his sense of failure, with the fact that his very manhood had been damaged. I---the liberated, professional woman---was outraged that he wasn’t taking care of me any longer… I knew these feelings came from some very deep part of myself … And I knew, also, that I didn’t want such thoughts and the feelings they brought with them… His depression passed, as did my anger, but not without plenty of psychological work for both of us.” (Pg. 22-25)

She states, “‘Mothering’ is an all-embracing word. To be mothered is to be nurtured in a most elemental sense---to be cared for in all the ways we might wish or need, from the physical to the psychological. But what does ‘fathering’ mean? It’s a much more segmented role, isn’t it? It’s hard even to think about what it means to be fathered… there’s no larger vision that immediately springs to thought, no yearnings that are stirred by the idea of being fathered as they are by thoughts of being mothered.” (Pg. 42)

She asserts, “The cultural sources of masculine and feminine personality have been given wide attention in recent years… To understand how and why it works that way, we must take a short journey into psychological theory… The journey starts with Freud… Freud gave us the first clear expression of the fact that the adult personality rests on early childhood experience… We must look to childhood if we are to understand certain central elements of adulthood.” (Pg. 44)

She suggests, “When a boy who has been raised by a woman confronts the need to establish his gender identity, it means a profound upheaval in his internal world. Despite the fact that other connections are made during the early months of life---with father, with siblings, with grandparents, even with babysitters---if mother has been the main caregiver, the attachment and the identification with her remain the primary ones. Now, in order to identify with his maleness, he must renounce this connection with the first person outside self to be internalized into his inner psychic world---the one who has been so deeply embedded in his psychic life as to seem a part of himself---and seek a deeper attachment and identification with father. But this father with whom he is expected to identify has, until this time, been a secondary character in his internal life, often little more than a… sometimes troublesome shadow…” (Pg. 55-56)

This book may interest those seeking social psychological approaches to relations between the sexes.