Rating: 4/5

I was surprised. This is a side story to "The Mote in God's Eye". It seems to take place at the same time (more or less) and in that universe. However, it has nothing to do with the Moties except as a vague news story about aliens found somewhere. 

The story: The Empire has rediscovered "Prince Samual's Planet" and is re-incorporating it into the Empire as a colony planet... to the objection of the current inhabitants including King David, the soon-to-be ruler of the planet. But according to Empire law a planet cannot be made into a colony if the inhabitants have space travel. Currently, Prince Samual's Planet has steam-driven cars and voice tubes. But there is an ancient library on another planet... now a very privative planet after The Fall of the previous empire. If they can hitch a ride with a galactic merchant, a small expedition might be able to get to the library, download the plans for making a spaceship and become a space capable planet. That's the plan, but plans go wrong. Luckily, King David has sent a man who can improvise, Colonel Nathan "Iron" MacKinnie.

Any problems with this book? Not too much. It should have been longer, but given the constraints of book publishing at the time "War and Peace" was never in the cards for a science fiction book. 

There was a lost opportunity in describing the journey from the Empire outpost to the city of Batav. 

They traveled... by sea. There was also a lot of naval lingo used but never explained. Luckily I had sailing lessons when I was younger so I could follow along. I had also read David Weber's Safehold series beginning with "Off Armageddon Reef" which goes into detail why some sailing ships are faster than others.

I will tell you what the phrase "in irons" (or "in stays") means to a sailor. It means that the boat has lost all forward momentum usually during tacking. Tacking into the wind requires that one do a zig-zag pattern against the wind in order to fill one's sails. It depends on the type of sails one is using as to what percentage off direct center one can face the wind to fill one's sails. The smaller the percentage, the easier it is to tack and avoid getting caught "in irons." You also go faster than anyone chasing you... an important plot point not explained in the book.

OK. I only took a few lessons in sailing. I'm not a sailor but it helps.

This book was also world-building in a sense. Very small innovations can produce a massive change in societies. David Weber demonstrated this his Safehold series and Dahak series. Eric Flint did this as well in his 1632/Ring of Fire series. In the case of King David's Spaceship, the Empire was aware that introducing too much innovation at once could send a civilization in unexpected directions, often not to the benefit the civilization and especially not to the benefit of the Empire. That attitude drove the Empire characters, seeming to keep secrets from the target civilization which was noticed and resented since it seemed patronizing as well.

The ending was unusual. One could see that the project could never succeed (at least in the time frame they had) to build a spaceship as anyone might envision it. It was a good ending despite the quick wrap up. I might read this book again, maybe after reading other books in the series.