Rating: 5/5

I can’t remember why I picked up John Case’s “The Murder Artist”, but I suspect it may have caught my eye and I thought it was a true-crime novel based on someone who drew pictures of suspects or a court artist. Not having heard of John Case previously, there was little to lead me to this conclusion, except perhaps the title of forensic psychologist Paul Britton’s book “The Jigsaw Man”. If that was my line of reasoning, I don’t know why I picked up this novel, having read that book, which proved nothing other than that Paul Britton could probably use a psychologist himself. Fortunately, “The Murder Artist” proved to be a work of fiction and a very good one at that.

Alex Callaghan is a television reporter, usually focussing on foreign stories, which has resulted in his estrangement from his wife, a situation he is trying to repair. Part of this is a commitment to reduce his workload and have his twin sons, Kevin and Sean, staying with him for a month. Having promised to take the boys to a Renaissance Faire one weekend, he loses tracks of the boys at one point and they go missing, with him receiving a call from their home suggesting their kidnapper has taken them there, but he has left clues which focus suspicion on Alex, allowing the real culprit time to get clear whilst the investigation isn’t looking in his direction.

Frustrated with the delays and lack of progress being made by both Police and the FBI, Alex quits his job and sets about carrying out his own investigation. He discovers that the kidnapping of twins is very rare and even when you add in murders of twins, it’s still not a common crime and the mother of the last set of twins to be kidnapped refuses to talk to law enforcement, so the links between these crimes have been dismissed. However, the deeper into things Alex looks, the more he believes that the kidnapped and murdered twin crimes were carried out by the same person and, worse, that this person possibly has his sons and that he plans to kill them in the name of performance art.

If you listen to enough true crime podcasts or read enough news stories, it soon becomes apparent that crimes against children hold a special place in the minds of most right-thinking people and those who commit such crimes are held in a particular revulsion. Writing here, John Case proves why that should be the case, as it is the emotional devastation that losing a child can have which makes them harder to take and he writes this devastation in the lives of Alex and his estranged wife, Liz, incredibly well. Many crime thriller novels miss the emotional impact of the crimes in favour of the solution, but “The Murder Artist” features this heavily and the grief of loss is well portrayed, as is the feelings Liz has towards Alex when he has been accused, with her suspicion mingling nicely with her grief and anger on the page.

Whilst writing the emotional impact very well, the story is incredibly well-written as well, with a layered mystery taking in stage magic and voodoo and with the solution requiring a cross-country solution. There are several murders which do not obviously seem linked, but Case has linked them together well and, whilst the mystery itself is wild enough that it doesn’t seem entirely believable, the way the mystery is unpeeled layer by layer and the pace at which this is done is certainly realistic within the setting of the novel. Whilst some of the turns it takes may be unexpected, there is rarely a sense of deus ex machina and each step follows naturally from each, with even the way Alex funds his investigations and the feelings each evokes along the way fitting the narrative.

“The Murder Artist” is a fantastic crime thriller, which mixes the emotions and the actions perfectly in with a beautifully layered mystery. Roadblocks are set up and removed and whilst the mystery takes a while to solve, the pace of the novel keeps the reader interested and rarely slows, even as things take some time to play out. I may not have expected what I got from John Case, but he has proved with this novel to be a crime writer of no small amount of skill and I’m certainly keen to read more of his work based on this effort.