Rating: 4/5

The story is great, but the book isn't as deep as it could be. Nevertheless it was written in 1987 about the 1981 hit film of the same name, Chariots of Fire.

Harold Abrahams and Eric Liddell were short distance runners for their countries, England and Scotland, respectively. Abrahams was a Jew, represented in the movie as out to prove himself to a world that has historically prejudiced itself against Hebrews. Liddell was preparing to be a missionary in China, where he was born to missionary parents. His brother and sister were missionaries to China. Yet, to his family, he seemed to put his missionary career on hold, while he ran races in unorthodox style...and won them. 

Abrahams and LIddle had many things in common. They won record setting races. They were Olympic contenders. They were collegiates. 

The juxtaposition of these two men, are stark. This high definition contrast clearly illuminates their individual motivations for running. Abrahams was a Jew whose goal in running was to prove himself to the world. Liddell was a Christian whose goal in running was to let God's glory shine. Abrahams time was spent with a trainer (which apparently was illegal) to analyze every move to make every move count. He had seen a race where Liddell ran and tripped, causing certain loss of the race. Yet Liddell amazingly got up, and speeding to the finish line, came from far behind to win the race. This is a dramatically true story! Liddell had a habit of running with improper form, arms waving and head thrown back. Abrahams was trained to perform with spit and polish, in preparation for the Olympics. Who would win the gold medal for their best race, the 100m?

While Abrahams spent his time in worry and training, Liddell spent his free time, outside of practice, in preaching. I read a story about the actor who portrayed Liddell. He had been studying the Bible for his part. When he read one of the sermons in the script he'd have to give, he felt extremely uncomfortable about it. He said to the directors that he didn't think Liddell, himself, would have preached in that manner. Instead of fiery sermons which were indeed typical of the day, Liddell had an easy going, mild manner. The actor was encouraged by the directors to write his own sermon for that part. He did and it became the most moving part of the entire movie. Of Eric Liddell, the actor who portrayed him said, "...he never pushed his faith down anyone's throat. When he spoke, he spoke rather quietly. He just talked about real things-about himself and his faith and what he did that morning." 

There is some fiction in the movie, such as the details surrounding Liddell's refusal to run in the Olympics. Liddell was originally scheduled to run in a heat on a Sunday. Liddell did refuse to run the race due to his personal principle of setting Sunday aside as a Sabbath rest. Unlike the movie, the details of allowing him to run a different race was settled before he arrived at the Olympics. Even though he ran for Great Britain, like Harold Abrahams, it was the heat for the 100m that he turned down that would have pitted him against Abrahams. Abrahams won the gold for the 100m.

Another fictionalized account surrounds an encouraging note Liddell received before his rescheduled race, the 400m. This long distance race was not one that anyone expected him to win, partly because he excelled in short distance races. The movie shows him receiving an encouraging note from one of the American athletes, Jackson Scholtz. In reality he received it off the field from someone else, but the note was the same. The note said, "The Old Book says, 'Those who honor me, I will honor.'" Encouraged, Eric Liddell stunningly won a gold medal in the 400m!