Rating: 2/5

I have a pretty good idea that with this review I'm going to step on peoples toes. So, be forewarned. You see, there really wasn't much I cared for. I don't like the author's writing style, I don't like the way he brushed over some really scarring things, and I really don't care for Martin Luther King, Jr. himself. Therefore, I'll probably disagree with many who read this.
Well, now that that is out of the way, let's get into the why and how of the book Martin Luther King, Jr.: A Life by Marshall Frady, and why I took the precautions of putting a disclaimer in my introduction.
My main problem with the book was that I learned several things I really didn't need or want to know. For one, the author has a very expansive vocabulary that bogs readers down when he uses it. He also has nothing against quoting cuss words in his book. And while I like description, I really don't need to know extreme details about minor characters, information he seemed overeager to share.
Even with all this detail, or perhaps because of all this wordy detail, there were times that the time line for me was blurred and I wasn't sure when things were happening, or just what was happening at all. I found that it was a little too easy to zone out, because very little drew you into it in the first place.
Another thing that annoyed me was how quickly the author painted everyone against King in a terrible light. No doubt there was a lot of people who wished him and his movements gone, but I'm also sure that not every white person was so oppressive and mean. And that maybe perhaps, with King's last movement where he was trying to take our country from capitalism to socialism, it wasn't necessarily that there was no "will or capacity of electoral government for that struggle [of changing]" but perhaps they realized that socialism wasn't good! I thought he was greatly jumping to conclusions in that instance.
The book clearly shows that Martin Luther King, Jr. was not perfect. No surprise there. However, I felt the author brushed over the gravity of some of the things which King did, and even possibly justified some of his actions occasionally. From what I can ascertain reading his work, Marshall Frady, while understanding that King wasn't perfect, thinks of him as a man who did a lot of good with his life and was a great man.
I both agree and disagree. No doubt good things came of King's movement. However, I found it so muddled with not so good things that took him very low in my esteem, and would never be able to make it to "hero" status with me. I know that no one is perfect and every hero has flaws, but I also believe that we can rise above the sinful lusts of this world, and I don't think King even tried; being both a plagiarizer and an adulterer for his entire life.
So all that is why I give Martin Luther King, Jr.: A Life a rather mediocre review. I do applaud Marshall Frady for pointing out some hard truths, even if I felt their importance was lessoned. He too took a risk at stepping on some toes, and though I didn't agree with him on quite a few of his subjects, I did learn a little about King. But, due to the harsh language, the vilification of everyone, and the brushing over of King's deep sins, I don't believe I would recommend it.