Rating: 4/5

The record of a friendship that lasted for over 30 years is the next best thing to a biography that Paul Theroux comes close to chronicling on V.S Naipaul. 

Theroux couldn’t have come up with a more difficult subject. In his words, Naipaul is the “one of the strangest and most difficult men I have met. He was contradictory, he challenged everything, he demanded attention, he could be petty, he uttered heresies about Africa (a land Theroux had a strong connection with), he made his innocent wife cry, he had impossible standards, he was self-important, he hated children, music and dogs. He was also brilliant and passionate in his convictions.” 

And yet there is a warmth between these two men, Naipaul the mentor and Theroux the willing acolyte and their lessons on writing that span continents in shared conversations, letters, and essays are invaluable even today, for these two men were totally dedicated to their craft, suffering the vicissitudes of the career writer who has no other outlet for self-actualization. Money was always a lack and a need for they alternated between selling critically acclaimed but financially lean books, dabbling in journalism, and taking teaching assignments to keep the bills paid while roaming the world, often alone, in search of material for their pen.

Some of the master Naipaul’s lessons to his student Theroux are worth noting:
a) Don’t get rich on writing before the age of 40. 
b) Tell the truth.
c) Create original turns of phrase and words.
d) The Man (writer) must never precede the work (yet Naipaul was pleased with the literary honours, including the Nobel that came after this book was written, heaped upon him).
e) Story is not important, narrative is better. Style is not important, structure and form are better.
f) Literary agents are “idlers” and publishers are “crummy.”
g) Writers steadily cancel each other out; the new (generation) replacing the old.
h) There is no middle way, a writer must be a free man. Anyone with a salary and a boss isn’t a free man.
i) On English courses in university: “It’s a silly parroting of political tripe. Close down the English departments.” (and yet Theroux and Naipaul accepted teaching jobs when times were tough).
j) On Literature: “Literature is for the old, the experienced, the damaged, who find echoes of their own experience and balm of a sort.”
k) On Titles : “They should be purchased for stamps at the post office.” (yet Naipaul was a willing recipient of the title of Knight - i.e. “Sir,” from the Queen).
l) On literary prizes: “A dreadful corrupting of publishing.” 
m) “All great writing has its own new form.”

Those who live in Sir Vidia’s shadow quickly become apparent: Theroux himself, who remains the eternal mentee; Naipaul’s long suffering first wife Pat who slept in a separate bedroom and had to keep the home fires burning while her husband hogged the limelight and was often seen in the company of a long-standing mistress; his brother Shiva who was an accomplished writer in his own right but who could never escape from under big brother’s fame in the literary establishment.

Through countries, books, publishers, mistresses and wives, the two writers keep a strong bond of friendship that waxes and wanes but never dies, until Pat herself passes away and Naipaul immediately marries a younger Pakistani divorcee with teenage daughters. Ironically, this same woman had crossed their paths when she was a child and when the two writers had been debating the merits of having children using her as an example. Theroux and the new wife do not hit it off from the inception and that spills into damaging his relationship with Naipaul.

The final meeting between the two prompts the writing of this book when Theroux realizes the wisdom in Naipaul’s words, “To all relations, there is a time to call them off.” And looking after the master scuttle up the road to Hyde Park, Theroux discovers that his giant literary friend is indeed a small man with no shadow. “Take it on the chin and move on,” are the final words from the great author that keep ringing in his ears, and with that, Theroux heads home to settle down and write this book as his form of preservation and purgation of a relationship that greatly informed his career as a writer.