Rating: 4/5

From Cleopatra and Herodotus to Howard Carter and the Curse of the Pharaohs, the investigators in "The Mammoth Book of Egyptian Whodunnits" uncover the murder mysteries of Ancient Egypt. 

This anthology covers two periods in history - the time of Ancient Egypt which stretches from the First Dynasty in 4000 B.C. to the time of the Roman Empire, and the time of the Discoveries, which covers the Napoleonic and Victorian periods of excavation.

The 19 short stories included are the following:

Introduction by Elizabeth Peters &gt;&gt; An author's journey to her current career and a brief explanation of the reason why Ancient Egypt issuch an inspiration to writers of sensational fiction.

"Set in Stone" by Deirdre Counihan  &gt;&gt; Taking real life figures from the time of Imhotep, the vizier of the Third Dynasty king, Counihan takes us back to the current royal investigation of a death occuring during the vizier's youth. 

"Serpent at the Feast" by Claire Griffen  &gt;&gt; Metjen-hotep, the Chief Architect of the second pyramid which now stands in Giza, was murdered. Baki, the Pharoah's Chief Physician, seeks the murderer. Is it the Chief Architect's adopted son, or the man who serves as his scribe, or his newest wife?

"The Sorrow of Senusert the Mighty" by Keith Taylor  &gt;&gt; Egypt's Middle Kingdom's most powerful ruler, Senusert III's life has attempted at for several times. Wine sought to poison him has failed, but will the murderer succeed with a trained man-eater of a lion?

"The Execration" by Noreen Doyle  &gt;&gt; A "lector" priest's ceremony of execration gone horribly wrong, at the expense of an innocent life. 

"No-name" by R.H. Stewart  &gt;&gt; When Queen Hatshepsut's mortuary temple was excavated, the coffin of an unidentified male was revealed. Who was he and what was his importance to Egypt's ruling family?

"Or You Can Drink the Wine...?" by Paul C. Doherty  &gt;&gt; A former tutor of the Queen of Egypt has ingested poison, making it appear obvious that she has committed suicide. However, Amerotke, the Chief Judge in the Hall of Two Truths in Thebes of a Hundred Gates, has his own investigation to perform. I always thought that there must be a better title suited for this short story, other than what appeared as published.

"Murder in the Land of Wawat" by Lauren Haney  &gt;&gt; A native of Nubia (then called Wawat) was found murdered. Lieutenant Bak, officer in charge of the Medjay police seeks the truth. 

"The Locked Tomb Mystery" by Elizabeth Peters  &gt;&gt; The undoing of a man in the hands of the two most powerful females in his life. 

"Heretic's Dagger" by Lynda S. Robinson  &gt;&gt; Court intrigue and power struggles in the time of the reign of one of the most easily recognizable pharoahs of Egypt, Tutankhamun. 

"Scorpion's Kiss" by Anton Gill  &gt;&gt; An investigator trusted by Pharoah above all others (much to the chagrin of his former protege) is asked to know the truth behind the murder of the Chief Interogator. 

"Claws of the Wind" by Suzanne Frank  &gt;&gt; The First Prophet of Anubis seeks to fing out the truth in a murder case presented before her. The priestess would have to choose between her duty and that what is right. 

"The Weighing of the Heart" by F. Gwynplaine MacIntyre  &gt;&gt; The Egyptians believed that during a person's death, Anubis would weigh that person's heart against Ma'at, the goddess-feather of Truth. But is such a thing possible when one's ancestor has committed murder to regain riches? 

"Chosen of the Nile" by Mary Reed &amp; Eric Mayer  &gt;&gt; Herodotus, considered as the father of history, travels to Egypt to observe the customs owing to the worship of the crocodile god of the Nile. 

"The Justice of Isis" by Gillian Bradshaw  &gt;&gt; A Gabinian soldier has been accused of defiling the altar of Isis but he claims innocence of the crime. 

"The Wings of Isis" by Marilyn Todd  &gt;&gt; No Egyptian anthology would be complete without including Pharoah Cleopatra VII. This one follows the ceremony of her ascent as the goddess Isis. 

"Bringing the Foot" by Kate Ellis  &gt;&gt; A reminiscing of the adventures of one of the early Egyptologists during the Naploeanic era.

"Unrolling the Dead" by Ian Morson  &gt;&gt; A murder case which parallels the translation of a papyrus against the actual events at the time of Pharoah Meryakare. I personally hated the dialogue of the "future" time.

"Heart Scarab" by Gillian Linscott  &gt;&gt; An examination of the relationship between a renowned Egyptologist and his son who loathes anything to do with Egypt. 

"Made in Egypt" by Michael Pearce  &gt;&gt; A terrible ending of a story to an otherwise great anthology. This one tries to explore the robbery of the Mask of Thutmose.

There are not centuries but millenia of possible settings and the editor has done a good job of selecting a spread of times and places as well as authors.

Book Details: 

Title The Mammoth Book of Egyptian Whodunnits
Author Edited by Mike Ashley
Reviewed By Purplycookie