Rating: 4/5

[9/10]

In one of the scaliest threats to his bachelor state, our old acquaintance Bertram Wooster is left without the moral support of his dependable gentleman's gentleman Jeeves. It all starts with a misunderstanding about a banjolele. On one side, Bertie is convinced that assiduous practice makes perfect when learning to play his newest toy. On the other, his neighbours have given him an ultimatum - either he or his bajolele must go from his posh London residence. Jeeves joins the ranks of the malcontents and hands in his resignation.

Rather than give up his musical pursuits, Bertie Wooster stiffs the upper lip, releases Jeeves and chooses self-exile to the countryside in Chuffnell Regis, the residential seat of his old school pal 'Chuffy', the fifth baron Chuffnell of Chuffnell Hall  and known only to his recent fiancee by his given name, Marmaduke .

Instead of the peace and quiet he hoped for, Bertie finds himself thrown once again in the soup, this time courtesy of his own reckless behaviour rather than under the push of an imperious aunt. As usual with P G Wodehouse, these troubles refer mostly to matters of the heart. Something in the air surrounding these stately English manors makes people  'suddenly begin to leap about like a lamb in the springtime.'  and contemplate marriage. Chuffy has his eyes on the lovely Pauline Stoker, formerly briefly engaged to Bertie while on a visit to New York. Chuffy's mother, the Lady Chuffnell feels the stirrings of a late spring when gazing into the eyes of Sir Roderick Glossop, another character familiar from past misadventures. The scion of Chuffnell Hall, 'young blighted Seabury', plays an unlikely Cupid who prefers to make some money instead of firing arrows at loving hearts ('Things happen to guys that don't kick in their protection money,' he said dreamily.)

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

After a couple of short story collections in the series I was well content to explore the kind of mayhem P G Wodehouse is capable of when using the longer form of narration. The basic structure of the plot remains familiar, but the potential for trouble is multiplied tenfold, especially when you throw in a pair of heliotrope pyjamas, a furious father hellbent on a shotgun wedding, a replacement butler (Brinkley) with a fondness for strong drink and for starting the socialist revolution in the Wooster cottage, a double serving of boot polish aggravated by an unexpected penury of butter, a couple of earnest village coppers with a bad case of insomnia and a breakfast plate of kippered herrings that seem as hard to win as the South Pole. (I am trying to be as vague as possible mentioning the key ingredients of the farce without spoiling the actual events)

It seems like a case that can be solved only by the oversized brain of Jeeves, so lets hope he and Bertie deal with the banjolele issue before wedding bells start to ring for the young Wooster.

 Thank You, Jeeves  is an entertaining addition to the Jeeves &amp; Wooster canon, and I highly recommend it as the perfect companion to a rainy day:

 It seems almost impossible, considering what the night life of Chuffnell Regis was like, but the next thing that woke me was not a girl leaping from under the bed, her father bounding in with blood in his eye, or a police sergeant playing ragtime on the knocker, but actually birds outside the window heralding in a new day. 

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

endnotes: Mr. Wodehouse had me once again joyfully diving for the dictionary as he explores the less trodden paths of the English language:

- to asseverate = to affirm or declare positively or earnestly, to affirm positively
- zareba = an improvised stockade constructed in parts of Africa especially of thorny bushes

More, please!