Rating: 3/5

This is an autobiographical story of Monica Dickens' experiences as a small-time reporter on a local weekly in a small English town shortly after WWII. This is not Fleet Street : the main topics are the Annual Meetings of various local organizations, the Assizes and the local "dog bites man" stories. The author struggles to find lodgings, and then becomes friends with her fellow boarders. Although the tone is gentle and ironic, the book drove home to me how hard those years were, especially for women. In the first place, it seemed to me that almost everybody was malnourished after years of food rationing. Second, sexism was rampant in a way that we can barely imagine nowadays. For instance, the title, cozy though it may seem, is a reference to the fact that, as the only "girl" in the office, the author was expected to make the tea every single day, even though, officially, there was a roster. Third, there is the story of how a (respectably married!) young woman bleeds to death after she has an illegal abortion because her landlady won't allow children and the couple can't afford any other lodgings. 

The story doesn't have much structure. It is more of a day-to-day description of a couple of months in her life, which end when she loses her job because she's tampered with the newspaper proofs, removing a paragraph that could end a friend's career (the reason being that that paragraph revealed that the friend in question, a ballet dancer, was married- another anachronistic form of discrimination). 

One of the weaknesses of the book was that we are presented with the narrator as fully formed, fully embedded in her newspaper job. We don't know anything about her background, her family, how she obtained her job, why she chose to take this unrewarding job etc. We don't even know her age or her appearance. All we know is that she sometimes spends a weekend in London with her family. So the main character remains a cipher, a shadowy figure. We can surmise from Monica Dickens' other books that she was a girl from a wealthy family who chose to make her own living - but nothing of that comes through in this book. 

Still, overall this is an engaging book for someone who wants to spend an afternoon with a "gentle" book that is yet not sentimental.