Rating: 4/5

I'm slowly making my way through the Inspector Wexford books, and each one is an old-fashioned but not too old-fashioned pleasure: Rendell continues to use these as a showcase for the comfort-reading delight of blending Agatha Christie-style puzzle mysteries with a more real, textured world. The style here is always restrained, Wexford and Burden always witty, warm, and suitably irritated, and the crimes always seem solvable by the attentive reader, but the world is recognizably ours--well, recognizably ours in the late sixties, at least--and full of complications, dark undercurrents, and well-developed characters.

The Best Man to Die centers around the murder of Charlie Hatton, the best friend and best man of Jack Pertwee, the faithful and generous husband of his wife Lilian, and an absolute dick to literally everyone else. It immediately becomes apparent that Charlie is living well beyond his means and certainly had some kind of illegally-gained income, but there the investigation briefly stalls: was Charlie making his money off orchestrating robberies? By blackmail? If it's blackmail, who was he blackmailing, and what did he know about them? Is it possible that someone killed him just for the hundred pounds in his wallet and the sheer satisfaction of shutting him up before he made one more snide little dig?

Floating around the vicinity of all this is an overpriced dentist with a collection of Chinese artwork, a car crash survivor who claims her daughter (identified as having also died in the crash) is still alive and in Germany, a newly-installed lift in the police station, and a somewhat pathetic dog that Wexford has been saddled with caring for. Some of the plot developments are obvious--as Kiss Kiss Bang Bang, a movie not otherwise remotely related to Rendell, would put it, "Your case, and my case, are the same fucking case"--but others are not, and others are not developments at all as much as they're complications, the red herring of something looking like a clue when it's really just a person behaving according to their own motives, initially unknown to our detectives. There is also the matter of Jack's grief for his murdered friend, which Rendell is sometimes wry about but always sympathetic toward--these were two men who genuinely loved each other as friends in a sliver of culture that didn't allow them to ever directly acknowledge that, and there's a nicely-mined pathos in Jack being effectively bereaved without the clear right to ever complain about it or show it without being judged.

Call it 3.5, rounded up for enjoyment but otherwise lessened by being a little slight for a Rendell--I screwed up the curve on all of these by starting with the comparatively weak From Doon with Death. This is better than that but worse than, say, Sins of the Fathers, but thus far, all of these have been well worth reading.