Rating: 2/5

Tutankhamen is probably the best known of the Egyptian pharaohs, largely because of the discovery of his intact tomb by Howard Carter in 1922. In this beautiful picture book, writer and illustrator Robert Sabuda attempts to give some idea of the boyhood of the frail boy king who came to power at the age of nine in the mid 1300s BC, ruled for ten years, and then died at age nineteen.

Sabuda’s book provides some information about how the young prince may have been schooled. The author also imagines the sights young Tut may have seen, including the building and then destruction of temples. The previous pharaoh, Akhenaten (also known as Amenhotep IV) turned Egypt away from the traditional pantheon to monotheism, the worship of a single god, Aten (the sun disk). 

There’s a huge problem with Sabuda’s book, however. I consulted multiple sources—The British Museum, National Geographic, and PBS, to name a few—and all of them make clear that Tutankhamen was the son of the iconoclastic pharaoh Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV), who systematically destroyed traditional religious institutions, art, and imagery. Tut’s parentage was apparently understood in 1994 when Sabuda’s book was first published, yet the author-illustrator incorrectly identifies him as the son of Amenhotep III (who was, in fact, Tut’s grandfather) and the brother of Akhenaten. He also represents the young ruler as a heroic figure whose gift to the Egyptians was the return to them of their traditional religion.

Based on my reading, Tutankhamen is considered a relatively minor pharaoh. There is speculation that he may have been under the control of powerful figures in the kingdom. Additionally, while the book does highlight Tut’s physical vulnerability, he had more significant health issues than Sabuda suggests. The boy king had an inherited bone disease, along with other genetic disorders. His contracting malaria certainly didn’t help matters. Tut’s parents were almost certainly siblings. (The purity of the royal line had to be preserved, thought the Egyptians.)

To be clear: one would not expect a children’s picture book to venture into the territory of inbreeding. At the same time, it is regrettable that Sabuda’s beautiful book is factually unreliable. I can’t imagine using it in a classroom.

The only real positive here is the artwork. It’s unfortunate that Sabuda didn’t leave the writing to someone more knowledgeable.