Rating: 4/5

PROJECTIONS

Coming out of a cinema having watched a film, one often feels, for a very short moment, somewhat astray. But very quickly one’s consciousness grapples to take hold of its position and put the realm of the movie into a contained and defined locus in one’s brain—somewhere on the side, no longer projected at the very back. Only then can one resume one’s life and self, and start chatting to friends about what did they think of the film.

With this novel I have felt a similar disconcerting magic that sucked me in and hauled me out from my viewpoint. Somewhat aware of my bewitchment I was anticipating a similar bewildering effect when I would finish the book and closed its back cover and its world and transform it back into the shape of a cardboard box. Yes, not unlike coming out into the open city, after the absorbing and dark session in a cinema.

During those reading hours I lived in the Henry James that Colm Tóibín was projecting so very skillfully.

And yet, at times I stirred in my seat. A certain mistrust was unnerving me.

May be the fact that Tóibín choses to begin with a literary flop in the career of Henry James (HJ) and then follows it with too much of a focus on the (homo)sexual inclinations of his subject.

Knowing little about HJ before I began reading The Master, and considering that it was my first two James novels that showed me the beauty of the English language, Tóibín’s initial approach did not accord well with my perceptions. Later episodes or comments confirmed my impression that Tóibín had set out to catch HJ in his faults.

This attitude was particularly problematic when recounting the friendship with and the fatal end of Constance Fenimore Woolson (CFW). May be others too, but certainly Tóibín wants to point fingers, in what I consider a dangerous and futile game of ‘what-ifs’ that are impossible to confirm, and for the most part the result of a simplistic view of cause-and-effect in life, a complex phenomenon. In Spanish we call this the futuribles. 

Tóibín also bites the baited hook tended for literary biographers: looking for the persons who were the source for his fictional characters. HJ’s cousin Minny Temple is one such – of James’s most famous female personalities, Daisy and Isabel. And I wonder if Tóibín himself has not also drawn on real people around him when writing his novels. To veer too much away from real life could also lead a writer to write about what he does not know anything about, as Tóibín tells us of HJ’s work ‘in the French mode’ when he wrote about an adulteress when he was still a very young man. Tóbín includes Henry’s elder brother William mocking him for this.

At times, when tracking the original identities HJ’s success at creating characters is presented as if he had been stealing the life of the persons around him to convert them into fiction on paper; a sort of literary vampire. Or the opposite, so that we also come to the subverted situation in which Tóibín reproaches HJ for not making the character quite like the real person.

So that Isabel Archer saw what Constance Fenimore Woolson saw and may indeed have felt what she felt, if only he could have fully divined what Constance felt.

For Tóibín judges HJ. He sees HK not able to empathize enough with his friend CFW. I, however, felt that CFW had also not understood HJ’s need for independence and privacy and may have drawn too many expectations.

This quest for Henry’s faults is nonetheless balanced out with the episode that narrates the relationship of the American writer with his problematic servants, the Smiths. Here HJ is portrayed under a warm light and the writer’s generosity is allowed to shine.

I also wished we had learnt more about HJ as a writer. A couple of times, his complex sentences are alluded to, and his fastidiousness with language is also amusingly presented when he admonishes his nieces when they say that they are going to ‘fix’ their hair asking them: "To fix it to what, or with what?"

All these negative aspects are to justify the missing star in my rating, because, as I have accounted at the beginning of this review, I have felt a very strong pull when reading The Master that disconcerted me strongly. The four stars shine on their own; the difficult one to identify is the missing one.

Tóibín has succeeded in fascinating me with his account. His fictional rendition of a person who in real life seems to have been despairingly inscrutable to those around him is masterful. His Henry James is so plausible that it has been my resistance to believe in its truthfulness that has led me to wrack my brains attempting to identify the dissonances that could signal to me that his account was a siren’s call. 

And it has been precisely this push &amp; pull rhythm in his novel that has been captivated and fully engrossed me.

Even if I find that I have to try and restore Henry James, the writer – with his novels.