Rating: 3/5

Zeus being the son of two siblings, the grandson of a mother and her son, fathering children with two of his sisters as well as cousins, and transforming into animals to have sex with mortal women isn't talked about enough. 

  

Welcome to Greek mythology, where everyone is related, and most have committed at least one SA. Why am I so terrible at math but so good at knowing who slept with whom in mythology? What do I do with this useless knowledge?

My pride and prejudice have kept me from reading Ovid. I avoided him like I avoid making good life choices. I hate how he portrayed some of the Greek goddesses and tarnished their reputations. I despise his version of the Medusa myth, which, for some reason, seems to be the only version that female authors write about these days. That being said, this ancient fella had talent.

One of the most memorable myths revolves around Daphne the nymph. Hello trauma, my old friend. I've come to recount this myth again. Brought to you by Persephone's Pomegranate and Simon &amp; Garfunkel.

Before I get into the Daphne and Apollo drama, I need to say something to my girls who aren't familiar with Greek mythology. Consent wasn't a thing in the lives of male deities of ancient Greece. If you can't get past that, you probably won't enjoy Greek mythology.

Any mortal or minor deity who was unfortunate enough to catch the eye of a major male or female deity faced one of three outcomes:

1. They were turned into a plant
2. They were put into an eternal sleep
3. They died in the most brutal way imaginable

In Apollo's case, the Greek god of the sun, prophecy, healing, poetry, light, and music, it was all of the above. He is the hottest (literally and metaphorically) of the male gods, as well as the unluckiest in love. And it's his own damn fault.

  

Daphne was a nymph, daughter of river god Peneus, OG hippie, and H₂O bachelorette. She was living her best life and had no wish to marry or have children. Frolicking in nature with her girlfriends was her aesthetic. All was well in Daphneland until a certain fiery blondie entered the scene and ruined everything for everyone. The most known version of the myth is that Apollo fell madly in love with her and wanted to, how do I put this in a non-triggering way, hook up with her, but she wasn't having it. She started to run away from him, and as she did, she called upon her father for help. To save his daughter from Apollo's pursuit, Peneus turned her into a laurel tree. So ends the tale of a woman-tree and manchild-sun who could not control his impulses.

  Tree though she was, Apollo still loved her. Caressing the trunk with his hand, he could feel the heart still fluttering under the new bark. He pressed his lips to the wood; but the wood still shrank from his kisses.   

In Ovid's version, what happens to Daphne is still Apollo's fault, although the details differ a bit. Apollo is madly enamored with Daphne, or at least thinks he is, but wait! The true culprit is Olympus' favorite wingman and matchmaker extraordinaire, Eros, who bestows Apollo with a maddening desire for Daphne and encourages him to pursue her (my beloved feathered hustler has never done anything wrong in his entire life, and I am tired of him being blamed for Apollo's and Zeus's rapey tendencies).

Daphne is not interested in this young god, his Jamie Campbell Bower levels of hotness, or his mint condish golden chariot. She is terrified of him and his powers and starts to flee. He chases her, not to harm her, but to 'talk' (the audacity of men). Daphne's father emerges from his watery domain and turns her into a laurel tree (and that, gentle reader, is why the book is called metamorphoses).

As much as I dislike making light of this tragic outcome, I can't help but be amused at Apollo's 'but what about me' energy. Here is Daphne, in the process of becoming a plant, and Apollo makes it all about himself. He waxes poetic about how he'll remember and honor her for all eternity. Read the room, my guy. 

  

Ovid's description of the abduction of Persephone is as dark as it is foreboding. 

  One day, Proserpina, Ceres' daughter, was there in the woodland, happily plucking bunches of violets or pure white lilies, filling the folds of her dress or her basket in girlish excitement, vying to pick more flowers than her friends - when Pluto espied her, no sooner espied than he loved her and swept her away, so impatient in passion. In panic, Proserpina desperately called for her mother and friends, more often her mother. All the flowers she had picked fell out of her loosened tunic.   

The Hades and Persephone myth has been romanticized to death (pun intended) by modern authors. I have a theory that this legend was originally intended as a cautionary tale for the young girls of ancient Greece. Nobody could have predicted that someday, in the distant future, modern girls would not only lose their fear of Hades but would even fantasize about being abducted by him. No one could have predicted a little thing called fanfiction. Now that I think about it, ancient Greek authors and modern teen girls have something in common: both enjoyed writing fanfiction about toxic relationships. #enemies to lovers, slow burn, angst with a happy ending, flower-gathering maiden/dark lord

  

These are not in the book, but I simply had to share two of my favorite paintings by Evelyn De Morgan.

Eos, Titan goddess of the dawn, and sister of Helios (sun) and Selene (moon)

  

Helen of Troy

  

I end this review with my favorite myth from the book, which holds a special place in my heart. 'The Minotaur and Ariadne.' I first encountered this story as a wee lass in my cherished children's encyclopedia, and my imagination ran wild. Ariadne (also known as Lady of the Labyrinth) was a Cretan princess who helped Theseus (the hatred I feel for this douche canoe cannot be measured) in defeating the Minotaur, Ariadne's terrifying half-man, half-bull half-brother. As a reward for her help, Theseus abandoned her on the island of Naxos when they sailed away towards Athens without so much as a jug of water. Theseus has a long rap sheet of offenses against girls and women. This Scummy McScummerson kidnapped Helen when she was a child and attempted to kidnap Persephone from the Underworld. As you can imagine, this did not go over well with Hades. 'You are trying to kidnap what I have rightfully stolen, and I think it quite ungentlemanly' from The Princess Bride immediately comes to mind. 

While Ariadne wept on the island, most likely cursing all men, she was discovered by Dionysus, aka Bacchus, aka Jim Morrison of Mount Olympus, aka the son of Zeus and the god of wine, fertility, theater, ecstasy, and madness. They fell in love, married, and had a large brood of children. Dionysus is nothing if not fertile, and honestly, good for Ariadne. There is a version of the story in which she dies, but most accounts depict her as becoming immortal and living in  sexual  bliss with her oenophilic hubby. I find it fascinating that the wildest god, known for causing chaos and madness, could show such empathy and tenderness toward an abandoned mortal woman.

  

  She wept and wailed in her lonely plight, till Bacchus swept her up in his arms and came to her rescue. 

'My star,' he declared, 'you must shine for ever!' 

Removing the crown from her forehead, he launched it skyward. It whirled and spun through the air, and during its flight the gems were changed into brilliant fires.