Rating: 4/5

Forgotten Fire Review
Joseph Wehmeyer, 1/31/17, Pd.8, It's Alive
Author: Adam Bagdasarian, 271 pages published in 2000, genre: historical fiction

Vahan Kenderian is a 12 year old boy living in Bitlis, Armenia right before WWI. In the book Forgotten Fire by Adam Bagdasarian, tells the story or Vahan’s struggle to survive during the Armenian genocide in WWI. In the hands of the Ottoman Empire, the Turkish feared that the Armenians were a threat to the government’s security and that their suffering may alert other countries in Europe to take action. Thus, the Turkish (who were in rule), sent out gendarmes (soldiers) to exterminate all the Armenians in Ottoman controlled areas. Vahan lived a good life, his father was a rich business man that was able to provide them food, water and a very nice house to live in for his large family. However, everything changed when the Turkish arrived in Bitlis. The gendarmes took away Vahan’s father on ‘business,’ his father never returned. The Turkish returned soon after, and executed the older boys and men of his family in their backyard.
Now it was just Vahan, his brother Sisak, sisters Armenhoui and Oskina, mother and grandmother. The gendarmes killed all the men of the town and left the women and children, who they eventually escorted to a new location to live. In an old prison, –rotted with dead bodies, people suffering, and soldiers doing awful things to the people there– Vahan and his family suffer with no food or water and begin to become malnourished. They are continually transported and are marching from location to location directed by the Turkish. With his family members beginning to dwindle one by one, Vahan and Sisak escape one night and are of on their own to another town to just try and survive. The end location goal is Constantinople, where safety is provided from Armenian refugees, but that journey is long and far awaiting Vahan. Throughout the book, Vahan’s life changes, each day bringing a new challenge and having to adjust every step of his journey just wondering if he can live on one more day without being killed or dying from suffering.
I would give this book a rating of 4, the reason why is that it is a great book, but it’s just such a depressing book. For some, the emotions given off in the book may make it even better, but I for one am not a big fan of sadder books. It doesn’t make the book any less of an astounding book, it makes one really realize how precious life is and should make one grateful to not have to experience the times that Vahan had to endure. I would recommend this book to anyone who would be committed to reading such a saddening story and be able to finish it out through the ending. The ending may make it all worthwhile.