Rating: 3/5

After the death of her parents, the European-raised heroine is summoned back to Australia by her wealthy paternal grandfather. She had never met him or her bevy of Australian relatives because her father became estranged from his family in his youth. Allegedly, he had an affair with a woman who lived in the neighboring vineyard. She was already married and refused to leave her husband and little son for her affair partner. Heartbroken, Heroine’s dad exiled himself abroad, met and married another woman, and fathered the heroine, never disclosing anything from his past to them. They thought he was a poor orphan, not a wealthy heir to a sprawling, majestic Australian vineyard! 

Now, the son of heroine’s father’s mistress is all grown up and has become the right-hand man of heroine’s grandfather, helping him to run his world-renown Australian vineyard. He has been training for years to eventually take over the vineyard and it is rumored that he will marry heroine's catty, beautiful cousin.

There is of course much family tension running between the Australian relatives and this “outsider” but the worst of it comes from the hostile, disdainful hero who somehow sees his position as heir to the empire threatened by the return of the prodigal granddaughter. Added to that is the fact that he is disgusted by the sordid history between their respective parents and wants to visit the sins of the father on the daughter.

The heroine is a typical Margaret Way Mary Sue: classy, fashionable, loving, resilient, and on top of it, she is a fine connoisseur of wines. Though the family members first bristle in hostility at her intrusion, she soon has them putty in her hands. 

The hero as usual is insulting and unlikable. He taunts her on her first day that she is an unfeeling golddigger with an eye on an ill, old, and easily influenced, wealthy grandfather. He stubbornly clings to his resentment and blows hot and cold until a devastating brush fire brings this rather underwhelming romance to its conclusion.