Rating: 2/5

welcome to...JUNE THE OBSCURE.

is this a good pun, or am i losing my mind? either way, this is PROJECT LONG CLASSICS, my life mission a lighthearted attempt to make big books more approachable by dividing them up into small chunks and smacking some wordplay on top.

i don't know what this is about (it's only on my tbr for penguin clothbound collection purposes), and i will be reading 3 chapters of it per day this month.

they should call me emma the obscure.

PART I, CHAPTERS 1-3
i too spent most of my adolescence thinking if i could just live in a city it would fix me. in my version it was new york because i was obsessed with NYU, but jude longing for the town his teacher moved to also works.

PART I, CHAPTERS 4-6
dreams of "knowing latin" have now taken a firm backseat to the first girl jude made eye contact with.

PART I, CHAPTERS 7-9
wow. the "she faked a pregnancy in order to keep him" style of misogyny has deep roots.

PART II, CHAPTERS 1-3
jude has gone to the teacher's town to chase his hot cousin, sue. (he ditched his pregnancy-faking wife. not unlike season 1 of glee.)

PART II, CHAPTERS 4-6
jude gets his hot cousin a job with the teacher he's a fan of and what does he get? the teacher going for the cousin. women, am i right?

PART II, CHAPTER 7; PART III, CHAPTERS 1-2
so far, jude has married a girl he hooked up with repeatedly and then consented to her leaving, whined a lot about wanting to be some kind of educated person and continually not done anything about it, and chased his cousin around even though he's married and she's about to be. not that sympathetic of a character as yet.

PART III, CHAPTERS 3-5
it appears sue has spent her life reading books, refusing to get married, and hanging out with guys she rejects when they declare their love. a modern woman.

PART III, CHAPTERS 6-8
sue is married and arabella is back from australia. can jude's life get any worse! (i don't think jude's life is all that bad.)

PART III, CHAPTERS 9-10; PART IV, CHAPTER 1
arabella is married to a different guy (in spite of being also married already) and told jude not to tattle. cool!

PART IV, CHAPTERS 2-4
sue's husband came in her room while she was asleep and she promptly got out of bed and jumped out the window. it goes without saying they no longer live together.

PART IV, CHAPTERS 5-6; PART V, CHAPTER 1
awww, the cousins are getting matching divorces.

PART V, CHAPTERS 2-4
congratulations to sue and jude on the illegal adoption of jude's nameless and unchristened heretofore australian son!

PART V, CHAPTERS 5-7
sue just turned to jude and said our lives are literally perfect! there's only one problem. this kid is dumb. (but now their lives aren't perfect even outside that obvious flaw, because everyone knows they don't accord with social laws and they're being chased across kingdom come [read: rural britain] by the rumor mill.)

PART V, CHAPTER 8; PART VI, CHAPTERS 1-2
i had a few different jokes written here but now i have to delete them all. basically...the aforementioned dumb son killed himself and the two other kids jude and sue had. and then sue was pregnant but that baby died too.

can't say i saw that one coming.

PART VI, CHAPTERS 3-5
sue just married the teacher again (conveniently she never married jude) because she thinks her kids died for her sins. okay yikes!

PART VI, CHAPTERS 6-8
arabella got inspo from that, i guess. we're back where we started re: marriages.

PART VI, CHAPTERS 9-11
if you didn't know jude was going to die in this section, you don't know my boy thomas hardy.

OVERALL
with this book i conclude my reading of the penguin clothbound thomas hardy editions, and this is by far my least favorite. all of them are very melodramatic and moral and didactic, but they vary in believability and timelessness.

this one was the worst offender. outdated and over the top.
rating: 2.5