Rating: 4/5

"come to a far when, a distant once, a land beyond the river -- but a river running no-one-knows-where."

up front: this was nothing at all like what i expected it to be. i enjoyed it a lot, although i will confess i think a larger portion of it than i'd care to admit went right over my head lol. this is another one you really have to sit with &amp; actually think about, &amp; i am definitely going to have to reread at some point. i thoroughly enjoyed the slow introduction &amp; reintroduction of characters throughout the stories, and it was a joy to reach the end when they were all interacting with each other for the first time.

this was an astonishingly thoughtful &amp; thought-provoking collection of interwoven stories. i can't think of a real-world power structure about which this story didn't have something to say, be that capitalism, racial &amp; cultural divides, patriarchy &amp; sexual dynamics, and especially the ways in which power dynamics weave in and out between each other. one of the running themes is the way (&amp; i'm just going to copy this from the wikipedia article) "that when one moves from a content to an image to a reflection, one reverses the form of the content," apparently a bit of mathematical theory delany was particularly fond of. 

relatedly, i'm glad i looked the series up on wikipedia, bc it gave a lot of insight into what delany as doing with his writing that i might otherwise have missed or not been able to really grasp in its entirety. a couple other bits of delany's commentary: "Sometimes you’ll rethink things in stories more than one back. But the basic factor is the idea of a continuous, open-ended, self-critical dialogue." &amp; "The series is very flexible. Here’s a short story. Next’s a bulky novel. That can be followed by a novella, or another novel, or another short story... (One good form of criticism comes from asking the question, ‘What, historically, might have caused people to act in a particular way that, when I wrote the last story, I just assumed was unquestioned human nature?’)" so that's something to keep in mind if you want to read this

the other thing i enjoyed was part of the general conceit of this series is that the foreword &amp; appendix are part of the stories themselves, which was not something i realized until i read the wiki page. by which i mean that the foreword was written by a character of the overarching nevèrÿon story, and the appendix was written as a sort of pseudo-academic work about another character from the story, &amp; they each show up in later installments in the series. this is to say that if you do not read through these as well you will be missing part of the story. i thought this, as well as the treatise on the culhar' fragment (fictional, containing the texts of the stories we have just finished reading), were extremely fun. 

this was not an easy read, to be clear. my adhd struggled a bit with this one, with its long &amp; often convoluted, circular sentences. but i did genuinely enjoy it, &amp; i look forward to continuing.

to end, two of my favorite quotes:

(from the preface)
"return to nevèrÿon is delany's overall name for his fantasy series - though the publisher, without forbidding me to mention it, has urged me not to stress it, as foreign-sounding words and diacritical markers are thought to be off-putting to the most embarrassing of statistical fictions, the commercial reader (not you, of course; not me), who presumably consumes texts only for story, is assumed to stand deaf to style, and is thought to applaud only the endlessly repeated pornographies of action and passion that, for all their violences, still managed to pander to an astonishingly untroubled acceptance of the personal and political status quo." (you see what i mean about the convoluted sentences. i loved this one tho)

&amp; lastly, from the appendix: 
"if some writer were to actually putdown these stories [i.e., the stories in the culhar' fragment], just what sort of reflection might they constitute, either of the modern world or of our own past history? could one consider such an imaginative expansion simply another translation, another reading of the text, another layer of the palimpsest?"