Rating: 5/5

(spoilers) 

Wow! I have a lot to say about this, I might write a separate review or something. Instead of finding a condemnation of "New Religions" - what Somersault has is a deeply humane view of people who participate in such groups. What's more telling is the way in which Somersault's religious group is portrayed - as essentially just people talking with each other and forming meaning, trying to figure out why they're the way they are and how they want to live! Sure, in real life we might have MLM/scammy/sketchy religious groups, but Somersault seems to argue that in a well-meaning group, it's about the participants just trying to help each other get by.

The way in which the portrayal of the group in Somersault parallels all sorts of 'acceptable' social units - the family, workplaces, universities, fan groups, Discord servers, etc, was interesting. In any social relation we're prone to abuse, but there is also the potential for healing under the right efforts or leadership.

People with mental disabilities, physically scarred peoples, single women with their children, scientists with 'failed' careers, artists with cancer and more - each interacts with the church with their own motivations.

Some are there just because it's something to do. Some are hoping the religious activity will lead them to answers to deep-rooted childhood questions. Others claim they're looking for salvation - but practically speaking are just looking for a place to live in peace. 

While most of the church's people would face isolation living in 'normal society', what they manage to pull off together in the rural villages, feels nothing short of amazing, even if their relations are filled with tension.

Somersault is a book about a New Religious group, but it also feels like a book about the various ways people can heal through the magic of social relations, and how that can coexist with the preservation of local histories and small-scale culture.

---

There's a lot more I could say, but I'll leave it at that Patron (co-founder of the church) is a deeply sympathetic and interesting character. Somersault is about many characters, but overall feels like it's about Patron even when it's not portraying him. He helped take his shattered religion and its lost followers, and rather than leaving his followers behind, manages to restore into something beneficial to society, a place where all these followers manage to fit in.

I feel like Oe definitely seems to have gotten kinder or mellow as he got older. The climax of the story, while tense, ultimately resolves and loosens through humor and quiet tragedy (rather than the... wild ending that was Silent Cry).

I also respect how he likes to bring so many of his stories back to his rural Japan hometown, and enjoyed the way he did it here. To me it feels like recognizing that the lives of people in Japan's margins - not the pop culture-making Tokyoites or politicians - are deeply valuable and worth caring about, especially in this era of aging populations and shrinking towns.