Rating: 2/5

i should change my "crummy chick lit" tag, because i don't actually find chick lit to be "crummy" across the board. i actually really enjoy it when i am in need of something fun &amp; frothy between the heavier doses of non-fiction to which i subject myself. this particular dose of chick lit, however, wasn't particularly to my tastes.

the plot stars perdita, a 29-year-old organic gardener who supplies a few local restaurants &amp; a "health farm," which is a british-ism that i don't understand. at first i thought it was a rehab center, &amp; then i thought maybe it was a spa. it doesn't really matter, it's not especially relevant to the plot. perdita's little house backs on to the land that is owned by her good friend kitty, an elderly wealthy lady who happens to be perdita's mother's godmother. perdita's parents are world travelers &amp; are never around, so perdita spends most of her quality time with kitty. perdita is a divorcee, having married an unsuitable bully of a man who could not be faithful when she was 18. their split was a dark chapter in perdita's life, but kitty helped her get back on her feet, emotionally, &amp; professionally, by giving her a parcel of land on which to build "poly-tunnels" (greenhouses?) in which to begin her gardening business.

perdita supplied veggies to a local hotel, but gets the shock of her life when she makes a delivery one day &amp; finds the old chef has been replaced with a new one--none other than her ex-husband, lucas, who was a stockbroker when she knew him. &amp; we pretty much all know what's going to happen, thanks to the punny title, but the author still makes us wait the entire 360 pages before we get there. there are your usual hijinks--the sous-chef, perdita's very young friend janey, gets a crush on lucas &amp; perdita sets her up with her employee, william, to try to distract her. lucas seems to hate perdita, but still gets her to agree to allow him to film a cooking show in her kitchen. perdita is tapped to be on the show as well. one night, perdita connives to get janey a night off to go on a date with william &amp; fills in in the kitchen. lucas is angry because supposedly a michelin reviewer is in the dining room &amp; he thinks perdita will mess up his chance of earning a star. they have a huge fight that actually involves perdita attempting to stab lucas with a butcher knife (!!!), &amp; then they almost do the deed right on the kitchen floor. it's your classic bad-boy-you-can't-resist story, which is why i say it's not to my taste. i never found lucas a sympathetic enough character. i was never convinced that perdita should let bygones be bygones &amp; start things up with him again. 

then kitty has a series of strokes &amp; requires around-the-clock nursing care. perdita moves in with kitty &amp; her caretakers. a long-lost nephew turns up &amp; perdita is the only one who seems to understand that he's just there to try to get kitty to sign over her assets to him in the will. he hints that he'll charge perdita for the use of the land her poly-tunnels are on once it's all his, so not only is perdita distraught by the impending death of her friend, but she's also concerned about the future of her gardening business. of course, she doesn't share her suspicions with anyone else. she just bottles it all up, &amp; once kitty dies, she puts off learning about what's in the will because she's convinced that the nephew inherited everything. she isn't taking care of herself &amp; everyone is concerned, until lucas whisks her away to the cabin in the woods where they spent their honeymoon. they start things back up again &amp; lucas gives her a long speech about how he had come back to town to find her again &amp; convince himself that he hadn't made a mistake by splitting up with her, but instead found that she had grown up &amp; become a confident, capable woman that he wants to marry again RIGHT NOW. they immediately (like literally within a few hours of hooking back up again) start making plans for their re-marriage &amp; all the babies they're going to have. lucas has seen kitty's will &amp; knows that perdita inherited everything. they move in to kitty's house &amp; lucas jokes that perdita may already be preggers. perdita realizes that she misses kitty, but she doesn't need her anymore, now that she has lucas's love or something.

it wasn't a terrible book, but all the british lingo was tough to parse out sometimes, &amp; the plot seemed to move in fits &amp; starts. there were long sections where perdita was keeping all her thoughts &amp; feelings to herself &amp; nothing seemed to be happening, &amp; then boom! she's back with lucas &amp; making baby plans in like five pages. but whatever--all i wanted was froth. i did expect the book to be a little funnier than it was, &amp; i expected a little more glamour from the whole TV program plotline, but...whatever.