Rating: 5/5

Now THAT'S More Like It
November 10, 2000

Gayle Wilson's series about former CIA agents returns to greatness in the amazing "Midnight Remembered," an absolute must-read. In the middle of a dangerous mission, CIA agent Joshua Stone made love to his partner, Paige Daniels. The next morning he and the top secret toxin they were sent to recover were gone. Three years later, a man matching his description has been found. Paige knows the man known as Jack Thompson is Josh. Can she unlock the secrets in his mind and hope he can remember her too?

The "Men of Mystery" series ends with a book that finally ranks with the first two, "The Bride's Protector" and "The Stranger She Knew," as truly dazzling. Books like this are why I have no problem saying that others aren't as good. Saying that "Her Private Bodyguard" or "Renegade Heart" are on the same level as "Midnight Remembered" only diminishes this remarkable achievement. Those books were nowhere near as good. Few books are. Wilson has won plenty of acclaim. This is truly one of her best.

"Midnight Remembered" is one of those special stories that delivers it all. Mind-boggling twists and heart stopping suspense. Compelling mystery and emotional romance. The book is a feat of plotting, keeping both the romance and suspense at a consistently high level throughout the book, something I wish Wilson would remember for all of her books. The characters are developed over the course of the story as they try to understand the strange circumstances they find themselves in, not by sitting around arguing with each other or through pages of narration. The main idea behind the story isn't a new one (I've about given up on finding those)--Rebecca York's classic "Talons of the Falcon" is built on a similar idea and Wilson herself has used variations on the theme. But this is a story like no other you've read. The way Wilson tells her story makes it feel new and fresh, her characters are complex originals and the international aspect adds unique flavor. (Two of the best Intrigues I've read this year have stories that go beyond the United States. I don't think it's a coincidence.) The best stories in this series have taken advantage of the wealth of possibilities the CIA aspect opens up, and the story here feels frighteningly real, even with name like Vladistan, so phony it's cheesy.

The romance is strong and beautiful. Josh and Paige's love story is very emotional, one readers will cherish. The climax is one of those heart-pounding situations where you won't be able to figure out how they'll get out of it. The amnesia element doesn't feel like a worn-out plot hook. It is a vital element used for maximum impact. The mystery is unique, not a situation of who-did-it, but what's happening. I could write pages on how great this story is. All you need to know is that it's a stunner.

I don't give five star reviews to too many books. I think they should mean something and go to books that are truly special. This one is. "Midnight Remembered" is one of the top three Intrigues I've read this year and I've read them all. If you thought the last two books were great, you haven't seen anything yet.