This review won't be overly long because I have conflicting feelings about this memoir, and I don't really want to spend more time thinking about this memoir than I have already had to for class.

Most of my thoughts on this memoir can be summarized in one sentence: I understand this memoir as a product of its time, but it doesn't mean I have to like it. 

I feel really shitty saying this, but I really didn't like Piri Thomas. My dislike of him really tainted my desire to want to continue reading this memoir and analyzing it for its merits. I understand that Piri was a product of his circumstances and that part of the point of this memoir is to illuminate how you end up down a certain path due to systematic oppression and racism, but that doesn’t mean I have to enjoy or like the shitty actions and decisions Piri makes. Therefore, I understand why Piri did certain things he did (the drug use, the letting gay men drug him and assault him, the selling of pot, the controlling of women and constantly being sexually involved with women so he could posture, etc etc). I get it. But I don’t have to like it. 

What especially rubbed me the wrong way was the way Piri talked to women and about women. I just couldn't let it go. It made me so uncomfortable, and it bothered me far more than his thieving (and other questionable behavior). There were times where he literally detailed feeling entitled to hit his current girlfriend and like. . . No thanks. And the whole wanting to wait to have sex with his girlfriend until after they were married but hooking up with other girls while he was still in this relationship? Ew. Again. No thanks.

If there was one thing I really enjoyed about this memoir was its discussion about race. The problems Piri experienced as a Puerto Rican man of color were issues still prevalent in Puerto Rican culture nowadays. Race relations are weird and complicated when you’re Puerto Rican, especially when you’re living in the US, so I liked that this memoir explored that. It handled this topic in a multifaceted way. Piri’s anger and frustration towards his family because of their complex race relations was incredibly well portrayed. I could imagine where his need to fully immerse himself in the black experience to further understand himself came from. Furthermore, this memoir didn't shy away from portraying how not only was Piri on the receiving end of racism, but he was also racist towards others due to his internalized racism. Therefore, I found it very enlightening to see how this book approached the topic of race, and I thought it dealt with it really well. 

Honestly. That's about all I want to say about this memoir. I don't want to think about it anymore. It doesn't feel right to rate it 1. because I don't like rating people's lives and 2. because as a reader in 2019 reading a memoir that was written in 1967 I'm bound to have some problems other readers wouldn't have had at the time this was published. So. Do with the little I have said what you will.