Rating: 3/5

The Starchild Trilogy is a collection of three novels by Frederik Pohl and Jack Williamson: The Reefs of Space, Starchild, and Rogue Star. The books share the exploration of similar ideas about the struggle between man and government, religion, higher intelligence, etc. and a common timeline. Starchild picks up far enough after The Reefs of Space that the events of the previous book are important, but not necessary to the understanding of the second book. The gap between Starchild and Rogue Star is similar. In both cases, some of the events of the previous books are retold, but in a manner that makes it obvious in this format that the new book's characters understand the previous events in a historical context, sometimes twisted according to the current society's views. Some of the characters may be related to previous characters, but most would never be able to live long enough to be in multiple books in this series.

The storytelling has some obvious influence from Frederik Pohl, but it's different enough from books he wrote alone that there is apparently some significant influence from Jack Williamson as well (though without having read any other books by Williamson, I can't really go into detail). Each of the books has one or two characters with some depth, but most of the detail is in the environment, rather than the characters. There's a weird mix of what was probably cutting-edge science in the 1960s and 70s and psychedelia (especially in the Reefs of Space and Starchild).

If I had to characterize the main theme of each book, I'd say that Reefs of Space is an attack on the systems of government in mid-20th-century "communist" states like the USSR and China (especially as portrayed in the west); Starchild is an attack on organized religion and religious states (especially like those which grew up around the USSR and China in part fueled by religious exiles); and Rogue Star is an attack on cults (especially the types of religious and communist cults which sprung up in the west in the 60s and 70s). Of the three, Rogue Star is probably the best at hiding the underlying theme, but also seemed like it did the worst job of giving the story any depth at all.

Overall, this is an interesting read about a galactic dystopia with plenty of imaginative features, very much like many sci-fi movies and television shows from the 60s through the mid-80s. It very rarely feels like something which might have been written recently, but that's not necessarily a negative point, either.