Rating: 5/5

Much better book than its off-putting title; the only worse novel title I know, Gogol’s Dead Souls, another comic novel whose title denies comedy. (See my review.) While the sequel Gaudy Night finds dozens of suspects but few murders, this one begins with a beach picnic punctuated by a body.

Sayers often cited as a great mystery writer, but she should also be known as a comic novelist, hilarious at points of high tension. Walking miles from her reluctant discovery to find police and report, Harriet Vane overtakes various people who later feature as suspects; but not one old, deaf man whom Vane asks, 
 “Has he got a telephone?”
 “Not till tonight. He’s over Heathbury market..”
 “A telephone,” she repeated,”Has he got a telephone?”
 “Oh, ay, you’ll find her somewhere about.”
 When she fails to flag a passing car, “Oh bother! I might have stopped that if I hadn’t wasted my time on this old idiot.”
 “You’r quite right, miss,” agreed Old Father William, catching the last words with the perversity of the deaf, “Madmen I call ‘em. There ain’t no sense in racketing along at the pace” (20).

When Harriet Vane confesses she was kissed by a murderer, the son of the older woman who had fallen for her young dance teacher (also, the carcase), Lord Peter despairs, “Tell me who this bone-headed, dissipated murderer is, who can’t even keep to his murdering”(234).
 
Sayers’ learning did not cease as an Oxford language major. Here she writes an impenetrable chapter decoding cipher, refers often to harnesses and horses (a “cob,” short-legged riding horse, “gees” are…), she tallies the minute differentiations of Lord Peter’s wine preferences, and even car mechanics. (Since my grandfather traded a dozen chickens for a 1917 Model T, I know about magnetos mentioned.) I sense she studied these as she wrote. Much about barbers here, and an old-fashioned straightedge razor such as the one I inherited from my Maine grandfather.

As always in English mysteries, a wealth of British slang, especially about dress—“mufti” for a police officer in civilian dress (47). “Saloon” for “limousine,” “Reach-me-down” for “hand-me-down”(suit, 171), “pantiles” for “tiles” though Chief Inspector asks what the devil they are (287).

Query: Did Prohibition in the U.S. hinder detection and help crime? Lord Peter Wimsey interrogates in pubs, and Sayers opines, “it’ll be black day for detectives when beer is abolished”(347).

Delighting me, a Shakespearean for forty years, Wimsey often uses the Bard in everyday speech, as “seeking the bubble reputation even in the cannon’s mouth”(404) from HV, my most cited article arguing H5 is comedy, ending like his others in marriage but adding regional accents of the Welsh Fleuellen, the Irish soldier Macmorris, the Scot Ramy, and of course the French.

Sayers’ writing always adds insight, as in her imaginative verbs. Skeptical of film, she writes “The film shuddered to its close”(388).