Rating: 3/5

"If you stop learning, and that includes any subject that interests you, your overall mental capacity and performance will decline." (28)

"Your memory for that event doesn't exist in your brain like a video waiting to be placed in a VCR. Instead, the memory changes each time you think about it. At first the changes are subtle, but with succeeding years the changes become more drastic until many years later, you have far fewer spcific memories of the event." (35)

Richard Restak's book about improving your brain contains a variety of helpful hints written in a very proactive way, with techniques you can apply every day and mindsets that you can adopt by habit.

He quotes other authors and books too much for my liking, and also repeats himself too much with the mental visualization technique. More about this criticism:

1.) Sometimes, the book feels written by a geezer from the 1950s who has lost his zest for life, grasping for anything that may give him a spark. The diction belongs to one well over the age of ambition and sanity, talking about experiences with grandchildren and faded memories, and overarching fear of Alzheimer's disease. This is not a good viewpoint to take for most people going through life, who are trying to accomplish things rather than avoid memory loss. He talks about the fear of losing jobs as if people these days care about their job more than their own mental health. Furthermore, he spends an entire chapter -- 10+ pages! -- marveling and explaining how to use the Find (Ctrl+F) option to locate specific words in one's own journal, as if that bears explaining! Then he talks about carrying a pocket voice recorder, as if people don't already have the Voice Memos app on their iPhones. Get outta your cave, Restak!

2.) Every few chapters, he repeats some iteration of taking a mental snapshot of the scene in front of you, closing your eyes, and trying to recreate it. He first mentions this in the context of memory exercises to improve the reach of your mind's eye, then again for reducing stress, then again as a test of your limits of memory, then again for focus games. Man, once is enough! Have some respect for your readers' ability to understand the value of an exercise with a single explanation! This book could have been multiple chapters shorter without all this repetition and regurgitation.

3.) The book quotes other authors like gospel. We readers didn't buy this book as an aggregation of other pop-culture writers! We bought it to hear from you, Richard Restak, noted scientist and supposed researcher about the human brain! Every quote from Ray Bradbury, John Updike, Tim Berners-Lee, Mark Twain, or James Joyce, people from a different time and walk of life, dilutes your book and drags down your position of authority. Write from your own experiments, science, and research! This isn't an essay that needs three secondary sources to satisfy the assignment.

4.) Too much description of the parts of the brain. All these black and white images of the brain don't do anything for me. I don't care if doing tai-chi activates my frontal cortex or cingulate gyrus, nor will it matter which part of my brain fires as I am listening to classical music. I appreciate the knowledge, but ultimately an expert on memory should know that useless trivia is not going to stick unless it's meaningful to the person applying it. Restak doesn't do a good enough job of relating these brain diagrams to the lesson at hand. Instead, these explanations go on for paragraphs and pages at a time, reducing what might otherwise have been a simple life hack to a lecture on human brain biology. Likewise, we don't care what makes a "Renaissance man" -- not the topic he should be wasting any words discussing in a self-help brain book!

ーーーーー Positive ーーーーー

Having said that, the book wasn't completely useless. I did extract some particularly applicable quotes:

"The acquisition of multiple languages can go particularly rapidly if undertaken early in life, when the brain is most plastic and malleable. At this early period of development, neurons easily enter into multiple circuits." (43)

"James Joyce described walking into a library in search of inspiration and aimlessly wandering around, fully expecting to encounter by chance a book relevant to the subject he was thinking of writing about at that time." (34)

"John Updike's point that books externalize our brains." (171)

"Whatever your reading selections, your goal is to provide your pre-frontal lobes with material for the formation of working memory. Most of all, you want to achieve a deeper knowlewdge and understanding of human psychology." (172)

"Attend to the thoughts (left) and images (right) that occur just prior to falling asleep and during the first few moments upon awakening." (92)

"And according to Shaw, this inherent ability to form and mentally manipulate patterns will continue to be enhanced whenever a person, of any age, listens to musical compositions like Mozart's Sonata for Two Pianos." (182)

"Under conditions of overstimulation, you can dispel mental distractions by focusing entirely on the movements." (202)

"You can also bring that tiny but important structure at the back of the brain into play whenever you dance, play tennis, or engage in any activity that requires smooth, coordinated responses." (189)

"In short, manual and mental skills are not opposed to each other, but form a continuum. By enhancing your finger-and-hand motor dexterity, you boost your brainpower." (196)

"Writing things down helps the brain retain information because the brain is utilizing a second input channel. While the same thing is true when entering the information in the computer, the process is less intimate and familiar. Only while writing by hand do you actually see your brain's expression in the intimate form of your own handwriting." (210)

"It is important to achieve a balance: art, music, business, manual skills, and the sciences." (216) (though he never explains why)