Rating: 3/5

3.5 ⭐

”A robot may do nothing that, to its knowledge, will harm a human being; nor, through inaction, knowingly allow a human being to come to harm.”

Earth’s renowned detective, Elijah Baley, and Auroran robot “detective”, Daneel Olivaw, reunite for another homicide investigation with a spacer twist.

What makes this particular investigation interesting is that the murder was committed on Solaria; a planet containing just 20,000 human inhabitants and 200,000,000 working positronic robots, and which has not been witness to a single murder during its entire 300 years of human settlement. In fact, this being the first crime of violence in two centuries, Solaria has no police force; this seems, at face value, to be one of the reasons they’ve enlisted the help of our favourite logic/reason coupling, Daneel and Baley but nothing in Asimov’s novels should be taken at face value and the results of the investigation have much further-reaching implications for the rest of the series than you would suspect at the beginning of the story.

The most compelling aspect of this novel, and indeed what spares it from being just another run-of-the-mill detective book, is the interweaving of Solarian social idiosyncrasies and postulations regarding the Three Laws of Robotics throughout the investigation. Baley is not only trying to solve a murder but is also having to navigate a completely new style of human (spacer) interaction and determine the uncertain implications that this has on the case.

The Solarian people have a number of societal peculiarities which are all established with the ultimate goal of maximum isolation through social distancing. They do not “see”, they “view”; that is to say, they very rarely, only under the most extreme circumstances, see each other face-to-face. As much as possible, they view one another by holographic means… So, they’re basically living through peak COVID, all the time.

  ”A Solarian takes pride in not meeting his neighbour.”

There are no willing relationships, only assigned partners paired up to create ideal gene combinations. Solarians reluctantly copulate in order to produce a child (because IVF is apparently not a thing in the future) and said child is brought up by Robots on a children’s farm. When one of the 20,000 Solarians dies, a child graduates from the farm and takes that Solarian’s position.

Baley envisions Solaria as ”a robotic net with holes that were small and continually growing smaller, with every human being caught neatly in place”. It sounds cold, sterile and against all human instinct, and it is. Asimov illustrates this through a prominent side character, Gladia Delmarre, who has an “unnatural” fascination with (read: “very natural” human urge for…) members of the opposite sex which she struggles to hide. In the same way, Baley who, himself, has always suppressed his very human longing for open space; for “unbroken [and] unobstructed space”, as a result of living in one of modern Earth’s “Caves of Steel”, by the end of the novel, is no longer able to do so. Especially given what we’ve been through over the last few years, in terms of isolation and the effects this has had on so many people’s mental health and state of being, the direction that Solarian society has taken in Asimov’s vision of the future seems not only less than ideal but laughably improbable and unsustainable. Personally, I would say that Solaria’s population could be more accurately calculated as 200,020,000 Robots and 0 human beings.

  ”The cities were wombs[…] What was the first thing a man must do before he can be a man? He must be born. He must leave the womb; and once left, it could not be re-entered”.

  ”He lifted his head and he could see through all the steel and concrete and humanity above him. He could see the beacon set in space to lure men outwards. He could see it shining down – the naked sun.

At this point, I pretty much know exactly what I’m going to get from an Asimov short story or novel and I like it, but I don’t love it. There are 2 more books in the Robot series which I’m still looking forward to and then I’ll probably pull the cover on Asimov for a bit. 
A very fond Adieu from me to you :)