Rating: 2/5

I hate the Lampreys. Hate them with a blazing intensity. Either they're monumentally stupid, or merely monumentally clueless - either way, I find them repulsive. 

And right now, as she apparently intended them to be charming (told us so often enough) and insouciant and adorable - and sacrificed the not-unpleasant non-entity Roberta to them - I find Ngaio Marsh a bit repulsive too. (Did she actually commit to the fact that Roberta's marrying in? I had to stop listening a couple of minutes before the end, with all the self-indulgent bilge about Monte Carlo.)

In much the same way that certain people and books bring out my latent fierce feminist, the horrendous Lamprey family brought out my buried inner revolutionary. These people are inherently worthless. Everything said by their "Uncle G" - who is depicted as being an ugly, stiff, stuffy old killjoy - was utterly true: 
"We were extremely grateful -"
"Is it too much to suggest that you might have shown it by pullin' yourselves together? I told you then that you should recognise the fact that you were a man with a small income and a large family and should cut your coat accordingly. It's preposterous, the way you live. Butlers, maids, cars, bringin' gels out, doin' the season, tips here, gamblin' there. Good God, you ought to be livin' like a - like a clerk or something! Why haven't you got some post for yourself where you earned a wage? What are those three boys doin'?"
"They've tried extremely hard to get jobs."
"Nonsense. They could have gone into shops since they're not qualified for any professions. I said when they were at school that they ought to face the facts and work for professions!"
"We couldn't afford the University."
"You could afford half a dozen white elephants. You could afford to traipse around the world in luxury liners, you could afford to take that place in the Highlands, entertain, and God knows what."
"My dear Gabriel! The amount of entertaining we do!"

I don't believe that line was intended to be funny - but the fact that the wastrel speaking it thought that the fact that they didn't entertain as much as actually wealthy people made everything ok. They still took cruises, they still rented homes, they still kept a staff and went on gambling holidays and were shocked, shocked I say! when creditors actually desired to be paid (how middle-class). 

And so, of course - spoiler - through no doing of their own they're all cleared, and they come into all the boodle in the end and will live happily ever after - - though I'm sure these idiots will be quite capable of burning through thirty thousand pounds a year and still end up in debt. 

Except for that one revolting romance novel I read last year (and Wuthering Heights, where I don't think you're supposed to like anyone), I can't remember ever hating an entire cast of characters as thoroughly as this. I hope all of the Lampreys' properties were all shelled in the Blitz. And I rather hope they were all in them at the time.