Rating: 2/5

My first impression was the correct one.

Some time back I read the second in this series ("While the Patient Slept") and was underwhelmed, to be polite. I thought it was absurdly melodramatic and completely unrealistic. So, why did I buy and read this one, the first in the series? Mainly because I've heard Eberhart's mysteries praised by reviewers whose opinions I value. And I love Mary Roberts Rinehart's mysteries featuring nurse Miss Pinkerton. 

Also, the first one is set in the stereotypical spooky old mansion, complete with candles, weird old servants, and curtains over the door spaces. This one is set in a hospital and I figured that might give it more realism. It does, but not much

St Ann's is a pretty typical hospital. The staff is small, compared to modern standards. The student nurses are more in evidence. But as with hospitals now the board of directors is less interested in patient care and medical treatments then in elegant lobbies and the latest refinements. (A telephone on every floor!) 

Sarah Keats is a middle-aged woman who's devoted her life to nursing. She's a romantic at heart and much interested in her friend Maida Day, the sort of beautiful young nurse who turns the heads of patients and doctors alike. The action opens with the two of them going to a dinner party at the nearby house of the medical director, Dr. Letheny. 

Neither of them cares much for his cousin/housekeeper Corole Letheny, but it's a change from hospital canteen food and a chance to meet the handsome engineer who's visiting Dr Letheny. The two were college mates, although Jim Gainsay is a young man and Dr Letheny a much older one. Maida Day looks gorgeous and the visitor is smitten. He's not the only one.

Notice how casually the staff treats their supply of radium. It's the latest medical miracle, although discoverers Marie and Pierre Curie both died of cancer. Like the Curse of King Tut's Tomb, everyone's too busy gawking at the gold to worry about the unexplained deaths. And the hospital paid $65,00 for that small box of radium. A fortune in 1929 and not chump change now. Everyone has an idea of how they'd use that kind of money, given the chance.

Then a patient dies and the radium disappears. What shocked me was the reaction of the nurses to the death. I tut-tut about nurses, teachers, etc today being over-emotional. I thought it was part of the new craze for personal drama. Looks like I was wrong.

In 1929, when medical care was primitive compared to today, the mortality rate at hospitals was higher than it is now, but these nurses act like they've never seen a stiff before. OK, the radium disappearing is unusual. And murder is different from a very sick patient dying a not-unexpected death or a very old one being gathered in in the fullness of time. But it's the second death that shakes the hospital staff to the core and who can blame them? The patients came to the hospital or get better or die, but not the staff.

Hot-shot young detective Lance O'Leary is unexpected. Not sure how he's connected to the police, since he seems to have no title. He's better dressed and groomed than any police detective I've ever heard of. But Miss Keate (no bad judge of character) recognizes his incisive brain and admires his ability to suss out the personalities and propensities of the suspects. Sensibly, she helps him since she really has no choice. He knows when she's lying.

It's not unusual to find attitudes in old books that are offensive to us now. O'Leary observes that beautiful Corole Letheny is different from her white-bread cousin. He mentions her "dark blood" - passed through her mother, a descendent of "canabalistic" tribes. That accounts for her dark skin, her yellow eyes, and her love of flashy clothes and jewelry. She inherits her cousin's fortune, but did she want more? And would she really "respond to the beat of tom-tom drums?" 

Then there's a third death. Always hard to tell when someone croaks after there have already been two murders. Did the person know something and underestimate the danger of that knowledge? Or was he/she trying a bit of blackmail on the side?

One of the silliest plot movers is the birth of a litter to Morgue - the basement cat formerly believed to be male. Really, it's not that hard to tell an unneutered male cat from a one. Even I can recognise a pair of testicles and I have no medical training.

The Miracle Birth seems to have been thrown in to raise the suspense level. After all, there are three BLACK CATS, which surely portends a third death. More reason for the nurses to peer nervously around corners and scream if a door slams shut.

Fans of this series love the suspense the author generates and she IS good at suspense. Unfortunately, it's suspense at the expense of common sense. The story grinds on until Lance O'Leary puts us out of our misery with a dramatic trap that reveals the guilty party. Then he feels guilty about ruining a brilliant man's life. Two characters turn out to be married (and unable to testify against each other) and two others will be marrying soon. All's well that end's well.

It's OK, but I'm disappointed with this series. Eberhart could write. She was an educated woman and two of the words she uses in this book sent me to the dictionary. I don't think she made the best use of her talent, but she sold a boat-load of books during her life, so why should she care about my opinion?