Rating: 2/5

Fourteen years after The Spellcoats, Diana Wynne Jones finally ended the series with The Crown of Dalemark. She claimed it took her that long to conceptualize how she wanted to put all the pieces from the previous three standalones together, and unfortunately that struggle basically shows in the final product. For one, there’s simply too many characters to do all of them, or even most of them justice. Though thankfully Moril and Mitt remain central* to the story, it’s a bit of a case of anything goes to all the other returning characters, some significantly changing and some gaining new prominence (or being shifted to the side). While I intellectually appreciate Jones’s willingness to keep the characters dynamic, it’s really an exercise that requires a lot of finesse and plain-old page-devouring development-- which is really lacking here. Subsequently some characters appear to undergo plain old character assassination rather than change, or are simply forgotten rather than continuing on in the background.

*and both stay interestingly unconventional leads. I totally admit them odd-coupling it around revolutionary Dalemark would be a read I would totally be into.

This faltering is particularly disappointing in the wake of The Spellcoats, which had a climax that lifted the mist from the true goal of the series (mainly by setting all the individual journeys into the context of a centuries-long battle against a single enemy of Dalemark). The further addition of Maewen, her modern-day/”future” context, and time travel don’t really add any further resonance to the conflict that wasn’t already there, and contributes the unnecessary busyness of the plot. It's not that I have anything against Maewen in particular, it's just that her stakes in this battle are nebulous or even nonexistent at best, and plopping her down amongst a bevy of returning characters with very high stakes just highlights her unnecessariness of her viewpoint character.

As a whole, The Crown of Dalemark just feels simply disjointed, and I ended putting down the Dalemark Quartet as a textbook case of the parts being greater than the whole. Rating: 2 stars (Reread 4/3/2011)