Rating: 4/5

Pro Tip:
Honoré de Balzac isn't a name that someone with a Southern accent has an easy time with, and I walked around for a week telling everyone that I was reading a book by someone whose name was Ballsack. Honestly, I should have just listened to the book, shut up, and kept my redneck pronunciation tucked under my hat.
It's hard to be taken seriously when you have a drawl.

 

Okay, first things first. Cousin Bette isn't as sympathetic as I thought she'd be when I read the blurb. She's a bit of a dick.
Now there are moments when you can get behind her, but most of the time, she's just as selfish and unlikable as the rest of the characters in the book. So don't go into this thinking you'll get to root for some downtrodden heroine. 

And yet, by the end of the book I was convinced the true villain was Adeline.
Now, I'm not saying it was her fault that her scumbag husband, Baron Hector Hulot, cheated on her. But I am saying that it's probably not the best idea to comfort your husband when his mistress throws him over for a wealthier man.
Balzac did this thing where he wrote her as this pseudo-sympathetic character, full of what everyone thinks the virtues of a good wife are, then perfectly pointed the finger at why all of those virtues are bullshit.
Led by her long-suffering example, her entire family fell into one ruinous situation after another.
Put a foot up his ass, Madame!

Ok. So the skinny gist is that Bette is this swarthy peasant who is jealous of her family. They're not terrible to her but they treat her like she's...well, a swarthy peasant.

BUT THEN.
You find out Bette has been financially supporting this sexy little artist in her building. She says she thinks of him as a son but...oh-ho-ho, methinks not!
So imagine her surprise when Adeline's beautiful daughter flits in like the Hamburgler and steals her young man right out from under her.

Now she's pissed.
In an effort to screw with them, she teams up with Valérie, an unscrupulous married woman in her apartment building. Valérie seduces (I use that term loosely) Adeline's husband and takes him for everything he has, bankrupting the family, while Adeline coos, coddles, and suffers in silence.
Valérie is so good at her job that she is also simultaneously carrying on affairs with several other men - including Adeline's daughter's husband and her son's father-in-law!
These men are all ridiculous and stupid. There's just no other way to describe them.

Throughout the story, Hulot just could not stop himself from chasing ever-younger ass. By the end of it he was just a sad old fart with half a chubby running after girls, and yet (like most narcissists) he never really got what was coming to him.
Because right up till the end, Adeline worshiped and enabled him.
No one really got what they wanted, Bette included. But she came close a time or two.
Fun story!
Recommended.