Rating: 2/5

It's rare that I put a book down before finishing, but the Oxford Dictionary of Quotations has the honor of being included in this group. It has a few good quotations in it. Some are even brilliant, either due the felicitous turn of a phrase, or something to illuminate the character of the person making the quotation. But for the most part, the quotations included here are neither interesting nor particularly incisive. 

Here's an example, a quotation by Thomas Gray (1716-1771): "Urge the flying ball." Without the context, this four-word phrase really means nothing. Why is the ball flying? We don't know. Why should it be urged? We don't know. If it's flying, I wouldn't think it needs any special encouragement. 

Or this quotation from Shakespeare's play, Julius Caesar: "Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace to-night." Apparently this phrase was uttered by Caesar while at one of his many wars, but it seems rather to be expected if there's a war going on. Or perhaps there are spirits of bellicose intent hovering around him. But without knowing, we can't really care much for such a phrase. Perhaps one might remember such a phrase as a thunder storm approaches. But that might be more relevant just as a thunder storm is passing and has spent its fury. 

This, from the Bible (there are plenty of pages taken up with quotations from the Bible). "To do good and to communicate forget not." Without the context, such a quotation is almost meaningless. (And the editors of this book insist on using the King James version, with its language over 400 years old, as if the 17th century had a monopoly on pithy expression. More recent translations are much more readable, and just as poetic.) 

To be sure, there are some excellent quotes here, which one might pull out in the right circumstances, such as this one by Elizabeth Bowen (1836-1901): "Nobody speaks the truth when there's something they must have." 

Or perhaps this from William Beckford (1740-1811): "He did not think, with the Caliph Omar Ben Adalaziz, that it was necessary to make a hell of this world to enjoy paradise in the next." I can think of quite a few people this might apply to. 

Perhaps my mistake was to try to read this book in large chunks rather than in one or two phrases at a time. Wit is probably more enjoyable when taken in small doses. But even so, I can't recommend this book to anyone. One would be more pleased with such thoughts as are included in The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations if they were encountered in context by reading either the poems or prose where they originally found themselves.