Rating: 5/5

Although the book addresses loneliness, I believe it speaks more to suffering and death (not just physical, but spiritual death). The content of this book kept drawing me back to believe in the God of all Love. The God who is in control; the God who is transforming my pain. I’m called back to faith, back to hope, back to Him, and who He said He really is. No longer to writhe, but to trust in pain, seeing Him create life out of death. He did it for His Son; watch Him do it in you. I am realizing as I walk with Him the kind of relationship He’s called me to—-not holding back anything. But He gave me all in His Son, so it’s an all-all exchange (60). It’s beyond me to do this. And yet, in the dying, it’s so full of grace…”first, last, and always” (63). I love how this book rehearses “distilled acts of faith and acceptance” (as Maud Monahan is quoted pg. 83). Look at Jesus—-look at how He learned obedience (92). Look at how He offered all, and now gives me something to offer, too, like a child a father has given money for which to buy a gift (95). Suffering, loneliness, death are all gifts. This is why the Gospel holds my soul's attention-—it is the reality of Jesus’ showing me God’s economy. Reversing EVERYTHING from suffering and death and rejection and shame and loss to “every knee will bow and tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord.” Will I go with Him? That is the invitation of the book (112).

Favorite Quotes:

“Those who only watch and pray and try to put themselves in the place of the bereaved find it almost unendurable. Sometimes they weep uncontrollably, for their imaginations never include the grace.” pgs. 12-13

“But safety, as the Cross shows, does not exclude suffering…trust in those strong arms means that even our suffering is under control. We are not doomed to meaninglessness. A loving Purpose is behind it all, a great tenderness even in the fierceness.” pg. 18

“Jesus knew that His joy lay in only one direction: the will of the Father. And so does ours. […] We may be earnestly desiring to be obedient and holy. But we may be missing the fact that it is here, where we happen to be at this moment and not in another place or another time, that we may learn to love Him—here where it seems He is not at work, where His will seems obscure or frightening, where He is not doing what we expected Him to do, where He is most absent. Here and nowhere else is the appointed place. If faith does not go to work here, it will not go to work at all. pg. 22

“The power of the Cross is not exemption from suffering but the very transformation of suffering.” pg. 26

“The coming of this transcendent authority into one’s life is bound to be an active thing, an immense disruption at times.” pg. 36

“At the Cross of Jesus our crosses are changed into gifts.” pg. 37

“My joy is becoming less dependent upon my own immediate circumstances and more attached to what He is doing.” Bonnie’s letter, pg. 45

“Deeper and deeper must be the dying, for wider and fuller is the lifetide that it is to liberate—no longer limited by the narrow range of our own being, but with endless powers of multiplying in other souls. Death must reach the very springs of our nature to set it free: it is not this thing or that thing that must go now: it is blindly, helplessly, recklessly, our very selves. A dying must come upon all that would hinder God’s working through us—all interests, all impulses, all energies that are ‘born of the flesh’—all that is merely human and apart from His Spirit.” Lilias Trotter, Parables of the Cross, pgs. 54-55

“We have been shown the way of acceptance on every page of the life of Jesus. It sprang from love and from trust. He set His face like a flint toward Jerusalem. He took up the Cross of His own will. No one could take His life from Him. He deliberately laid it down. He calls us to take up our crosses. That is a different thing from capitulation or resignation. It is a glad and voluntary YES to the conditions we meet on our journey with Him, because these are the conditions He wants us to share with Him. Events are the sacraments of the Will of God—-that is, they are visible signs of an invisible Reality. These provide the very place where we may learn to love and trust.” pg. 82

“In circumstances for which there is no final answer in the world, we have two choices: accept them as God’s wise and loving choice for our blessing (this is called faith), or resent them as proof of His indifference, His carelessness, even His non-existence (this is unbelief).” pg. 89

“When a man or woman, a boy or girl, accepts the way of loneliness for Christ’s sake, there are cosmic ramifications. That person, in a secret transaction with God, actually does something for the life of the world. This seems almost inconceivable, yet it is true, for it is one part of the mystery of suffering which has been revealed to us. […] Each time my heart in love to Christ says YES when my human nature says NO, there the Cross is taken up. There I become a little more like my Master, there I live in Him, there I participate in His work of fulfilling the Father’s will on earth.” pg. 108

“…He knows that spiritual stamina cannot develop without conflict. We must take with both hands the thing given, submissively, humbly, sometimes courageously, or even, as one friend put it, ‘defiantly’—saying to ourselves, This is part of the story, the story of the love of God for me and of my love for Him. This is acceptance in the truest sense.” pg. 114

“My theme is oblation—the offering up of ourselves, all we are, have, do, and suffer. Sacrifice means something received and something offered.” pg. 117

“The heart which has no agenda but God’s is the heart at leisure from itself. Its emptiness is filled with the Love of God. Its solitude can be turned into prayer.” pg. 131

“When waiting is an act of obedience it is of course an invisible one. Only the One waited on sees it for what it is, but we must resist the temptation to defend and explain to our critics, and simply go on trusting.” pg. 133

“Take it honestly to Him…He will understand…Waiting on God is an act of faith—the greatest thing ever required of us humans. Not faith in the outcome we are dictating to God, but faith in His character, faith in Himself. It is resting in the perfect confidence that He will guide in the right way, at the right time. He will supply our need. He will fulfill His word. He will give us the very best if we trust Him.” pg. 139

“Waiting is an offering and a sacrifice. We may lift up our very waiting to Him as a daily oblation, in a spirit of expectancy—like Linda’s, who asks daily only for God’s agenda. Waiting on God in this way is true faith—no agenda of one’s own, no deadlines, no demands on what God must do. Simply an open heart and open hands ready to receive that which God shall choose, and a perfect confidence that what He chooses will be better than our best.” pg. 140