Rating: 5/5

Black Elk Speaks: The Complete Edition by John G. Neihardt

Black Elk Speaks is arguably the single most widely read book in the literature relating to North American Native history. To better understand ourselves, it is a book that everyone with a modicum of conscience should read. It is also a treasure trove for research.

I'm at the point in life where there is little else to linger for save yesterday. This book took me there in spades.

"It is the story of all life that is holy and is good to tell, and of us two-leggeds sharing in it with the four-leggeds and the wings of the air and all green things; for these are children of one mother and their father is one Spirit." ~ Black Elk

This is a story from the perspective of indigenous beliefs, born of how they perceived the natural world they had an intimate relationship with. A people with deep respect for the unknowable, that knew well the brightness and darkness inherent in the psyche of all life forms, and that understood the connectedness of all life. That in sharp contrast to so-called civilized peoples that plunder our little blue canoe, blindly driving nails in humankind's coffin.

“A savage is not the one who lives in the forest but the one who destroys it.” ~ unknown

Uppermost though, it is the story of a people that were self-sacrificing for the good of all, that only wanted to live with Nature as they always had, even on what little was left them in treaties. The obstacles were overwhelming though, with the greed of the weedy materialistic culture wanting all there was, and having no respect for the natural world. It is an age old story of avarice and genocide, this genocide the greatest by far in humankind's history [see Genocide of indigenous peoples, and Genocides in history articles on Wikipedia], estimated at upwards of ninety percent of the Indigenous population. According to geographers from University College London, the colonization of the Americas by Europeans killed so many people it resulted in climate change and global cooling.

And yes, in the telling there is much bloodshed and many died, because the colonialists' materialistic culture was relentless in taking all they lusted for irregardless of treaties. How could there be any saving grace in what was done to Native Americans, with the colonialists employing massacres of women and children, biological warfare (intentionally spreading the infectious diseases they brought with them), starvation (the last survivors of the northern buffalo herds were killed off in 1881), slavery, and ethnocide (e.g. the resident school system). One abhorrent example of the massacres, is in a latter chapter where Black Elk recounts what he saw first hand at Wounded Knee.

"Wherever we went, the soldiers came to kill us, and it was all our own country. It was ours already when the Wasichus [white people] made the treaty with Red Cloud, that said it would be ours as long as grass should grow and water flow." ~ Black Elk

“Everyone believes in the atrocities of the enemy and disbelieves in those of his own side.” ~ George Orwell

Notice in Black Elk's recounting that these peoples' rituals commonly included an element of giving to those that had the least. For example, in one instance in preparing for a ceremony a holy man would find a holy tree for the dance, and a warrior would strike the tree counting coup upon it. Then the warrior would give gifts to those who were most needy, and the braver he had been the more he gave away.

This in contrast to what Black Elk observed later in the story when visiting major cities.

"I could see that the Wasichus did not care for each other the way our people did before the nation’s hoop was broken. They would take everything from each other if they could, and so there were some who had more of everything than they could use, while crowds of people had nothing at all and maybe were starving. They had forgotten that the earth was their mother. This could not be better than the old ways of my people." ~ Black Elk

Hmm, sounds familiar.

Black Elk's concept of community was as different as day and night.

"The Six Grandfathers have placed in this world many things, all of which should be happy. Every little thing is sent for something, and in that thing there should be happiness and the power to make happy. Like the grasses showing tender faces to each other, thus we should do, for this was the wish of the Grandfathers of the World." ~ Black Elk

Be aware in reading this book that what is conveyed is in part through metaphors and mystical symbolism in the ways the ancient ones enhanced the vividness of a telling. One example in Black Elk's vision is when he speaks of the fourth Grandfather, "he of the place where you are always facing (the south), whence comes the power to grow." The first association is that in numerous Native American beliefs, after death the soul travels south along the Milky Way. Thus, throughout life one is always facing south. The second association is of the power to grow. Restated in modern terms, the power is that of the natural world's closed loop system of life fueled by life, recycling the essential elements of physical being for a continuum of life.

Other examples include the circle (hoop), which not only symbolizes life's cyclical journey, but also represents a way of life in interacting with each other in a circular fashion to negate power struggles. The number four also has special significance, as in the elements of Earth, fire, air, and water; the seasons of winter, spring, summer and fall; and the primary directions of North, South, East, and West. Symbols can also be used in combination, such as a circle divided into quarters with four arrows signifying wisdom, innocence, foresight, and soul-searching.

The perspicacious reader will find more inclusive relevance in what Black Elk says, as parallels abound in the broader community and history of humankind. Something to think about is the circular aspect of life, where 'what goes around comes around.'