Rating: 5/5

“You are my face; I am you. Why did you leave me who am you?

I will never leave you again

Don’t ever leave me again

You will never leave me again” (Morrison 256)

My first reading of this titanic literary masterpiece began in early oughts, then multiple times in the 2020s. 

I have read "Beloved" several times in my reading life. Each time, I am always astonished that I can hear Morrison herself narrating the text, audiobook set aside. 

What I’ll never forget is how Morrison captures the terror of how human beings are degraded as chattel. “Beloved” remains just as disturbing as the first time I read it. 

I have some minor additions in which I wanted to share after reading this book again, this to reflect on how I’ve approached this masterpiece for young readers, and for myself. 

Though it's tough to say which Toni Morrison novel is my favorite (“Jazz” has my heart) I love all of them for different reasons. 

Based on critical lists and reflections based on cultural impact- I agree with "Beloved" being Toni Morrison's most famous and revered book. 

It is utterly unforgettable and spellbinding as a work of historical fiction, a work of horror, and a work about love. 

Sethe Suggs is one of literature's greatest heroes- she is one of the toughest, yet most tender survivors of unspeakable and unfathomable trauma ever written. 

In terms of emotional weight and epic vision, Beloved, The Bluest Eye and Song of Solomon should be the three novels anyone who loves literature that must be read. Period. 

Having survived the horrors of Sweet Home, Kentucky; surviving sexual assault and her breast milk stolen; and forced to make a choice that will change the course of her life- she endures, falls, and triumphs all at once. 

Paul D, also a survivor of many of the horrors that befall Sethe also is an unforgettable male character- masculine and suffering at the same time. 

Sethe's daughter Denver is also resilient and ends up a courageous heroine herself. Baby Suggs, Sethe's strong willed mother in-law preaches love, and wishes for color. 

That title character, Beloved, whether she is a reincarnation of Sethe's dead baby, or a mysterious woman is also a chilling and mystifying character. 

Morrison also doesn’t let us forget that the Underground Railroad was a horrifying, sad journey that spelled out both horror and the unknown, of dread and unbearable suspense. 

It is unlike so many of the stereotypical images of which there are brave leaders with torches that led slaves to freedom. 

One of the most gorgeous quotes that stuck out to me was "We got more yesterday than anybody, we need some kind of tomorrow" (Morrison 322). 

There are too many quotes and passages to write about, but this quote was particularly resonant with me because currently in (2020s) -we are (or at least I am) living in a constant state of anxiety and constantly remembering trauma and sadness that is really unspeakable for me on here. 

On this particular reread, I narrowed my lens on revisiting the deep mother love Sethe had for both Denver and Beloved, "it was Beloved who made demands. Anything she wanted, she got, and when Sethe ran out of things to give her, Beloved invented desire" (Morrison 283) that remains the beating heart of 124 Bluestone Road. 

This time, I was able to unpack further into Sethe's feminist will to remain independent without any man, especially rebuffing Paul D's wish to have a baby with her to solidify his masculinity is even more resonant today. 

Sethe simply wants to be reunited and beg for remorse from the the sins of the unspeakable, "I wanted to pick you up in my arms and I wanted to look at you sleeping too" (Morrison 227). 

I remain believing that "Beloved" is one the greatest works ever written: created out of pure love, anger, and all that pain dredged up that turns into one of the most lyrical and heartrending novels ever. 

Rounding out the large cast of characters include Stamp Paid, strong willed, understanding, and one of Sethe's allies; Ella, at first snooty and annoying, but also becomes part of a community that begins to understand the Sethe's past. 

There’s the villainous Schoolteacher, who is the catalyst for many of the horrors that befall Sethe and Paul D, and Sethe's hapless husband Halle.

There is the brave white woman Amy Denver, who saves a pregnant Sethe and helps her give birth to Denver- are all integral in taking part in what is for me, the best novel written about and during the American Reconstruction that I've read. 

I will keep treasuring the spirit of Toni Morrison as long as I teach, and read- and because of her, I always try to do my best at everything. Because, in the words of both Sethe and her creator, "love is or it ain't. Thin love ain't love at all" (Morrison 194). 

Love deeply, live in the moment, feel what you want to feel. 

This is an all feeling book, not for any of those who don't have a pulse.

As Sethe, Denver and Beloved all vow to each another, I guarantee this will never leave you.

Toni Morrison was not just an author. She had been on this earth to teach and lift us up. What more can you say? She was a genius that I miss every single waking day of my life.