Rating: 5/5

‘I want to buy … an elephant,’ Mulla Nasrudin explains to the rich man to whom he has gone for money.
‘If you have no money, you can’t afford to keep an elephant.’
‘I came here,’ said Nasrudin, ‘to get money, not advice.’

The Mulla's reply comes in the form of stories – a hundred-and-eighty of them. They don’t seem like advice; but, story by story, they guide Nasrudin's –our– relationship to the Elephant of the great Sufi masters. They focus a gentle light on facets of the human psyche, revealing all our absurdities and craziness. Our human weaknesses are laid bare but, because humour is the instrument, we don’t feel antagonised. Rather, we can’t help smiling, as we recognise the less admirable aspects of our character.

The mental images are vivid. We see Nasrudin, armed with a mallet, packing an ancient and valuable Chinese vase with fine sand to measure its exact capacity. Inevitably the vase breaks. Elsewhere he tries to rescue what he believes to be the Moon, from the well in which it has been trapped. When his efforts result in him being thrown on his back, and he sees the Moon riding in the sky, he still does not realise that it was its reflection he saw in the water.
‘Glad to be of service,’ he says to the heavenly body. ‘Just as well I came along, wasn’t it?’

'Nasrudin was sitting meditating in a mosque, at the end of a row of the faithful. Suddenly one, involuntarily, said: "I wonder whether I have left the fire burning at home?"
 'His neighbour said: "You have broken your silence and spoiled the prayer. Now you will have to say it again."
 ' "So have you," said the next man.
 ' "Praise be to Allah," said Nasrudin aloud, "that I have not broken silence." '

Many of the impediments to seeing and thinking clearly, arise from our upbringing. When Nasrudin’s little boy is asked, ‘What is a Kar-kor-ajami?’ he replies without hesitation, ‘It is a blind-deaf-and-dumb-walking thing.’ to which his father adds, ‘and I taught it to be those things.’

However, we needn’t remain Kar-kor-ajamis. By the end of the book Nasrudin has achieved completeness. At this stage, in the eyes of the world, he still looks ridiculous.

The Mullas’s last joke centres around his tomb. The date inscribed on the tombstone was 386. The numbers translate to the Arabic word SHWF. ‘This is a form of the word for “seeing”,’ Shah tells us, ‘especially for “making a person see”.’
‘Perhaps it is for this reason,’ he concludes, ‘that for many years the dust from the tomb was considered to be effective in curing eye troubles …

The stories fade from consciousness, but an intangible legacy remains.