Rating: 5/5

Bloody fantastic!!
Women were seen as equals- unlike western stories. In these stories Women were seen as brave, wise and powerful, and were respected. They were also admired for their beauty, but unlike what the western world tells us to believe- that was never their only option to achieve admiration, respect and power. Their characters could be both beautiful and wise, both beautiful and strong, or all beautiful, wise and strong! Loved reading these stories. The divine feminine comes in many forms. I cannot give examples without using spoilers. 

Also, many of these stories obviously inspired J.K Rowling which excited me to imagine someone who wrote such creative masterpieces was inspired to write this through the same stories I was reading. 

Spoilers: 
When Admetus was sick not one man was brave enough to sacrifice his life for that of their beloved King, Admetus. They all feared death more than they feared battle. Not even his own frail, weak, old parents would sacrifice their lives for him. However his beautiful wife sacrificed hers so that he might live. Only she was brave enough to face death. 

I liked how Theseus become wise and learned the tricks of old men: he was noble and brave. 

Many stories show the length women will go to protect those she loves- her sons, her lovers, or her kingdom. The women always bravely helped their men who they loved- even if they had to go against their family or loved ones. Ariadne of Theseus was one example: she helped him escape her fathers dungeons and escaped with him, leaving everything behind. 

Orpheus went into hades to redeem his love Eurydice, however he turned around to look at her seconds before granting her freedom. With a sad smile She said, you should not have turned so soon! We were almost free! Goodbye!
She wasn't tearful, angry, or hateful because of his mistake he made from impatience. 

Atlanta was brave and did not want any husband because she wanted to be free. She was braver than any man. She deserved a prize because she saved all the men in her group:as they hid, she killed the monster. Meleager defended her: she deserved the prize. "The men did not like the words of Meleager. They did not like to think a woman had been brave when they had been afraid. They said, this woman must not have the prize. Let's take it from her. "
Meleager was a true Man- brave, fair, and honest. He defended her. Even though those men were his uncles, He killed them. Atlanta fell in love with him.