Rating: 4/5

"We all wanted to be something else, to be somewhere else... The thing was always about denying our miserable reality, to disguise it with...glitter. or, better still, to invent a new past, dress ourselves up to the hilt, head out, and be someone new, among the spotlights and the dry ice, mirrors and strings of lights, to start out fresh, newly born". 

Synopsis (From Goodreads):
Discovered by Martha Divine in the backstreets of San Juan, picking over garbage, drugged out of his mind and singing boleros that transfix the listener, a fifteen year old hustler is transformed into Sirena Selena, a diva whose uncanny beauty and irresistable voice will be their ticket to fame and fortune. Auditioning for one of the luxury hotels in the Dominican Republic, Selena casts her spell over Hugo Graubel, one of the hotel's rich investors. Graubel is a powerful man in the Republic, married with children. Silena, determined to escape the poverty and abuse s/he suffered as a child, engages Graubel in a long seduction in this mordant, intensely lyrical tragi-comedy - part masque, part cabaret - about identity (class, race, gender) and "the hunger and desire to be other things."

I really enjoyed this translated Caribbean tale that tackled themes of transexuality, homophobia, poverty, sex tourism, childhood abuse, grief and rape in the underground trans and queer community in Puerto Rico and Dominican Republic during a time where homosexuality is taboo and unspoken. The author excelled in setting tone and place. Her descriptive writing made the scenery and music come to life. You could almost envision the sound of the protagonist Sirena Selena's boleros. The story is told through brief vignettes from the POV of several different characters that you meet throughout the story. My heart broke for them. Each one is well written and adds depth to the story. I had to take my time with this one because the prose was so magnificent. It made me savor every word and pay attention to every detail. The only criticism I have is that the ending just fell short. It felt like the protagonist's story just came to a brief stop. Overall, this was a beautiful and emotional story. This bookdragon rates it