Rating: 3/5

This book should have been made into a movie, for oh so many reasons. It was ridiculous and yet so fun to read. I think that's why it would have made a great chick flick, except that they would have to change things to completely make it a rom com, because this is a British chicklit and things don't always equal girl meets boy and ends up happily ever after with boy.

After a day from hell, Molly runs off to Paris for a weekend. She was supposed to be there on a business trip, but her boss is truly a butthead.

When she gets to Paris she really lets loose and does things she normally wouldn't do and in turn meets a handsome French artist,who is everything she wants in a man.

There's so much fun as Molly lets go of her uptight self for awhile. She wears clothes she wouldn't normally wear and does an awful lot of things she wouldn't normally do. She seems like she's turning into a new Molly, but when Fabrice does something that she doesn't agree with, it was nice to see her go back to her slightly goody goody self.

I wasn't keen on Fabrice. From the start he felt too good to be true. I guess I have a stereotype of guys that are too good-looking being jerks. Not that he's 100% a jerk, but he has a lot of growing up to do.

The last part of the book was such a whirlwind that I often got confused with what was going on. It felt like the author was trying to toss as many life changing events into one weekend as she possibly could no matter how impossible it could be. (Again this is why this book would make a great chick flick)

Some of these events stem from Molly being a child of a single mom, who won't reveal who her father was, no matter how many times she asked. It has always been "Molly and Mum/Mum and Molly." So mom has never really kept a guy around either.

So there are a lot of silly and insane things happening..but what bogs the story down is the small part of the story that is told from Malcolm's point of view. (He's part of the story, but not and it hardly seemed necessary and then he just disappears)

But Molly...oh Molly...I liked her and I wanted to shake her so much. She is the queen of bad choices, and maybe just maybe in some ways I saw a little bit of myself in her. (A good reason not to like her to be sure) She was a character that was simply "too" too smart, too good, too foolish. I mean she felt she was in love with Fabrice after only knowing him for a day.

There was one character I did like and that was Fabrice's father, who is played out to be a not so nice guy by his son, but you soon see that that description is wrong. There were times when I wished he'd hook up with Molly, but a plot twist prevented that.

I can't say enough how much action happened in the last part of the story and a lot of it isn't satisfying. So while I enjoyed this book, it didn't wow me. It was a fluffy read and a book that I'm glad I found at the library, because otherwise I would be lamenting the money I spent on it.