Rating: 1/5

AROUND THE WORLD OF CRIME AND MYSTERY
British - 1993
CAST - 2: Steven Scott makes toys and is rich. He decides to get into horse racing: there is no explanation as to why. I'll hazard a guess: he wants to play with living things, but of course the author can't actually say that, as it makes Scott the villain who is supposed to be the good guy. But Scott IS the villain: he doesn't understand the fees, the money, etc., that goes around, that greases the gears. But Scott SHOULD know because that's how the author crafts this world: round and round with toys and round and round the race course then round and on top of the love interest. Francis even says this in the introduction. The novel opens with Scott firing Jody Leeds, Scott's trainer, as Jody has trimmed some money off the top. Of course Jody has! That's the world. Jody is winning a LOT of money for Scott, but poor Scott can't handle it, can't even just have a conversation with Jody, Scott just out and out fires him. So I had mixed feelings about everyone in the cast and didn't much care for anyone. Oh, and then there is Ganser Mays, a bookie who makes a little extra on the side. Shocking, right?
ATMOSPHERE - 2: A little bit about making toys (not enough), a little bit about horse racing (not enough), a little romance off to the side (yawn) and rich guys who want more and more money and will have horses killed without much thought. Rather a cruel world is horse-racing. In earlier Francis books, the horses and their health ruled. But here in later books, Francis seems not to care.
CRIME - 1: Jody Leeds skims a little off the top from a very wealthy man. That's not really a crime, that's how things just are.
INVESTIGATION - 1: No cops, but there are dead horses and a fake census.
RESOLUTION - 1: Stupendously violent for a certain character and, because this character does something pretty awful OUTSIDE the world of horse-racing, he almost deserves it, but Scott is no judge and jury. And the final line is just plain lazy writing.
SUMMARY - 1.4: In the world of this genre, the butler might guzzle and extra pint from the master's cellar. A maid might wear a bit of jewelry then return it. A pair of nice driving gloves may go missing. But no one is slaughtered, no people, no horses. Here, in this book, they are. This guy Scott is a piece of work: he shoulda just stuck to making toys and being the born playboy. Isn't that good enough? He even flies from London to Miami for some hot beach sex. Then horses die. Fun times.