Rating: 3/5

A couple of days ago I was writing about the (very good and unjustly neglected) 1952 screen adaptation of this book -- starring Michael Wilding, Margaret Lockwood, Orson Welles and Miles Malleson -- for my Noirish site when it occurred to me that I'd never read the source novel. (To be more accurate, I think that about forty years ago I started but abandoned it.) So, since I was interested to compare the book with the movie, off I trotted to Project Gutenberg.

Ruthless international financier Sigsbee Manderson is discovered, shot through the head, in the grounds of his English pied a terre, White Gables. Alongside the police investigation, monied artist and amateur sleuth Philip Trent probes the case, soon falling head-over-heels for the dead man's widow, Mabel. When he believes he's worked out who was the killer and why, he gives Mabel a manuscript of his reconstruction of what happened, telling her that it's up to her whether she wants to pass it on to the newspaper that commissioned him to investigate and report on the case or, for fear of her reputation, simply destroy the account.

Time goes by and Trent, his relationship with Mabel advancing, with her permission decides to confront the individual he believes killed the tycoon. That individual takes the very same facts that Trent used for his reconstruction and shows that, with the addition of a couple of facts that Trent could not have known, a rather different -- and apparently true -- explanation emerges. Trent is convinced, but that night at dinner he discovers the third and this time real explanation.

In the latter stages of the novel, Bentley makes clear he has something of an agenda. As he has demonstrated, circumstantial evidence is by its very nature unreliable and potentially very misleading, and should never be relied upon exclusively when convicting a suspect, no matter how guilty that suspect might seem. This is of course true, but it may have seemed a mighty novel concept back in 1913 -- as it indeed still does in far too many courts of law today.

I can understand why I abandoned the book way back when. The first half or more is dull as ditchwater, with Trent swanning around like Peter Wimsey with a bad attack of verbal diarrhea. The latter part is far more interesting, as we witness the workings out of the three rival solutions to the case.

There's some gratuitous racism that leaves a very nasty taste in the mouth.

All in all, Trent's Last Case is a novel that's a must-read if you're interested in the history and evolution of detective fiction, in which it has a key role. Otherwise, there are plenty of more entertaining rivals around of similar vintage.

======

UPDATE 6/3/2017 TO ADD:

My discussion of the 1952 movie has now been posted on Noirish here.