Rating: 4/5

Picking up where the last book left off, the Poldarks and their neighbors are hoping the long war will soon be over and Napoleon vanquished at last. The war with America is far away and inconsequential. Jeremy still suffers from heartache and fear of repercussions from what he did the previous year. Clowance also experiences romantic woes while old friends forge their own paths to happiness. George is ever worried about money, especially since Lady Warleggan spends it all. His hopes are pinned on Valentine making a splendid match and at last, cementing the Warleggan name as country gentlemen of Cornwall. Valentine has other ideas, enjoying his single life. New friendships and new neighbors are made and old ones tested in this 10th volume of the Poldark Saga.

I enjoyed this book a lot more than the previous one but not as much as the earlier novels. Winston Graham did not know how to seamlessly weave history into his novels. There are too many chunks taken up by letters from George Canning and information dumping about the Napoleonic Wars. I am reading this because I care about the characters and want to know what happens to them. I know the history or I can look it up easily. Winston Graham, sadly, also did not know much about Regency fashion. I would give him a pass given the pre-Internet publication date, however, Georgette Heyer had an impressive knowledge of the nuances of Regency fashion and he could have consulted her before she died or consulted some of the same sources. Clowance should at least ask Papa to bring her back a copy of the latest Ackerman's Repository so she can see what's in fashion and have it copied by her dressmaker or at least consult Caroline. I know Demelza doesn't care for high fashion. 

This edition of the book also has a shocking amount of typos for a professionally published hardcover book!

The plot is much more exciting now. I kept skimming ahead to see what was going to happen. There will be spoilers ahead but first I will review the plot. Ross and Demelza take a back seat to their now adult children who are in the throes of their first romances. Clowance is on-again, off-again with Stephen Carrington. I still don't care for him and good riddance to bad rubbish. He is brash, reckless and his temper gets the better of him. He doesn't understand Clowance or her family ties. He thinks of Ross and Demelza as rich, old fuddy-duddies and the sooner he has Clowance away from them the better. Clowance is still young and doesn't really know her own mind. She is in the middle of a love triangle. I don't normally like love triangles but I found this one was sensitive and well done. Benjy Ross Carter is in love with Clowance but he knows it can not be because of the difference in station. Still, he does not like her with Stephen either. He'd feel better if she loved one of her better born suitors. Ben is an important member of the mining community and since Zacky Martin is elderly and ill, Ben is the underground mining captain in his grandfather's place. Ben has a good head on his shoulders. He's a bit of a loner and sensitive, in fact, a lot like Jeremy but more practical. 

 Jeremy has been working on a big steam project and working to get Wheal Leisure back up and running. He's brooding over the woman he can't have and committed a crime to channel his anger and frustration over his thwarted romance. Now there may be consequences. I don't really care for Jeremy's brooding, sensitive nature. He's so different from his father, more like Francis. Does that come from having money or is it just personality? While I didn't like Ross's recklessness, I like Jeremy well enough when he's doing something but not what he's brooding over Cuby. She isn't worth it. She's a bit cold and very spoiled. I don't think she's as much of a cold fish as Elizabeth was or as deliberately calculating but Cuby accepts Jeremy's friendship at the outset knowing that a romance can not be. Even so, I want to root for Jeremy. For his mother's sake, I don't want him hanged for his crime. I also don't want him to go off to war and be killed. I had to skim ahead to see whether it all worked out for him.

Ross and Demelza's youngest daughter Isabella-Rose is a wild child. She's very spoiled and rather bratty but in a precocious way. Her parents and older siblings can hardly deny her anything. I like how she embraces life wholeheartedly and doesn't accept limitations. She loves music but isn't very musical. Isabella is the most like her father. 

One plot thread gets picked up again- the love affair of Morwenna and Drake Carne. Morwenna still has PTSD resulting in nightmares and sometimes day nightmares. Drake stays by her side loving her no matter what. Drake and Morwenna are the happiest couple in the series, even in spite of her PTSD. Ross and Demelza are happy NOW and Caroline and Dwight seem happy enough. It's hard to tell. He's focused on his career and she on the children. Drake says they may have only the one child but it's not for lack of loving. He's very sweet! They are my favorite couple. 

Another subplot revolves around Geoffrey-Charles. I was happy to see him back as an adult, eager to know if he can fix up Trenwith and keep his evil half-brother from eventually inheriting. I hope so! G-C is a nice man in spite of being hardened by warfare. He's still the open-hearted, kind boy he was, however, he disregards Drake's feelings and plans. Geoffrey-Charles is a bit entitled in that way but he does reconsider and accept that his plans and wishes may not be best for everyone involved. 

George is a really nasty guy. I don't feel sorry for him anymore. He takes perverse pleasure in brutally punishing those he feel have wronged him in some way. Because he's sexually attracted to Clowance, as he was to Morwenna, this spells trouble for the Poldark juniors. Ursula is a strange child and takes after George. Both are unnaturally interested in cruelty and punishment. George is unhappily married and it's partly his fault. He spends too much time thinking about how a gentleman should act he ignores how gentlemen actually act and misses out on living. He never has any fun and begrudges every penny spent. Lady Warleggan is uncouth and untamed but she is a lady. Her personality is more warm than Elizabeth's and I think George should stop trying to compare them. 

George is a terrible father to Valentine. Valentine is busy sowing his wild oats but he seems to want to have a relationship with the Poldarks. His parentage is still under suspicion and it's becoming increasing clear which man is his biological father. 

There are some new neighbors in Cornwall. Mr. and Mrs. Place. Selina is the young bride of an elderly, ill man. Selina is much younger, barely older than his daughters, and he keeps her under lock and key. His nasty suspicions and jealousy rival George's. He is not of the sort to want to be nice to his neighbors and make new friends. Selina may be a bit too ready for a flirtation or even more but I really feel bad for her. Even wealthy married women don't catch a break in this time period. 

Another subplot revolves around a village man, "Music" Thomas. Music is viewed as barely more than a simpleton and only half a man because his voice has never broken and he walks on his toes. I really like Music. He's sweet and means well. Music has a massive crush on Ben Carter's sister Kate. They both work for the Place family. Kate is not pretty. She's tough and no-nonsense. I cringe every time Music tries to impress her because it can only end in heartache. Only Dwight believes Music can actually be a man. 

Now for the spoilers for those who want to know what happens to their beloved characters once the TV show ended. 

Henry was first after an uncle of Demelza's and then in Miller's Dance she says it was after Ross's grandfather's middle name!

I can see why Aidan and Eleanor didn't want to do more series of the show. The action switches to the younger generation while the older characters we love are settled into middle age. Dwight is still working and working hard while Caroline raises the children. Ross is back and forth from London, running the mines and the farm, content to stay home with his family and loving Demelza. He's been boring so far. 

Almost nothing from this season aligns with the later books but Winston Graham isn't super careful with his facts. Loveday was a mare but Loveday is now Drake and Morwenna's child. Isabella-Rose and Henry are not special names from history or associated with Cornwall or the characters so much that Ross and Demelza would immediately come up with those names for the new baby. 

Geoffrey Charles is about to resign from the army now they believe the war is over. (Napoleon has been sent to rule over Elba). His young wife has money to restore Trenwith. G-C is to return home to Trenwith and use his wife's money to set it to rights as soon as she is confined. They have a baby girl named Juana or Joanna as she will probably be known in Cornwall.

Clowance marries the sketchy guy she was infatuated with. He almost died from a terrible illness and is now, supposedly, more humble. He understands how much her family's approval means to her now. In spite of her words of caution, Stephen thinks George is his friend and is quick to do business with Warleggan and Willyams bank. Uh oh!

Valentine dropped a HUGE bombshell! He is in love with and married a young widow 12 years his senior! (How, since he's underage, I don't know but he says it's legal). He wasn't interested in Papa George's plans. Valentine wanted to marry someone he was at least fond of or preferably loved. He didn't know this girl George wanted him to marry. George blew up at his son! They had a nasty fight that turned physical. George believes his son should obey him in everything. He's very draconian and medieval. Valentine resents his father because first George hated Valentine and then George used Valentine to feed his ego. Having a son was about self-aggrandizement. It was something to boast of having a son at Eton, having a son at Cambridge, having a son soon to be master of a grand Castle, wed to a girl from an ancient family. Valentine doesn't give a hoot. George kicked V out of the house and plans to cut him off. V's wife has $30,000 a year in the 3 per cents so he's not hurting for money. 

Valentine married a rich widow for her body, her money and her property. He does not intend to be faithful to her but thinks he will always return to her. She thinks she may not always be there if he comes back. His powers of rough seduction render her senseless though so we'll see.

Ross is asked to go join Wellington in France but bring the family and make a spying mission look like a vacation. He was also offered a baronetcy! He refused!! Demelza was horrified at the idea of being Lady Poldark but she regrets Ross won't get to thumb his nose at George with a higher title.

Trouble in paradise (Nampara) briefly when Demelza figures out Jeremy and friends robbed a coach carrying Warleggan bank money and property. She was so sick over it she got stinking drunk in the middle of the day. Ross was furious with her. He called her a stupid slut, which had different connotations back then but I still don't like, and threatened to throw her out if she continued. She didn't tell him exactly what was wrong, just that she had a premonition, a dream about them lying in bed together, holding hands, dying. If one let go, the other would die and she kept thinking "What if I want to let go because my hand is clammy? What if I want to turn over because I'm uncomfortable?" Ross is a little more perceptive than he was in his younger days and realizes later that D was "queasy" about Jeremy. 

Ross gives his eldest some advice : Go and take the woman you love! Persuade her, argue with her, if necessary, to go with you. Jeremy laughs thinking his dad is joking. Ross is seriously antiquated even by Jeremy's 19th-century standards! Ross even offers to go help waylay the woman's brother and servants in long conversation or fight if necessary. Demelza's advice is better. You can't just go and help yourself to a woman! Not even your father... oh wait...

Jeremy joined the army but fortunately the war is over shortly after. He had a sexual relationship with a Belgian girl to try to banish thoughts of his Cornish love interest. It didn't work. Jeremy goes on a late night adventure but different from his father's. He talks to the woman and she thinks familial love is more important than marital love. She fully intends to send him away and stay with her brother forever but when she opens her mouth to say "no" she says "yes, please." They rush off to be married by special license (HOW when neither has any money?) and she has second thoughts and then second thoughts about her second thoughts. To show Jeremy she's serious, she allows him access to her body before they're wed. And so they live happily ever after for now.

This is such a great saga. I don't want it to end because I am so involved with the characters. I do think, though, the writing isn't as incredible as it was in the earlier books. However, some of that may depend on the edition I read as I heard some of the earlier books were edited.