Rating: 5/5

D.H. Lawrence, what have you done to me? This book was so much more than I thought it was going to be. This was an experience that I wanted to devour quickly, but that would mean not being able to soak up and bathe in Lawrence's every word, so it quickly became apparent that I needed to take my time.
 
I found this book in a used bookstore, and even when I picked it up, my Dad raised an eyebrow at me. I said 'Oh come on Dad, whats my age again?' I thought it was just going to be a book with countless sex scenes and not much else. I was wrong though, of course, as although the sex was heavy, it intertwined perfectly with the plot.

"My soul softly flaps in the little Pentecost flame with you, like the peace of fucking. We fucked a flame into being"

I just love that quote. It's just so painfully raw and that is what I love and appreciate about Lawrence's writing style. He is confident in his style, and hell, it shows. He is writing completely from a woman's perspective too, which is a challenge for any male author, and I have great respect for that. 

The two main characters, Lady Chatterley and Mellors, are very frank about their sexual experiences, and I think this is what makes the book so desirable. The words "Fuck" and "cunt" are used countless times, but these words fit in beautifully with the scenes. They are both for the most part, very believable, apart from when Lady Chatterley remarks about her womb rather a lot, and possibly some of the sexist remarks that come from Mellors. 

The sexual scenes were beautifully written, long and drawn out, and to me, they were even a little sad. I did laugh a little at Lawrence's grand effort to describe the female orgasm. It really was excellently done, though.
I think what I love most about this book, is the way sex is openly talked of, without absolutely no shame. This is how sex ought to be discussed. It's natural, beautiful and we all have needs and desires, and this book shows us just that in the most erotic and incredible way possible.