Rating: 4/5

The hardship of life in rural India written in 1954. As I read it I wondered how much things have changed in those 65 years? And I suspect the answer may be “not much other than cell phones, and motor scooters instead of donkey carts.” Hopefully there are more social services and people don’t die as often from starvation. 

The main character is a woman who has the bad luck of being born a fourth daughter (so no dowry left) and she’s kind of plain looking, so she can’t hope for much in the way of a marriage partner. But she does marry, not to a farmer who owns land, but to one who rents land. There is no way out, so that means they are condemned to a life of poverty living in a two-room thatch and mud hut. But even one of those rooms is mainly used for storage of the rice and corn that they grow. 

They are always at the mercy of nature: floods, droughts, insects, wind storms. “Nature is like a wild animal that you have trained to work for you. So long as you are vigilant and walk warily with thought and care, so long will it give you its aid; but look away for an instant, be heedless or forgetful, and it has you by the throat.” 

The outcomes of such natural events are not just hard times – it’s starvation for a season. During these times their daughter turns to prostitution to get money to buy food for a dying younger brother. The daughter who became a prostitute had married but was ‘returned’ to the family as barren. A brother is killed by guards while breaking in to rob a factory. There’s a particularly poignant scene of the mother going nightly to the stored bag of rice and re-arranging the piles of grain to see if they will last 24 days or 30 days. 

Two themes in the story portend change. This totally rural area is experiencing some growth due to the construction of a tannery. It brings outside money - and outsiders – into the area. The other is that the main character becomes friends with a British doctor who returns on and off to the area, eventually building a clinic. But he’s not riding a white horse; he’s a classic Ugly European who spares no words in telling her that she and her people are ignorant and superstitious. They struggle to understand each other’s worlds.

Another consistent theme through the story was the love that the couple had for each other that sustained them through all these hardships. As their old age approaches you can see the story headed toward “It’s Been an Incredibly Hard but Wonderful Life.” But no.  In his old age, the farmer’s land is bought and he, just a renter, is evicted. They sell all their possessions and journey several days to find a son to take them in. The son has disappeared. They are robbed and then end up living as beggars in the temple and breaking rocks for pennies. The husband dies and the mother goes back to her daughter. 

I thought it was a good read that gave a good and somewhat detailed sense of these rural lives; simple things like how they had a treat of fish each year after they drained the rice paddies. It is simple but eloquent writing, fitting the topic. 

The title comes from Coleridge: 
“Work without hope draws nectar in a sieve,
And hope without an object cannot live.”

The author (1924-2004) was an upper-class Indian woman who was a journalist and wrote a half-dozen novels, of which Nectar, her first, is by far the best-known. She married an Englishman and moved to England. 

Photo of Indian peasants, 1946, from 2.bp.blogspot.com
Photo of Indian mud and thatch hut from alamy.com
Photo of the author from Goodreads