Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars rounded down

I made a mistake. And no, I'm not talking about my personal life this time, but about this reading experience, that was not at all how I imagined it would be. I know Kidnapped should have been an entertaining and compelling adventure novel, that it was supposed to be easy to read and easy to follow, in short, a novel to have a good time. Besides, it was first published in the magazine Young Folks, a weekly children's literary magazine, that was, to my understanding, mainly for children, therefore—again—a straightforward story. Other novels by Stevenson were also published in this magazine, such as Treasure Island and The Black Arrow.

Since May I started listening to audiobooks in English without reading the book at once, basically just the audiobook and my optimism. Everything seemed to go well since then, a novella by Wilkie Collins, a couple of books for my Pride Month reads, and especially children's books, until I came across Kidnapped on LibriVox, and then everything just fell apart. 
I picked up this novel in this format for two reasons: it is an adventure novel—hence a compelling, gripping story—and a 'children' book. Well, I didn't notice anything wrong with the book at the very beginning, as I was enjoying the novel quite a bit, probably during the first 4-5 chapters everything was understandable and enjoyable, though I was struggling a little bit with some dialogues (never ignore those hints again), but overall everything seemed to be fine. By the way, the story depicts the adventures of David Balfour, a 17-year-old boy whose parents have recently passed away, and who must visit his uncle Ebenezer in Scotland, after receiving a letter that has to be delivered to him. Thus, after some terrible circumstances, David will live a series of adventures throughout Scotland, where will be friends with Alan Stewart at some point in the story, and will try to come back home.

So, what was my main problem with this book? I suppose you know the answer: that's right, the language. Once some sailors and a boat were introduced in the story, I knew some things might be a little hard to follow, though I guess I was so naïve: it was not only really hard to understand the nautical vocabulary, but also some parts of the book turned into a confusing and beyond-my-understanding story. As for the dialogues, they were literally incomprehensible—especially when Alan or the sailors said something—and even some expressions/words didn't sound like anything I had heard before, it was like a completely different language. It turns out that it was indeed a different language – I googled it and it is apparently something called Lowland Scots(?); so, in a nutshell, the reason why I couldn't make out the story from that moment on was very clear to me. Either way, I'm assuming this would not be a problem for a native English speaker (characters are speaking both English and this Scottish language, mixing both languages together while speaking), but clearly it was a problem for me—I'm neither a native English speaker nor a fluent English speaker (yet), so it is comprehensible—and I have to admit it was also frustrating to struggle with this situation at this point in the story.

Fortunately, David as a narrator is always speaking English, which was the reason why I was able to finish the book, and therefore, to understand his adventures, or at least, to figure out what was happening (sometimes I was missing something, yet I knew what was going on because of the context and the story as a whole). Also, if you asked me why I didn't give up on this one or why I didn't pick up another format, simply because I could actually understand the audiobook narrator and his accent—the narrator is American, and I'm really familiar with some American accents, though I know some people won't be happy listening to a novel by Stevenson in American accent—and besides, I didn't miss all the dialogues, but just some parts of them (especially when some characters didn't speak English, as you know), and finally because I'm kind of a perseverant person, I usually don't give up. 

Finally, I would like to correct my first statement and to say the truth regarding this book: "I know Kidnapped 
  is
 an entertaining and compelling adventure novel, that 
  is
 easy to read and easy to follow, in short, a novel to have a good time." Now, if I had to describe this novel by saying just one word, that one would be friendship. Alan and David's friendship is one of the most beautiful things I have ever read, and Stevenson really knows how to portray a true, unconditional friendship. I truly loved these two characters, being essentially their friendship the cherry on top of the cake for this story. 
I'm also sure I have to reread this book in the future, not only because it deserves to have a better place among my reading experiences (I hope so), but also because I believe it won't catch me completely off guard the next time; my English journey somehow must make a difference.

P.S. Sorry if I ended up talking about my life when I said my mistake had nothing to do with it. I guess sometimes it is inevitable.

  I minded me of all Alan’s kindness and courage in the past, how he had helped and cheered and borne with me in our evil days; and then recalled my own insults, and saw that I had lost for ever that doughty friend.