Rating: 5/5

Before we were Free was written by Julia Alvarez. Julia Alvarez was born on March 27, 1950 in New York City to a Dominican family. Alvarez is an impressive Dominican-American poet, novelist, and essayist. Alvarez has also written famous novels like In the Time of the Butterflies and How the García Girls Lost Their Accent. In this historical fiction, it is about life in the Dominican Republic from the eyes of a young girl, Anita de la Torre. Anita and her family are under the rule of a dictator, Rafael Trujillo or also known as Mr. Smith. Anita’s father and her uncle, Tio Toni, are part of a special group of men trying to assassinate Trujillo. Anita is trying to act normal and typical but she understands that something serious is going to take place. Anita has become agitated and erases her diary everyday so no one can figure out what she has been thinking or reflecting about. Family members start to leave the country, secrets start to unravel and intimidating men start to invade the compound. Throughout all of this change, Anita has started to become an independent woman.

One strength I enjoy about Alvarez’s writing is to make me feel like I am in the story and how I can see and feel what Anita is going through. The author’s writing style shows that Anita is growing up to become a strong woman or senorita. “The last thing I want is a man knowing I’ve gotten my period.” (Alvarez p.73) This quote shows how Anita is growing up to be a senorita. Anita has grown up from being a young girl to a responsible woman. She has grown physically, mentally, and emotionally. Here is another reason why Anita is at her ‘coming of age’, “But I don’t cry. Not right away. I listen carefully until the very end. I want to be with Papi and Tio Toni every step of the way.” (Alvarez p.151) Anita handled this situation when she was a twelve year-old girl. She showed how she is now a senorita and a mature young lady. Anita is at her ‘coming of age’, and the book's theme is: ‘coming of age’. Through all of this change, Anita matures, discovers, and understands what it is to be truly free.

In all honesty, I am pleased with this novel. Alvarez wrote some excellent values and lessons to be learned and I will never forget them. The valuable lessons has affected me to see how fortunate I am. I did not have a clue who Rafael Trujillo was, and what life was like under his rule. After reading this book, I see how difficult life was in the Dominican Republic. I recommend this book to everyone out there. If you enjoy vivid and dramatic books, this is the right book. I am impressed how Alvarez wrote this incredible novel and I hope you like it as much as I did. I look forward to read more books from Alvarez.