Rating: 5/5

A comparison comes to mind with Henry James- and his “portrait”of “old” Europe: sophisticated, elegant, blasé and rotten under its delicate skin, juxtaposed Australia- new, uncomplicated, unspoiled and sincere.
Fred Scully is an optimistic, “uncomplicated young Australian”, terribly in love with his much more pretentious wife and with his intelligent seven year old daughter. He is a man who likes to work with his hands with no hang-ups about any type of employment as long as it provides money for his family. 
The book starts when he is renovating an old Irish farmhouse where his family has decided to move to and settle. He is alone and anxiously waiting for his wife and daughter. They are to come as soon as the house in Australia has been sold and all documents are in order. The day comes to pick them up from the airport and his daughter comes out. Alone. No sight of his wife, no note, no telegram, nothing. His traumatized daughter is of no help. Dropping everything, Scully frantically grabs his daughter and sets out to look for his wife in Europe. 
I enjoyed this book on many levels: I really liked the “anti-hero” hero of this book, possibly misunderstood by many readers who, like his European friends, misunderstand and underestimate him, and call him “a working class hero”. In my opinion, Scully is and isn’t - he is by choice, but not by his background. He works with his hands, yes, but he has also had quite a bit of education- studied architecture, and has literary reading tastes- Slaughterhouse Five, The World According to Garp. He is more of a free man who provides a living the way he can. He is just gifted in what he does. It was also refreshing to see a really good daughter- father relationship in a book for a change. Scully and his daughter have an almost extrasensory understanding. The languge is very good too with the lyricism, especially in the descriptions of nature and landscape which appeal to all senses and are done wonderfully and with a type of sensitivity that is almost tangible.
4.5/5