Rating: 4/5

There was this whole stereotype about gay dudes, back in the day, they were every girl's best friend. Oh man, girls loved to get themselves a gay best friend. He would swan about calling her outfits fierce and making bitchy jokes. He would listen to her complain about her love life. He would say things like "Girrrrrrrl, he did NOT deserve you!" He himself would be neutered. The whole thing is frankly offensive; it reduces gay men to campy tics. They exist only during brunch.

idk who this is I literally googled "stereotypical gay guy"

You can't exactly tell someone their actual life is offensive, and this is, more or less, Armistead Maupin's life, pulled apart and turned extremely soapy for this iconic gay book, the first in an endless series. But he was under command, by the San Francisco newspaper that serialized it in the 1970s, not to overgay it - which could help explain its tiptoeing quality. According to my friend Gray, some editor was keeping a chart of the characters to make sure, as Maupin puts it, "the homo characters didn't suddenly outnumber the hetero ones and thereby undermine the natural order of civilisation." Which is funny to think about because with the amount of fucking all these people are doing of each other and each other's others, you have to imagine that the character chart would look pretty much like this

Crazy wall!

So good luck, editor. And besides, Maupin snuck in so much queer stuff, it's like a Where's Waldo where everyone's Waldo. 

It's a little bit sad and scary to read this book with hindsight. It's like one of those early scenes in movies where kids are skipping in slow-motion and you're like oh, man, this can't end well. In 70's San Francisco everyone was tumbling into bed with everyone, but the AIDS crisis was looming. But first: brunch!

I've been here on Goodreads for about ten years now, and I have a few friends that have been here with me the whole time. One in particular, El, wrote savagely funny and insightful reviews that deeply influenced me. Over our long friendship, we talked each other through good times and bad ones, and we talked endlessly, endlessly about books. She died two weeks ago - suddenly, accidentally, shockingly. I miss her. But as I finished this book, I looked it up and there she was again - as always, way ahead of me. Here's her review. This is what she sounded like.