Rating: 4/5

It is my opinion, that everyone should read The House of God, and if you work as a doctor or study medicine, you MUST read it. A hilarious but most importantly very vulnerable and touching account on the dehumanizing effects of working as a doctor, Samuel Shem's novel about the young Doctor Roy G Basch is a timeless tale (even if it is very grounded in the '70s) and a coming-of-age novel of sorts, even if Roy is a good 10-15 years older than most bildungsroman protagonists. It's such a sweet story of a person learning to be open and honest about his feelings and weaknesses and taking responsibility for himself ending in a grand declaration of love, that I just had to assume it'd be the perfect fairytale ending of Roy and his true love Berry living happily ever after.
But wasn't I a bit foolish to assume that? For being very dramatic and a bit exaggerated for humour's sake, House of God is grounded in real experiences and real feelings, and Roy's journey as a doctor had only just begun.. So of course he'd be in for further trials, as he *SPOILER for HoG* starts his training in psychiatry at the prestigious private institution of Mount Misery.
The book is divided in five parts, each exploring a subspecialty of psychiatry as Roy is transferred to different wards for his education, and scathing critique is given to many practices of psychiatry that still don't function optimally to this day as well as the insurance companies that are more willing to pay for pills and short stabilizing admissions rather than long term healing through therapy and proper addiction rehab as well as not covering the "unwashed masses" that have to survive in the worse equipped public institutions. With his gang of loveable but troubled fellow young psychiatrists Henry and Hannah as well as guidance from the empathetic, energetic and wise Dr. Malik, Roy tries to find out how to help the patients of Misery as best as he can, notably the successful but depressed lawyer Cherokee and the young and furious rich kids Thorny and Zoe with borderline PO. Soon he starts to question if his abilities as a doctor is even an asset in this strange new world, and wonders if maybe the invincible experts in their ivory strongholds, especially the enigmatic psychoanalyst Schlomo Dove, might be running things to their own benefit rather than to the patients...
Returning to the growing up motif, I really liked to see how Roy had matured since the last novel, and while there is still some saucy sexual affairs and pranks, the struggles seem a bit deeper and more meaningful than the last time we spent with the young doctor, and he is now longer as passive a protagonist but gets the ball rolling on his own in the face of injustice. The characters are good, though not as memorable as the great cast from House of God, but the kind Dr. Malik, the spacy mistress Jill and reggae-loving "gay-latent" Henry Solini are surely standouts. The chiefs of medicines at the different wards are also good for the most part, coming off as almost saturday morning cartoon villains in the beginning (which could certainly describe a couple of senior doctors I have met) but hiding a lot more under the surface, good as well as sinister and vice versa. This makes the stakes feel higher than it did in House of God, as Roy now has the maturity and skill to fight against their tyranny, which never really felt like an option in the previous novel.
The book certainly is not as funny as House of God, even if I laughed out loud quite a lot during my read, but given the subject matter trauma, depression, anger and suicide are common guests in the narrative, with a huge catastrophe already striking early in the story to cast its shadow over the rest of the book. The pieces take a long time to fit together, but at the end, a beautiful tapestry is woven from the threads of human suffering, and Roy (if only in his own thoughts to ease his conciousness) finds meaning in the madness in a way that I found very compelling, and even at 560 pages, the book does not overstay its welcome.
Not to say that it is perfect. I have already mentioned some of the way it falls short in comparison to its amazing predecessor, but some of the other problems are some strange anachronisms, where there are references to CD's, new Microsoft PC's, the Japanese tech boom and Eisner as the president of Disney in a book that supposedly takes place in the mid 70's. I suppose it was in order to critique the psychiatric system in 1999, where the book was written, which is fine I guess but I found it a bit confusing. I also think that not all of the chapters were of even quality, some could have definitely used a bit more content, notably Roy's time on the emergency psych reception and the psychosis and addiction rehab wards. The plot really develops in these chapters and a lot of focus is put on that as well as Roy's own deteriorating mental state, so I guess it's a trade off between that and time with patients. Finally, I have some professional disagreements with Shem about certain matters relating to diagnoses and drug treatment, but there is nothing overly offensive and a lot of things have definitely changed between today and the 90's (or 70's.. seriously WTF?). What he describes would definitely be bad practice today and I certainly agree with much of his advice for delivering better psychiatric care and treatment. Finally the "villains" are definitely a bit too exaggerated, which hurts the realism that made House of God great. Where you felt like you could meet Dr. Leggo or The Fish in real life, the chiefs of medicine feels comparatively more like characters in a novel.
All in all, I definitely think this is a worthy follow up to House of God, not as funny and probably not really as shocking and real as that book, Mount Misery still delivers a great continuation of the story with fun characters, biting satire of psychiatry and psychiatrists, lots of heartfelt moments and even higher stakes. It felt shockingly relevant even today, as I was working a temp job doing admissions at a very Mt. Misery-like hospital in Denmark while the nation was shocked by a tragic shooting by a former psychiatric patient. It has many great points on learning to be with people in pain as well as ahead-of-its time comments on toxic masculinity, sexual abuse and healthcare inequality. When you're done reading House of God, definitely pick this up to continue learning about life and loss with the young Roy G Basch MD.