Rating: 2/5

NOTE: I did not listen to the Blackstone Audio CD—I listened to it in mp3 format on my smartphone. There is just no separate record for that format on GoodReads.

I was able to check out the audiobook via OverDrive, a company that licenses ebooks to local government public library systems in the U.S. Library card holders can then access thousands of audio- and ebooks free of charge via OverDrive’s “Libby” app for smartphone or tablet. Libby also supports Kindle, so you can read Kindle ebooks on Libby or on the free Kindle app. 

If you live in the U.S., you probably have access to free audiobooks and ebooks—all you need is a library card, which is free to residents. You just need to go in person to your nearest public library and bring 1-2 pieces of cancelled US mail showing your name and address (e.g., utility bill), plus your official driver’s license (or other official ID) showing photo, name and address. That’s the only time you need to go in person if you’re only interested in reading ebooks or listening to mp3 audiobooks on your smartphone or e-reader device. After that, you can borrow and return digital books from your device, at least in metropolitan areas with a public library system large enough to offer digital materials. In states with vast rural areas, procedures will likely be different, but your state may still offer statewide remote access. Who knows. It’s definitely worth a phone call to your local government (city, county, or state) to ask. 

Now to a review of the book itself. It is quite strange. After studying GoodReads records for this series, all I learned was that the GR database is an absolute mess. At least for this author who is, admittedly, more prolific than most. You’ll have to do some sleuthing yourself if you want to verify series details, because GoodReads is NO authority. Series names are truncated so severely that they’re meaningless (“Love”, “Royal”, etc.) This book is supposedly part of the “Royal” series, whatever that is. Despite having no royal characters. Beaton/Chesney doesn’t even tell us Bartholomew Storm’s title, just calls him “Lord Storm”. Judging from the sheer number of books Chesney has dashed off, I’d say she really didn’t care too much about such pesky details. Or assumed her readers didn’t. 

There is definitely a comic element here—kind of a no-brainer given the star status assigned to the hound. But the humor is sporadic; more often than not, the story’s focus is on the challenges faced by our heroine, Miss Emily Winter—mainly from her hateful half-siblings. There is romance, but the 2 main characters do not express their true feelings until the very end. Typical, I suppose, for the entire romance genre as a whole.

My final criticism is that whoever created this and other GR records for Blackstone Audiobooks failed to include the narrator’s name. That’s awfully important, because quality varies widely. Especially in these older audio recordings. Fortunately, the narrator of this book—Lindy Nettleton —isn’t bad. That is sadly not the case for two other books in this Blackstone Audio series, where the narrator’s voice is so grating it’s painful to listen.