Rating: 1/5

I made it to disc 5 (of 10) in this and had to stop listening/reading. I couldn't do it. What is it about postmodern writings that everyone has to be hella depressing and have terribly uncomfortable and pessimistic sex with everyone? I don't get that. Plots can go along just fine without it. I promise.
So I actually didn't realize much of what this was about when I picked it up because sometimes I just grab something for a long car trip. I've actually gotten some surprising winners that way, but this wasn't one of them. I liked it at the beginning; as a medievalist, it was interesting to think about what the modern world would do to a visionary, and how our skepticism rides so closely to our desire to have some experience outside of what we know, what we always experience. I liked seeing the pilgrimage aspect with the relics and the physicality of the "faith" as one who has read a number of medieval accounts of saint sightings, miraculous healings, and the like. I even liked how uncoordinated the priest was, how human, how incredibly unexalted because it is real and true. (I about died when they brought in all of the church inanity regarding building another church, though, as that exact type of conversation was part of the reason I was going on vacation at the time!) I wasn't sure of the necessity of the priest's attraction to Anne, though; that just seemed like a potshot, an easy way to make him just a bit more sullied.
So it was promising--but then we got into the back story of EVERYONE, which made the book feel incredibly long and convoluted. It wasn't that I didn't understand what was going on, I just didn't care. Tom's life sucks. Got it. You don't have to tell me all of why it sucks, or every instance that produced the many ways in which it sucks now. I understand. It's postmodern--everyone's life sucks, and everyone is miserable, and everyone hopes but no one will have a happy ending because that's not "real." Got it.
I finally gave up, though, at the descriptions of Anne's back story. There are some things you just don't need to write, I feel, some intensities that aren't for mass market distribution. I won't spoil it here, but it caught me totally off-guard, and I have to give props to the narrator because I would not have been able to read some of this stuff, nor to give it the gutturally twisted pleasure that the character needed.
No thanks. There's enough depressing in my life. I don't care enough about these characters to suffer theirs as well. Unfinished, and likely to stay so.