Rating: 5/5

What can I say about this extraordinary book? Not since Crime and Punishment have I read a novel this intense. It captivated me from start to finish. Nothing has mattered more to me in the past three weeks than the trials and tribulations of Philip Carey. I was literally on the edge of my seat the whole time I was reading this. 
Philip's early life is depicted in the grand tradition of the picaresque novel: orphaned at a young age, club-footed, adopted by an aging vicar and his wife, unhappy dreamer, reserved, introspective, bullied at school, unable to settle on a choice of a career, moving from place to place, living the life of an art student in Paris, of a med student in London, unhappy in love, foolishly generous, driven to poverty, failing time after time, a complete loser. Will he get up after his umpteenth fall or will life finally crush the living breath out of him and leave his carcass on the side of the road, carrion for the crows? This is the burning question that keeps the pages turning. 
Philip Carey is one of those characters you can't help but root for. He is so fully realized and many-faceted he almost feels like a close friend. He is more than a friend in fact, he is the body and mind you inhabit as you read on with bated breath. When he limps along the streets of London and Paris you limp along with him; when he despairs at the indifference of his lover you feel despair in your own heart; when he triumphs you take a flying leap in the air and shout hurrah (and people cast a sidelong glance at you. Let them). 
Philip is on a constant search for the meaning of life. Is it really worth living, this life of pain and disappointment, or is it all meaningless? The poet Cronshaw, a deadbeat English expatriate who drowns his days and nights in absinthe at the Closerie des Lilas, reveals a secret that will only make sense to our hero many years later. Life, no matter how dull, happy or abject it may be, draws a pattern which resembles the motif commonly seen at the centre of a Persian rug. Therein lies all meaning. It is up to you to find the right thread and trace your own conclusions. Only through experience and with a great deal of patience will the pattern emerge, blinding you with the light of its truth. Philip's epiphany near the end of the book is both startling and beautiful. Maugham must have had it too, it feels so real.
After reading Of Human Bondage, I really feel like I have lived another life. And when I think of all the books I've read up until now and all the books I have not read, I feel lucky to have lived so many lives and to have so many lives left to live. There must be a pattern in this, surely. Perhaps in time will this pattern reveal itself to me.