Rating: 5/5

Do you not hear what the Erlking quietly promises me?

The title of this brilliant novel comes from a poem by Goethe and traces back the love and admiration that the French novelist Michel Tournier (1924-2016) felt for Germany. His father being a renowned expert in that country’s culture, the boy learned the language at an early age. He was raised with a German model in mind and a compulsive cult for order. Published in 1970, the novel is centered in the figure of Abel Tiffauges, who we follow throughout his life. In the first part of the book, by his “Écrits sinistres” (sinister writings) a diary written with the left hand where we learn of his vices and obscure views of the world and in the second part, by a third person narrator, from 1938 to 1945. In Goethe’s poem, the ErlKing is a bleak mythical elf who is said to linger in the woods. Erlkönig means literarily Alder King (in French Le Roi des Aulnes).

Tiffauges, vous êtes un lecteur de signes, je l'ai bien vu, et d'ailleurs vous me l'avez prouvé. Vous avez cru découvrir dans l'Allemagne le pays des essences pures où tout ce qui passe est symbole, tout ce qui se passe parabole. Et vous avez raison. D'ailleurs, un homme marqué par le destin est voué fatalement à finir en Allemagne, comme le papillon qui tournoie dans la nuit finit toujours par trouver la source de lumière qui l'enivre et le tue. Mais il vous reste beaucoup à apprendre. Jusqu'ici vous avez découvert des signes sur les choses, comme les lettres et les chiffres qu'on lit sur une borne. Ce n'est que la forme faible de l'existence symbolique. Mais n'allez pas croire que les signes soient toujours d'inoffensives et faibles abstractions.

Tiffauges, you are a sign reader, I have seen it, and by the way you have proved it to me. You thought you would discover in Germany the land of pure essences where everything that passes is a symbol, everything that happens parable. And you're right. Moreover, a man marked by fate is doomed fatally to end up in Germany, as the butterfly that spins in the night always ends up finding the source of light that intoxicates and kills him. But you still have a lot to learn. So far you have discovered signs about things, such as letters and numbers that are read on a terminal. This is only the weak form of symbolic existence. But don't think the signs are always harmless and weak abstractions.

Abel Tiffauges was a car mechanic who lived in the district of Champerret in Paris and believed he was a fairy tale character. He was obsessed with deciphering signs all around him. While holding an injured fellow worker in his arms, he experienced a revelation that would prove crucial in his view and understanding of life. The word phorie in French relates to the act of holding the world or a boy, as Saint Christophe (the patron saint of his school) according to legend, held once the boy Jesus in his arms and carried him to the other side of a river. With this image in mind, he patiently awaited the heroic moment that eventually would arrive. 

Erklönig, Moritz von Schwind (1804-1871)

Car s'il y a dans la Genèse une chute de l'homme, ce n'est pas dans l'épisode de la pomme – qui marque une promotion au contraire, l'accession à la connaissance du bien et du mal – mais dans cette dislocation qui brisa en trois l'Adam originel, faisant choir de l'homme la femme, puis l'enfant, créant d'un coup ces trois malheureux, l'enfant éternel orphelin, la femme esseulée, apeurée, toujours à la recherche d'un protecteur, l'homme léger, alerte, mais comme un roi qu'on a dépouillé de tous ses attributs pour le soumettre à des travaux serviles.

For if there is a fall of man in Genesis, it is not in the episode of the apple, which marks a promotion on the contrary, the accession to the knowledge of good and evil, but in this dislocation which broke the original Adam in three, bringing down the man, the woman, then the child, suddenly creating these three unfortunates, the eternal orphaned child, the lonely, frightened woman, always in search of a protector, the light man, alert, but like a king who has been stripped of all his attributes to subject him to servile work.
 
The author makes a strong case of the idea that good and evil live together in the mind of his fictional character. The paroxysm of opposites seems to haunt him in the crucial moments of his life. The ambivalence of human beings is put into question as the novel evolves. Tiffauges finds it hard to fit in his social role when the community unjustly points a finger at him. Deep inside, he expects that same society to someday redeem him. 

 A loner by nature, Michel Tournier lived for most of his life secluded in Chevreuse, a commune outside Paris, where he wrote in solitude. His early formation was devoted to Philosophy, an important presence in his fiction. In Le Roi des Aulnes there is no exploration or innovation of formal structures. There is however, luminous originality in the writing: superb richness of language and impeccably built prose, baroque in nature, surrounded by persuasive rhythmic vitality. 

Erklönig, Julius Sergius von Klever (1850-1924)

Tournier said he lacked imagination and declared in interviews that the invented parts are minimum in the overall plan of the story. There is a strong influence of Flaubert in his writing that is reflected in specific sections of the plot. Like the 19th century novelist, he saw himself as a collector of stories from history and everyday life. Tiffauges, first a prisoner during the war and gradually engaged by the Nazi regime, is seen as an ogre by the outside world (although he considered himself righteous and noble). But is he really so evil? The question remains opened and is resolved epically in the last scene, biblical in its conception, bringing the mythical figure to human proportions in the grandiose apotheosis of the novel. 

Erlkönig, poem by Goethe-music by Franz Schubert

The setting of Goethe’s poem Erlkönig composed by Franz Schubert when he was 18 years old, and performed in this historic video by the legendary Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau. 

ERLKÖNIG

Who rides so late where winds blow wild?
It is the father grasping his child;
He holds the boy embraced in his arm
He clasps him snugly, he keeps him warm.

"My son, why cover your face in such fear"
"O don't you see the ErlKing near?
The ErlKing with his crown and train!"
"My son, the mist is on the plain."

"Sweet lad, o come and join me, do!
Such pretty games I'll play with you;
On the shore gay flowers their colors unfold
My mother has made you a garment of gold."

"My father, my father, o can you not hear
The promise the ErlKing breathes in my ear?"
"Be calm, stay calm my child, lie low
In withered leaves the night winds blow."

"Will you, sweet lad, come along with me?
My daughters shall care for you tenderly;
In the night my daughters their revelry keep,
They'll rock you and dance you and sing you to sleep."

"My father, my father, o can you not trace
The ErlKing's daughters in that gloomy place?"
"My son, my son, I see it clear
How grey the ancient willows appear."

"I love you, your comeliness charms me, my boy
And if you're not willing, then force I'll employ!"
"Now father, o father, he's seizing my arm
The ErlKing has done me the cruelest harm!"

The father shudders, his ride is wild
In his arms he's holding the shivering child
He reaches home with toil and dread.
In his arms, the child was dead. 

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe