Rating: 5/5

I've never read any of Ms Gregory's Tudor novels. The Tudor era doesn't particularly interest me (though I'm not opposed to the period if a novel has elements I enjoy), so I was intrigued by this trilogy for three reasons: 1) the Georgian setting; 2) her earlier (supposedly less-romantic) work; 3) the negative reviews due to an antagonistic &amp; incestuous heroine.

I agree the incest is gross. It's definitely not the sort that draws a reader's sympathy (like, say, Flowers in the Attic). But once Beatrice's initial romanticism has passed, said incest becomes another facet of her anti-heroine status. She is an unreliable narrator -- and, as such, she is the only choice to relay this kind of story. If Celia was the primary POV, Beatrice would be nothing but a villain...which is unfair, even for a character who does such vile things. Nobody can deny Beatrice impacts, warps, &amp; (frequently) ruins everything around her. But the root of her negativity -- her terrors of homelessness, of lacking security, of leaving her childhood home without a ripple of effect on the land she holds dear -- are sympathetic. She craves knowledge that she is loved, &amp; in that she's a tragic character more than anything else. She's a combination of Victoria &amp; Aurora Floyd &amp; Scarlett O'Hara.

So while Beatrice definitely isn't a good person, her villainy has understandable roots. Her defeat is inevitable; in that she's unlike Scarlett O'Hara, who had enough goodness to prevent total downfall. But I'm sad that so many readers don't look past the grotesque plot points &amp; enjoy the heart of the novel -- a sprawling, semi-gothic epic of a twisted family &amp; its relationship with the land. Who is the true parasite -- the family or the land they live upon? It's a romance in the old-fashioned sense -- a tale of warped standards, a la Zofloya -- and that sort of romance doesn't need a moral paragon to narrate. 

4.5 stars, but this time I rounded up.

...Take that, one-star reviews. ;)