Rating: 1/5

THE ‘TRUE STORY’ ACCORDING TO THE MAN WHO ADMITTEDLY PLED GUILTY

James Earl Ray (1928-1998) is the convicted killer of Martin Luther King Jr. He was convicted of the April 4, 1968 murder in 1969, after he entered a guilty plea (which saved him from the possibility of a death sentence), which he later tried to withdraw in favor of a jury trial. He died from kidney disease and liver failure at the age of 70.

Rev. Jesse Jackson (!!) wrote in the Foreword to this 1991 book, “No thoughtful person, after reviewing the evidence, can believe that this one man, James Earl Ray---who had bungled virtually everything he had ever tried, including criminal activity---acting alone, killed Martin Luther King, escaped during the evening traffic rush… traveled to Canada and England with international passports, avoided an international network in search of him, and was only caught sometime later. Such a scenario strains the imagination, not to mention the reasoning process... I have always believed that there was a conspiracy involved in Dr. King’s assassination. I have always believed that the government was part of a conspiracy, either directly or indirectly, to assassinate him. I have never ruled out the government’s DIRECT involvement because there were many in the government---J. Edgar Hoover among them---who had an intense, visceral and deep emotional hatred and fear of Dr. King…

“James Earl Ray may or may not have been part of the conspiracy. I have no proof or facts one way or the other, nor am I in a position to know. Read his story and draw your own conclusion about him. I only contend that there are some things you SENSE before you KNOW… What IS known now is that the government… DID have a COINTELPRO program… to discredit, disrupt and destroy the Black movement and to prevent the rise of a Black Messiah… Thus, while I do not know, I have a strong sense that there was a government conspiracy to kill Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.” 

“If Dr. King had been wounded and lived through the assassination attempt … I believe that he would have been the first to call for a full and complete investigation. I believe that he would have been the first to demand a fair trial for James Earl Ray. I believe he would have been the first person seeking justice for this alleged assaulter. Surely the American people and the government can settle for nothing less.” (Pg. 5-8)

Mark Lane (noted for his Kennedy assassination books, such as ‘Rush to Judgment’) asserts, “Ray has been subjected to brutal treatment… and was badly mistreated and tortured by the authorities… Ray has been incarcerated for more than two decades for a crime that I am convinced he did not commit… If a skilled, experienced investigator and writer with … libraries and other archives at his command [had] … produced this book, it would be noteworthy. That Ray, devoid of a support system, has achieved such a result is monumental.” (Pg. 9-10)

Evidence? “Very likely the only eyewitness of value in the rooming house [across from the hotel where Dr. King was killed] was Mrs. [Grace] Stephens. When photographs of James Earl Ray were shown to her she unequivocally stated that he was not the man who emerged from the bathroom just after the shot was fired. She was threatened by FBI agents and local police and told to cooperate. She was offered a substantial ‘reward’ if she would identify Ray. She said she would be glad to cooperate … if they ever caught the right man… Mrs. Stephens was surreptitiously sent to a mental institution… She was illegally incarcerated there for ten years until I was able to organize a public campaign to seek her freedom… The federal authorities… then approached her husband. Told of a $100,000 reward, he signed an affidavit saying Ray was the killer. Immediately the attorney general of Memphis had Mr. Stephens arrested, claiming that he was a drunk… Clearly, Ray could not be tried. The state had not a shred of credible evidence linking him to the murder… Therefore, the federal and state authorities arranged for the case not to be tried. A detailed description of how this was accomplished forms the … most chilling portion of this book… I join in James Earl Ray’s call for the appointment of an independent federal special prosecutor to investigate the FBI’s involvement in the plot to kill Martin Luther King.” (Pg. 11-12)

What kind of case does Ray present? “The FBI said that during examinations of the discarded items, found on the sidewalk after the shooting agents… they found several fingerprints, including one on the rifle that matched mine. The FBI decided not to conduct a ballistics test on the rifle claiming that the fatal bullet was misshapen.” (Pg. 100)

What about Ray’s attorney, Percy Foreman? “As far as Foreman’s investigative technique went, the two main questions… were: ‘Was there a conspiracy to kill Dr. King?’ and ‘Did James Earl Ray’ fire the weapon?’ He never asked me either question. I would have answered that I did not shoot Dr. King but that I was unwittingly part of a conspiracy since I was hired to purchase a weapon of the type used in the killing and did bring it to Memphis.” (Pg. 120)

What about the guilty plea? “a very agitated Percy Foreman … presented a paper for me to sign, claiming that he needed ‘evidence’ that he had advised me to let him negotiate a guilty plea on my behalf… I signed the plea document but told Foreman I didn’t intend to plead guilty. He went to work trying to persuade me to do so.” (Pg. 127) “As February was ending, Foreman had no assurances that I’d plead guilty, so he resorted to terror tactics usually attributed to dictators… I was succumbing to the grind---the cage, the glare, the stale air, Foreman’s incessant demands that I plead guilty. In late February, I tentatively agreed to enter a plea of guilty… Once I compromised my position by signing a paper saying Foreman had advised me to plead guilty, he began … [giving me] stipulations for me to sign. In all, there were 55… My job was to ratify the state’s case down to the last comma… This went on for days, until the stipulations were down to a few, leaving only those Judge Battle would read at the hearing where I’d officially plead guilty… My signature of approval appeared on each page.” (Pg. 130-132)

He continues, “The following morning I appeared in court to play my part in the scene scripted three days earlier… I’d already pleaded guilty… Judge Battler jumped in, rereading several questions he’d put to me during my guilty plea… The day after I pleaded guilty, Foreman invited my brothers for drinks in his suite.” (Pg. 133-134)

He argues, “The FBI’s performance after the King shooting is … mysterious. There has been no explanation for the 30-minute delay in getting the bureau into the King case---which might have closed exits from Memphis to the killer or killers… And along the chain of odd events in the FBI’s pursuit of me there is the record of the bureau’s continued efforts to keep a wire on the King household and the SCLC leaders even after the murder.” (Pg. 249-250)

He closes with a two-page list of ‘Remaining Questions,’ such as: “What role did the Memphis … fire chief have in pulling the city’s only two black firemen away from a post near the Motel the day before Dr. King was shot?”… “Why, considering that my fingerprints were discovered minutes after the King shooting, did it take the FBI more than two weeks to get out a bulletin of my alleged involvement in the King shooting?… Why did the first wanted posters name me as ‘Eric S. Galt,’ the name known by Raoul [Ray’s alleged accomplice in the conspiracy] but not used at [the] rooming house?” (Pg. 266-267)

Ray hardly makes even a mildly convincing case for a Special Prosecutor and a jury trial. (But after reading his book, I was even more distressed that Rev. Jesse Jackson was supporting Ray’s arguments.) Try reading William Bradford Huie's book, 'Did the FBI Kill Martin Luther King?' for a contrasting view.