Rating: 2/5

Stein’s book is about how to write good fiction and, ostensibly, how to apply good fiction techniques to non-fiction. Really, though, Stein is about one type of writing only – good literary technique (tension and conflict; character definition and evoking emotion, etc.). He acknowledges popular-commercial fiction but does this with a not-so-subtle air of distain. Literary writing is for “permanence,” writing for the ages and that sort of thing. It is, Stein says, “a calling, not an occupation.” It’s not for daily entertainment, as if there’s something wrong with that.

And nowhere does Stein acknowledge another type of writing, thinkers who write, when content is more important than technique. Referring to John Gardner’s comment that detail is the lifeblood of fiction, it could be that such detail is fly-over country for those who are more interested in ideas and what is written versus how it is written. Stein says we should move from generalities to visual particulars. “She boiled water in a lidless pot so she could watch the bubbles perk and dance” is much preferred he says to “She boiled water.” Really? Just how important is it for the reader to know that a “she” needed to watch bubbles perk and dance? Stein rewrites the introductory paragraph to Arthur Hailey’s Airport, but it comes across as way over done. Technique takes over. It moves the writer to the front and gets in the way of the story. Good writing Stein says pays attention to diction. Describing a famous general as “humane” won’t work because it is “a colloquial parlance” for ‘“regular guy,’” which “a hundred readers would pile many meanings relating to their own experience.” Yet it could be this is precisely what is needed to make a point and not get bogged down. Stein advises that “bald pink knees” is the crucial part of a sentence that states that a male sat on the balcony with his “bald pink knees thrust against the ironwork.” Well, that seems more distracting than not. Who might care about the color of knees? “Thrusting” conveys enough, though I suppose it explains why knees are pink and not white, but aren’t knees bald by definition? And, like other writing books, Stein advises his readers to cut adjectives and adverbs, and to “make every word count,” the efficiency of which seems to counter the emphasis he puts on cluttering detail. 

Here and there, Stein provides good writing tips (e.g., role of titles, the three main points of view, the use of markers to identify characters) that make this a helpful book to read. Clearly, he has all of that high-level experience and a lot to offer a reader from that perspective ("a master editor" the book cover states), though sometimes he is just too much: “The craft of creative writing is at least as complex as the craft of science,” he writes. “I have one student who is an aeronautical engineer and another who is an obstetrician, and I dare say both would admit that writing to a professional standard involves craft at least as complex as their occupations. You wouldn’t want a layman walking into a hospital operating theater to deliver a child. Nor would you want a layman to design the next airplane you travel in.” Stein has his professional standards and he relays them in this book, but it's fair to say that there’s far more subjectivity involved than what he allows.