Rating: 4/5

I generally have a difficult time with science fiction, unable to comprehend the concepts and never entertained by space ships and so forth. I’ve always had a fascination with the cyberpunk subgenre though; combining high concept philosophical questions of the near future with computer technology and noir themes. 

The problem with cyberpunk and the reason it isn’t a huge subgenre any more is that it has been played out. Virtual reality as an escape from reality, multiple levels of reality, what is real and what is not when pulling the consciousness into other places, switching bodies…The genre’s main theme has been hammered home. Tea from an Empty Cup is, in essence, this very thing: a generic cyberpunk novel gleaning themes from every other example of the genre and set in a seedy noir world. But despite the fact it is fairly same-y when looked at in the context of the whole subgenre, it’s still a pretty fantastic read. 

A mere 250 pages, Tea from an Empty Cup manages to do the job of introducing interesting characters, a good premise, and tie everything up in a mind-bendingly satisfying way without missing a beat. The book focuses a lot of the sexual aspects of AR and explores many unsavory aspects of that, but the main focus is on the idea that no one in AR is who they say they are and you can change your name, jump into another skin, or create an entirely new skin. There’s a mystery of levels, of drugs, and what Old Japan is; a lot of angles for our two protagonists to explore. 

What propelled me to finish this book in pretty much a day was the crisp writing that perfectly captured the spirit of weirdness in description and great dialogue with a flair for what I’ll call “future speak”. The book isn’t heavy in the action department at all but the writing makes the slow unravelling of the mystery worth savoring. That said, the editing of the book could use some work. I can look past it because Cadigan’s quality is obviously there…I just wish someone had given the book some TLC. 

There’s not much I can say about this book without spoiling it. I liked the ending for the most part, I felt like it went exactly where I figured it would while still managing to be open-ended enough to be up to interpretation. I think that the book will endear itself to a certain very specific crowd but it definitely does not have wide appeal. It’s a weird little story with an interesting, if derivative, plot and some very distinct and memorable imagery. 

If cyberpunk is a genre you enjoy, I’d say give Tea from an Empty Cup a shot.