Rating: 4/5

YOUTHFUL BLUES

We are so used to see colours at their best that we no longer see their richness. Any tone, any tint, any hue now is as it should be. 

But it wasn’t always like this. Not too long ago, endowing colours to objects was a difficult, expensive, laborious, and sometime politically dangerous endeavour. Back then it was not so much their chromatic tone as their depth that mattered. Luminosity and richness, saturation and concentration were the valued qualities of a colour. Those were the colouring values. So much so that some tints were ignored. 

From Pastoureau we learn that for a fairly long time, in the West, only a few colours were talked about and blue was not one of them. Blue is a young colour. 

Talking about a colour means endowing colour with a place in language. The Greeks did not really have a term for blue. They used the word Glaukos to refer to a light tone, while Kyaneus alluded to a mineral and to being dark. And we have Homer missing his blues and alluding to the wine-dark sea. They did however have the word Indikon, but it referred to the material pigment of Asian origins, rather than to its chromatics. Even in the Bible blue is not found, while red has a blatant presence. It is after all a fairly violent book. The Romans knew blue, but paid little attention to it since they had seen that the Barbarians (from the Germanic lands and Brittany) painted their own selves in blue. The Romans relegated the tone to the lower classes and to backgrounds in decorative uses.

The conspicuous neglect of blue in the Greek world perplexed the nineteenth century when it was concluded that the Greeks simply could not see, physiologically, this colour. Thanks to a social and historical approach our current understanding is that blue had not gained its own cultural space. As Pastoureau says, it was not a question of vision but of perception.

The most secured path when tracking the history of colour is to follow that of dyeing and dyers. And this began in Asia and Africa, and at the beginning there were only three tones: white, black and red. They were the three poles for the two axes. White was the centre and Black was its opposite in terms of Luminosity, while Red was the other extreme for Density.

When cultural consciousness began identifying blue, Latin had to borrow new terms from other languages. Azureus came from Arabic while Blavus arrived from Germanic tongues. Red, however, not only did have more of its own language but the word colour itself implied red. Some languages such as Spanish have kept the word colorado for red. 

If blue is not a biblical colour, it did not manage to get its codified place in Christian liturgy either. Worship was cast in red, white, black, green, gold and violet. Blue, however, begins to appear, modestly, in the arts in the West around 1000, but was not clearly distinguishable until just less than two centuries later. Its advent was embroiled in the theological discussion on whether colour was a quality of light or of the object. If the former, then it was also divine and immaterial, but if it pertained to the latter, its materiality immediately demoted it to the superficial Vanitas. Venerated or shunned. This was the Cluniac and Cistercian debate.

Those who enjoy iridescence have to thank Abbot Suger’s passionate defence of colour in his De consecratione. He presented it as a component of godly light and therefore the concomitant element of the visual and architectural arts that this treatise strongly defended. For it is in the filtering of the sacred sunrays that blue makes a magnificent presence as it pervades with its hue the glorious space. In Suger’s Abbey the anointing blue was christened as Bleu Saint Denis. 

Having acquired the same preciosity as Sapphire, the hue extended its presence to enamels and to illuminations of luxurious book pages. In manuscripts it jumps from backgrounds to the most exquisite presence, the tunic or the mantle of the virgin.

From art it was easy for blue to run onto people’s clothes, and in France we have King Saint Louis ostentatiously wearing it. Of course, the Capetians had already started using it somewhat earlier as they adopted the virginal Lys and the Azur for their armour. Louis made blue the hue of royalty and Heraldry provided the international channels for further European distribution. 

Suger was right but so was Saint Bernard. Colour is part of light but its materiality cannot be denied either. Colour has its physics and its chemistry. Pigments, accessing to them and their deployment were not obvious tasks. Lapis lazuli, indigo (indigotine) or woad for blues, and madder and cochineal for reds, turned men’s minds and purses around. Pastoureau does not dwell in detail on the peculiarities in the handling of these pigments, but gives a fascinating account of how different and powerful economic centres developed in Europe: in Thuringia, Tuscany and the Languedoc their wealth had been tinted with blue.

The rapid ascendancy of blue continued during the middle ages and, together with green and yellow, it succeeded in breaking the stable trio of white-black-red. But another black entered the scene and the Black Death in mid fourteenth century halted, amongst other things, the way the new array of tones were perceived. 

The aftermath of the plague brought about the stringent Sumptuary Laws. Pastoureau unfolds the tripartite dimensions of these Laws: the Economic, the Ethical and the Ideological. But all these laws tinted with different moral tones all the colours, with red acquiring its reprehensible scarlet tone. Red was seen in its full amoral blush, while blue, similarly to the way it avoided liturgy, also stood on the sides of morality.

If penance filtered sin in the coloured senses, their denial would mark the path to follow. The fifteenth century is the century of black and the budding house of Burgundy, when it spread its cosmopolitan presence, would then install it in several of the European courts. Blue, in its darker variety benefited from its blackish lustre.

When Christian religion split again, its hues also separated and we see a renewal of the Cluniac-Cistercian debate amongst the Reformation and the Catholic branches. But this time it was only the chromatic aspect, and not the richness or saturation of the tone, what was judged as a contemptible display of wealth.

It had to be the century of the Enlightenment when light was finally shed on colour. Newton displayed the full spectrum and with it black and white ceased to be seen as colours. The rainbow, which for centuries had been identified as a gradation of six colours, finally acquired its seventh, blue. The labels of Primary and Complementary were attached to the different wavelengths, and new additional qualities were identified. Some hues were cold and some warm.

And yet, Newton forgot about perception. It was Goethe who recovered it from Aristotle in his Zur Farbenlehre in 1810. The subject, and not just the prism, was important in the formation of colour. Goethe also made blue the hue of Romanticism when he covered his Werther in this tone. And it was also in Germanic lands were the very successful Prussian blue was precipitated and where later the synthetic anilines started a new, and huge, industry.

Blue is both a beautiful and fascinating subject and Pastoureau draws attention to many interesting aspects. But it is a complex theme, and while at times a bit repetitive, he does not discuss enough the uses of the blue in the Ancient Middle East and Egypt, nor its appearance in decorative uses in the Greek world. Similarly, the uses of blue in the Arabic world and its entrance in the West through them would have been a welcomed angle. 

After reading this book I now see blue differently. It is certainly much more luminous.