Rating: 3/5

The closest my experience compares to the experiences of the characters in Slave of my Thirst was visiting the Gateway of Indian monument in Mumbai (once known as Bombay). Even that was dedicated some years after the events recounted in the first section of this book, but the monument was built during the British Raj. This section describing events on the frontier of the Raj began as a solid pulp adventure, told in first-person by a British officer but introducing two major characters who would continue in the final two portions of the book. One character was Dr. John Eliot, an agnostic medical doctor (former classmate of A. Conan Doyle), while the other was a professor of Sanskrit at Calcutta (now Kolkata) University with a penchant for occult investigation, Professor Huree Jyoti Navalkar. This first portion of the novel reveals to the reader the strange phenomena discovered in the rare and mostly avoided region of Kalikshutra, mostly avoided because of the slavish devotion to the destroyer deity, Kali. Much of this section reads like the offspring of something Robert E. Howard, August Derleth, or H. P. Lovecraft would have written mating with something H. Rider Haggard or Edgar Rice Burroughs would have written.

The second portion of the novel is much more ingrained with the tropes and descriptions of gothic horror. This makes perfect sense because author Tom Holland is known as a scholar who specializes in the life and work of Lord Byron. To make things both more interesting and ironic, Holland introduces the stage manager of Henry Irving’s and Ellen Terry’s theater, the Lyceum. Abraham Stoker, aka Bram Stoker, allegedly receives his inspiration for both the play and novel, Dracula, from the investigations conducted in the last two portions of the book. However, one might only recognize a couple of names from the famous gothic horror novel: the head of an asylum named Renfeld, an actress named Lucy with a surname beginning with West (but not the same as Lucy in the classic novel), and a doctor named John (though that takes quite a different direction than that of Seward in the classic).

To further enhance the gothic feel, the second portion is entirely narrated in the form of journal entries and correspondence. This is a very appropriate conceit for a gothic novel and I generally enjoyed how well-written and compelling it was. Alas, though, the conceit had one other effect on me. Unfortunately, the shorter entries gave me lots of exit points to put the book down. So, as a result, I took a lot longer to read this novel than I would normally have taken.

Yet, the description of one vampire’s mental state sounded hauntingly like some folks I know (including myself) with Attention Deficit Disorder: “…the desire for mental exaltation had always been a feature of my character; yet now I was becoming its absolute slave, for the more I sought to banish the threat of boredom from my brain, the more my search for fresh excitements would grow.” (p. 389) I should warn the squeamish, though, that the final portion of the story is rather replete with descriptions which make it a rather modern horror story. There is overt lewdness and more than enough blood and gore to satisfy any slasher movie fan. It’s quite disconcertingly effective in one way, but it rather decreases the artistry in the conceit that the novel is written contemporary to its era.

Now, while it is awkward to speak of these without overtly giving away any spoilers, I have to say that the identities of some of the monsters (for so there would have to be in a gothic horror story would there not?) were rather unexpected. One particularly twisted manifestation was very expected by me because I have learned not to trust the seeming innocent in such stories. Of course, that general mistrust might apply to more than one seeming innocent in Slave of my Thirst. These twists are fascinating, but when I consider the entire work, I feel ambiguity in evaluating it. 

Slave of my Thirst was an intriguing book, but it is not my favored genre. As a result, it was probably not as satisfying for me as it would have been for another.