Rating: 4/5

An author doesn't want to come right out and say they have written the definitive book on a subject, that should be left to the reviewers, but this author came up with a clever work-around: in his introduction he rattles off all the previous Gide biographies and dispatches each one for insufficiency; two were too short (180 and 192 pages for an eighty-one year life) and two were too long (1,250 pages for Gide's first twenty-six years and the next seven years in 600 pages), a fifth conked out after one volume with Gide at age thirty-eight or -nine. He also describes them as prudish, tendentious, inaccurate, shoddy, eccentric, skimpy, and one "much, much worse."

Gide himself was a homosexual pedophile who married his first cousin eleven days after his nagging mother died but never consummated the marriage, having instead an out-of-wedlock child with the daughter of a soon-to-be former best friend. Born into wealth, he paid for his early books to be published; to have written for money would have been unseemly for a French gentleman of that period. He traveled constantly around western Europe, North and Equatorial Africa, looking for a place to give his muse free rein but as likely as not coming up with something akin to writer's block. He belatedly took an interest in Communism and became a fellow traveler but after four or five (literarily unproductive) years saw the light and renounced it as he had Christianity. World War II was spent in exile in Tunis and Algiers after which he received a Noble Prize for literature.

Andre Gide never visited the United States and as far as I can tell none of his works ever really knocked it out of the ballpark there. I read this book more because the biographer's style intrigued me than for the subject himself. Alan Sheridan was a French-English translator and the book is peppered with brief asides about words and phrases getting lost in translation as they say. There's a great quote that I can't find now from Gide's journal that neatly encapsulates the semantic problem with English-French translation.

One weakness with the book is that the odd little habits and details of a life are few and dispersed. For example, it is only on page 530 that we learn that Gide enjoyed light reading - he "arrived [...] - and promptly plunged into a dozen Simenon thrillers that he had not yet read." Another one, rather humorous, was that in his last year of life his doctor diagnoses heart failure and orders him to cut back to only six cigarettes a day. All this after barely a word previously about smoking. Gide also hired an architect to design a dream house for himself in Paris' 17th Arondissement but the job was completed botched and Gide eventually sold the place at a loss. The details of that story would have been useful to know. But mostly the book just tells us that Gide went from Point A to Point B where he stayed for a week or so then on to Point C or maybe back to Point A. By the time I realized this was what the book and Gide's life amounted to I was too far along not to notch this on my bookshelf and I plowed on through.

This is a trade paperback with thick pages and sturdy binding, I will say that for the Harvard University Press.