Rating: 4/5

This book definitely started off slower than the other Sackett books, but my goodness, what a great book. Jubal Sackett, the quiet son of Barnabas, is a loner, a dreamer, an explorer. Like his father, he has a love for the land. He is not content to stay in the wild frontier of the Carolinas or even the rugged Tennessee valley. Jubal, virtually half native by upbringing and inclination, wants to see the great mountains that divide this new continent. The tug of the distant frontier, the lure of the unknown, draws him ever westward and across the virgin plains of Kansas, Nebraska and Colorado.

As Jubal crosses the continent it is impossible to ignore just how vast, how wild North America is. The story takes place in (roughly) the 1630s. America is a vast, unknown place. Jubal can travel for days without seeing a soul. I appreciate the sense of vast emptiness. It is utterly alien to my own experiences and gives me a sense of awe and wonder at how that world must have been. No developments, no roads, no strip malls, only an endless forest or endless plain. 

True, there are people in the wilderness - the Cherokee, the Shawnee, the Pawnee, the Comanche and more. And these people lived in some sort of balance with the virgin land, but even in the distant mountains, the French, the English and the Spanish are beginning to have an impact on their world. Scarcity makes things valuable. The native peoples are eager for the trade goods - the good steel needles and axes and knives - that the white men bring. And the horses and firearms too. Change lays over the landscape. And change, Jubal recognizes destroys the life that the natives had led.

All of this wide, empty world is a backdrop to a love story. Jubal is sent on a quest by a Natchez wise man to find and ask Itchakomi, a daughter of the sun, to return to her people. Jubal finds her despite adversity and the two (predictably) fall in love with one another. In fact, the relationship between the two (at times) threatened to ruin the story for me. He loves her, but is too noble to ask her to stay. She loves him, but s too proud to ask him to ask her to stay. (Really?!) Once the two got together the story could flow along naturally.

For some reason I underestimate these stories, but each one has left me with a positive impression. Four out of five stars. Ultimately, I like the story for the sense of scale that the book conveyed. I also appreciated the time period - learning more about a time when America was little more than a vast, sparsely populated wilderness.