Rating: 2/5

The Taming of the Shrew may not deserve the rating I have given, but I had to anyway, for it was a disturbing reading experience. In the play, a spirited woman is "tamed" by her husband through cruelty and humiliation. He starves her, deprives her of sleep to "tame" her into submission and to teach her her duty as a wife. In so doing, she becomes a broken puppet, which the husband proudly celebrates, exhibiting her wife's newfound obedience to her family and thus humiliating her. If reading this was not bad enough, the action was justified in the name of love! I felt awful.

Irony, the time it was written, and dream against reality have been offered as defences for the play. However, they weren't adequate for me. Let me tell you why. Irony or not, this was misogyny and domestic abuse in its extreme. The unmistakable glorification of them was appalling. 
"She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,
My household stuff, my field, my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass...."
This is how the man sees the woman, not as a human, but as a beast or a thing that he can either make or break. And all this is done for love? Can you buy such hypocrisy? And being written over four centuries ago is no defence either, for things said and done in this play are NOT dated! Domestic abuse (in the scale it's expressed in the play), both physical and mental, happens around the world even today. Four centuries later, male chauvinism is still intact. The last defence, that it was a dream and not the reality, is also feeble. It was true that the play began as a story within a story where a prank was practiced on a drunken man, treating him like a lord and performing a play for him. The drunk, in his semi-conscious (dream-like) state, watches it. But at the end, no mention was made of this farce (not in the copy I read, at least). So, the only dream there was the dreadful dream I dreamt while reading it! 

The irony (as I see it) was the fact that this was a comedy! To be fair, there were some comical elements in it, especially in some of the dialogues. But to call this a comedy was taking much liberty on women, in my opinion. I know I have written my review passionately. It also sounds feminist. But having represented women who suffered domestic abuse in my practice as a lawyer, I cannot read these kinds of stories passively. And so, I cannot offer an apology. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/