Rating: 4/5

The book is a collection of Rogers’ papers done on different aspects of his person centred approach, organised into three main sections: personal experiences and perspectives, the person centred approach in psychotherapy, and it’s application in education. 

The first noticeable quality of his writing is the clarity of it. The wordings are precise, the logic coherent, and even the slightest confusion over what he meant is almost not possible. The clarity is so noticeable that it naturally reminds me of other psychology books I’ve read and how I can not say the same about them. It’s almost as if Rogers knew where ambiguity may take roots and nipped them in the bud before they had a chance. He writes like who he is, a humanistic scientist. To the point and flow of the logical mind. 

Secondly, I am taken back by his openness and honesty. He talks about parts of his own life - especially how he decided not to dedicate all his time to care for his wife when she was battling with illness at the end of her life, for his own well being, for his survival. He talks about how it has affected their marriage at the end, how she struggled to make peace with it. This wasn’t the only example of his honesty but one of the most outstanding one in my eyes. This was where I started to believe that he really is what he preaches - a believer in the freedom of one’s being, in its congruency and openness, free from judgement and social and cultural pressure of one perceived reality. 

Then, the thing I love the most about this book is that it opens a new door for me, a door of person centred approach. I completely agree with this philosophy and I am grateful that he points it all out for me, going into practical details like what is real listening, what is real empathy, the elements of modern loneliness, how and what provides for behaviour change and more. I love how he challenges the idea of one reality. I love his analysis on the case of Ellen West. These are precious lessons one can never get enough of. They liberate one from confusion and suffering. They save lives. 

I gave it 4 rather than 5 star because one, I wasn’t sure why the Brazil encounter group experience was put under the 3rd section of education. Though it involves a big group but it seems more appropriate to me to have it under section 2. Two, for some reason, I was growing restless and found it hard to concentrate in the last chapter where he talks about the future of humanity and his philosophy. Three, which is probably the key reason, I find myself reading too much of the same idea in different chapters. Not to the point that I became impatient, but enough to want to skip it sometimes.