Rating: 3/5

The differences in thoughts between Asians and westerners have often been elaborated from the perspectives of history, culture, politics, and philosophy. Therefore, it's good to read on a psychology approach on this analysis. 

The author developed his argument on the basis of case studies carried out among Asians, Asian-Americans, and westerners. Of course, the results of each case study is never conclusive, but in the end, as a whole, the author's work should be commended. Indeed, he merely reconfirms many of the stereotypes existing on Asians and westerners. However, it's refreshing to learn that these stereotypes can and have been proven through controlled psychological experiments. 

Certain parts of the book is enlightening; I actually enjoyed it quite immensely. When reading about the questions posed during his case studies, I often find myself trying to answer the questions posed in the case studies, trying to identify whether I am more of an Asian of a westerner. The verdict on this remains inconclusive, but at least I have a better idea of the differences in perceptions between the two sides.

For my own personal purposes, the book has definitely enrich my perspective on how Asians and westerners perceive diplomacy. Asians will most likely believe that we must surrender ourselves to the dynamic changes in situations (basically "go with the flow") and appreciate the process more than the result. Meanwhile, Westerners would make us believe that if factors to a situation are analyzed well, then situations can be controlled to produce a desired result.

The author claims that in the future, there will most likely be two end results to the differences in thoughts between Asians and westerners. The first assumption, like Samuel Huntington's, is that there will be a clash of thoughts that is inherently irreconcilable. In the end, conflict may surface as a result of such clash. The second assumption, however, would see the development of a "third way" which draws lessons from the positive values imbedded in both ways of thinking.

For the longest time, I've thought myself as an Asian with western thinking. In doing so, I've more than often fallen into the trap of looking at the Asian way of thinking in a condescending manner. However, the more I live in Indonesia, and the more I'm surrounded by my people, the more I'm beginning to see that there is virtue in the Asian way of thinking. That, maybe, the end of history is not here yet, and that the western way of thinking is not the apex of mankind.