Rating: 3/5

Cargo of Eagles is the 19th book in the Albert Campion mystery series by Margery Allingham. In fact, it's more than just a mystery series as Albert Campion is a mysterious individual, with a mysterious past who seems to have worked for the British spy service during WWII and maintains connections with them.

In this story, the focus is on other people, an American historian, Morty Kelsey, who has been in Saltey, on the outskirts of London, located by a salt marsh. He comes to London to meet Campion to maybe get his assistance with a matter. A woman doctor, Dido, who he has taken a fancy to, has just surprisingly inherited a house in Saltey, the other residents object to. Dido has been receiving mysterious (yes, that word 'mysterious' again) threatening letter telling her not to move there. But this just makes her want to more. She won't back down.

'Mysterious' things are happening in Saltey. Campion has sent his butler / assistant Lugg there to keep an eye on things as well. Campion is investigating something but isn't providing much info. He's working with an old friend from the intelligence services and also a retired police superintendent and friend, Stanislaws Oates, because there was a history of smuggling in that area and it may have something to do with what's going on.

The solicitor who managed the will of the decedent is murdered and this brings in London cops who leave behind Sgt Throstle to investigate that aspect. Suffice it to say that there is a lot going on and I'm not doing it justice. The locals are very secretive. There are gangs of Mods and Rockers invading periodically and causing problems. And two old dangerous criminals who seem to be leaving calling cards.

It's an intriguing story and at times the tension is palpable and the action is quite exciting, especially the fights between locals and the 'tearaways', the motorcyclists. Through all of this Campion is a bit ghostlike. He wanders in, gathers info from Morty and Lugg and heads back to London. But he doesn't provide much info until everything is resolved. But at the same time, there are moments when he is surprisingly firm and intransigent, not at all like him. 

Neat people, fascinating action-filled story that draws you in completely. The series is definitely worth reading. 3.5 stars