Rating: 4/5

Incredibly astute if somewhat boring in its detail, there is no doubt that this is full of enough profound observations so as to make it both highly re-readable and an essential text on the Revolution, and therefore political science (relevant knowledge of the period prerequisite).

notes:

“even despots do not deny the merits of freedom; only they wish to keep it for themselves, claiming that no one else is worthy of it. Thus our quarrel is not about the value of freedom per se, but stems from our opinion of our fellow men (…) it is no exaggeration to say that a man’s admiration of absolute government is proportionate to the contempt he feels for those around him.”

“when great revolutions are successful their causes cease to exist, and the very nature of their success has made them incomprehensible.”

“Even if it had not taken place, the old social structure would nonetheless have been shattered sooner or later. The only difference would been that instead of collapsing with such brutal suddenness, it would have crumbled bit by bit.”

“When the nobles had real power as well as privileges, when they governed and administrated, their rights could be at once greater and less open to attack. In fact, the nobility was regarded in the age of feudalism much as the government is regarded by everyone today; its exactions were tolerated in view of the protection and security it provided. True, the nobles enjoyed invidious privileges and rights that weighed heavily on the commoner, but in return for this they kept order, administered justice, saw to the execution of the laws, came to the rescue of the oppressed, and watched over the interests of all. The more these functions passed out of the hands of the nobility, the more uncalled-for did their privileges appear-until at last their mere existence seemed a meaningless anachronism.”

The peasants had become land owners. “In this restricted form it was far more hated than in the heyday of feudalism, and we are fully justified in saying that the very destruction of some of the institutions of the Middle Ages made those that survived the more detestable.”

On the Lords: “Yet, though he no longer governed, his very presence in the parish and his privileges put difficulties in the way of establishing a good parochial government in replacement of his own. For the mere fact that there existed within the community an individual so highly privileged, so independent and different in kind from all its other members, told against the due enforcement of laws, which, in theory, applied to all alike.”

“A French peasant may be willing enough to leave the government of the nation as a whole in the hands of and autocratic central power, but he bitterly resents the idea of not having a say in the local administration of his village.”

“When the judiciary intervenes in administrative matters, only material interests suffer; but when the State tampers with the course of justice, the effect is to unsettle men’s minds and to render them at once servile and revolutionary-minded.”

“In the sphere of finance alone there are now such frequent changed that a municipal officer who wished to keep abreast of them would have to devote his whole time to this task, and neglect his other duties.”

Mirabeau on capital cities: “when the head becomes too swollen, the body develops apoplexy”

“Of all the various ways of making men conscious of their differences and of stressing class distinctions unequal taxation is the most pernicious, since it creates a permanent estrangement between those who benefit and those who suffer by it. Once the principle is established that noblemen and commoners are not to be taxed at the same rates, the public is reminded of the distinction drawn between them year by year when the imposts are assessed and lev-ied. Thus on these occasions each member of the privileged class takes notice of the practical interest he has in differentiating himself from the masses and in stiffening the barriers between himself and them.”

“It is curious to see how a difference in political principles led to a complete divergence in the social system of two countries separated only by a narrow arm of sea. In England during the eighteenth century it was the poor who enjoyed exemption from taxation; in France it was the rich. The English aristocracy voluntarily shouldered the heaviest public burdens so as to be allowed to retain its authority; in France the nobles clung to their exemption from taxation to the very end to console themselves for having lost the right to rule.”

“When we come across any ancient medieval custom which was maintained, with its worst elements willfully exploited in defiance of the spirit of the age, or any new and equally pernicious measure, we always find, if we go to the root of the matter, some financial expedient that has crystallized into an institution. Thus, to meet emergencies of a temporary order, new powers were frequently created which were to last for centuries.” Against conservatism 

“The segregation of classes, which was the crime of the late monarchy, became at a late stage a justification for it, since when the wealthy and enlightened elements of the population were no longer able to act in concert and to take part in the government, the country became, to all intents and purposes, incapable of administrating itself and it was needful that a master should step in.”

“For in its desire to make money out of everything the old administration put up to sale most public offices and thereby deprived itself if the right of appointing or dismissing its officials at will.” The dangers of privatisation and deregulation 

Almost all the vices, miscalculations, and disastrous prejudices I have been describing owed their origin, their continuance, and their proliferation to a line of conduct practiced by so many of our Kings, that of dividing men so as the better to rule them. But once the bourgeois had been completely severed from the noble, and the peasant from both alike, and when similar differentiation had taken place within each of these three classes, with the result that each was split up into a number of small groups almost completely shut off tom each other, the inevitable consequence was that, bough the nation came to seem a homogeneous whole, its parts no longer held together. Nothing had been left that could obstruct the central government, but, by the same token, nothing could shore it up. This is why the grandiose edifce built up by our Kings was doomed to collapse like a card castle once disturbances arose within the social order on which it was based.”

“I cannot help feeling that had this revolution, instead of being carried out by the masses on behalf of the sovereignty of the people, been the work of an enlightened autocrat, it might well have left us better fitted to develop in due course into a free nation.”

“In fact, those who prize freedom only for the material benefits it offers have never kept it long. What has made so many men, since untold ages, stake their all on liberty is its intrinsic glamour, a fascination it has in itself, apart from all "practical" considerations. For only in countries where it reigns can a man speak, live, and breathe freely, owing obedience to no authority save God and the laws of the land. The man who asks of freedom anything other than itself is born to be a slave. (…) Other nations, once they have grown prosperous, lose interest in freedom and let it be snatched from them without lifting a hand to defend it, lest they should endanger thus the comforts that, in fact, they owe to it alone.”

“generally speaking, the most perilous moment for a bad government is one when it seeks to mend its ways. Only consummate statecraft can enable a King to save his throne when after a long spell of oppressive rule he sets to improving the lot of his subjects. Patiently endured so long as it seemed beyond redress, a grievance comes to appear intolerable once the possibility of removing it crosses men's minds. For the mere fact that certain abuses have been remedied draws attention to the others and they now appear more galling; people may suffer less, but their sensibility is exacerbated. At the height of its power feudalism did not inspire so much hatred as it did on the eve of its eclipse. In the reign of Louis XVI the most trivial pinpricks of arbitrary power caused more resentment than the thoroughgoing despotism of Louis XIV.” Tocqueville argues that France was not on the decline, and the people had not simply grown weary of their circumstances, but that in fact it was in the best position it had ever been, yet the revolution still broke out as it was an inevitability for the progression of French Society, and a result of the undermining of faith which followed from attempts at reform and loosening of authoritarianism. In this way, you can understand why the Soviet Union collapsed under Gorbachev but not Stalin. It is a very astute observation. Thus the case for conservatism is held up, on the condition that you believe the French Revolution was not a good thing. It’s a very interesting situation - gradual reform and respect to the toil of established tradition ensuring the stability of the state as would have occurred conservatively, versus brazen reform where “scarcely any novelty, however startling, would not seem worth trying out”, to the outcome of total degradation of faith in the state, and the creation of the Revolution. Ultimately your choice of whether or not you believe in conservatism or not comes down to whether you think the revolution was good or not. Tocqueville himself, on this note, says: “Radical as they were, these reforms did not seem to have jeopardized the State itself, but every Frenchman was affected by them, if only in a minor way. He felt that his life had somehow been disorganized, that he must cultivate new habits, and if a businessman, that his activities would now be handicapped. True, routine of a kind still prevailed in the conduct of affairs of vital importance to the nation, but already no one knew from whom he should take orders, to whom he should apply, or how to solve those small private problems which crop up almost daily in the life of every member of a social group. Thus the nation as a whole was now in a state of unstable equilibrium, at the mercy of that final stroke of destiny which was to have such tremendous eftects and to produce the most formidable social cataclysm the world had ever seen.”