Rating: 5/5

Murderess is merely brutal. It's like a hammer, or a lump of metal. I would rather be a murderess than a murderer, if those are the only choices.
 This is the story of Grace Marks. A most unfortunate woman-- depending on how you look at it.

The story starts with Grace in prison, serving life after being granted clemency in the trial after the murders of Thomas Kinnear and Nancy Montgomery. Out of the gravel there are peonies growing, the story begins. A dream that Grace had which she is relating to Dr Simon Jordan. A perpetually horny and well-meaning doctor on a tour to study crimes of mania and insanity. 

Grace Marks was working as a maid at sixteen years of age when her employer, Thomas Kinnear and his mistress/housekeeper are brutally murdered by James McDermott and her, allegedly. Some accounts believe that James is her paramour and he conducted the killings on Grace's coercion. However, other people believe that Grace was just a hapless captive. A stupid witless pawn who got embroiled in a conspiracy that had her in way over her head. 

This book is startling. I often had to remind myself that Atwood published this in 1996. It reeks of Victorian era Canada, accurate in its gothic nature and sensibilities. Oft times it got caught in its own dogma. The puritanism, sexism, ignorance, marginal progressivism and proto-feminism of the era. In his student days, he used to argue that if a woman has no other course open to her but starvation, prostitution, or throwing herself from a bridge, then surely the prostitute, who has shown the most tenacious instinct for self-preservation, should be considered stronger and saner than her frailer and no longer living sisters. One couldn't have it both ways, he'd point out: if women are seduced and abandoned, they're supposed to go mad,(I now realise this was remarkable foreshadowing) but if they survive, and seduce in their turn, then they were mad to begin with. The language in this is also enticing. When we get to explore Grace, I sit with my rough hands folded, eyes down, staring at the flowers in the Turkey carpet. Or they are supposed to be flowers. They have petals in the shape of diamonds on a playing card; like the cards spread out on the table at My Kinnear's, after the gentlemen had been playing the night before. Hard and angular. But red, a deep thick red. Thick strangled tongues.

It's so easy to find yourself mired in the world of Grace who suffers from chronic main character syndrome. She often reacts to things that affect others way more than her but it's all about her feelings. Her reactions. Her world rocked. 

She recounts the story about how her family immigrated from Ireland to Canada, only for tragedy to strike during passage and once more it was all about how it affected her. Grace is also obsessed with the imagery of flowers and water. I was often befuddled as to whether her obsession with peonies had any narrative value. Eventually I wondered if it was just Atwood high on her own prose just having a ball. 

This book is surprising in its relatability. For all of her naivete, Grace has an alacritous ability to peer into the human condition. When she remembers that she may never have children due to her prison sentence, When you are sad it is best to change the subject.

When she reminisces the tragic life of her old friend Mary Whitney...saying what you really want out loud brings bad luck, and then the good thing will never happen. 

She was even a bit of an amateur nihilist, A sea voyage and a prison may be God's reminder to us that we are all flesh, and that all flesh is grass, and all flesh is weak.

This book is also ridiculously funny. ...as with crows, when you see two or three of them gathered together you know there is a death in the offing, and they are discussing it. With the crows they are deciding which parts they will tear open and make off with, and so it is with the doctors. Especially, according to Grace, if they have a leather bag or knives. 

Before going to bed, she greased the skin of her face like a boot.

Perhaps the strongest arsenal in this punch of a book is its characterisation. Grace's anecdotes of the people she encounters give such powerful portraits of them. Grace's pragmatic observations of the people around her (while possibly mendacious) showed dynamics that created room for treachery, jealousies and negative passions. One that particularly stood out to me was a moment between Grace and Nancy. 
  Oh Grace, said Nancy, we will have to kill a chicken, just step out and request McDermott to do it. I said that surely we would need two chickens, as there would be six to dine, with the ladies; but she was annoyed, and said there would be no ladies, as the wives of these gentlemen never condescended to darken the door of the house, and she herself would not be taking dinner with them in the dining room, as all they would do was drink and smoke and tell stories about what fine deeds they'd done in the Rebellion, and the would stay too long and play cards after, and it was bad for Mr Kinnear's health, and he would catch a cough, as was always the case when these men came to visit. She allowed him a poor constitution when it suited her.
 Grace's sometimes uncharitable opinions of Nancy make you wonder, could she have possibly been more complicit than she would have us believe?

She was fond of fainting spells and espousing her aforementioned weak constitution, even so much as crying when the chicken was slaughtered. 

My favourite part of the book, apart from the prose, was the subtle commentary of society. Atwood jabs at norms relevant to modern day human behaviour. From pathologising women, to the patriarchal expectation of women to perform and exist for the whims of men, to tabloid culture the newspaper journalists like to believe the worst; they can sell more papers that way, as one of them told me himself; for even upstanding and respectable people dearly love to read ill of others.

This book had everything and then some. I'm so glad I got to buddy read it with Raul. And while I may be able to write a thesis on the feminist relevance of villainised women, I shall just leave you with this quote by Grace which left me shook, 
  ...you may think a bed is a peaceful thing, Sir, and to you it may mean rest and comfort and a good night's sleep. But it isn't so for everyone; and there are many dangerous things that may take place in a bed. It is where we are born, and that is our first peril in life; and it is where the women give birth... And finally beds are what we sleep in, and where we dream, and often where we die.