Rating: 3/5

There are a lot of books trying to tell you how many plotlines there are in the world. There's the 36 Dramatic Situations, the three in the Basic Patterns of Plot, and the Seven Basic Plots. A wiki search could tell you about any one of these theories without having to buy the books.

Essentially, even though this book states intriguingly that there are 20 plot types, the author posits there are only 2: Mind versus Body, Character versus action. For example, the first two plotlines he gives is that of a quest versus that of adventure. A quest would be Don Quixote on his way to prove something to his friends and ultimately to himself. An adventure would be Indiana Jones on any of his regular outings. In the mind/quest plot, the protagonist seeks something that ultimately changes him in some profound way, while in an adventure, the plot is simply one for fun, and nobody changes too much afterwards.

There are 26 chapters in all, and like many reviewers said, the book is pretty good for about the first half. The plots start in at chapter 8, and the author has some interesting insights about plot structure before that, about character relationships and interactions, and reader expectations in determining how to set up your plot.

Each chapter also poses a few examples in which he lays out the three points inside that specific plot structure and how it usually plays out. He ends with a checklist so that you can stay on track.

This book sort of falls apart in the "love" and "forbidden love" chapters. I'm primarily a romance reader, so the way that these sections were written clearly showed that he was fairly unaccustomed to these plotlines and a bit dismissive of the genre. That's okay; it's not for everyone. On the other hand, other reviewers also thought the book started to lose steam towards the second half as well. 

He has a lot of interesting things that he posits at the beginning, probably because he reads a lot of scripts on a daily basis as a TV producer (? he mentioned his job but I can't remember now). Essentially, he worked at a TV station and knows about what news stories get presented and how soon after some news story goes viral that a TV movie then comes along with the exact same storyline. He discusses which stories are not interesting stories and which are, and he does say that, after a long career of doing this, that he finds the mind stories more interesting than the body stories.

An okay read. He's a very clear writer. It's not what I would call a self-help book, but it reads fast and is like a pop-textbook.