Rating: 4/5

...it was so quiet I could almost hear my heart beating. "It's not deep enough to be a grave," I whispered.

 Ashley and her mom are starting over - new town, new home, new life. Neither of them are particularly happy about the change but it's better for them to move on rather than dwell upon the past.

They have moved into the top apartment of old Miss Cooper's home and right away, Miss Cooper doesn't seem to like Ashley. 
"The real estate agent said I could play in the backyard," I said.
"Not in the garden, though. Not there! You stay away from my roses. ... This is my house, and if I don't want you and your mother here, I can kick you out - just like that!"

But Ashley, and her neighbor Kristi, do end up playing in the garden and they find a strange little box buried under one of the rose bushes.

Kristi has funny ideas about the Cooper place - she says that there's a ghost cat and a little girl who cries only in the summertime. And at first, Ashley thinks Kristi is just being a baby, but then she notices something quite odd about the cat - 
"Down on the lawn, in full view, I saw Snowball. He was looking up at me, and for the first time I noticed he cast no shadow on the moonlight grass."

If there's something up with the cat, what does that mean about the crying girl?

Well, I was expecting more of a scary experience. This just made me cry. Grief is never truly over - and there was a moment towards the end of the book that just got me right in the heart. I won't spoil it but whew. Tears. 

Anyway, the story on the whole was mildly spooky for the first few chapters but for the most part, the characters were trying to help the little ghost girl which took away the scariness and made it more of a mystery for me. 

I did enjoy reading this one - the plot was interesting and I was invested in the whole Snowball/crying child mystery.

I liked how the author built tension and suspense with Miss Cooper's antagonistic behavior towards Ashley and Kristi.

While there were a few illogical 'kid moments' with the heroines, but I will acknowledge that their behavior didn't seem out of the realm of possibility for jealous children. A bit frustrating for me, but not unrealistic.

And, I definitely appreciated how the author kept a thread of grief woven throughout the story - of love and loss and how to live again. I think that was the best part.