Rating: 2/5

I wasn’t terribly impressed with the stories in this anthology. I stopped reading this book to read a couple of more interesting novels. I had to get this book from the library twice because it was so easy to put down, that I ran out of time. Below are reviews of the stories I enjoyed the most. 

Her Father's Eyes - Kage Baker, 2/5. Post WWII a young girl encounters a sad young boy on a train who is traveling with an unsettling man and a woman. The girl is afraid for the boy. We never learn what happens to him after he leaves the train. 

A Book, by Its Cover - P.D. Cacek; 2/5. A Jewish boy has lost his family to the Nazis. He becomes suspicious of a bookseller who received visits from adults with children, but the children never reappear. It turns out the bookseller is saving the children by transforming them into books and shipping them out of the country. 

Somewhere In My Mind, There Is A Painting Box - Charles de Lint; 2/5. This is a story of young woman who would like to become an artist. She finds an old paint box in the woods that belonged to an artist who disappeared many years ago. Later she encounters his companion who seems shell shocked. She is eventually faced with a decision to embrace the small magics of our world or to migrate to the vivid and highly magical realm of the fairy folk. I thought the author did an excellent job of bringing the forest to life. 

The Green Word - Jeffrey Ford; 4/5. This story describes the conflict between the forest people and the king who has invaded and usurped their lands. Using druidic magic vs. the mediaeval technology of the king, this story can be seen as the modern conflict of industrialization over the environment. I found it engaging and well written. 

The Pagodas of Ciboure - M. Shayne Bell; 4/5. This charming story postulates that the composer Maurice Ravel had childhood leukemia and traveled to his grandmother’s home in Cibourne to rest and recuperate. There he encounters the ‘pagodas’ of French peasant folklore who build bodies out of broken china and glass. They are rumored to have healing powers as well. Maurice tries to secure their help, but is not sure if he has succeeded. Maurice risks his life to aid the pagodas when they are attacked by snails. Another story where the author does an excellent job of describing the landscape and setting the scene. 

From the Cradle - Gene Wolfe; 3/5. A boy is a helper in a book store when an elderly woman comes in with a special old book to sell on consignment. The caveat is she will only sell to a person the book wants. Years pass without a sale. The boy grows into a lonely man and inherits the store. Along the way he reads and tries to make sense of some of the stories in the book. Finally a young woman expresses interest in the book. Mildly interesting twist at the end. 

Travel Agency - Ellen Klages; 3/5. A very short story that reminds us of the books in which we have thoroughly immersed ourselves. 

A Fable of Savior and Reptile - Steven Popkes; 2/5. Through the perspective of a tortoise, Jesus of Nazareth is depicted as a victim of circumstances more than the leader who founded Christianity. An odd little tale. 

Comrade Grandmother - Naomi Kritzer; 3/5. Kritzer is the reason I picked up this anthology in the first place. Baba Yaga and a young heroic woman save Mother Russia during the siege of Stalingrad. The story captures the sacrifices and heroism of the Russian people and especially those of Stalingrad. I’ve read a lot about this siege, so this story might echo more for me than other readers.