Rating: 5/5

This book is a long form love letter to Francis Bacon, an Englishman to whom the author credits the industrial revolution, the scientific method as we currently understand it, capitalism, free trade, MI5, and the success of the British Empire, which was an 'Empire For Good' as Guy Verhofstadt would put it. The author makes a compelling argument for the above, and I adore his 'Starship Troopers' style confidence in the British Way :D. It's genuinely inspiring, and nobody can say that this is a man who does not want progress! This is a man that sees it as humanity's manifest destiny to rule the galaxy! Some would say that the British Empire was, broadly speaking, a force for good in the world, and I suspect that the author is one such.

An excerpt from the last chapter:
'The long-term trend towards ever greater mechanisation was given a new and powerful impetus by Francis Bacon. In the 20th century, two important rulers have tried to rebel against Bacon's philosophy. Both failed. The first of these was Hitler, who drove genuine scientists from his country and proclaimed that 'a new and magical interpretation of the world is coming'. The second, Mao Tse-Tung, had a more flexible mind and was able to change his policy when he saw that it was leading his country to ruin. All such 'rebellions' in the future, even if at first appearing to succeed, will be similarly doomed. All the passionate ideological movements which can be imagined, all possible brands of millenarianism, Communism, militarism, anarchy or Fascism, will avail themselves nothing against the dead hand of Francis Bacon. Let these enemies of human progress exercise their free will to the full. Let them attack by propaganda or actual subversion, by local acts of terror or wholesale devastation, by single bombs or a holocaust, by declared war or sudden ambush, and they will always lose. The Baconian scheme can be delayed, but it cannot be stopped. People who think otherwise, who seek to relegate large parts of humanity to the status of animals, and who thereby challenge Bacon's law of progress, take the risk of being answered, as the Japanese warlords were answered at Nagasaki and Hiroshima, by a Power that admits of no dispute.'