Rating: 4/5

The Doctor and the Detective: A Biography of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle is a biography of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, a British writer and physician. Martin Booth was a British novelist and poet, who wrote this biography.

Arthur Ignatius Conan Doyle was a British writer and physician. He created the character Sherlock Holmes in 1887 for A Study in Scarlet, the first of four novels and fifty-six short stories about Holmes and Dr. Watson. The Sherlock Holmes stories are considered milestones in the field of crime fiction.

Famous for creating Sherlock Holmes, Conan Doyle grew quickly frustrated with the way his creation would eclipse everything he is known for, but could not do without him. Booth investigates Conan Doyle and his creation with shrewd detachment, including the possible link between Holmes' cocaine habit and Conan Doyle's old medical partner. Conan Doyle's achievements minus the Great Detective would have been respectable: writing everything from serious historical novels to proto-science fiction, running for Parliament, serving in the Boer War, lobbying for such social reforms as divorce laws, investigating wrongful convictions, observing the front lines in the Great War, and many more things.

The Doctor and the Detective: A Biography of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle is written and researched rather well. Booth admirably tires to fit Doyle's extensive life into a biography, from world traveler, photographer, physician, wartime correspondent, amateur detective, patriotic booster, and, finally, writer of some of world's best and worst genre fiction are so varied that even the best biographers would find it difficult to squeeze everything in.

Even so, Booth manages to set some records straight, reprint some legends, celebrate his Doyle's triumphs, mourn his embarrassments, and explain his enduring popularity. Doyle emerges as an honorable pillar of Victorian pride and prejudice, even when he wrote ineptly and let others play him for a fool.

All in all, The Doctor and the Detective: A Biography of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle is a well researched and interesting look into the life of Arthur Conan Doyle.