Rating: 1/5

Take a short story. Split it up into paragraphs. After each paragraph, insert two pages of horse_ebooks tweets. That is the experience of reading Michaelmas.

Honestly due to the migraine I got after reading even a quarter of a page, it was quite difficult to finish this book. Michaelmas contains word choice and sentence structure that can only be best described as … puzzling. Dialogue that appears to have been written by someone who lacks theory of mind? And a plot more suited for a short story (which apparently Michaelmas started as) than a novel. 

I had to reread every page like five times. At first I assumed it was my fault that the book was incomprehensible and not the book's, until I came across some more egregious examples of complete disregard for the reader. For instance, Algis will regularly use pronouns like "that" or "it" to refer to subjects or objects that are either ambiguous, or mentioned several pages ago. Here's just one example: 
"With the passage of time, Domino was beginning to learn more and more about how Michaelmas's mind worked. He didn't like it, but he could follow it when instructed." (46) Is 'he' referring to Domino? Michaelmas? Is the first 'it' referring to Michaelmas's mind? Domino (a machine)? How Michaelmas's mind works? The action of following Michaelmas’s mind? The fact that Domino is learning about how Michaelmas's mind works? What does the second ‘it’ refer to? Commence migraine. 

Another problem with this book is that literally every sentence in it feels out of context. It's a bit hard to give concrete examples in this review you might read them thinking they're out of context because they're just quotes, but NO. They read as out of context even IN context. Here is one example:
"Michaelmas obligingly turned in his seat and peered back through the rear window at sun-browned legs in football striped calf socks scampering two by two up the old white steps to class. But to be young again would have been an unbearable price." (42) Ok, so Michaelmas is ogling up some calves, following so far. But… why would being young have been an unbearable price? In what way? After the quoted text, the book abruptly switches to describing a hotel room next and this thought about being young being an unbearable price is never returned to as far as I can tell. 

Very young children and the severely autistic lack the ability to recognize other people as sentient, with rich inner lives and their own experiences of consciousness. Algis writes dialogue like he never learned at age 3 that 1) other people have a own conscious experience of the world and 2) the conscious experience of other people is not equivalent to his own in that they cannot access the information and frame of mind Algis himself had at the time of writing. Here’s an example. The context is a reporter named Watson is talking to Michaelmas about a third man who might have been mysteriously brought back to life. Just to let you know: as far as I can tell, there is no context for legs or runners. 
"Watson looked nakedly into Michaelmas's face with the horrid invulnerability of the broken. 'I don't have any legs left,' he explained. 'Not leg legs-- inside legs. Sawed 'em off myself. So I took in a fast young runner. Hungry, but very hot and a lot of voodoo in his head. Watch out for him, Larry. He's the meanest person I've ever met in my life. Surely no men will be born after him. My gift to the big time. Any day now he's going to tell me I can go home to the sixties. Galatea's revenge. And I'll believe him." (35) So of course after reading this, my thoughts: ah, the character has aphasia, and our author is demonstrating how people with brain damage in the language centers of the brain talk. But no, the character does not have aphasia. 

Ok one more example: 
"Frontiere moved his eyes as if wishing to see the people behind him. 'If necessary, an announcement will be made that it is not planned to change the flight crew.' Michaelmas cocked his head. 'In other words, this is an excellent fish dinner especially if someone complains of stomach.'" (68) It's SO CLOSE to making sense. But it just … doesn’t. What is an excellent fish dinner? The announcement? Not changing the flight crew? Does the complaining of stomach part mean it’s actually a bad thing that they’re changing the flight crew? Complains of stomach what? Upset stomach? Complains of having a stomach? I’m just lost here.