Rating: 5/5

The premise of Farid ud-Din Attar's poems in The Conference of the Birds is simple: the birds gather to seek the king of the birds, the Simorgh. One of the birds, the hoopoe, tells them that the Simorgh lives far away and that the journey there is hazardous. 

First, the birds are enthusiastic to begin their search for the Simorgh -- a metaphor for Almighty God in Sufi mysticism -- but when they realize how difficult the journey will be, they start to make excuses. For instance, the finch says that he is too weak and cowardly. The hawk says he is satisfied with his position at the court waiting on the kings. The nightingale says he cannot leave his beloved the rose, and so on. The birds are identified by their species, and each species indicates a human type, and their excuses for not going on the journey are given according to their kind. 

The hoopoe, on the other hand, represents the birds’ guide, and he is the equivalent of a Sheikh in Sufism leading a group of Sufis. He answers each of the bird’s excuses with anecdotes, and each anecdote shows how their desires and fears are mistaken. 

Finally, the group formally accepts the hoopoe as a leader. They fly a little, and then before proceeding further, they ask him a series of questions about the journey. Again, the hoopoe answers them with anecdotes. Each answer contains two or three stories, illustrating the particular point the hoopoe is making. All the stories are linked together by admonition and commentary. 

The last questions are about the length of the journey, on which they must cross seven valleys. Why "seven" valleys? The number "seven" in Islam is significant because in the Koran it is the most repeated number after the number "One", which represents God. Seventh heaven, above which is the throne of God. Seven doorways to paradise, which are represented by the seven valleys in The Conference of the Birds, through which the birds must pass to finally reach God. The seventh day for ‘Aqeeqa’, one of the four stages in Sufism. Seven stages for the completion of man’s creation....

In The Conference of the Birds, Attar frequently stresses one doctrine: the soul is trapped within the cage of the body. It can reach God if it wishes, but to unite with God, the soul must look inward and make an internal journey to pass the seven valleys to reach God.

The journey is quickly completed. The birds reach the court of the Simorgh. But when they first arrive, they are turned back. Finally, they understand that the Simorgh they have sought is none other than themselves, and that they have completed their internal journey. 

The Conference of the Birds is beautifully written, and I highly recommend it. 

Qais Akbar Omar