Rating: 3/5

Alexis de Tocqueville is most well-known for his book Democracy in America, published in two volumes that were released in 1835 and 1840. Sixteen years later he turned his attention to the task of divining the root causes of his own nation's upheaval. The French Revolution required a leveling eye; its truths having been twisted, as they so often are, into convenient justifications for (or against) post-Revolution policy reform. But more than this, de Tocqueville recognized how compelling it was in the aftermath of a substantial societal eruption to shorthand the event; to shear off its complexities and deliver it up denuded of all but a tuft of basic rationales. And if history is meant to teach us, that sort of short-handing leaves only a half-lesson learned.

This is a brief, heavily-researched work that requires a bit of dedicated concentration. Examinations are made not simply of the administrations, classes and movements of the age, but also those leading up to the reign of the ill-starred Louis XVI. We are introduced to structures that eroded over time; aristocratic influence that did in fact diminish; safeguards that were lost as France attempted, long before its citizens thought to riot, to embrace a more equalizing vision of government. In fact, the most fascinating element of this treatise for me is de Tocqueville's theory that the initial, activated stages of much-needed reform are those in which a society is most vulnerable to revolt. That it was precisely because the peasant caste was finally receiving the empathy it deserved that it rose up in rebellion. That the revolutionary match was struck after the problems were laid on the table and had begun to be addressed. In short, once everyone (including the aristocracy) agreed such grievances were well-founded. As if the poor had finally received permission to be enraged.

It's an interesting book if you've got the time and focus it requires. I'd certainly consider it canon in the field of French Revolution writings...and also apropos as an application to studies of modern-day Russia.