Rating: 3/5

Better to marry than burn, St Paul said, but he didn't say what to do if you marry and burn.

Meet Stacey. She's mom of four, and wife of Mac, who is mainly a monosyllabic grump. She's also sister of Rachel from A Jest of God, which I recently read. Rachel, who is living in tiny Manawaka with her controlling, hypochondriac mother, envies Stacey and her marriage, children, and ultimately her freedom living in Vancouver. In this book, we see Stacey isn't so free-wheeling as her sister imagines.

It hit me early on that this is a Canadian, female version of Rabbit, Run. Let's face it, suburban family life ain't always what it's cracked up to be. I'm sure most people wake up at some point when the kids are fighting or the spark has disappeared from the bedroom or the house is a mess or money is scarce and they dream about when they were young and golden and the world was a hopeful, promising place, and think damn, is this IT??

Stacey feels trapped and alone. I get it. It was probably pretty groundbreaking when it was published in 1969. Somehow though, I didn't have the same connection with Stacey as I have with other Margaret Laurence heroines. Maybe it was partly to do with the format. For whatever reason, in this book (not her others, to the best of my memory) she abandons quotation marks. And, often, periods at the end of dialogue sentences. This gets a big ol "MEH" from me. In addition, there are many, many (many) interior monologues that are indicated by a "-". Then, flashbacks to Manawaka, the small town where Stacey grew up, are indicated by an extra indentation. Even halfway through the 300 pages, I still hadn't acclimatised to this system and found it annoying.

Plus, it is a bit too long. Too many of the same going-nowhere fights between Stacey and Mac. Too many long, interior soliloquies. It seems sacrilegious to say this about a Laurence book, but... it was a bit of a slog. I was also disappointed that she didn't describe the city of Vancouver with more love, care, and detail. It might have been set anywhere.

I've now read all the books from the Manawaka series - this is my least favourite. It's still Margaret Laurence though, and it addresses an everyday person experiencing the agonies of an everyday life, so there are worse ways to spend one's time.

I was myself before any of you were born. (Don't listen in, God - this is none of your business.)