Rating: 5/5

This book was amazing! This book had me thinking about my own teenage drama that is going on in my life. This book to me is really appealing to the teenagers because it's about the lives of some teenagers. What drug me into this book was the way the author in the beginning on page 10 of the book chapter 1 started off with dialogue and imagery and dove straight into the action of what was going on. for example in the text it said, "No! i shouted at the top of my voice. Stop Dakari. Please stop! He kept kissing me as if he'd heard me say yes instead of no." This made it hard for me to put this book down because it was interesting and i wanted to keep seeing what was going to happen. In the middle of the book i noticed how the author would switch in time frames. some authors double space, but the author of this book used lines to indicate time frames when you jumped ahead or you jumped back or to another subject matter. for example on page 102 of the book the last sentence before the line was "I know that if i focus half that much on my daily walk with god,my life would be a lot easier." Then the next line after said "There were about thirty people there everyone had talked about their outfit except lynzi." The author would skip around in places also so it would give me a visual on where everything was happening the setting that these characters were at. What i noticed about the book was that the author says this whole book in the perspective of teenage seniors and it can be appealing to other age readers because majority of the world had or has to go to high school and it unlocks some of the situations that might occur in high school. But i can relate to this book because I am christian too as well as the girl Payton so i knew what she was going through. And the struggles she had to face. I related to the when payton forgave starr on page 190 when she said, " Time to move on from that pain. " it makes me think about the situations i may have faced throughout high school and might have to face later on in the future and how i have had to let go just like she did. This book i say was an over all good book to me because i was interested in the drama the book brought and the problems and solutions, i would recommend this book to read because i enjoyed it.