Rating: 4/5

I had heard great things about this book from Brad Wilcox, who jokes that he quotes Hafen so much he should list him as a coauthor on The Continuous Atonement. I think because of that, I was a little underwhelmed when I started this book. I was also bothered by how often he used the phrase "Applying the Atonement," as well as some of his doctrinal theories and about Adam and Eve and the Atonement.

But I'm glad I kept reading, because some of these chapters are amazing. I particularly loved chapters 3-7, where I learned:
3. We shouldn't be disappointed when BYU, a temple marriage, or any other piece of the Church is not perfect. If life were always nice and comfortable, we would never learn from our challenges.
4. If we try to escape pain in search of constant entertainment, we will never find true joy.
5. We have a culture that focuses too much on success and outcomes, when we should focus on the journey, especially the relationships we build along the way.
6. Those who take commandments too seriously and those who don't take them seriously enough have the same problem: they are uncomfortable with their inadequacies. They think everything depends on their own effort, so when they mess up, they mask their pain by pretending they don't care about the rules or obsessively obeying even more rules. What they need to understand is Christ's willingness to help them in their helplessness, to be their strength, and to make them better than they could be on their own.
I still tell people about that last part I learned in chapter 6. I'd always had that question, and it finally makes sense. I also enjoyed how much he brought in European history to explain why we believe what we do (or used to) about our relationship with God.
I think the overall message is that we can find meaning, despite our shortcomings and trials, thanks to the Atonement of Christ. The gospel isn't about checking boxes and passing a test,
It's about becoming a better person through obedience and sacrifice.