Rating: 3/5

Ralph Bunche. Albert John Luthuli. Desmond Tutu. Nelson Mandela. Kofi Annan. Wangari Maathai. Barack Obama. Like Martin Luther King, Jr., they are among the black Nobel Laureates for Peace.

Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929-1968) was an American Baptist minister that led the African American Civil Right movement. He was born in Atlanta, Georgia where his mother used to tell him Martin, you are as good as any child in Atlanta. These words made the boy Martin dreamed high despite being born black. In this biography, he made references for the people who he got his inspiration from: Jesus Christ (his mother was a devout Christian), Gandhi (for his non-violence), Thoreau (for his effective civil disobedience) and Abraham Lincoln (for his earlier contribution on racial equality).

If I am not mistaken, this is my first autobiography book. Having read Antonia Fraser's Marie Antoinette: A Journey and Randy Taraborreli's Music and Madness: The Michael Jackson Story I think I prefer biographies. Because the book was written by the person himself and maybe because Rev. King was more of a speaker rather than writer, everything written here seems to be positive and mostly just stating the obvious. Then half of the book is mostly excerpts of his speeches. I was amazed reading the texts of his 1963 Washington famous speech, I Have a Dream so I even went to YouTube to watch and hear it for myself. There is nothing like hearing his bombastic and forceful voice compared to just reading the book.

For me, being an Asian in a Third World country, the legacy of Martin Luther King, Jr. is his inspiration to believe that it is possible to achieve racial equality in every nation. This is easily said than done and may take forever on a global scope. However, if each country has a Martin Luther King, Jr., little wins can accumulate and will result to bigger wins later as shown by one Peace activist (like Gandhi) inspiring King. Then one black Nobel Peace prize laureate like King inspiring another like Nelson Mandela.