Rating: 5/5

‘See, the nations count as a drop in the bucket, as a wisp of cloud on the scales; the coastlands weigh no more than a speck. . . . Before him all the nations are as naught, as nothing and void he counts them. To whom can you liken God? With what likeness can you confront him?’ (Isaiah 40:15, 17-18)

In her biographical novel, Saints and Villains, Diana Giardina does a masterful job tracing a probable spiritual journey of Dietrich Bonhoeffer beginning with his intellectual study of theology to the awakening of his conscience as the realities and complexities of life under the Third Reich unfolded. Giardina describes Bonhoeffer’s early pre-war life through the miserable years he spent living a half life as a spy, a ‘theologian of ambiguities’ patriotic in a higher sense, appearing a traitor by all outward appearances. Although he was misjudged by almost everyone—even those closest to him—what brought Bonhoeffer the most suffering during the war was his inability to take decisive action. When he saw such great injustices all around him, he could do so little: to help the Jews, his own family and friends, to end the war, even to eliminate Hitler. Giardina weaves other important historical characters into her story including: the great British Bishop George Bell and the young student conspirators Sophie and Hans Scholl (the White Rose) who were also martyred. I found the novel both moving and believable, despite it being fiction. I appreciated Giardina’s empathic rendering of Bonhoeffer the patriot who comes to see there is a higher duty than nation—as described many years ago by the Prophet Isaiah.

For the sake of the novel, the author introduces characters and composite characters and takes license with history which the reader not well acquainted with Bonhoeffer’s actual biography would be advised to note beforehand. This is a work of fiction, however much the author has tried to base it on the broader facts of a great man's life.

Most highly recommended!