Rating: 5/5

The play starts with the standard three witches, (which Shakespeare practically invented) plotting the assassination of Duncan. Why the King of Scotland is to be killed is never explained, the weird sisters (an appropriate name ) maybe they just like to cause evil, such a brilliant scene to see and absorb. Their tool is Macbeth , a lord and very ambitious man, married to an even more woman, Scotland in the mid 11th century is barbaric, bloody and with the greedy nobles perpetually fighting for the throne, the sword rules here. The English and Norsemen outsiders also battle for influence in that rough land , the tumultuous conflicts always ready to appear, death comes not infrequently. A great opportunity occurs when the king is to visit Macbeth's castle, in order to thank him for defeating the rebel Macdonwald. The Lady Macbeth urges her husband to kill the trusting Duncan , a weak ruler and seize the throne from his cousin. She implies that Macbeth is not a man and cowardly if he doesn't eliminate Duncan; hesitating his mind in turmoil can he kill his own kin, already a very important man, treachery wins ... deciding he wants the glory of the title, power is a magnet for the rogue . After the bloody deed is done, Macbeth is almost reluctant to slaughter more and more of his perceived enemies...Including the noble Macduff's whole family (Macduff had fled south of the border), there are an endless supply of opponents. But the former monarch's sons had escaped, Malcolm the eldest to England, Donalbain the youngest to Ireland, they can never forget... revenge will be so sweet. The deteriorating Lady Macbeth begins to sleepwalk, trying to wash the imaginary blood off her hands, when observed by her husband and doctor she says "Out, damned spot, out I say," a sad sight to behold for the new king, the strong woman evaporates, his circle of friends diminish as loneliness prevails. The tide turns a storm is brewing, forces are gathering in that troubled kingdom, Malcolm and Macduff, with the help of 10,000 English soldiers are coming. Macbeth is confident that he cannot be killed, the witches have promised him, would they lie? One of the greatest plays ever performed on any stage, Shakespeare at the top of his abilities contributes to the world of illusion.