Rating: 3/5

A little bit frustrating, as anyone who’s read “A Family Affair” (the final book in the Nero Wolfe series) might have hoped for a genuine continuation of the overall story, and this isn’t that. It’s three novellas, one of which isn’t even new; “The Bitter End” was published in 1940 and was already written and bound as a Tecumseh Fox mystery, with the title “Bad for Business.” “The Bitter End” is literally the same exact story, only instead of Fox doing the detective work, it becomes part of the Nero Wolfe series. I’ve read the novella, both the Fox &amp; Wolfe versions, prior to buying “Death Times Three,” and when I bought what was billed as the sequel to “A Family Affair,” but which wasn’t a sequel at all, I felt frustrated and like I’d wasted my time. Both “Bad for Business” &amp; “The Bitter End” were published in the same year, and a very lengthy introduction attempts to explain this, acting on the premise that it’s a treat to give readers what they already had access to. I disagree and felt the introduction went too far in trying to justify republication of a novella we’ve already seen twice, and certainly at least once, for the Wolfe series. The other two novellas are so-so— the plots are thin and the new clients and characters are thinner. There’s very little detecting to do, and much of it seems trivial. In one of the novellas, it’s clear that the only reason so much time is spent on the story is because Archie might have fallen for a woman in it. Stout also mentions that the woman’s name is “Tammy or Tammiris” so many times in a short story, that it becomes a source of annoyance to keep reading. This felt like a waste—I’d gotten excited about new book with genuinely original &amp; unique content, and this really just felt like I’d sent a donation to Stout’s estate (or whoever gets the money for this book’s purchase). Not worth the time or having to skip the first novella, which isn’t new for Stout or new to the Wolfe series. Frankly, had Stout not already had a renowned series, I doubt this set of three stories would have sold much or been well rated, but because of the way they were represented, I wanted time and money reading a book that really doesn’t add anything of value to the series. How disappointing this was.