Rating: 5/5

The Broken God is the first book of A Requiem For Homo Sapiens, a trilogy I regard as a kind of exploded view of Neverness (the 1988 novel that spawned said trilogy).

Neverness was a detailed work, with long, rich paragraphs that could so easily have been tedious, but never, ever, were. TBG is even longer, even more detailed, even more rich... and every bit as enthralling.

The backdrop, almost entirely this time, is again Neverness city - surely up there, alongside Nessus, Virconium, and The Last Redoubt, as one of the greatest genre cities imagined. Like those, it has that charm of far future barbarism and romance, the mystical and prosaic, ancient ritual, viciousness, and wonder. Like those it is isolated, and yet teems with life - the chaos of hundreds of different factions and races intermingling along its icy glidderies and in its dark cafes.

Danlo the Wild, son of Neverness's focus, Mallory Ringess (now a god), enrols into the Order of Mystic Mathematicians and Other Seekers of the Ineffable Flame (everything Hogwarts wished it would be when it grew up), where begins his friendship with one Hanuman li Tosh (surely one of the most tragic and doomed double acts in fiction) - wonderfully realised -for all the calamity and downright evil it engenders- in achingly subtle and introspective prose.

The world-building and characterisation are nothing short of staggering, in breadth, depth, and utter sincerity. As with Neverness, comparisons with Dune and The Book of the New Sun are inevitable and quite deserved (though there is less of the colour of Jack Vance than was noted with Neverness, perhaps because the setting here remains almost exclusively icy and grey-white), but -and again- these are only jumping-off points for something that is very much Zindell's work (more so here - Danlo is nothing like his father, and so nothing like Paul or Severian), brimming with philosophy and wise insight and the joy and terror of living a life worthwhile.

Perhaps it is trite to say, but I would dearly love to see these books adapted for screen.

Strongly recommended.