Rating: 5/5

It is impossible to review a book such as this one in a comprehensive manner without putting the information it contains into practice, so I reserve the right to revise my opinions in the future. That having been said, this nearly 50-year work in progress contains a wealth of information which will be increasingly useful as we enter into a post-peak oil world and people everywhere are under pressure to provide for their own needs using increasingly diminished resources. John Jeavons illustrates, as the rather long-winded full title makes clear, that almost anyone almost anywhere with access to a small patch of land can engage in fully organic subsistence farming without relying on artificial fertilizers, pesticides, or inordinate quantities of water or other resources. If enough people put these techniques into practice the results could shake the agriculture industry to its core.

The following quote, found in one of the appendices, neatly summarizes the author's viewpoint: "Chemical agriculture requires ever-increasing amounts of fertilizer at an increasing cost as petroleum supplies dwindle. The use of chemical fertilizers depletes beneficial microbial life, breaks down soil structure, and adds to soil salinity. Impoverished soil makes crops more vulnerable to disease and insect attack and requires increasing amount of pesticides to sustain production. 'A modern agriculture, racing one step ahead of the apocalypse, is not ecologically sane, no matter how productive, efficient, or economically sound it may seem.' Biointensive agriculture can sustain yields because it puts back into the soil those elements needed to sustain fertility. A small-scale personal agriculture recycles the nutrients and humus so important to the microbial life-forms that fix atmospheric nitrogen and produce disease-preventing antibiotics."

This books touch not only on the philosophy and general principles, but gives practical advice for what to plant, when to plant, and how to plant; how to control pests and disease; and even provides plans for how to construct the tools which will help facilitate the work described. A gem of a reference!