Rating: 2/5

companion to Amberwell and Summerhills

Will Hastings returns to his Scottish hometown of Torfoot after active military duty in and just after WWII. He has grand plans to reconnect with his dad and run the estate. Being home again brings back memories of his childhood best friend and almost brother Rae, who was killed in action in France. Everything has changed since those idyllic long ago days when Rae, Will and Rae's sister Patience running around the hills. When Patty reveals a mystery Rae left behind, Will just has to solve it. His search takes him of a wild goose chase to France where he discovers what he came for and much more. 

I really didn't care for this story much. It's very slow moving and I guessed pretty quickly what the mystery was. It solves problems a little too neatly. I skipped around and ahead to see it was an incredibly predictable story. While the descriptions of the French countryside are beautiful, the depictions of French characters are not. The French waiter is silly and stupid, the vinter is sloppy, the peasants ignorant but hard working and the mother incredibly tough and stubborn. Maybe I'm reading too much into this but it rubbed me the wrong way. Of course this is only for the secondary characters. The main character, Julie, is intelligent and hard working. The only English spinster is portrayed as a sad, lonely woman in need of someone to talk to. 

The entail annoyed the heck out of me. Patty clearly loves her home and the entail forces people into lives they may not want to lead. This would have happened to Rae if he had lived and it happens to Patty too. It's not fair. Why can't she inherit? It's all so unfair. 

The characters are all so superficial and boring. The one I really liked was Mrs. Murray Elliot and only because she's pleasant and cheerful in spite of dementia. I was also really bothered by the attitude towards someone with dementia. I can make allowances if they didn't know what that was but I'm pretty sure they did because I've read descriptions of "second childhoods" in sources much older than this book. Mrs. Elliot Murray clearly has early dementia stemming from the loss of her only son. Yes this book is dated. I feel bad for the Elliot Murrays that they lost Rae, but he seems like he was not my kind of person- a typical gentryman into outdoor pursuits as a child and then not really seeming to think things through or plan for the just in case. Will is as dull as dishwater. It takes him FOREVER to see what's right in front of his nose. Patty is equally obnoxious and too willing to sacrifice her future for the sake of her parents. Hugh comes across as condescending and the type who likes to mansplain but I don't think he's fundamentally a bad person. 

I really can't stand Julie. I did not understand her decision or why she made it. What kind of mother just up and leaves her child never intending to come back? Just because he's heir to a Scottish estate doesn't mean he can't visit France and vice versa. Why can't he go to school and have his Maman visit during short vacations and split long vacation between Scotland and France? I understand her decision to marry the winemaker but she seems to be replacing her child with her future child and that's just not right. I think she did fall in love with Will but realized Will and Patty are meant for each other and that's the big reason she went away.

I liked catching up with Stephen Ayerton and his cousin Emmie. It's nice to know what happened to them and Summerhills. That was the best section of the book. The rest is unmemorable and uninteresting.