Rating: 2/5

An interesting assortment of characters populates Victor LaValle’s The Ecstatic, everyone from the morbidly obese main character, Anthony, to his ninety-something grandmother who is periodically (and literally) strapped to various family members’ backs, to the precocious teenage beauty pageant contestant Nabisase, to Uncle Arms, the proprietor of an alternative pageant not focused on beauty but tribulation.

It’s been several days since I finished this book and three things remain with me. And, I suspect, none of these were the intent of the author, which I will discuss later.

The first aspect of the book that remains with me above everything else is the section on the duelling pageants in which Nabisase will participate. They serve as the heart of the book and where most of the action takes place. However, much of the action in this segment is derailed by Anthony’s interactions with Uncle Arms, whose own pageant may as well be called the Miss Misery Pageant. It rewards hardship and personal tragedy over beauty, while the Miss Innocence pageant rewards the “virtue” of virginity. Though Anthony and his family have personal tragedy, what with various family members suffering from mental illness, they own these hardships rather than letting these tribulations own them, thus giving them a sense of triumph and perseverance that might be lacking in others. In fact, the thirteen-year-old Nabisase owns her sexuality, and later in the book pursues an older man with the sexual dedication of one ready to explore. Furthermore, when Nabisase or Anthony strap their grandmother to their back, it isn’t with a sense of difficulty or hardship; rather, it simply is. It is just what you do to get through to support a family member. Overall, this section of the book, is entertaining, lively, and aptly portrays a family trying to get by.

This portrayal of the family is what brought me to the second most memorable part of the book, which was the believability of the grandmother and the action surrounding her. With any book, one must check believability at the door and accept the rules of the book’s universe. While it explores some of the zanier aspects of our world -- beauty pageants, dangerous weight loss methods, and a litany of odd neighborhood character tropes -- LaValle’s The Ecstatic is set squarely in this world. With a diminutive ninety-something grandmother of my own, I found it quite unbelievable that anyone would strap her to their back and walk around, whether or not they were overweight. In this book, the grandmother is carried around by both the overweight Anthony and by the thirteen year-old Nabisase. Maybe a large man might carry around his grandmother, strapped to his back, maybe…..but a teenage girl? Couldn’t anyone have found a wheelchair? A small complaint, yes. Despite this stretch of the imagination, it still made for several funny scenes.

Finally, I come to Uncle Arms, who is by far the most interesting character and the third aspect of the book that remains with me. He is a charlatan of the first order, who has adopted the affected persona of an uneducated Southern gentleman with a near-unintelligible drawl. Meant to remind his audience of the antebellum South and the subservient behavior of one descended from slaves, Uncle Arms uses both his race and his diminutive stature, to hide the fact that he is actually descended from one of the few black aristocratic families from the Old South. In the character of Uncle Arms, we see what might have been LaValle’s larger authorial intent in which we could explore both race and class. This character uses both to his advantage to reinforce his pageant audience’s expectations of how a black man should act, all the while hiding his own class background so that he can profit off of the audience’s biased and racist expectations.

Oddly enough, this felt like what should have been the heart of the book and this dip into race and class could have been explored more. However, it seemed as if LaValle actually intended to highlight obesity and mental illness rather than race and class. In other words, there was a tug between these four ideas (race, class, obesity, and mental health) that felt as if they were competing for the author’s attention. With the focus so much on obesity and mental illness, to some degree the question of mental illness, in particular, was still left unresolved. I suppose this might have been intentional as the specter of Anthony’s mental health lingers throughout the book and we don’t know how he will turn out. But we are left wondering what happened to Anthony’s mother. Again, was this intentional? If so, I would have liked to have a little more resolution. We didn’t necessarily need to know exactly what happened to the mother, but it would have been nice to have some element of conclusion with the character, especially since she was such a large part of the first section.

While questions of authorial intent remain for me -- and I would have liked more of the second section of the book, particularly with the pageants and Uncle Arms -- LaValle’s book succeeded as a first novel. Though I have only read two works by him (this novel and the novella “Lucretia and the Kroons”) and I liked the novella more, I will still continue to read LaValle. Several times throughout The Ecstatic, I found myself literally laughing out loud, chuckling to myself, or re-reading various parts because they were funny. LaValle also painted the characters in such a way that I have no doubt Anthony, Nabisase and the grandmother really exist and are still somewhere in Queens, New York, planning a trip to another pageant, though I doubt the grandmother is strapped to anyone’s back.