Rating: 4/5

I enjoyed this Campion much more than others I’ve read with the Reading the Detectives group. It returns to the building tension of The Tiger in the Smoke, as Inspector Charlie Luke follows a hunch to track down an elusive con man and killer. Campion is along for the ride during much of the day during which much of the action takes place, but he is more in the background (where he often prefers to operate, anyway!). Very enjoyable outing.

I very much enjoyed the early Campion mysteries when I read them decades ago, after seeing the PBS Mystery broadcast of Peter Davidson as the eponymous character. I bought many of her books when they were reprinted in attractive paperbacks, but got tired of what one member of our group described as Allingham’s self-indulgent writing. I often felt, though wonderfully descriptive in parts, in other parts she crammed in 15 words where 5 would have worked! But this more straightforward crime story really worked for me, after a very descriptive, but vague opening of a crime on a rainy London night left me wondering if we were off the rails, and I’d be floundering for chapters trying to figure what was going on. 

I was reassured by the start of chapter two, eight months later, as a Campion, now in his early 50s, visits a keyed up Charlie Luke at the request of his superior. Luke has got a pet theory about an elusive criminal operating in a London backwater neighborhood, the same neighborhood where the murder in chapter one took place - the killer was never caught, the police were stumped, but Luke is on the trail...okay, this was more like it! An innocent old lady, a young couple, and various others are (or have been) sucked into the murderous conman’s web, and Allingham does an outstanding job having the reader tag along as the killer weaves his spell around those he uses and manipulates to get his way. It was fascinating and powerfully done, and the tension grew to a climax.

I did listen to the audiobook as I read, but find some of narrator David Thorpe’s cockney voices really annoying. I’ve listened to him for other books, and he’s not so grating and strident- so I’m thinking it’s just his cockney accents that bug me!