no...there is no peace and no rest in the development of material interests. They have their law, and their justice. But it is founded on expediency, and it is inhuman; it is without rectitude, without the continuity and the force that can be found only in a moral principle (p423)

On the reread I feel that this unrelentingly bleak novel is the novel of the twentieth century, at least for a fair proportion of the population of the world, this could be the country of Heart of Darkness once it had achieved 'independence' or it could be  One Hundred years of solitude but told with earnestness and without optimism. As a student in class, we were given a cartoon strip version of animal farm, this differed in one way from the original - at the end instead of simply observing how the pigs and the men became indistinguishable - the animals rise up in revolt through the whole bunch out and restart the cycle with a different species promoted to the leadership of the free world..

The most striking feature of the text is that Conrad gets bored with a conventional linear narrative and chops it up in different ways. Events in the few few pages are revisited from a different perspective, towards the middle of the book and towards the end Conrad tells the political ending through flashback, the reader must infer some detail and make allowance for the peculiarities of the specific narrative voices in each case. An effect of this is to suggest that the detail is irrelevant, the big story about the country of Bird shit coast, so I loosely render Costaguana into English, is about international interests, structures and habits of power, ultimately avarice wins and while avarice is unlikely to take your confession with a cigarette drooping out of the corner of its mouth before you are dragged out and shot, it is violent and destructive enough in its own way, trumping here with ease the nineteenth century ideal of nationalism and patriotism with the simple logic that if you have enough money or more accurately access to international credit you can buy the most modern guns and make your own country -all you need do then is invent a new flag. There is a vision of the silver rich mine: She saw the San Tome mountain hanging over the campo, over the whole land, feared, hated, wealthy; more soulless than any tyrant, more pitiless and autocratic than the worst government; ready to crush innumerable lives in the expansion of its greatness (p.431). The archbishop advises his flock to think on eternal suffering, which in the context of the history of the Bird shit coast seems unnecessary advice - but he himself is infected with the same avarice in the form of desire for the restitution of the landed wealth of the church. One might wonder about politic,s but from early on we are shown that the political ideals that had half starved, near naked men fight and win armed with knives tied to sticks in the service of Garibaldi for a united Italy are out manoeuvred by Cavour, the only relief is that money can wash away the incipient proto-fascism of the admirers of Napoleon III too. Love also seems coloured by wealth, Nostromo's relationship with his designated wife demonstrated by gifting her the silver buttons off his jacket as something of sufficient value to her. Dr Monygham loves Mrs Gould, but his love is a kind of injury, felt as pain and a feeling he can only appreciate because of the experiences that have left him with PTSD. 

The shadow of de Tocqueville's opinion that all new regimes are built out of the bricks of the preceding one hangs over the narrative, escape from patterns and socialisation into violence, coercion and extortion is not to be found here. one of the few positive seeming characters is a bandit leader (and later minister of war), perhaps Hobsbawn's idea of social banditry was drawn more from this and memories of Robin Hood than from more conventional historical research.

One thread in the fabric of the twentieth century has been to hold men like Charles Gould up as heroes, but for Conrad, he is an adventurer - a member of a foreign legion, essentially alien and uncaringly destructive for all his claim of having been born 'here' implies some kind of kinship with the other citizens.

In short this novel is like a great bird that loosened its bowls across ideals of the nineteenth century, the vigorous splatter of which reveals the pattern of the twentieth century perhaps for all of us, since the banks must make their five percent, and to borrow their money you must meet their conditions what ever your own values.

I wonder having finished what Conrad might have made of the prospects of independent Poland, on the strength of this novel, I suspect he'd have felt no excess of optimism.

 reading notes:equally the debt replacements / credit-worthyness of the state, silver from the mine goes to USA banker who lent the money necessary to restart the mine.
Setting: bird shit coast - the country of Heart of darkness having achieved independence.

From the beginning Cavour and Garibaldi. Repression and violence. Power over gangs - backed up by violence as means to obtain more power - minister of war. failure of ideals? Weakness of ideals in the face of power politics. Technocracy - steam ships named after gods - a bit above it all.
Conrad chops up the narrative and by opening the way he does effectively allows us to see the folly of the settlers for what it is - cyclical narrative events in the opening pages repeated from another perspective pp160/200, the fleeing Ribera contrasted with the opening ceremony for the railway.
The mine itself is violence - a tear in the landscape - dynamite- 'if I can't have it no body can
 the continuous political changes, the constant 'saving of the country', which to his wife seemed a puerile and bloodthirsty game of murder and rapine played with terrible earnestness by depraved children (p73), yet this is a game we are all obliged to play
but you weren't born here Mr Gould to Mrs Gould
Kleptocracy.
silver tarnishes.
childlessness/infertility
violence/coercion as way of life/ men press ganged into army ( to fight for the mine? From which they receive no benefit)
railway - to carry silver to the docks more efficiently