Rating: 5/5

Really top notch. I only say underrated (McGahern has won several noteworthy prizes) just because I hadn't heard of him and didn't think he'd gotten the recognition he deserves this side of the pond.

The writing is beautiful- humane, poised, distant, appraising, tender, complexly simple, Chekovian, minutely realized, lucid, almost translucent in its knowingness, and the characters are drawn as near to life as you can get. They have inwardness- McGahern shows, he doesn't tell, and you see them as they fluctuate amid each other.

The title is from the rosary, of course, but its also the quietly frustrated, occasionally bitter and abusive state of affairs of Moran, the main character. Moran is a widower but he is also an ex-IRA solider, a fine and intelligent one at that, whose war is over in everywhere but the arena of his bitterness. He's surrounded by women- his three daughters, the middle aged Rose who, undaunted by his gruff, irascible, brittle broodingness, forthrightly agrees to marry him. Indeed, Moran would be the last one to admit it, but she does him the favor of his life by not only making the first move but consistently and selflessly devoting herself to the attention, friendship, and responsibility of Moran's only castle- Great Meadow, his proud and distinctly distant home, and his family where he is equally loathed and respected. It's so true to life. How many times has a friendly, wise, personable woman decided to align herself with a man who is anything but? McGahern captures this real-life paradox with knowing distance (she's a pushover, more times than she should be) and gentleness (she knows there's a better man deep inside Moran, if she could only cull him from Moran's piety, repressed self-hatred, and murky piety). There are two sons, Luke and Michael, who each have warred with the man (figuratively and metaphorically) and found some struggle of tenuous peace. Peace, I should add, which does NOT come dropping slow...

What started to really take over for me, as a reader, and maintained its pull was how I read this novel with that sort of hazy clarity which reminds you of moments in your own life which you'd forgotten or repressed for one reason or another. I hate to quote a book blurb, but I really do have to hand it to John Updike's luminous praise, given as the chair of an award panel: "McGahern brings us the tonic gift of the best fiction, the sense of truth- the sense of a transparency that permits us to see imaginary lives more clearly than we see our own."

When Moran is angry, disappointed, emotionally wounded, or confused he does what so many men (especially in the era in which Amongst Women takes place, the 50's) automatically do: with stoicism and almost unconscious deliberation, they go to the "cave", as it were. Be it the den, the tool shed, the bar, the garden, the tv room, whatever- they do not run away so much as stomp around inside themselves, mending or fixing or sitting somewhere alone and staring off into space. Moran tends to the fields- it's his cave, it's where he goes to puzzle things out, let off steam. it's where his privacy won't be violated. It's of course the once place where he doesn't violate the privacy of others, which is his curse, but it's also where he takes people in.

It reminded me of my grandfather, a stoic, pleasant, repressed, uneducated first-generation Swede who never said much of anything by way of conversation and was maddeningly trite when he did. I think I literally had 2 or 3 5 minute plus conversations with him about anything, and I tried, as did my mother and siblings, in the thirty years I knew him. Not a bad man, or a hard one, as Moran certainly is, but inscrutably... ordinary . One day we were standing on the carpet next to the tv when he said, apropos of nothing, "want to look at my tools"? Uh, sure, let's go. We walked down into the cool, dry, mostly empty basement. He opened the door to his 'shop', pausing to nod at the newspaper clipping taped to the door of soldiers raising the flag at Iwo Jima. "I was there when they did that" he said, ambling towards the shelves. (He wasn't, I have on good authority) We stood there as he pointed out his plastic shelves of tiny screws, different lengths of nails, and so on. He showed me his saws, hammers, screwdrivers, one by one. He explained how long they were and how one fit with its proper tool. I didn't say anything- I didn't have anything to say. He turned at one point and said it was his favorite place. "You could get lost in here". That's it. We walked upstairs and that's all I remember. 

Moran hides in his fields, in his solitude, because the country he fought for is taken over by "small minded gangsters", he refuses his government pension, he barks insults at the daughters whose futures he is frightened of and mistrusts. His constant insistence on praying the rosary is equally as intense as his "who cares, anyway" remark, which he makes on matters relating directly to him and to those around him. He's caught between an indifference he feels politically from the country he was proud of fighting for and has now somehow gone past him and the proud, sullen self-sufficiency he has spent a lifetime accumulating. He has the insecurity about appearances which equally, indelibly marks the intensely private and the deeply embarrassed (not the same thing). I don't know as much about 20th Century Irish politics as I ought to, but the point has been made to De Valerain Home Rule (enclosure, rural insularity, fetishization of old fashioned home and hearth). 

It does seem interesting, going through the novels which came before, how true it indeed is that the best and brightest seem to feel it existentially necessary to get the hell out of the emerald isle. Exile is a literary theme (and, often enough, political necessity!) all over the 20th Century. I wonder- is Mother Ireland (old sow, farrow-devouring) a microcosm? Or a symptom?