Rating: 5/5

Irwin Shaw is a master storyteller known mostly for such novels as “Rich Man, Poor Man” and “The Young Lions”. His storytelling abilities though were never more on display than in his collection “Short Stories, Five Decades”. I first read these 61 stories maybe 25-30 years ago. As I reread them this go-round I was struck by the fact that no one has ever bought the collection and tried to make a series of them for a streaming service like Netflix or HBO. Shaw must have led and interesting life because his stories run from World War II GIs blowing off steam waiting for the next battle, to barflies in New York City dives arguing about fighters, to couples skiing in the Alps, to the unhappy marriages of Connecticut country clubbers. There is something for every age and taste in Shaw’s writings.

I won’t review every story but as I’ve done with other collections I will mention the most famous or the ones I liked the most. Perhaps Shaw’s most famous was “Tip on a Dead Jockey” which was made into a film starring Robert Taylor. In it an ex-WWII pilot is offered a sketchy job paying $25,000 to smuggle money out of Egypt. Since his cash is running low he considers the job but declines when a horse on which he had been given a tip falls and kills the rider. Bad omen. Some weeks later when the wife of another pilot asks him if he has seen her missing husband he fears that the man took the job himself.

In “The Inhabitants of Venus” a man skiing in Milan becomes obsessed with revenge on a German he sees and whom he is convinced he first encountered years before when he was a teenager. He had an accident late in the evening on the ski slopes and the first person to come to his aid left him for dead when he discovered the boy was a Jew. In “Then We Were Three” two guys traveling together and a girl traveling solo in Europe join forces to travel as a trio seeing the sights but vowing that there would be no romantic relationship between either of the guys with the girl. How long do you suppose that lasted? “In the French Style” a reporter returns to Paris after a few months covering a story on the road. Hoping to immediately go out on the town with his reliable girlfriend he finds to his dismay that she has become engaged.

The human condition is on display in all of Shaw’s stories. “Searching Through the Streets of the City” was a touching story about a man and woman who meet two years after breaking up, each realizing they made a big mistake. The grasping wife of a boxing palooka nags him to accept a fight with a much better opponent for a bigger purse knowing he doesn’t stand a chance and could get seriously injured. And in “Weep in Years to Come” a man and woman dream of a future they know they can’t have with the war in Europe looming. 

Shaw moved easily from decade to decade and the final story of the book, “Circle of Light” shows that he made himself at home wherever he lived. In it a man sees a prowler outside his sister’s house one night. He doesn’t know who the man is but when the police come to the house to investigate he swears he would be able to identify the prowler. He gets the chance a few nights later when he sees the man hosting a backyard barbecue. Should he tell his sister? Call the police? Confront the man? I have a better idea. Read these stories and then call Netflix and tell them you have a great idea for a series. And I won’t even charge a finders fee.