Rating: 3/5

Somone gave me a Ludlum title and I didn't have anything to read, and I started on it when I took a flight to St. Louis. I was riveted and got on this Ludlum kick--I must have read six or seven of his books this past month. Something of a debauach, I admit. I decided to read all of his books in order; this is his second.

Some of his older stuff is somewhat dated, but his ability to tell a tell that keeps you reading is unparallelled. And the "About the Author" section of 'The Chancellor' Manuscript' has a wonderful note, by Ludlum himself, about how his twenty years in the theater helped his novel writing trememndously. 

Three families who live in a posh 'burb of New York; odd things are happening to each of them. A fourth family, the Ostermans, are coming in from Los Angeles.

The main character, John Tanner, is a news director for a major network. He is summoned to Washington, DC to discuss his network's FCC licence. When he arrives, however, he learns that he's been gotten to he nation's capital ona pretense, and he is recruited by the CIA to spy on his friends, one of whom, he is told, is a Soviet agent. He is forced to cooperate, and is told that his job is to find out which of his friends is the spy.

It's easy to underestimate Ludlum. The old "Soviet Spy Stuff" seems dated, clearly the political problems of yesteryear. And the technology--no cell phones, large main frame computers that use cards, and the attempts of middle aged men to be "hip" in the late Sixties and early Seventies all are anachronistic.

His characters, however, are not. The poele Ludlum creates are people we know and can believe in, and their fears and troubles are ours.

Ludlum has two types of plot--the story in which an ordinary person is caught up in an intrigue and grows to be capable of extroardinary action, and the "super spy" Jason Bourne stuff, in which the (actions) hero triumphs through superior training.

The author's best plots are the earlier type, the ones in which ordinary characters are caught up in extraordinary circumstances. 'The Osterman Weekend' is one of those books, and, despite the differences in age, time, and era, his story is one well worth reading. 

This is a page turner in the best sense of the word. 

I'd like to say I'm ending my "Ludlum debauch" and am going to get to more "literary" work, but I'd be lying. My next book is 'The Matarese Circle."