I didn't realize, before I started, that this is not a Peter Wimsey mystery. Actually, I really enjoyed it, after I'd figured out the difference. It's a collaboration between Sayers and one Robert Eustace—does anybody know anything about the nature of the collaboration? I found the intelligent, talented, but above all middle class (for want of a better term) characters quite refreshing and engaging, even the whacko ones. I also found the conceit of the novel's construction, as a collection of documents, kind of compelling—while it was impossible to read without bias, you did feel that you were a participant in a way that conventional first or third person narration doesn't allow.

I kept worrying that there would be a horrible twist turning my favorite character into the villain and was quite relieved when he got to the end with a clean conscience (apart from what he perceives to be treachery in narcing on his obnoxious friend). Wish I'd seen more of Elizabeth, too, as I quite liked her.
 
On a not-entirely-relevant note, I loved the conversation between the scientists and the creationists near the end, where the tangential Hoskyns manages an elegant balance of both:

"…all you people talk so cheerfully about Matter, as if you know what it was. I don't, and it's more or less my job to know. Go back again, go past your colloids and your sea-water. Go back to the dust of the earth and the mass of rotating cinders which was before the ocean even began. Go back to the sun… Go back to the nebula. Go back to the atom. Do some of the famous splitting we hear so much about. Where is your Matter? It isn't. It is a series of pushes or pulls or vortices in nothingness… Even your heredity-business is fortuitous. Why one set of chromosomes more than any other? Your chain of causation would only be a real one if all possible combinations and permutations were worked out in practice. Something is going on, that is as certain as anything can be—that is, I mean, it is the fundamental assumption we are bound to make in order to reason at all—but how it started or why it started is just as mysterious as it was when the first thoughtful savage invented a god to explain it." (pp 207-208)

I never know how seriously to take her science (is all that "optically active/inactive" stuff true?), and this was originally published in 1930, but I believe Hoskyns.
 
--------------------------

OK… I just looked this up on Wikipedia here and my questions are answered very briefly; "Robert Eustace" is Eustace Barton, who suggested Sayers use the polariscope to differentiate between organic and inorganic matter. The article says that "As a practising Christian, she was pleased with the religious-scientific theme offered to her by "Robert Eustace", which was based on the idea that the asymmetry of living molecules was an indication of the hand of God in creation.

"[The idea] touches the very key note of the mystery of the appearance of Life on this planet. There seems no escape from the conclusion that at some wonderful moment in the evolutionary process a Directive Force-From-Without entered upon the scene of Life itself."
 	— Dorothy L Sayers, Dorothy L Sayers: Her Life and Soul. Barbara Reynolds, Hodder &amp; Stoughton 1993 , chapter 15	
But also, the author of the article that Sayers wanted to make a much bigger impact with these very themes that struck a chord with me in the novel, and felt that she had failed to do so.