Rating: 1/5

Current popular ideas about depression frequently center around “low serotonin” and are the remnants of the outdated monoamine hypothesis that originated in the 1960s and stems from the (perceived)efficacy of monoamine reuptake inhibitors in treating depression. However, despite that fact that the human body is not as simple as the monoamine hypothesis would make it seem, it is still potentiated. Many “health” websites still perpetuate this theory in a way akin to the humor theories of the Greeks and Romans. Websites such as “Universityhealthnews.com” mislead with statements such as “If you’re feeling pessimistic, sad, distrustful, unconfident, or ready to have a panic attack, you may have a serotonin defeciency”. Serotonin is the new “sanguine humor”, and cortisol is the new “black bile”. Even PhD’s such as Joseph M Carver, on his website make outrageous claims such as “Your brain burns up more serotonin than it creates”. Julia Ross MA in her book “The Mood Cure” spouts the same monoamine montra, even going as far as to add monoamine deficiency to symptom clusters and phenotypes despite having zero clinical evidence. This type of literature is harmful and may contribute to decreased quality of life in those with depressive disorders. 

	The real pathophysiology of depression is farm more complex than any humor based ideas. Evidence suggests many neurological, immunological, endocrinological and psychological factors that may play a role in depression. The ability for the brain, immune system and endocrine system to interact is studied, and is the focus of psychoneuroimmunology. The lack of efficacy of tryptophan depletion, to produce depressive symptoms in non-high risk patients, as well as the inability of fenfluramine(the SSRA) to produce euphoria and alleviate depression fail to support the monoamine hypothesis. Serotonin receptor binding has failed to produce consistent results in relation to depression. Serotonin levels in the blood and CSF fail to differ between controls and depressed patients, further dampening any serotonin based hypothesis of depression.

This book is the largest piece of psuedoscientific bullshit I have ever read. I read it because some review I saw made me cry inside. Do not trust this harlets writing, ideas or dietary reccomendations. Amino acid therapy is ineffective in depression, and as evidenced by the EMS outbreak in the 80s are potentially harmful. See a real doctor for depression. Get real antidepressants.