"These are questions that, in the hurly burly of our daily tasks in school, we rarely ask ourselves"

"Practicing how to write the letter g is potentially no more or less boring than practicing how to kick a soccer ball or play a chord on a guitar."

"Parents can make a point of doing the homework assignments alongside their child(not doing it for her), and thus the can share the experience of coping with frustration or finding amusing ways to tackle a boring assignment."

"I am appalled by how rarely parents and students are invited into the conversation about what teachers should teach and what kids need to learn."

"Song by myself" de Walt Whitman si eleva deprimata careia poezia ii poate aduce un A.

"March comes in like a lion and goes out like a lamb".

"Have the legislature pass a law, or get corporate area and business support, to give every parent one or two days a year, as paid leave, to spend in their child's school seeing what and how their child is learning."

"Schools should create more multigrade classrooms, that place students at two grade levels in the same classroom."

Pornind de la poemul "Tyger" de William Blake, o eleva a scris poezia:
"Horse, horse, whhy do you have to work for humans?
Because my cousin, The Unicorn, stole my wings.
Why do you jump this high?
Because I try to be free, by jumping.
Why can't you fly?
Because as I told you, my cousin stole my wings - DUH!"

"Classrooms should be places where children should learn to talk(not to just sit quietly and listen)."

Un copil de 4-5 saptamani face sunetele lui si bunica lui il asculta. "You have to let him know that he's a juman being, and that when he says something, there's somebody listening. That's how he feels validated and he knows that his voice is significant."

brown nosing

"Since shy children have shy parents, overcoming shyness can be something that child and parent agree to work on together."

"So, if we want more kids to "talk" in class, and to do so thoughtfully, and be listened to with respect by peers, we need to treat the like people who have ideas worth sharing, people whose interpretation of ideas, based on their life situations, are intersting to us."

John Dewey quote: &lt;&gt;

"It is a too-often-used analogy to say that we pay millions of dollars a year to a baseball player who, as a batter, fails to do what he's supposed to do seven out of ten times."

chutzpah