Rating: 3/5

This is an interesting memoir about a man going blind due to retinitis pigmentosa, a genetic eye disease that he has passed on to one of his daughters. Both of them can still see, but Andrew Potok, the author, is losing his vision and can no longer do his art, painting. He is 43 years old.

He is desperate and when he hears about Helga Barnes bee therapy, where she boasts she can cure retinitis pigmentosa, he makes the decision to go to London, where he has distant family, and do her treatment. His wife travels with him, she has not been to London or met his family, and they attempt to reconnect. They have a strained relationship, she returns home after a few weeks, she asks him to come back with her but he stays. Despite their strained relationship she supports him in his decision. 

Helga Barnes is renamed from her real name Julie Owen, to avoid lawsuit. It shows the desperation, and utter obsession of someone faced with such a large loss. He goes through all the stages of grief on his journey. And, he brings his daughter for treatments, who is still sighted but fated to one day become blind like he is. It shows perfectly how desperate people reach for whatever might be a cure.

There is a four month period he reflects on, about his time at a live-in center to learn brail, to use a cane, and to navigate in his new blind state. This part is interesting, he is of a higher income and education status than the others in the group and he believes the managers of the program don't want him there. But he starts everyone talking to each other, and changes the dynamics, making some strong connections. And here he foreshadows his outside relationships from his wife, who is a ceramic artist. 

Reading gets tedious as he keeps going to this ranting woman who is obsessed and living in a psychotic bubble. After a long separation from his family back in Vermont, when his two younger children tell him how upset they were when he left he seems to have no understanding of their needs. In this total obsession he is narcissistic. This is true to his relationship with his wife as well, it seems they have an understanding, and he has a relationship with a woman in London while he is there. The book is well written, and probably the first book he wrote after his transition from seeing painter to blind writer, but it gets tiring to read with all his self-absorption. Before the end of the book he realizes he must learn to live with his blindness.