Rating: 5/5

This was a lovely set of Christmas novellas. Of course, Mary Balogh can't be beat. Her beautiful, tearful wishes really do come true at Christmas, and the story is beyond heartwarming. She combines a child's silent Christmas wish with a second chance love and does it with literary perfection. 
Then there is Mistletoe and Folly by Sandra Heath, who delivers another wonderful second chance novella. Richard is shocked when he unexpectedly, in a mere act of kindness, comes face to face with the woman he has never forgotten. Diana left England without a word and Richard Curzon heartbroken and bitter. She had reasons, but can he forgive them? 
Then there is the delightful The Christmas Cuckoo by award-winning novelist Mary Jo Putney. What does one do when a domineering aunt, who happens to be a haughty countess, decides to turn her newly titled nephew into an acceptable Lord of the Realm? Major Jack Howard is met upon his return to England by The Countess' pompous secretary and her long list of to-dos. If you are the major, you take the next stagecoach out of London bound for who knows where with a friendly passenger who shares his Christmas flax of undiluted whisky with him. Jack wakes in a quaint farmhouse with an obliging Miss, who believes him to be Captain Jack Howard, a friend of her brother. When the Major attempts to explain, Meg is far too busy to listen, preparing for Christmas and her brother's arrival. And this Jack is becoming attached to the quaint household. 
Melinda McRae brings us a sweet story of a prodigal son who, after 16 years, returns home to find his family away for Christmas and might have just found what he has been searching for all these lonely years by way of the governess left behind. 
Last but certainly not least is Edith Layton's The Dark Man, where Miss Eve Swanson comes to London with her father, a younger son of a title gentleman and finds herself betrothed to the most sought-after bachelor in the ton, The Earl of Poole. With no town bronze, Eve falls victim to the envy and spite of her ambitious cousins, who believe she is unworthy of the Earl, and she calls off the betrothal. Her distraught and embarrassed parents banish her to the north country. But the earl truly loves the young lady, so what will a gentleman, who always does exactly what is expected of a titled gentleman, do now? 
It is unusual to enjoy all the stories in an anthology. However, maybe it was due to the Christmas theme or the fine selection of authors, I'm not at all certain, but I enjoyed all 5.