Rating: 4/5

Thirty-something scientist, Michael Blasco, is your typical all work/no play type. He is involved in a love affair that's gone well past its sell by date, mostly owing to his neglect, and his current research project involves the sort of animal testing that even he seems a bit squeamish, if not rueful, over. One day, on his way home from the gym, the personal trainer about whom he fantasizes appears to him on the tube platform and performs an ad hoc striptease seemingly as a result of Michael's thoughts. In short order, Michael discovers that he can create a doppelganger of anyone on the planet (living, dead, real or fictional) who must do exactly as he pleases. After the initial shock and disbelief wear off, he warms to the idea and wastes no time in calling up a variety of "doubles," including his boyhood wet-dream, Tarzan (as played by Johnny Weismuller), a Jessica Rabbit-like cartoon character, Lawrence of Arabia, his own American military man Father (on whom he was sexually fixated as a boy), Billie Holliday and, most memorably, a totally manic go-getting Pablo Picasso. 

Of course, much like the experiments he performs on helpless animals, his manipulation of these people is not without its ethical ambiguities and complications. Each person reacts differently to his overtures and, despite their obligation to obey him, almost none of them acquiesce happily. Slowly, with each encounter, he begins to learn valuable lessons about consideration, responsibility and relationships. In the end, rather than being corrupted by his newfound powers, he comes out a better, more caring, person. 

Lust is a rewarding book on so many levels. It has a lot of humour, partly as a result of the absurdity of its premise but in larger part due to the hilarious, whimsical characterizations which are the book's major strength. Every character, whether based on a real person or a complete fiction, is wonderfully alive and completely unique without ever once stepping over the boundaries into caricature. Increasingly I find fictional characters (particularly those in queer literature) to be bland and difficult to distinguish from one another, with the unfortunate exception being the token outrageous, flamboyant stereotype, but the people in Lust are absolutely 100% believable individuals. Even Picasso, the book's most over-the-top creation, is a total delight. Reading it, I felt as if Ryman really knew these people. 

In addition to the humour, the book has a lot of heart and is surprisingly romantic. It examines religion, destiny, self-acceptance, relationships (familial and sexual) and responsibility. It has a protagonist who, while not always likable, is extremely easy to relate to, understand and even sympathize with. In many ways, he is just an average guy in extraordinary circumstances. If you like your queer lit with a dose of fantasy, humour, philosophy and/or romance, Lust has something for you.