Rating: 5/5

This book is 40 years old, but it holds up better than most baseball books would after 40 years. Why? Because it tells stories of baseball players no one ever heard about in the first place. Players come and go, but baseball is timeless. Kahn's book reminds me of this universal truth.

Lucky Roger Kahn. After hitting it big with Boys of Summer (an excellent book in it's own right), he's offered the opportunity to become owner of the Utica Blue Sox, an independent class A team in the New York-Penn League. Other teams are affiliated with major league teams that stock them with players. The Blue Sox, as an independent team, get their players through an agreement with a Texas baseball talent agency. The Blue Sox play in a municipal stadium where the stands are all bleachers and the player seating in the dugout consists of 2x1o lumber bolted to iron supports. The clubhouse is so cramped that many players change at home before arriving. The team comes complete with a reputation for not paying its bills, so the only bus company that will even agree to transport them insists on payment up front, as well as the option of providing a school bus on dates where other customers have already booked all the coaches. For the sum of $15,000, Kahn becomes majority owner and team president. He's a hands-on executive. His office is in the same former house trailer, parked behind center field, which houses the general office and the ticket sales division. 

The book proceeds chronologically through the Blue Sox' short season schedule, June through August, with playoffs for the league championship extending into September should the team qualify.

The early parts of the book recount the business frustrations of trying to run a business which is a sport. It's a fascinating look behind the scenes which parallels the chicaneries that afflict honest business people anywhere - lyin' politicians, schmoozers who want something from you, irate minority stockholders, the difficulty of building team spirit in the business organization when employees are working for $800 a month, that sort of thing. Kahn recounts it engagingly, with the through line that it's all in the service of the team and the game.

The really interesting part is watching the development of the team's identity and cohesiveness. Surprisingly, these players have nothing in common with the bad news Bears. One might suspect that, as players passed over by major league organizations, they'd be unrealistic youngsters or old men with nothing else to do with their lives, bumblers all. Not true. The book deserves it's title, which surfaced in a conversation between Kahn and his general manager (who also serves as office manager, bookkeeper, and diligent guardian of team property, doling out balls and bats with miserly suspicion). She knows some of the players from previous seasons. The new owner asks, "How good are these guys really?" She responds, "Good enough to dream."

In fact, they're very good. One of the truths of the book is that, historically, major league scouting leaned too heavily on the eye test. Did these guys look like ball players? Often, not so much. Too short. Too long-haired. Too round. Could they play? The answer is a resounding "yes." Kahn insists that the team’s closer could close in the bigs. Team batting average for the season is north of .300, and some players hit .380. Are they professional? Absolutely. Almost all are driven by the desire to prove the major league scouts wrong. Most of the other teams in the NY-Penn League are major league farm teams, so the Blue Sox take particular pleasure in trouncing their rivals while the major league scouts are watching. 

The book could devolve into a tiresome recounting of what happened in this game, followed by what happened in the next series. For the most part, it doesn't. There's enough particularity to lend authenticity, but that's not why the reader is here. As team president, Kahn is absolutely serious about winning. It's fascinating to see him become arbitrator when tempers flare, conciliator when feathers are ruffled, morale-builder when cohesiveness is frayed. One example: he institutes, at club expense, an after-game beer bar where every employee, from the grounds-keepers (three 20-something part-timers) to the players and coaches to the front office staff each receive two free beers. It’s a great way to release the tension of the game, and it keeps the players from heading straight from the game to the bar. 

The season consists of three months of baseball played every day. Luckily for the author, the season proceeds along a story arc that would be judged too good to be true if it were fiction. The Blue Sox pound the opposition and are eight games up after one month. The race tightens until they fall into a tie for first place. They exchange places in the standings with their chief rivals throughout the final month. I won’t reveal the ending, but suffice to say that much tension and emotion are involved.

In the end, I don’t read a sports book to find out what happened. Who cares whether the 1982 Utica Blue Sox won the pennant? I read it to find out how the people who made it happen did or didn’t negotiate the challenges and interpersonal dynamics that occurred along the way. I read it for the style as well as the substance. Roger Kahn is one of the finest baseball writers I’ve read, right up there with Roger Angell. Baseball fans will enjoy this book.