Rating: 5/5

Oddly enough, this book first caught my attention because I've been tearing through Eric Flint's 1632 series and noticed Sorceress of Karres shelved alongside them at my local library. Out of curiosity I did some checking on goodreads and was surprised to find that the book was not only a sequel to another author's work but to a book that is now almost 50 years old. Doubly intrigued I reserved a copy and I'm certainly glad I did. This book is a rare gem among older science fiction, particularly the mid-20th century variety, it doesn't show its age with goofy antiquated "future" technology or silly dialects and literally feels as if it could've been written last year. Partly, I suppose that this is because it is as much a fantasy book as a science fiction book, but mostly it's because the author's writing is funny, imaginative, and clever, and his characters are delightfully quirky and likeable.

The story follows Captain Pausert, a young man from the very proper sort of planet (Nickeldepain) on his way back from a profitable trade voyage, hoping to repay a rather unfortunate debt and win the right to marry his secret betrothed. His life takes an unexpected turn when he encounters a girl slave being attacked (he thinks) by her master, whom he accosts. Surprisingly, he finds the owner and the planetary authorities practically giving him the strange girl (Maleen), and being a decent sort, the Captain agrees to buy her so he can return her to her home planet, Karres. However, she has other ideas and demands that he free her sisters as well (Goth and The Leewit). Two bizarre (and cheap) exchanges later, the three girls are in his charge and all seems well as he sets course for Karres. However, he's barely off the planet when it becomes clear that the girls not only exceedingly powerful witches (with amusingly bizarre powers) but that wherever he takes them, trouble is bound to follow as Pausert finds himself hunted by practically every malevolent power in the galaxy, from the horrific alien Worm World down to the pirate king Agandar.