Rating: 3/5

I picked this up from the tables of second-hand books underneath the bridge outside the National Theatre on the South Bank - I'd been queuing for theatre tickets, and had blasted through the final chapters of the Wooding book, so thought I'd pick something up to keep me entertained for a bit longer. I've never read any Farmer before, but a friend had recommended him recently, and I didn't want to buy something that was an orphaned part of a series, so at two quid this seemed like a good buy. Plus I fancied a bit of old fashioned science fiction.

I'm a big fan of the end-of-the-world thing. Moorcock's Dancers at the End of Time, Clarke's City and the Stars, that kind of thing, so this was always going to appeal to me. Having said that, I was surprised by how old-fashioned the whole thing felt, even though it was first published in the early eighties. There's a fairly traditional quest thing going on, at least to begin with, not to mention some questionable sexual ethics (although they are, to a certain extent, explained away within the book as part of the degeneration of humanity. Still rankled a bit, though - I suspect that, since my complaining about Veteran, I'm paying more attention...)

That issue aside, however - and it only pops up occasionally, generally there isn't a problem - the book bangs along quite entertainingly. It feels like Farmer has thrown everything into his writing, dropping ideas and characters and settings in whenever he feels like it, and the energy helps to gloss over the repetitions of plot which are a little too prevalent in the first half of the text. There's an annoying tendency for our lead characters to set off on a bit of a quest, get to the end of it, then suddenly have to head off again because someone has stolen the thing they were looking for and run off again. Every journey is interesting, and Farmer gets to show off his (often very impressive) ideas, but it all felt like a pretty flimsy framework for a bunch of entertaining scenes. To be fair, towards the end of the narrative things get a bit more focused, and I certainly found it hard to put the book down, so it can't be all bad. I just had to accept that it's about the journey, not the destination or the characterisation.

I read a nice tatty old paperback, and felt like I was about twelve again, the first week of June. Look like it might be out of print, but I'm sure there are lots of nice tatty secondhand copies out there for you to own as well.