Rating: 4/5

Usually I just breeze through military history, but this was very affecting. Horne has that novelistic eye for the pathos of everything human--for even something as dry-sounding as the fluctuations of French army tactical doctrine 1870-1940. Horne shows you the sadness and helplessness behind the old cliche, 'generals are always fighting the last war.' The French army is bottled up and surrounded in fortress towns like Sedan and Metz by the Prussians in 1870--so in the years between then and 1914 a mindlessly aggressive, chauvanistic faith in the holiness of attack, and a contempt for fortifications or defense or even tactical retreat, holds sway among the French officer class--and you can guess how successful those ideas were against machine guns and massed artillery, once WWI started. The incredible carnage and loss of manpower of WWI then swings the pendulum the other way, and France re-commits to fortresses and static defense, and builds the Maginot Line, a relic that is then simply driven-around by the German panzer corps in 1940.

 The defining choice of the battle of Verdun was General de Castelnau's decision to defend the city, to pick up the German gauntlet, a choice Horne doesn't see as very wise--but de Castelnau was a young officer in 1870, had witnessed the headlong rout of the French army and was fearful of what might happen if he ordered a retreat from a city of great symbolic importance to French history. There is something so poignant about how military officers are shaped by the traumas of their early careers, when they are young and powerless witnesses of defeat and incompetence. One thinks of Colin Powell's doctrine, which states that the US should only commit itself to war when it has overwhelming force, a definite political goal and an exit strategy. A junior officer in the 1960s, Powell wanted to avoid another Vietnam; they heeded his doctrine in 1991 but, as we know, in 2003 even Powell seemed to forget it.

All war is sad, but there's something about WWI (and the American Civil War) that strikes me as especially tragic. I think it's just how unprepared Americans in 1860 and Europeans in 1914 were for what was about to overtake them. They spent years grimly performing quaint, outdated, "heroic" tactics with industrial weapons that had rendered the use of such tactics nothing short of suicidal. That disparity, that failure to come to grips with a merciless new order, that suspension in a bypassed culture, is for me a powerful image of human bewilderment before change, and time passing. Horne is very well placed to represent this as he was an officer in WWII, and one of his recurring themes is how differently things were conducted (when it came to infantry tactics) in the war he fought in. They had finally faced up to the bottomless destructive capacity of modern war.