Rating: 3/5

Honestly I had more fun than I expected reading this book. Which is surprising given that it was in no way, shape, or form historically accurate. It took me out of the book a little bit whenever Violet casually undressed and redressed in the span of five-ish minutes. Do you know how many layers people wore back then?? There were straight pins involved no one was this casual about undressing. Also, women didn't wear any underwear so there was really no point. You could always just ... lift up your skirts and get going. 

But anyway, my main problem was that there were never enough servants! The aristocracy at this time were rolling in servants. You couldn't turn a corner or look behind a bush without seeing a servant. And yes, I know that Ford is poor or whatever, but still! I would expect at least five servants in that house of his, not two. And Violet is rich! Where is her lady's maid? Her chaperone? Etc etc! Like no single viscount in the entirety of the 17th century ever knocked on a door himself, especially in the rain. There are *peasants* for that. Like I honestly cannot express how much the servant thing annoyed me. Like other than the fact that there simply weren't enough, Chrystabel was super friendly with all her servants? I'm not saying that no aristocrat ever was friendly to their servants, but ... actually maybe that is what I'm saying. And there were so many golden opportunities for some class commentary, all of which were IGNORED. I know I am one of the few people who enjoys class discourse in my romance novels but I really, really, really enjoy it and it disappointed me to see an opportunity wasted.

To conclude this review, I include some of my stream-of-consciousness notes I took while reading the first few chapters (before I got sucked in like a ship into an enormous whirlpool):
**For the real, authentic vibe, these are directly copied from the notes app on my phone
1. Isn’t a Ford chase a car? Idk I’m bad with cars
2. No noble man in the 17th century knocked on other people’s doors HIMSELF there are servants for that
3. “It’s time you grew up and realized there is more to life than science and seduction” I'm CACKLING
4. WHERE ARE ALL THE SERVANTS
5. how is this mother so chill and cavalier with her daughter’s virtue
6. Seriously where the fuck are the servants. 
7. I am not on board with this alchemical pseudo history

So, yes, I enjoyed it but I would have enjoyed it *more* with the appropriate number of servants.