Rating: 5/5

Mio Dio! What a book! My heart is so full right now, I can't stop smiling. It feels like quite some time since I've felt compelled to write a review, but I simply must talk about Prince of Foxes.

This was sublimely entertaining. From start to finish. I devoured it, page after page. My fingers have been glued to the cover. (Honestly, I nearly gave myself eye-strain over this one. It was that bad.) The pace is wonderful, the writing is just so exquiste that I had to caress the pages. And it has, as I said, left me with an inner warmth I am going to relish for as long as possible.

This was a Goodreads recommendation for me, and proved to be exactly what I needed. I think I've fallen a little into my own trap. Too many dreary stories, too many broken or doomed characters. I desperately needed some uplifting. And the exhilarating exploits of Andrea Orsini and (my darling son) Mario Belli have been the perfect balm.

Andrea, the crafty Prince of Foxes, seems at first very one dimensional. His talents are limitless. Master of art, stategic mastermind, master of dance, you name it, this man has perfected it. But while in most cases, this might make him a bore, he is impossibly loveable. I found his downfall, his self-reflection and loyalty very endearing. I tried not to like him! But the cunning fox wins again it seems. But my favourite, by far, is the wonderful devilish assassin Belli. Every scene he was in made my facial muscles ache from smiling. 

Gosh but there are so many fantastic characters in this story! I don't know where to begin. The silky, cold, terrifying charm of Cesare Borgia! I confess I was eagerly anticipating his entrance. (I have a thing for historical bad boys...) He is gorgeously written. And the female characters were a real pleasent surprise too. Madonna Milla is sharp, she is strong and touchingly mischievous. While she does fall somewhat into that time old damsel in distress trope, I found her pleasently complex enough to hold my interest. But most of all, I REALLY liked Angela Borgia, she was full of wonderful menance and cunning. Watching Andrea try to untangle himself from both Angela and Cesare's intriciately spun webs was enormously good fun.

Drawbacks? Weak points? Yes, there are some. Seraph, the young blackamoor servant made me feel very uncomfortable. I found myself wishing I could edit out those sections as they really hampered my enjoyment of what is otherwise a fantastic story. Having been spoilt with such an array of detailed, lovingly composed characters, I was left wishing that Seraph could have been treated in kind.

Overall, my first swashbuckler has won a solid place in my heart. Curiosity sparked, I am off to read up on those scheming Borgias...