Rating: 3/5

Hey look it’s a Christmas read! I didn’t think I could fit one in, but here we are. I’m way more on and off with reading at this point but I wanted at least one. I picked it myself, wanting something simple and easy,

Here we have a 1994 Scholastic book by Dian Curtis Regan. She’s done other holiday books like My Zombie Valentine and Home for the Howlidays. She’s still doing this and has a website. Someone I follow covered those books and they seemed to good so I wanted to check it out. 

It focuses on Ben, a kid who recently moved into a new house. In the attic, he finds a vampire named Zander who had been crashing here. Turns out he’s a good vampire who is even on the run from the big head vampire he used to work for. The two hit it off and try to spend the holidays together even as the threat of the head vampire looms.

So this was good. It felt sort of like an early DCOM, in that Under Wraps sort of way. Like, you got this kid bonding with a vampire who is good and turns out to be a father figure. Dad is around but gets a bit busy. We even get him missing this important recital, yes it gets that 90’s.

It’s cliche and corny but in all the charmings ways. It can be nice but doesn’t get too shchamltzy with it. The two have fun interactions and in general there is good humor and writing. Dian has a solid talent for combining these elements pretty well. 

It won’t be for everyone, especially if you find the cliches eye roll worthy. The way the villain is defeated is insane, so goofy and corny that you’ll ever love or hate it. I love it, mostly for being a big bowl of “that’s it?”. There are few spots where they do cap off a side thing but in a more mundane way.

There’s this neighbor girl he finds annoying and her last bit is actually nice but I was hoping she’d play a bigger role. The ending is a nice wrapup but is a bit abrupt, I wanted to see the full fallout. His dad doesn’t get to fully appear and I wanted to see how that would go.

But overall, it’s a nice read. Corny but charming. Mostly due to the writing which keeps a solid balance of humor and other stuff. A pretty typical story for most of it but a fun one. The Christmas element is good, enough of the usual things and the spirit does come through by the end.

You won’t get anything too new and it won’t be to everyone’s taste. But it was a charming read for what it was. Although the title is amusing as it refers more to the head vampire than the main one.

But yeah, that about does it. There could be one more misc read before the year ends but that’s a big maybe. In general I’m more hit or miss with reading as I am more focused on other stuff and more easily distracted. Once things clear up in the new year, we’ll see where I go with these reads. For now, this could be a good note to end the year.

No idea what could be next so don’t ask lol. Until then, Merry Early Christmas.