Rating: 4/5

Oh Conan. I was wrong about you, and I am so very thrilled that I was.

You're not a macho fantasy devoid of interesting ideas that I'd always cast you as. Instead you're the meeting point between the childhood hot cocoa of sword and sorcery tales, and some dark and strange new way of telling stories. You lulled me with a world full of ancient mysterious ruins, bustling desert towns, and cosmic glittering treasure. Around every corner lurks another pretty girl, or evil sorcerer, or a band of ruthless pirates. 

Howard's language is as rich as his world. From the first quote - which eloquently described our titular Cimmerian literally squashing civilisation under his big fat sandalled foot - I was totally on board. There's a sombreness in these stories that never rings false. There's surprises in these pages too - concepts such as alternate dimensions, the illusion of civilised power, and the nature of death - and I was pleasantly surprised to find Conan's world holding up as a pulpy reflection of my own.

Conan himself was another surprise. I was prepared not to hate him, but worse, to be bored by him. And there is truth to this prediction. Conan is a character built out of repetition. Howard tells me that he's strong. Howard tells me that he's uncivilised. Howard tells me that he is better than his civilised foe. On the whole it works like a mantra, or a myth. It's almost like a herald chanting the particular truths of this universe.

And it's satisfying watching it come true. When Conan survives his foes and outsmarts his enemies (and SPOILER he does, every time in this book) it's not dull at all. In fact it's wonderful. Conan's world bends to him continually, and how often in this post-modern world does that happen to a character outside of Forrest Gump? 

The only story I did not like in this collection was 'The Vale of Lost Women'. I've read Keely's review, and I think he makes a fair intellectual point about modern political correctness, but everything in me loathes that story. I hold no grudge towards the author for writing it - other people have mentioned the time and the norms of Howard's age - but I firmly believe it's something I did not particularly want staining my mind. I know if I ever were to buy a copy of this book, I'd cut that section out with a scalpel. Sorry not sorry guys.