Rating: 5/5

Carry On Mr. Bowditch has been a huge part of my life since childhood, though I didn't fully appreciate it till I reread it as a teenager. For me, it’s one of those books that is so wonderful and beloved that it’s an impossible task to write a review that captures the book or does it justice. But I’m going to try, and hopefully my review will be adequate and worthy.

When Nat Bowditch is forced to quit school at age 12, he thinks his life and dreams are over. He’ll never be able to make something of himself, attend Harvard, or become a mathematician and scholar like he wants to be. But he refuses to give up or give in. He keeps working hard to learn, grow, and better himself--somehow, some way--with the help of people who support him in his endeavors along the way.

From boyhood to young manhood, Nat faces great tragedy and adversity, but through it all, he chooses to keep his hope and determination, to keep going through it all. Eventually, he reaches his new goals and dreams. They are not the same ones he dreamed as a boy, but they’re not so different, either. And they may be higher and better things than he ever could have imagined.

Carry On Mr. Bowditch is the true story of a quiet but fiery American hero, who saved countless lives and changed the world by revolutionizing navigation and sailing. His exceptional intelligence and immense skill with mathematics--and his hard work, determination, and grit--enabled him to succeed in creating scientific innovations other mathematicians had tried and failed to reach for hundreds of years. He reached this achievement as a young man, but his hard work from boyhood prepared him to succeed.

Jean Lee Latham’s fictionalized biography of Nathaniel Bowditch accurately captures the story, character, and humanity of the real Mr. Bowditch, with heart, humor, powerful depth, and quality writing. Carry On Mr. Bowditch is an engaging nautical adventure, with a gentle but steady pace, interspersed with laughter and exciting anecdotes. 

The skilled, understated writing conveys Nat’s emotions with subtle power as he goes through hardship, and the author captures his bright and strong spirit. The real Nat’s personality, good nature, liveliness, strong moral character, values, and relationships are accurately and touchingly portrayed. Nat Bowditch himself steals the show for me, but I also love the fascinating, endearing portrayal of his interactions and bonds with the people close to him, including his family--especially his sisters and wife--his mentors, and the rough sailors he inspired with his leadership, as their teacher, and later as their captain.

The story of Nathaniel Bowditch inspires and challenges me to pursue my dreams with dedication and hard work, to do everything with excellence and passion, and to strive to be kind, patient, and loving towards everyone I meet, even when we all sometimes fail. Nat’s temper might blaze suddenly despite his good nature, but he always strives to overcome it--and most of the time, he uses his kindness, heart, and generous nature to understand and care about others. 

I admire how Nat used his intelligence and skill with mathematics--and with people--to give back to others in return for the help and support he received from successful people as he grew up. He spent hours, days, and years of his life teaching others what he’d learned himself. Even though he was one of the most brilliant people who ever lived, he cared enough to teach mathematics and navigation to sailors who couldn’t do more than add and subtract on their fingers, purely to give them the chance of gaining a better position in life--the same chance Nat was given by people who helped him. While teaching them mathematics, he taught them to believe in themselves and not give up. And he didn’t stop there--he worked longer and harder to write a book teaching navigation to any sailor who wanted to learn--a book which was vital and revolutionary in Nat’s time and which has been the worldwide authority on navigation ever since. Sailing was dangerous and claimed countless lives. Nathaniel Bowditch’s American Practical Navigator made sailing infinitely safer. It’s simple, clear, and accurate--and better than any book written by centuries of famous scientists. And it includes a revolutionary discovery he made on his first sea voyage as a young man. Nat spent months eradicating the numerical errors contained in every other book, errors that meant life and death for the men who relied on them. He worked tirelessly for years to write his book, fueled by passion and drive to save lives, even when everyone he knew thought he was crazy and believed no one could improve sailing or make it safer. This was the culmination of his achievements in navigation, though not in science and mathematics--he continued to study and achieve his entire life.

I relate strongly to Nat’s experience of having my life, future, and dreams destroyed at a young age. I aspire to his refusal to give in and his drive to pursue and achieve goals that should be impossible, both for someone in a situation of unique hardship and for everyone else in the world. Nat Bowditch inspires me to hard work, determination, a fiery spirit, and unquenchable hope. He shows me that I’m not crazy for striving to reach dreams deemed unattainable by the rest of the world--or rather, we’re both crazy in just the right way.

Carry On Mr. Bowditch is a fabulous read for readers interested in historical fiction, sweet families, charismatic protagonists, and seafaring adventures. Though it’s written at a middle grade reading level, it can be enjoyed by all ages. It follows Nat into early adulthood, and it has depth, thoughtful themes, and fascinating story and characters that will appeal to adults as well. Readers young and old will be impacted and inspired by Nat Bowditch’s story.