Rating: 2/5

The summary of this book was really original. I thought it was weird at first, but decided to check the book out anyway and give it a chance. When I read it again it grew on me and really sounded like a magical story. I liked the cover, how it look so enchanting with all of the smiling faces of the pumpkins and the boy’s hair blowing in the wind as he draws them.

The first page with the name of the book was so pretty! There was a tree with orange leaves, and brown rolling fields with the sun and its rays peeking over the top, and pumpkins and their green vines on the ground. I really liked the artwork. 

Angus as a baby was so ugly! He had lines where he didn’t need them that made him look a little haggard and old. The beginning was a little overdone, what with talk of the sun like a shining pumpkin and the light filling Angus and staying with him his whole life, and feeling like he’d been hatched from a pumpkin like a chick from an egg. Very odd thought to have. The mom’s and dad’s skin was scratchy and marked with places that seemed to glow from a light within. It looked like they had a light source inside themselves, making places on their skin shine. One pumpkin was split open in half and I wondered why. Did that mean an animal ate it or something?

I liked the picture of the jack-o-lantern on the table, its back to us as he drew, so that we saw through the pumpkin. The boy’s face was lit up from the light source. I thought it was a little wrong though how he loved drawing and painting as much as he loved his parents. There was an inconsistency with Angus’s story. On Halloween day in the afternoon he would run to the store to see the pumpkins in the window. Then, some lines later, the author said he would stand all day. That was a contradiction, because if he arrived in the afternoon, he couldn’t have been there all day long. And I found it highly unrealistic that parents would let their child stand all day, or even all afternoon as the author originally said, and into the night, in town, all by himself. No parent would leave their child alone like that. That would mean he missed supper and by the time he was heading home the moon was high in the sky so it would have been pretty late for a kid to get home. 

The word engrossed was a really bad choice to use in a children’s book. Kids do not possess a vocabulary like that and would be totally stumped. It would cause them to not know what was going on in the story. Authors really need to realize what audience they’re writing for and use their readers’ vocabulary, not their own. You have to use words kids know.

The page where Angus is running home was hard to figure out. He looked like a little old man instead of a 10 year old boy. It didn’t look like he was running either. It looked like he was standing and then running legs had been superimposed onto his body, because the top half of his body was so upright. There were boys waiting for him behind the fence, one holding onto a stick with a skull on it, wearing a top hat and a really long scarf flying up into the sky. The other boy I assume dressed as a vampire, but his fangs were so long they looked like snake fangs instead of plastic vampire ones, and he seemed to be holding onto a ghost or something, couldn’t really tell what was going on there. The leaves blowing in the wind didn’t so much look like leaves. They were so big and one was like a bowl in the middle, looked like you could drink out of it. Their taunts were rather lame, calling him a pumpkin man. Wouldn’t they call him pumpkin boy? 

His pants looked so baggy and his shoes so big, like he was wearing bell bottoms in the 70s. 

His parents decide as a punishment for coming home late that he can’t have pumpkin pie, which makes sense, but his dad says he can’t hang his pictures up. Is that really a punishment?? The daydream he had was so strange, of moon pumpkins floating across to the barn…I think there could have been a better imagining. Why would he picture white pumpkins floating from his window to the barn, like what would be the point of that? Then, all of a sudden, he ends up in the barn. And it's explained by saying he couldn't have told you how it happened. It was way too convenient for the author to have Angus all of a sudden appear in the barn loft. That was just taking it too far, and it was obvious he did it just so Angus would be able to see his mom set a pie in the window, because if he had stayed in his bedroom he wouldn’t have been able to see it. Very see-through and way too convenient to do that. I did like the face of the scarecrow, the crow’s feet around the eyes and the jagged-lined mouth, and the stalks of corn. 

The lines “Sometimes he thought he could almost hear sounds from deep within the pumpkin. As if messages from the sun and the moon somehow entered through the pumpkin’s stem to rest among the silent seeds” are way too deep. That would go right over kids’ heads. They don’t think that deeply and wouldn’t be able to process that. 

The field of pumpkins as his parents mourn his absence was so pretty. The illustrator really excelled at the pumpkins. They were so full of color. 

It's amazing how complacent they seem. Their son is missing and they're sitting in the pumpkin patch like I guess he ran away. Wouldn't they be running around like crazy having a search party to find him? What parent just accepts their child is missing and does nothing about it? 

His dad does suggest he might have been taken across the fields by an angry spirit, which was random because this book hadn't established that there were angry spirits. And I doubt a mom would say "At least we have him" in regards to a dog that suddenly showed up at the same time their son was missing. I'm sure a stray dog wouldn't even come close to filling the void of a child that went missing with no warning. Senseless things like this took away from the story. 

And it was cute how once Angus is in the form of the dog, he bites his mom’s skirt and pulls her out of the house to the magic pumpkin that needs to be carved, and one of his paws is on her shoe. The dog was so pretty as he’s showing her the pumpkin in the loft, full of different shades of color. I liked how he was done. 

The paragraphs became way too big. I think kids would lose interest with all of those words on each page. 

It wasn’t explained how the parents knew his name was Autumn. The scarecrow had named him that, and he was the only one that knew. There’s no way the parents knew to call him that. Major flaw. And he didn’t even need a name. It was weird for the scarecrow to even name him after turning him into a dog as punishment. I don’t think kids would know what shafts of light are, or sunbeams. And it was a bad idea to let readers see him turned back into a boy and the pumpkin carved before we’d even read that had happened. On the left side of the page were the words, but you couldn’t help but see the right side of the page with Angus standing as a human once more. I can’t stand when pictures give away things before we’ve read it. 

One second they're standing in what is clearly the kitchen, he had the door open behind him, and it was said that she rolled the pumpkin into the kitchen. The mom decided instead of making a pie with it she'll carve it up like her husband used to do. And that's when he came back. Then the next page he can't see because the light is so bright, and then he sees his parents in his room hanging up his drawings. How did they get in his room? They were just in the kitchen, and his dad hadn't even been there. Very convenient writing on the author's part. Things didn't flow together and he made them bounce around to whatever he needed them to do. 

And where is the reaction of the mother that the dog that had just been getting her to get the pumpkin suddenly transformed into her lost son? There was no reaction whatsoever to having a dog in the kitchen suddenly change into her son. The story was long in places it shouldn’t be, and skipped out on details that needed to be included. 

It was quite a jolt to the system to flip the page and see an old Angus, still painting pumpkins as an old man. His favorite painting was that of a dog sleeping by a pumpkin, but it didn't look like a painting. It looked like an open window out onto the night scene of the dog and pumpkin.