Rating: 4/5

Baker is a great storyteller. His journalistic talents shine through as he narrates about his own impoverished upbringing. You feel for him and as a mother you really appreciate what your own parents have gone through to raise you. I can’t imagine having to go through some of the things he has, but he had me crying one minute and laughing the next. Book Pairing: Growing Up by Russell Baker
Baker, Russell. Growing Up. New York : Congdon &amp; Weed : Distributed by St. Martin's Press, ©1982.
In order to clearly demonstrate knowledge of domestic events during the Great Depression and understand the effects that World War II had on the home front, teachers and students could go beyond a history book and supplement with first-hand accounts and primary sources. In pairing with Of Mice and Men, students could write a faux-memoir from the point of view of George. Comparing George’s plight for the American Dream to Russell’s plight to successfully make a name for himself would make for a creative authentic assessment. If an avid reader and history student wanted to learn more about life during the Great Depression or the years leading up to and during World War II from a boy his or her age, then the history teacher could refer him/her to this memoir. 
I would put this nonfiction memoir in the hands of a VA and US History teacher. This book is inspiring, compelling, and witty. Although it’s not packed with gripping twists and turns, it does tells about a young man’s coming of age in very difficult times during American history, from the Great Depression to World War II. While Of Mice and Men told about the hardships of the working man’s struggle for the American Dream, Growing Up focuses on what it was like to grow up in the backwoods of Virginia and witness first hand the labors of life in the 1930s and trying to become a man and have his own dreams as America begins its plight into World War II. Teenagers could learn a lot about what it was like during this time period and compare Russell’s harsh upbringing (loss of his father, his relationship with his mother and the struggles to support a family, etc.) to their own. 
	Because the book is autobiographical, it would also be of interest to students who like to journal or keep a diary. His writing is entertaining and reveling, so young writers or aspiring journalists might be able to take away something as well. 
Accuracy: This is a nonfiction memoir that is as much a narrative as it is a historical slice of American life. The author is a well-known journalist, and he describes his plights while growing up with sincere details, not for sympathy but for posterity. It not only somehow idealizes a turbulent time period, but it also seeks to educate future generations. 
Authority: Russell Baker is an award winning journalist and published author. He was awarded two Pulitzer Prizes, one of which is for this book. In this novel, he wrote first-hand about day-to-day events he experienced. 
Relevance to Curriculum: It could be used as a supplement to the history text as it goes into detail about life during the 1930s and 40s. With the easy reading level, students who are struggling in American History could do research on an American living during the Great Depression who goes on to do great things. 
Appropriateness: According to Scholastic, the reading grade level equivalent is an 8.6 and the interest level is 9-12. Written as a memoir, students would be reading about a man his/her own age growing up but just in just a different time. A collection that needed more nonfiction or biographies would need a book like this. Students who have an interest in journalism or writing could use this book. As students prepare for career research, this would be a good addition. 
Scope: This book goes beyond what a student would learn about this time period in a history book. Not only will students be learning about a young man’s struggle to help his family survive during rough times, but they will also be learning about relationships, family, and the value of life. 
Value to Collection: Not only could it serve the needs of helping students make connection between prose and history, but it could also be a supplemental read for staff members. The reading level could appeal to reluctant or challenged readers. Baker grew up in very meager surroundings, so this could appeal to disadvantaged students. Baker could be seen as a positive role model for how far hard work can get someone in life. 
Literary Merit: 
In 1983, Baker won a Pulitzer Prize for his novel and made the YALSA list for Outstanding Books for the College-Bound- Biography. 
VUS.10 The student will demonstrate knowledge of key domestic events of the 1920s and 1930s by
c) Explaining the causes of the Great Depression and its impact on the American people;

VUS.12	The student will demonstrate knowledge of the effects of World War II on the home front by
	a) Explaining how the United States mobilized its economic, human, and military resources;
	b) Describing the contributions of women and minorities to the war effort;
or
ENGL 1.4 The student will read, comprehend, and analyze relationships among American literature, history, and culture. 
ENGL 11.5 The student will read and analyze a variety of nonfiction texts.
a) Use information from texts to clarify understanding of concepts.
c) Generalize ideas from selections to make predictions about other texts.
Library Journal. 9/15/2001, Vol. 126 Issue 15, p140. 1p. 2 Color Photographs. 
Call Number: PS3552.A4343Z466 1982
ISBN(s): 0865530548 
0312922671 (St. Martin's)
Cost: $16.00