Rating: 4/5

The miller's daughter has a problem; the local Highness has an itch for more gold for his coffers, and the miller's daughter can spin straw into gold. What's a miller to do but acquiesce to this powerful noble, and require his duaghter to perform miracles from her spinning wheel. If she doesn't spin all this straw into gold by morning his Highness has proclaimed- "Else you will die!" She is now bolted in her room full of straw and expected thanks to her father to do the impossible. Crying, despairing, and without help, a little troll imp comes through a trap door in the ceiling and descends to the spinning wheel. The jester troll offers to spin the straw into gold, but asks "What will you give me if I spin it for you? She responds her necklace. The troll has many skills and amazingly spins all the straw into gold, but he keeps demanding more from the miller's daughter with each impossible feat. The king keeps wanting more gold, the maiden keeps making impossible things come true, and of course the impish troll keeps hiking his demands for rings and other priceless things. The troll finally demands that the milller's duaghter give him her first child. She believes that her first child won't be born since she is so young for years, so she gives in and hopes the troll will forget. The jester troll does his job, and everyone is happy for many years. The miller's daughter gives birth to her first child, and the troll comes to her prison home to be repaid. The little imp returns to her window to claim his prize, but the Miller's daughter is wise enough to catch on to his riddle about his name, and guess tricks him into telling his name- Rumpelstitltskin. The trickster is tricked by the miller's daughter and spins himself round and round back into the cracks of the stone of the castle where he came from. 

What makes this classic medieval tale about not making promises you can't keep, greed, and trickery work is that the miller's daughter realizes at the end that the best way to beat the jester is to trick him as his own game of riddles. The troll's own vain glory at creating gold from straw convinces him that his name can never be guessed at, but the miller's duaghter uses his pride and arrogance to say his name. The miller's daughter is a victim of her father and king, but in the end her own quick wit saves her life and the day. The illustrations have the very small details and flat appearance that readers see at musuems when looking at original medieval paintings from the period, and the readers are drawn into this tale by reknown illustrator Peter Sis's ability to recreate these depictions of settings and people from the Medieval Age. The story telling is straightforward, scary, and suspensful, and 4th graders should have no problem relating to the miller's duaghter's plight and woes. Many themes here about evils surrounding greed, making impossible promises, advantages of trickery for imp and miller's daughter alike, and the prices paid to those who do greed's (symbolized in the troll's?) bidding