Rating: 5/5

4.5 Stars

’Once our father bought a convertible. Don’t ask me. I was five. He brought it and drove it home as casually as he’d bring a gallon of rocky road. Picture our mother’s surprise. She kept rubber bands on the doorknobs. She washed old plastic bags and hung them on the line to dry, a string of thrifty tame jellyfish floating in the sun. Imagine her scrubbing the cheese smell out of a plastic bag on its third or fourth go-round when our father pulls up in a Chevy convertible...He saw it parked downtown with a For Sale sign and decided to be the kind of man who buys a car on a whim.’ - Bobby

’I was not ladylike, nor was I manly. I was something else altogether. There were so many different ways to be a beauty.’ - Jonathan

This is a story about love, about belonging - or not belonging, or perhaps not belonging any one place, to any one person, anything. It is about belonging everywhere and nowhere at the same time. Having the freedom, or audacity, to change your mind along the way, of what you want...or perhaps of wanting the flexibility to have what you want without that cancelling out your other wants. Not in the sense of “I’d like a hamburger and a milkshake, but in choosing a life, a person - or persons - you want to share your life with, intimately. 

’This is what you do. You make a future for yourself out of the raw material at hand.’ 

A Bob and Clare, and Clare and Jonathan, and so on kind of story. 

This is also a story about loss, family, love, friendship and devotion.

Clare is around ten years older than Bob and Jonathan, she feels the window of opportunity to fulfill her desire to have a child closing day by day. Clare had always wanted a settled life and a shocking one. Her life one of nursing flocks of undisciplined wishes that collided and canceled each other out. 

’Hope takes on a fragility. Think too hard and it’s gone. I was surprised by the inner emptiness I felt, my heart and belly swinging on cords. I’d always been so present in the passing moments. I’d assumed that was enough - to taste the coffee and the wine...Soon there would be an important addition to the list of things I was too old to do.’ - Clare

Although there are various locations in this story, the main story takes place in NYC, followed by upstate New York, not far from the Woodstock, where Clare was during the 1969 Festival. They buy a somewhat ramshackle old house that needs work, and then a small restaurant which is run by the men. 

And life is good, although it takes on a somewhat day-by-day routine of the necessary things in life, leaving little time left in the day for fulfilling leftover wants or dreams. 

They’d hoped for more, life was good, but was missing some of the things they’d envisioned. Their visions for their future had been formed in the optimism of their former, more youthful years, and their belief that they would not change as their parents had.

Years ago, the year it was published, I read Michael Cunningham’s The Hours - years before Goodreads - and was swept away into those pages, and his prose. The stories aren’t really comparable, and even though this story didn’t flow quite as fluidly as The Hours, the prose is as lovely, and the story is nearly as engaging. 

Many thanks to my friend Candi, whose review led me to read this. Her review can be found here:
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...