Rating: 2/5

High Deryni seemed more anticlimactic to me than anything else. The warring armies never actually clash; the Camberian Council is revealed and they're a bunch of squabbling, out-of-touch stuffed shirts; the problem of the rebellious Warin de Grey and his crusade against the Deryni is solved in a couple pages, and all the excommunications just go away as a consequence; major characters use their powers in morally reprehensible ways; and the ending is a deux ex machina with no real dramatic satisfaction. 

The main problem I have with High Deryni is that it seems to be pushing a blurring between the idea of a strict division between human and Deryni, what with the speculation that Deryniness is a condition that one either is or is not rather than a heritage that comes in degrees, and with Warin displaying powers despite not being Deryni at all. I assume that it's leading into a revelation later that there is no difference, and some humans in the past developed powers and started calling themselves Deryni, and that co-existence is possible, and all of the optimism that could be found in 70s fantasy.

But the behavior of the actual Deryni in the book totally undermines that message. I'm not talking about Wencit. Sure, he's a butchering thug, but "butchering thug" has been an apt description of those in power for the entirety of human history so there's nothing different there. I'm talking about Morgan, and Arilan, and Duncan. Like I wrote in my review of Deryni Checkmate, it's reasonable to be suspicious of people with the power to read minds and kill with a thoughts and who--we now learn--have their own secret governmental structure that enforces their own laws with no relation to temporal authority. And with the way Morgan behaves in High Deryni, I'm starting to think the persecutions of the Deryni were entirely reasonable.

I'm not just talking about how he casually violates the sanctity of the children's minds at the scene by the waterfall, though that was bad enough. I'm talking about the scene with Warin's sudden "change of heart." I put that in quotes because the reader doesn't get either of their perspectives, so what we see is that Morgan and Duncan claim that Warin might be Deryni because of his healing powers, Morgan offers to "Mind-See" him, and then after the spell is over, Warin changes all of his deeply-held beliefs and decides that if Deryni can heal, and he can heal, Deryni aren't that bad, even though he was a zealous anti-Deryni campaigner for the entire series up to this point.

Leaving aside that the backfire effect means that he'd be much more likely to assume that Deryni were counterfeiting his real gifts using the powers of Satan, how do we know that Morgan didn't use his time in Warin's mind to edit his psychology and make him more pliable? Kelson needed all the help he could get, and Derry's betrayal shows that it's possible for Deryni to twist people's minds in ways that probably won't be found until it's too late. Reprogramming Warin's personality is absolutely something Morgan would do, and if this how the "good" Deryni behave, then I can only imagine how bad it was during the days of the Deryni Interregnum and I'm pretty sure the pogroms are justified. 

Arilan and Duncan aren't that bad, but they've repeatedly proven themselves willing to lie under ecclesiastical oath, so they're hardly trustworthy. So has Morgan, come to think of it. About the only Deryni we see who isn't totally deceitful is Kelson, and he's only fourteen. Give him time. 

The other thing is the schism in the Church. It's really odd that the real-world Catholic Church is basically transported wholesale into Gwynnedd, but there seems to be no higher authorites to appeal to. Since there are Moors out there somewhere, I would have expected there to be some kind of greater religious hierarchy that Loris would have appealed to for the authority to impose the Interdict or ratify the excommunications, but apparently not. And furthermore, Kelson's authority easily supersedes Loris's, which makes me wonder why he didn't just overturn the excommunications earlier. I realize that Morgan and Duncan going to Dhassa is part of the reason he was able to do it, but what with a cataclysmic war on the horizon I expect he might be forgiven. The Church in High Deryni tries to act like the real-world Catholic Church without any of the authority or infrastructure to back it up, and it rang false every time I thought about how any of it would work.

Those two aspects of the book were the major impressions the book left on me, and the damp rag of an ending didn't help. Everything is being set up for a climactic confrontation, and then a sudden but inevitable betrayal occurs from a direction that's impossible to predict and it's over in half-a-dozen pages and I just thought, "is this really it?" Well...yes, it really is. I was wavering between three and four stars halfway through the book, but the scene with Warin and the ending squandered all the goodwill I had built up. 

A disappointing ending to a series I had hopes for. 

Previous review: Deryni Checkmate.