Rating: 3/5

Between 1934 and 1975, Rex Stout wrote 33 novels and 39 novellas featuring his fictional detective Nero Wolfe and Wolfe’s wise cracking assistant, Archie Goodwin. Reading one of his novels is like pulling an old, favored sweater out of your dresser drawer and putting it on. The sweater might be a little out of style, but it’s comfortable. Brilliant, but misanthropic and eccentric, Wolfe is a great literary creation and Stout constructed well-plotted mysteries that he wrote in a breezy style. If a complaint can be leveled against his Nero Wolfe novels it’s that they tend to be formulaic, but it’s a formula that works. In his novels, a murder has been committed and Wolfe is hired to solve it. Since Wolfe refuses to leave his New York Brownstone, the legwork falls on his wise cracking assistant, Archie Goodwin. Soon, a collection of suspects is assembled and the culprit is eventually unmasked. Usually, Inspector Cramer, the head of the Homicide Division and Wolfe’s most frequent foil, makes an angry appearance somewhere along the way. The books have held up fairly well and there’s little in them that’s cringe worthy by modern standards. About the worse that can be said about them is that there is a small element of sexism in the stories. The books are written in first person, from Archie’s point of view, and Archie is a ladies’ man who has a keen appreciation of the female form. The female characters are well written, though, and don’t come off as weak or simpering.

This story doesn’t veer far from the series successful formula. In the novel, a man dies when a bomb explodes in the desk drawer of rival TV network executive, but was it meant for the executive or for the man who opened the drawer? There’s soon a collection of suspects, each with their own motive depending on who the bomb was meant for. Archie does the legwork, Wolfe questions the suspects, and the murderer is eventually unmasked. Nothing world shattering, but it’s a fun and entertaining read.