Rating: 4/5

Casanova, inspired perhaps by the memoirs of Giacomo Casanova 
8.6 out of 10

In the age of MeToo, surely we cannot appreciate a film, or anything for that matter, that centers on the figure of the paradigm of the infatuated, reckless, macho, sexist male.

Casanova was the ultimate serial seducer, the quintessential image of the man who benefits from his privileged position, taking advantage of women who most often, if not always, could not defend their honor or themselves from this Predator.
And yet, this romantic, comical look at some of the adventures of the serial lover proposes a different perspective.

First off, he may be redeemed and resurrected, brought from the dead - the realm of those without a heart - by...Love.
In this sense,the motion picture can be educational.

Indeed, there are some clever, amusing, witty exchanges between Casanova aka the formidable, late Heath Ledger and Francesca aka the talented Sienna Miller.
Francesca is in fact the representative of the early feminist movement, as an energizing, strong, brave, driven, intelligent, fulminating, creative woman.

She not only talks with Casanova about the meaning of love,if we can call amorous affairs that involve only the senses, but she makes the hero Feel the real passion and admiration for her.
There are a series of unfortunate, but also comical, events, for the Ultimate Lover is wanted by the authorities.

The most dangerous of all is the representative of the Catholic Church, in Inquisition mood at the time, Pucci aka the Master Jeremy Irons.
Oliver Platt has a remarkable performance as Paprizzio, a magnate of lard, destined to marry Francesca and thus the one to ruin the plot for us...if all goes according to plan that is.
Omid Djalili is outstanding as Lupo, the man servant of Casanova, a sort of court jester and Sancho, loyal, jocular and wise...not always, but often.

The rising standards of the age would probably send this romantic comedy in the 'accused' file, to be ignored by future generations...
Well, it is a pleasant feature, but not a historical achievement.