Rating: 3/5

Finally finished this. It’s readable - when I got into it each time I picked it up, I did want to keep going; to know what would happen next. But it’s not my favorite by this author. I’ve read reviews by people who really liked it. I feel like it suffered some for being an older work by the author. Not necessarily in terms of the writing, but definitely in terms of the gender and battle-of-the-sexes stuff…which was honestly far better than many books I’ve read. But it’s 2025 and for all the politicians are trying to shift us back to the 1950s, we’ve come a long way as a society even since the 1990s and 2000’s, and so has characterization of male-female interactions. In short, Severance irritated me. He was much better than many heroes I’ve read, but he was still completely sure he and only he was right all the time, he still got his way more often than not, he still got away with behaving badly while the heroine was explaining or apologizing or at a minimum worrying about her behavior in relation to him, and I don’t think he once even realizes this is going on, let alone owning it or apologizing for it or doing better. For the time, he was probably the epitome of a decent man and good hero. But he’s not really up to today’s standards for heroes, in my opinion. 

Separate of that was the concept of people being either Harmonics or Wolves. I couldn’t fully buy into it. I don’t think humans fit neatly into two categories…certainly not those two categories. I’m not sure if the author was just looking for a twist, or was exploring some specific idea. Either way, it didn’t really work for me. Especially since at the beginning it seems like Harmonics are presented as the perfect ideal and it saddened me (a little, to the extent I got into the story), that it seemed the heroine would never achieve her goal. By the end, things had flipped and it seemed like the Wolves were far and away the better thing to be. Not just that the heroine accepted who she is, but that for society as a whole, the Wolves were better…or at least what would enable the society to survive. And I just had trouble suspending disbelief for the whole concept to begin with, even without the value judgements.