Rating: 5/5

Sebastian Barry is a conjurer, and he conjures up Ireland, the chaos of the Irish question and the impossibility of living an unpolitical life while suspended between the English and the IRA. Into this maelstrom he tosses Eneas McNulty, a quiet man who would like to live a simple life in Sligo, but who finds himself under the sentence of death by the rebel faction. Eneas lives his life in the shadow of this sentence, haunted by his memories and by nostalgic ties to a place he is barred from forever.

I am in awe of what Barry can do with the complex language that the rest of us sometimes struggle with. He is so fluid and supple, easy and graceful, that I felt I was swimming in a river of words that were pulling me along effortlessly. As in the case of this first kiss,

She takes his face in her hands like a farmer's wife lifting a swede in pride from the earth and plants her mouth on his and in the same moment sucks the life out of him and forces the life into him.

Or this passage that explains the passage of time in a way that I could easily relate to but felt I had never encountered before:

But by the grace of mere time itself or, sometimes, he thinks, the peculiar clock of God, whose divisions seem both unending and brief in the same span, he spends a decade and more at that work, in which to catch the cold fish and douse his brain with the solemn rainwater of stars. It is true that such work repeated and repeated, with its circles of journeys and seasons, weaves a pattern as simple as a country bedspread that gives the years the sensation of brevity.

Eneas McNulty is a very minor, passing, character in Barry’s The Secret Scripture, and when I realized there was a book featuring Eneas himself, I knew I wanted to read it. I did not actually expect it to meet the level of The Secret Scripture; I certainly never imagined it might exceed it. This book is among the most affecting books I have read in a long time. I felt the same outrage over the careless ruining of Eneas’ life as I had felt over the unfair incarceration of Roseanne. I drank the words on the page as if I had been served the finest wine, but in a homely coffee mug rather than a crystal goblet.

The story is wistful, plaintive and wholly memorable. It is about wide-ranging, societal questions, but it is also about the individual needs of the ordinary man. What does it mean to have a friend? How quickly does life pass us by and what is its worth if you are just one of the great unwashed?

How quick they come, how quick they go. Friendship. Oh, well. God sails his boats on the pond of the world and at fall of darkness goes off through the rubbed-out roses with the boats under his arms like a fabulous boy. The clock is the terrible high clouds fleeting to some unknown meeting. In the city encircling the park of the world lives are lived quickly, the admired baby soon the dreaming old bastard in the narrow suntrap under the less of the church. Quickly quickly everything goes. 

I can attest that life goes more quickly than you can imagine in your youth. I believe it is the most human of all traits to look back at your life and wonder if it has had any impact upon the world or if you will be forgotten in the moment of your passing. And, I believe that one of the strongest pulls on any human being is the pull toward home. 

Sebastian Barry has written a literary masterpiece.