Rating: 4/5

The Canary Trainer
By Nicholas Meyer
Reviewed March 2007

Note: This review was originally posted on a now defunct Phantom of the Board board. 

This is not so much a PotO story as it is a Holmesian story. If you are not a regular Sherlockian, some of the references in the story, even with the explanatory footnotes, might not mean much to the reader. So, if you have come to this book because of its Phantom of the Opera connections, you've been warned.
	
I have to confess that I have a great fondness for Mr. Meyer’s Holmes novels. He wrote three of them – The Seven Per-Cent Solution, The West End Horror, and The Canary Trainer – and all three are in my Baker Street library. Yes, I’m as avid a Sherlockian who was introduced to Holmes back in 1974 when Meyer wrote his first novel, The Seven Per-Cent Solution, and to this day believe that Holmes never really fought Prof. Moriarty by the Reichenbach Falls, but was in Vienna with Sigmund Freud getting cured of his cocaine addiction. But that’s another story altogether. Anyway, suffice it to say that I like Meyer’s novels. Now, back to The Canary Trainer.
	
This story takes place during “The Great Hiatus” – those “missing” years when the world presumed Holmes was dead. But, of course, he wasn’t. Using the alias of Henrik Sigerson, Holmes was traveling the world and, being a world-class violinist, decided to try out for the orchestra of the Paris Opera while visiting that city. This is how he becomes involved in this case. 
	
Holmes is approached by “the woman” – Irene Adler – who is an operatic singer from his past. Irene is concerned about young Christine Daaé. Joseph Buquet has been found dead after having been kicked out of Mlle. Daaé’s dressing room by an irate Vicomte de Chagny. Buquet, it seems, was in infatuated with Christine.
	
Ms. Adler, whose dressing room is next to Christine’s, asks her one-time adversary to look after the young ingénue. Adler has befriended Christine. 

“She is quite an innocent,” says Irene Adler. “Beautiful and simple – one might almost be tempted to say simple-minded!” 

Irene fears that Christine could be used by unscrupulous sorts, and she has little faith in Raoul’s ability to help, calling him “a mere puppy.” Irene has heard voices coming from Christine’s dressing room of late, and suggests to the detective that this has something to do with a person known as the phantom of the opera. 
	
Meyer has made some changes to the overall plot, something I don’t hold against him. After all, which of us hasn’t done the same thing when writing our own PotO stories? He even addresses some of these changes in his notes at the end of the story. The main thing that most PotO readers probably won’t like is that the phantom is relegated to a relatively minor role. We don’t even meet him until the last quarter of the book. This story focuses more on Holmes – how he goes about solving this particular mystery. The phantom isn’t even called Erik. 
	
As a blend of Phantom and Holmes, it’s a pleasant enough diversion. Just keep telling yourself – this is a story about Sherlock Holmes and one of his many cases, not about the Phantom of the Opera. Oh, and the title? The Phantom is sometimes referred to as the canary trainer because of his ability to teach his little songbird (Christine) to sing.