Rating: 4/5

A new case for Detective Elijah Baley (a human from Earth) and R. Daneel Olivaw (a robot) and I found myself cheering at the reunion! :D

It's been a few months since the first book and Baley has been promoted. One day, he is called to Washington for a new assignment - one he can't refuse despite the fact that it is off planet! 
On Solaris, one of the Spacer colonies that is politically hostile to Earth, a murder has been committed. Puzzling is how the killed scientist could live compeltely isolated (he only ever "met" with others as a hologram) and yet get bludgeoned to death. The fact that his faithful robot servants simply stood by and watched despite the famous 3 laws, is a further complication.
But there is also the problem of Earth's government instructing Baley to assess Solaris for weaknesses since this is the first time an Earther is allowed on a colony planet and both groups of humans are in a dangerous struggle for the survival of the species.
Oh and then there's the fact that Baley feels VERY uncomfortable in open spaces due to him being an Earther (that was so sad to read, the phobia of open spaces, nature, direct sunlight etc). 

So this was, once again, a whodunnit (the delightful part, for me, always is figuring out HOW the murder was committed, but that was almost painfully obvious here *lol*). However, since this is Asimov, we also get wittily veiled criticisms of society (from the confinement in cities to racism) and a wonderful exploration of inter-planetary politics. The worldbuilding deepened here, giving a chilling sensation at the back of my head.
In a way, the crimes are always just a vehicle with which to transport the reader to strange futures in order to see even stranger future humans and their master creation: robots.
(Though, here, we also get a glimpse at the world(s) to be explored in the Foundation cycle.)
So while this one’s mystery was „weaker“ it had a more detailed exploration of humans - both the ones back on Earth and the different Spacer colonies, which was what the author was going for, of course.

So was the 1st law broken or not? And how? After all, there is a second murder and the robots are once again not much help, confusingly enough. Dun DUN DUUUUN!

More interesting to me was the assessment of this weird, permanent social distancing (especially considering current world events). Eerily chilling. And, yes, I soaked up all the implications for future stories because all robot stories, in the end, are one. And I intend to read them all (almost).