Ah, another Phillip Jose Farmer short story. Ever since I read his Dungeon series as a teenager, I was attracted to some of Farmer's ideas. For example, using famous or historic heroes/heroines, which Farmer would seemingly rip straight from a history book or from classic literature, often from a character that you would never have found interesting. Famous commanders, warriors, musicians and also childrens fictional characters were thrust into a situation, usually a bizarre sci fi world where they would struggle to survive.

Night of Light is one of Farmer's old short stories - those thin musty books you can read and finish in under four hours, giving you a quick introduction of characters, a hero, a sex scene with the enemy or an alien (or atleast a reference to one) and an epic almost wild west gunslinging show down, followed by the hero licking his wounds and summing up with rhetorical thoughts on a few untied endings. These short stories are good - in today's age, where things are moving so quickly, its good to be able to sit down and read a book like you would watch a good movie: absorb it all in one sitting and think about it later - but still use your own imagination.

*Spoilers below*

Night of Light is a unique story of a phenomenon called Night of Light on an alien planet that occurs every seven years, where a person's thoughts can manifest and come real. Those of an evil nature are often destroyed by their own thoughts, or are transformed into something even worse, while those of a good nature (if they survive) will emerge purified after facing their own manifested fears and doubts.

One of the things I find most interesting about this book, is that halfway through the book, the reader is suddenly kicked 27 years into the future. I mean, you have just gotten to know the main character: its John Carmody - the perfect anti-hero reckless, chaotic assassin type, experiencing this phenomenon and WHAM; he's suddenly an old catholic priest (a catholic priest!?) with alot of friends, a son, an arch enemy and a whole new look on life. 

While there is a brief explanation for the change, as a reader you find there is a part of you trying to work it all out, but these thoughts are quickly stamped out by political intrigue and a mysterious enemy with a personal grudge known only as 'Fratt'. All in all, the change is clever and quite smooth with the constant re-introduction of past characters from the beginning of the book, some friendly and some not so, making you feel as if you really have known the character for a long time.

Like many writers, Farmer uses the names of certain places and landmarks as a blunt indication of the story, allowing you to understand certain themes on another level and encouraging you to predict and hypothesize as you are directed through the story's events. For example, the storyline is that Carmody is a convicted psychopath on the run from earth, and has landed on this planet called 'Dante's Joy', where conscience and thoughts come alive and turn on you. If anyone has read Dante's works, I would say you would get the picture pretty quickly. Carmody is visiting Dante's hell; the scenes have a ghostly and hellish quality with Carmody's past victims coming to life, and various fauns, vipers and other monsters making an appearance. The ending of this escapade is entering the God's temple and meeting Him. There are also various other references to Dante's works; such as a description of the levels of hell and heaven being described as part of the religion on Dante's Joy. Carmody's friends, when mentioning the survivial of the phenomenon, says "Yes, we both came through the fire". Using Dante's book as a reference, Farmer is able to explore many facets of hell, heaven, good vs evil and self exploration.

The theme of facing your own evil is an obvious part of the book. Through Carmody's experience, he becomes a devout priest, but of the catholic earth religion, rather than the bacchic-like religion of Dante's Joy. In this way, the writer has created Carmody as a stereotypical character that has become a servant of God through defeating his previous transgressions. However, John Carmody's life is a constant struggle against his previous life. His wife is murdered by Fratt, a mystery-man from his past with a personal grudge against Carmody, and he constantly encounters mercenaries and shady characters he used to work with. His reflexes still get him into trouble, and when he sees conflict, his actions are of an active fighter rather than a passive civilian and this often causes trouble, but also saves his life numerous times.

All in all a good read if your a fan of sci fi, like finding old books and enjoy books that reference and expand or consider other stories, themes and concepts that have gone before.