Rating: 4/5

Oh yes and...

On fear of flying.

One of the things I love about this series is he captures ordinary sensible fears of flying so well.

I've just got off a plane, yet again without it falling down in a non-prescribed manner. But still, it's made me think about this situation.

Have you ever been in a plane, sitting in it, expecting to take off, when the pilot says 'Attention, attention, attennnnshhunnn. Passengers, in order to fly safely we need to take off 100 kgs. I'm asking for two volunteers and their luggage to leave now and wait for the next plane.'

This is true, it really happened. And, of course, nobody believes it. If the pilot says 100 kgs or we fall out of the sky, then the passengers want at least double that. What if somebody's done their arithmetic wrong. How can they know 100 kg is the right figure???

And you know what happens? Everybody looks at the biggest, fattest people. Looks at them like, come on, this is your moment. This is the only time in your life where there is any purpose to your wantonly deep fried life-style. Yes, and you will have the heaviest luggage, we all know that. You can save this entire jet of passengers from certain death by doing no more than simply hanging out in the Qantas lounge and feasting on free lunch until the next plane comes. This is win-win for everybody. Nobody actually says a word but it is patently clear what they are all thinking.

People like me get completely ignored, which is funny because although I don't make the cut on my own, my luggage always weighs more than I do, so I'd do the job. But instead I can just sit there knowing this is some weird form of Big Brother where my seat is safe. Nobody's voting me off this trip.

On fear of trollies.

Adelaide is such a sweet town. You know that because it has the only airport left in the whole world where you don't have to put a down payment on your trolley. 

The last time I used a trolley was in Los Angeles many years ago. I put in my two bucks, got a trolley, used it for hours and then, when finally we were able to check in our luggage I simply left the trolley. Walked off only to turn around because honest to God, two large grown up men zoomed in on the trolley and were fighting for it. I mean fighting. At least one of these men was going to die. I stood, horrified. I'd just spent several weeks in the US largely trying to get out of the place and now...now. For sure I was going to be charged with some sort of affray leading to the death of at least one person. Far from escaping the place, I'd be put in gaol, death row, if I was lucky and the jury understood it was an innocent mistake on my part, not understanding the significance of the situation.

It had never been properly documented before until I next went to my therapist. Trolleyphobia. I expect academic papers have been written....conferences attended.

------------------------------------------

I see there is something of a dispute on goodreads as to whether this is the best of the trilogy. Better? Worse? Slightly different? I'm not going with the argument that you have to go to conferences to get why this one's so special. Like the idea of a conference isn't out there in the ether.

How about this instead. Hands up if you've written a book of literary criticism. I put my hand up. Look around, count hands. Oh. Just the one then. So, you know. You all wouldn't really understand then. Not like I would. I mean, we are reading about the lives of literary critics, after all.

We have here the very special point of view of someone who hasn't been to a conference, but who has written a book of literary analysis. Lucky, lucky you.

The thing is, I have to begin by saying, I hate analysing literature. I can't think of a more effective way of spoiling the stuff. At school I was the relentless objector to everything non-literal. But why are sharp pointy things in Tess of the D'Urbervilles phallic? Why can't they just be sharp pointy things, doing sharp, pointy sort of things?

Having said that, I did sort of analyse Changing Places.

Here I will merely add that there is more padding to this book but that it made me laugh uncontrollably a couple of times.

So I’m at the Italian Consulate a few days ago waiting, waiting, waiting. I knew it would be like that, after all, a micro model of the Italian government at work. I’ve brought various things with me including this book, of which I read maybe fifty pages. Suddenly it makes me laugh, I mean really laugh out loud, LOUD, out loud. I swear to God the man at the desk looked at me and moved me right to the bottom of the queue. And the two dozen people around me, dull, braindead looking specimens if ever I’ve seen any, looked like they fully approved the desk man’s decision.

Swallow is in Turkey to present a paper at a conference and he's brought blank A4 paper with him to use as toilet paper. He's wiping his bottom in a blackout when the lights suddenly come back on. He's up to page five of his paper! 

Later on I'm in bed with somebody who is asleep and I'm reading(don't get excited, not the least possibility of sex). Persse is on a plane which is going to have trouble landing, maybe even crash. One of the airhostesses is desperately trying to come up with a prayer to address to the passengers - it's an Irish plane - and suddenly it comes to her 'Oh Lord, for what we are about to receive, make us truly grateful'. Hilarious. I silently shook with laughter for a while and then went back to my own bed....where I could laugh noisily.

Have you ever been on a plane that can't land? I have, and actually, it wasn't all panic the way Lodge tells it...

I was on my way to Adelaide (as usual) and preparing to land was announced. The plane got very close to the ground when the pilot chickened out and took us up again. The weather was lousy and he was nervous. As this happened a couple more times, it was interesting to observe the effect on the passengers.

I would have expected a diverse reaction. Self-important businessmen complaining about being late. Hysterics here and there. Somebody asking why couldn't they have a second lunch?

Whereas in fact the passengers pulled together as one and were on the pilot's side. If he didn't think it was right to land, we were with him. Not a murmur of dissent.

In due course the inevitable happened. The plane ran out of fuel. It was now or never. Might one define clarity as lack of choice? However impossible the pilot had thought landing to be, suddenly it was simple routine. It was a plane in the air that had to come down. Yea verily. We all cheered.

--------------------------------

I really do have to make random observations as I go along, reading this book, or I shan’t write anything at all.

'No country for old men.' Coen brothers movie....and okay, title of book by Cormac McCarthy. But here it is in a book written in the mid-eighties. Does this mean it has some other, even earlier origin which I should know and don’t, that is commonly borrowed? Has McCarthy taken it from Lodge? Come up with it independently? I’m dying to know the answer to this question. Somebody please enlighten me!