Rating: 3/5

I want to give this book a four because of the ending, but I have to judge the book as a whole and so I have to give it a three. 

However, with that in mind I will say that this book (aside from the ending) just fell lackluster for me. Now, after reading the twist ending, I feel like MacHale was just trying to get us to this great twist he had in mind. 

When Bobby got to Eelong and discovered that humans (read gars) were actually the inferior race and klees (big cats) were rulers I initially was ecstatic but, it just took too long to develop and Kasha (the new Traveler for Eelong) just was too hard to like and feel sympathy for. It's almost as if he keeps recreating the same girl in different costumes. Take the first one we're introduced Courtney, Bobby's bad-ass, don't-take-crap-from-no-one, beautiful, and killer competitive love interest was extremely interesting. Then he goes to Denduron and meets Osa and Loor (Osa's daughter and future traveler of Zadaa) she's hard nosed don't-take-crap-from-no-one bad-ass, beautiful and another love interest for Bobby. Fast forward to his adventure in Cloral and he meets Spader's friend and boss Wu Yenza who is a middle-aged beautiful, straight forward don't-take-crap-from-no-one bad-ass that helps the Traveler's (as Spader's acolyte). Then fast forward to First Earth and he meets along his adventure a gorgeous twenty-something year old pilot named "Jinx" who again doesn't-take-crap-from-no-one. And then we fast forward once more to Veelox and he meets the traveler in charge Aja who is pretty in her own right, hard nosed, stubborn and guess what? Doesn't take crap from anyone. 

My point, I'm tired of this character. Granted I understand that MacHale wants to empower (perhaps?) his female characters or maybe he just isn't a fan of the damsel in distress model, however, I don't approve of his other extreme. There are more complex characters, yes? But perhaps that's asking for too much. 

But like I said, if you can power through and get to the ending - it's totally worth it - where Saint Dane amends his plans to cut off three travelers from coming to Bobby's aid in the remaining territories was just brilliance and something I hadn't expected which I'm very happy about and approve of, as far as storyline and plot goes.