Of the countless volumes that passed through my hands, only a few remained attached to my soul and mind. But that is normal, I think, how would be to stuck to every book ? I'm talking about good books, certainly.
 Amoung them, this disturbing radiograph of human psychology, but also a blunt painting of a begone society, but whose moral strengths have been perpetuated in eternity. Having the action placed in the west of France, at the beginning of the 19th century, after the restoration of the monarchy, "Eugénie Grondet" - is a terrible social fresco, in which Balzac manages to combine the portrayal of rural French with urban life. 
 Unlike " Le Père Goriot" - here Balzac pays more attention to country life, and is more of a novel of state, of atmosphère , in which the action does not matter as much as the introspection and analysis of All the characters. It is amazing, how, in just 200 pages, the author manages to draw with such ease, but at the same time - with such depth, the portrait of each person he mentions. Balzacian realism is not a picture of reality, even if its long descriptions might make you believe that. More than anything, the realist novelist is an illusionist.
 It is necessary to analyse the composition of the novel, in order to reveal the writing strategies, that promote the refferential illusion, more precisely - the way in which the writer brings all the necessary elements to the reader, to believe that he is discovering reality. In order to make a mirror of the soul, Balzac selects symbolic details.
 Reflection of national or social origins, whether it charms or arouses laughter, the character's words are fully part of their being, and are magic, thanks to the style , hence the concern in Balzac to give an account for linguistic peculiarities.
 Speaking of the novel protagonists, the central character could be considered the heroine's father, however, Eugénie remains, arguably, the most interesting character of the novel. 
 If I were to say that "Eugénie Grandet" - was one of the first feminist novel, maybe it would be too much. But I thought how much Balzac would have been glad, knowing that females representatives finally won...