Rating: 3/5

In this book, Erica Jong pays homage to the first great female poet of our Western culture and, although there are not many solid facts concerning Sappho´s life, the author weaves a curious tale, which seems to find inspiration in the epic tales of the Greek.

Since an early age, Sappho knows that her life purpose is to sing the glory of Aphrodite. Completely fascinated with the works (and charm) of the poet Alcaeus, she finds herself in the middle of a rebellion to overthrow the dictator of her home island, Lesbos. The coup goes wrong and the two lovers are separated: Alcaeus is banished forever from the land and Sappho must marry an old merchant. The young poet never forgets her first love and, after the death of her husband, starts a journey to find her lover, which will lead her to the ancient oracle of Delphi, the land of the pharaohs and the mythical realms of the Amazons and Centaurs, with a brief stop at Hade´s underworld.

The structure of the book reminds me of the classical works of Homer and Virgil – there is a hero, who has to go on a very long journey and faces lots of perils, many of which are created by the gods. During the story, the main character is constantly praised for his/her achievements and, in the end, gets the most desired prize – a name in History!

Erica Jong´s Sappho is portrayed as a true feminist, who wants to be free of all moral constraints when it comes to love, sexuality and the typical female roles, in general. But, although she is quite spirited in the first half of the book, she starts losing her spark as her journey proceeds to different lands and, in the last part of the story, she just seems to be your normal romantic character, constantly pining over her lost love. Therefore, what seemed to be a 5 star read in the beginning just went falling down the hill and I cannot give more than a 3 star rating. I really enjoyed the mix of History and Mythology – the stop in the land of the Amazons is quite fascinating – but Sappho´s evolution as a character is just disappointing.