Rating: 5/5

I have had this book for a long time without reading. As I was tired of reading fiction, 'the Prince Caspien,' I decided to read non fiction book. Until I completed the book, I did not know I was reading about some of Indian Tribes that are almost vanished. This book dealt with the Mansdans, Hidatsas, and Arikars that covered North Dakota area. 

My family traveled to Plymouth on Thanksgiving many years ago and enjoyed to learn Indian life style and culture. "An Indian Winter" by Russell Freedman reminisced the travel. This book is written based on the journal of a German Explorer, Phillipp Maximillian, and the reproduction of illustration of a Swiss Artist, Karl Bodmer. Thanks a lot to the Prince Maximillian, and the artist Bodmer who drew beautiful and detailed treasure-like pictures. And also to Russell Freeman.

The culture I enjoyed most is the marriage among the Mandans. The marriage was arranged by families, though the young lovers' account mattered. The young man would move into the bride's family lodge and the bride's father was considered the head of the household. As a mother who has two daughters, it looks very desirable. But I could not understand the most heavy work is done mostly by women. Men only concern about wars. Without mentioning of the Indians' cruely, I was very upset by Indians' dance. In order to celebrate their warrior husbands, Hidastsa women dance with dangling enemy scalps from the ends of long poles. 

These Indians are almost gone due to the smallpox brought by Europeans. The Mandan Chief Four Bears, Maximillian's friend, who died of the smallpox, made the very bitter last speech against the Whites who he loved because he believed as some Indians suspected that 'the smallpox was introduced to the New World deliberately, or that the whites had a secret remedy which they would not share.' This suspicion arose as so few whites died while Indians perished due to smallpox. I feel for Indians who disappeared, but I am also relieved that their cruel traditions, dancing with enemies' sculptures or taking the enemies' heart out while alive to please the Sun God are gone.