Rating: 5/5

2022 Series Review:
When I first read the Dragons in Our Midst series not long after this book released, it quickly hit my favorites list. The Oracles of Fire series took me a little longer to win me over, but eventually, it joined its predecessor on my top ten (technically sharing a space, as you really can't have one without the other). But time went on, and my growing reading list meant I reread less, and before long, years had passed without my touching these books (except to occasionally take Bookstagram photos). And the question arose: were they as good as I remembered? Other favorites from that time had fallen in favor as I found other stories that I loved more and that rang more true and as I discovered other authors with lovelier writing. Would Dragons in Our Midst and Oracles of Fire hold up?

In October 2021, I decided to find out. And as I delved into the familiar pages, I quickly found myself falling in love again with the story, characters, and themes, all of which were as excellent as I remembered — or, in some cases, better. Maturity on my part meant I could better appreciate certain characters and choices that had frustrated the younger me and that I could more clearly see the spiritual truths Davis weaves into every page of his writing. And books I originally didn't love — mostly Tears of a Dragon, Enoch's Ghost, and The Bones of Makaidos — I found I liked much better this time around because, again, I could better appreciate the themes, particularly the theme of sacrifice that runs so strongly through this series.

It's bit interesting for me to think that in some ways, these books were published at the last possible moment that they could've been really successful, both in- and out-of-story. In-story, the increasing omnipresence of the internet and surveillance and just the increased number of people with cameras on their phones would've made it nearly impossible for the dragons and anthrozils to stay hidden (especially in the case of LITERAL dragons or Bonnie and her wings) — and that's not even starting on the events at the end of Circles of Seven or the merging of Earth and Hell in Oracles of Fire. Those were a Big Deal in the story; they'd be receiving hundreds of times more attention and panic today. 

And out-of-story, well, you can't get far into these books without recognizing that Davis isn't exactly subtle with his spiritual themes. Even compared to other books of the time, these books are saturated with Biblical truth, scripture, allegory, and messages — I would argue even more so than some books that were explicitly allegorical. It's even more evident compared to a lot of Christian fiction today, which tends to be much more subtle. But honestly? It's kind of refreshing to read a book that's so in-your-face about these things. 

So, do these books hold up? Absolutely. If you've never read them before, pick them up. And if you have read them before, well, don't you think it might be time for a reread?