Rating: 5/5

An inspiring book which walks you through the process of becoming a leader (or much rather becoming yourself - letting your self emerge) with the help of some beautiful quotes, of which I have chosen a few: 

"The point is to become yourself, to use yourself completely – all your skills, gifts and energies – in order to make your vision manifest. You must withhold nothing. You, must, in sum, become the person you started out to be, and to enjoy the process of becoming."

"Playwright Athol Fugard said that he worked his way out of a depression by starting every day thinking of ten things that gave him pleasure. I’ve found thinking of the things in my life that bring
me pleasure a peaceful and positive way to start the morning, and I’ve started doing it regularly. Thinking of the small pleasures around one—the glow of the morning light on the ocean, the fresh-cut roses next to the word processor, the tall café latte waiting at the end of a morning walk, even the dog that wants to be fed—is a much better way to deal with a perceived failure than to ruminate on it." Barbara Cordray

“The path of mastery is built on unrelenting practice, but it’s also a place of adventure. . . . Whether it’s a sport or an art or some other work, those we call masters are shamelessly enthusiastic about their calling. . . . Those on the path of mastery are willing to take chances, play the fool. . . . The most powerful learning is that which is most like play. . . . The word generous comes from the same root as genial, generative, and genius. . . .[The genius] has the ability to give everything and hold nothing back. Perhaps, in fact, genius can be defined in terms of this givingness.” Author George Leonard

“I really think youth is something you win from age. You are rather old and stupid when you are young. The youngest men I ever met in my life were Luis Buñuel, who made his greatest films between the ages of 60 and 80, and Arthur Rubinstein, a man who became a genius at 80." Novelist Carlos Fuentes

"Everywhere you trip is where the treasure lies. That’s learning."