Rating: 3/5

This is a very very strange jumble of bitter drama, mystery, comedy, romance, and odd morality. Sometimes it sounds like Stout is trying to be O. Henry or somebody like that, and at other times he is grinding out throw-away newspaper romances. “Target Practice” has a parade of lawyers, some soldiers, lots of New Yorkers, small-town types from Ohio, vacationers in Colorado, and random others. 

	The worthwhile entries include a cute small town “boxing” story, called “It's Science that Counts”, a lawyer sleuth thing, called “Secrets”, and a delightful novella about a useless lawyer aided in defending an innocent man by his young assistant, that being “Justice Ends at Home”. 

	There is outrageous garbage, like “If He Be Married”, which, I'm forced to admit, is so totally alien to modern human relations that I could derive no point at all from it. The weirdly racial and frustrating “Sanetomo”, which involves a Japanese man-servant and a deeply annoying white married couple. There's also a beastly little romance called “Baba” which very nearly had me quit this book halfway through.

	This is my first time reading Stout, so I don't know how any of it compares or relates with the Nero Wolfe stuff. One does get the impression that the author does have a handful of themes he liked to come back to time and again. 

	“The Rope Dance” involves a guy from Arizona being drugged and robbed in New York City, and then having to find a way to get his money back. That one is maybe a little like “Coogan's Bluff”. The title story involves the French military in WW1 and conflicting loyalties, and it's pretty solid. “Warner &amp; Wife” really should have been better, but I couldn't hang with the old theme of a man getting his confidence back and taking his wife down a peg or two in the process. “An Officer and a Lady” is a funny one involving a burglar's encounter with a little girl. 

	“Target Practice” is a highly uneven and often disappointing collection (the 2nd half is easily superior to the first), but “Justice Ends at Home” was well worth it. That one has the right sized dose of humor and cuteness, offset by a nice take on the courtroom thriller, murder, conspiracy, and some underdogs beating the odds.