Rating: 4/5

If L. Frank Baum were writing books, for adults, in the latter instead of early half of the 20th century, his work would probably look a great deal like Jerome Charyn's.

That's just another thing I've learned about his work while reading one of Charyn's books. The other thing that became clear while reading Darlin' Bill is that his characters would have been curled up in fetal balls if they were in anyone else's books and experiencing even half of what he puts them through. Have you read Cormac McCarthy? Jerome Charyn is Cormac McCarthy with gumption. This was pretty clear, I suppose, from the first I'd read from Charyn, Johnny One-Eye, but there tend to be other distractions along the way.

The main character this time is a young woman who grows in Texas just prior to the Civil War, and as the years progress her life becomes intertwined with Wild Bill Hickok's. Charyn writes all of his stories in the manner of the dime novels that popularized Wild Bill, as wild adventures that mercilessly toss their characters together and apart as some primal upheaval is changing the world around them. This is a Western, but chances are good you've never read a Western like this one.

As he does with all the famous figures that crop up in his books (unlike, say, Thomas Pynchon other than in the pages of Mason &amp; Dixon, they tend to be main or at least integral characters in the narrative), Charyn is hardly easy on Wild Bill, and neither is he disrespectful (the biggest challenge he's nailed in this tradition, that I've read, is his most recent book, I Am Abraham, which like The Secret Life of Emily Dickinson is heavily foreshadowed by Darlin' Bill).

Mixed in for good measure I'll also reference Israel Potter, Melville's contribution to the kind of centuries-old storytelling Charyn has since single-handedly revived, and Tristram Shandy, which thank god Charyn echoes with much greater clarity (for one, no one is telling this story with a million tangents).

How does Baum fit in with all of this? His penchant for creating characters out of his characters. That's a knack Charyn consistently demonstrates, and which always helps energize his stories. 

Although if you just want the chaos a famous gunslinger can provoke, there's that too. Long before The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford, Charyn with great precision explained why it became so easy to kill a legend.