Rating: 4/5

Dodwell must be a very brave lady - during the course of the journey described in this book, she was arrested several times as well as being attacked by unfriendly people and bitten by strange dogs. At one point, she nearly falls over the edge of a steep cliff path. Just as one starts questioning the sanity of anyone who would put themselves through this kind of 'journey', she describes a heartwarming meeting with a friendly local family, or a beautiful view of the country through which she is travelling, and one understands why she is willing to face so many hardships.

As the title suggests, this book is very focussed on travel by horseback. Although I'm not particularly interested in horses, I found Dodwell's account of her journey fascinating, and her interactions with the horses, especially her last horse, Keyif, left me with a deeper understanding of the love so many people have for these animals. So while there is a fair bit of 'horsey talk' in the book, I don't think it would be offputting unless you are someone who really hates horses!

One interesting fact I learned from this book: The structure we describe as a yurt is actually an alachekh. "When travellers in Central Asia brought back the word yurtthey mistook its meaning. Yurt means the ground on which the alachekhis pitched."

I did appreciate Dodwell's nuanced approach to the cultures she encountered, and especially the way in which she didn't assume that everyone would be desperate to experience a more Westernised way of life. However, I did feel that sometimes she had a slightly too rosy-tinted view of life, particularly for the women. Travelling in Tehran, she comments that although the chadoor is compulsory, "women don't mind as much as their liberated sisters would want them to. They quite enjoy wearing one..." Yet later, she comments "Iranian women who resisted covering up risked having acid sprayed in their faces." Several times, she encounters groups of women who enjoy 'breaking the rules', but always with one woman on lookout duty to make sure they are not caught and punished by their male relatives. It doesn't seem to occur to her to question if the women's attitude of 'quite enjoying' their restrictions is simply a survival mechanism in a land where the penalty for rebelling is severe.

Overall, I found this book very enjoyable and easy to read, and I am grateful to Dodwell for bringing alive to me a part of the world that I am unlikely ever to see for myself.