Rating: 4/5

Covering the first five games in the Sierra adventure series, it was written by the same guy as the King's Quest guide, along with his son. As with the other guide, it includes both novelizations of the games and more straightforward hints and walkthroughs; and it provides an in-universe explanation for how the designers got their information. The games take place in the future (which is sometimes mentioned in the series, but not entirely consistently), and Roger Wilco insists that the ending of SQ3, where he takes the Two Guys from Andromeda to the Sierra headquarters, must have involved a brief trip to the past. He also says that he's the distant descendant of someone who felt a connection to the games because he shared the name of their protagonist, and that every subsequent generation had someone named Roger Wilco. He's still not sure about how the Two Guys would have known about what Roger did after the third game. The narrative parts work in some extra jokes and references, and also provide additional connections between games. Each one starts with Roger dreaming about a crush, the celebrity Cornucopia Agricorp in the first four, but the mother of his future child in the fifth. And all of the main villains are part of the extended Vohaul family. Sludge Vohaul is the clone of the creator of the Star Generator, and he was forced to develop artificial sweeteners and processed cheese foods. Elmo Pug's middle name is Vohaul, and Rhaemes T. Quirk is Sludge's sister's son. Running gags related to the sci-fi theme include practically every alien who interacts with Roger calling him "puny human," and every species being referred to as a something-oid, even Cliffy from SQ5 being a Scottoid. The Pac-Man cameo is included, and he's called a Pacoid. The description of the mall arcade in SQ4 also refers to Marioids, Sonicoids, Linkoids, and Carmenoids. The Two Guys are Swineoids. And Astro Chicken was a celebrity chef before there were any video games about him.