Rating: 2/5

I managed to be quite disappointed in this book. Yes, some parts are clever and funny, especially near the beginning; but by midway the joke had gone stale, and by the end I was elated to be done with it. 
		
The main problem, for me, was that Twain’s satire is almost wholly directed at the mythologized world of King Arthur. Twain rips apart this world readily enough, but I could not see the purpose in his project. Why bother to write a whole book mocking a time that never existed? I suppose the answer lay in Sir Walter Scott’s immense popularity in Twain’s day. Indeed, it says on Wikipedia that Twain held Scott responsible for the Civil War, since Scott filled up the heads of southerners with romance and battles. 
		
To cut through all these notions of chivalry and honor, Twain ventures to show how superior the modern world is to the world of Scott’s knightly tales. One yankee engineer is enough to subjugate the entire world of King Arthur’s Court. The people are servile and superstitious, the church is nefarious and corrupt, the wizards are foolish frauds, the knights are savage morons, the aristocrats are privileged buffoons—and meanwhile Twain’s narrator, Hank Morgan, is clever, resourceful, and generally goodhearted. Twain finds time to criticize the culture, religion, economy, political system, and even the manners of King Arthur's England. Probably I would have found it all a great deal funnier if I had read Scott; as it was, I found it merely tedious, and self-congratulatory on Twain's part.
		
Some people have suggested that Twain’s characterization of Hank Morgan is ironic. Perhaps we are meant to see through Hank’s schemes and realize that he, too, is just as muddle-headed as the medieval people he so constantly criticizes. But I do not see any evidence for this view. Hank is always successful; he pulls off his plots without a hitch; he anticipates every difficulty; he finds his way out of every dilemma. He is moral, too; he works to educate the peasants and to create a democracy. In sum, he is the good guy of the story—intelligent, ethical, and successful. It seemed to me that he is only meant to demonstrate the superiority of nineteenth century culture, not its shortcomings.
		
Aside from Twain’s satirical purpose, which did not interest me, the story struck me as rather slapdash. The pacing was erratic, and the plot episodic. The characterizations were mostly flat and exaggerated. When Twain attempted pathos, such as when a family of sick peasants die before the narrator’s eyes, it comes across as false and heavy-handed. Similarly, the relationship between Hank and Sandy felt rushed and pointless, with Hank’s numerous professions of love only tiresome. Thankfully, the end picks up a little, with a battle scene that, as many have noted, is strangely reminiscent of World War I. Other than that, and a few other well-done scenes, I really could not enjoy this book.