Rating: 3/5

The London Season 1780s... Miss Alethea Newnham is spending the Season in Town under the auspices of her aunt, Mrs. Manbury and alongside her cousin Lydia. Alethea is content to dance at Almack's but she would rather tour the historic sites of London and attend literary salons with Miss Hannah More, the author. Beau Devenish is one of the biggest flirts in London and he has his sights set on Alethea but for some reason she seems to disapprove of him and won't engage in flirtation. How shocking! How novel! Devenish is used to getting his own way in everything and Alethea's coldness towards him is perplexing. He sets out to make her his latest conquest with surprising results. 

This story is a sort of Heyeresque Pride and Prejudice without the sparkling wit and enchanting characters that feel like real people. The plot takes a long time to start and is very slow. Alethea isn't even introduced until after all the other characters. The story picks up a bit later on but remains fairly slow. The romance is of the Heyeresque variety which means there's barely any emotion and I think maybe two kisses. The story lacks intrigue or a detective plot to make it more interesting. 

Mrs. Manbury is an old-fashioned woman of a different generation when marriages were arranged. She doesn't understand her daughters or her niece and bowls along ignoring their feelings. I don't think she's necessary a bad mother, just a woman of her time. Her daughters are not likable. Caroline is snippy and sarcastic because she's deeply unhappy in her marriage. Her husband is not her intellectual equal and they have nothing in common. It's really quite sad. She has good advice for her sister based on her own experience but the two don't really get along well. Lydia is an awful brat. She's happy flirting and making the gentlemen fall in love with her without intentions of marrying any of them. A man who does this is called a flirt at best and a rake at worst but somehow it's acceptable in a teenage girl. She's a big pill until the end of the book. Eleanor seems the best of the bunch. Her husband is a nice man and kind to her sister and cousin. Eleanor is content to be a wife and mother and doesn't seem as unhappy as Caroline. 

Alethea is a great heroine. The daughter of a clerical scholar and only girl, she was educated right along with the boys. She's fond of literature and has read a wide variety of things. The salons Alethea attends sound interesting and I would rather attend one of those than dance the night away and flirt with rakes. Mrs. Burney and Miss More have cameo roles. How Jane Austen would have loved this and should have been a part of it. Alas, she was too young and too poor. Mr. Tracy, a poet, is kind but socially awkward. I would like to have read some of his poetry to judge it for myself. Alethea is nice to him sort of out of pity because she's a warm-hearted young lady but it makes him fall in love with her and poor Mr. Tracy is just not husband material. I wish him happy though.

Devenish and his friends are awful people by heroic standards. Lord Calvert is a big flirt and a tease and Devenish doesn't seem to take anything seriously except clothes. Devenish, of course, has hidden depths that are slowly revealed but not enough character development to give us a true insight into his mind and character. He seems to be well-versed in literature but uses it to tease and taunt Alethea. He associated with a lightskirt in Vauxhaull at the same time he was flirting with Lydia and I don't approve of that behavior. I don't mind the lightskirt so much but people were gossiping that he was courting Lydia and therefore associating with a lightskirt is not cool. I also don't approve of trying to make a "conquest" of a woman just because she's not that into you. Devenish does improve over the course of the novel but I would have liked a bit more character development. 

The Allertons are a very nice family even if most of them are not bookish. I feel sorry for Simon but it's a good thing he isn't the heir. He's destined for Oxford so perhaps he'll become a Don or at least a clergyman. Clarinda and her sisters are all one in the same-silly girls without brains but kind-hearted and willing to be good friends to Alethea. Vivyan is the worst of the family. He would be nice and heroic by modern standards if not for his pride. Sure, the woman you love rejects you AFTER you've been warned numerous times she's going to do that and yet you go and get drunk and flirt with everything that moves. Yuck. I feel sort of bad for him for falling in love and I must say she doesn't deserve him despite his awful behavior. 

The historical details are good. The fashion is limited largely to the description of Beau's signature blue striped waistcoat. There are a couple of historical details put in to set the scene in the Georgian era but not at the level of the master Georgette Heyer. 

If you're looking for a decent Heyer copycat you can do worse than Ley. Her stories are forgettable though and I don't even remember the previous two I read.