Rating: 4/5

Re Bodycheck- EO brings us another regular working H for this outing. The H is a former SAS soldier turned security specialist who is hired by a big CEO to guard his girlfriend, the h who is a model, when he receives a threatening letter with her picture attached. He isn't wildly wealthy but he is hilariously funny as he tries to outwit the smart and sassy h who doesn't really like the CEO, she dates him occasionally because he is her dad's boss and she can't see the need for a full time bodyguard.

The story starts with the h and father arguing over the CEO's decision to stick her with a bodyguard. The h doesn't want anything to do with the situation but her father, who is nervous, head in the sand and pathetic type insists that she needs to do as his boss says. The H shows up and takes over the arguement. The h gives out a fiesty and and valiant effort but the H wins the arguement. Tho the h's side was pretty creative against him following her around, she loses when he moves in to her and her dad's house.

The h has a big modelling stint coming up in Paris, so she and the H take off, arguing and sniping all the way. The H makes her stay in a less luxurious hotel to prevent any stalking since her other plans were well known and the h has plenty to say about that too. The h isn't really witchy, just irritated at how the CEO tries to manage her, but because the H is fairly amusing, they develop a friendship spiked by mutual attraction. 

The H can't quite figure the h out, she is supposed to be the girlfriend/soon to be fiance of the CEO and yet the h makes it clear she couldn't care less about him. The H is fairly sure she isn't with the guy for his money, she makes quite a bit on her own, so this is a puzzle he needs to sort out.

The h is modeling lingerie in various locations around Paris, and she soon finds out how handy having a full time body guard can be when he defends her from some pushy on-lookers during a photo shoot and then catches a hotel porter who was spying on the h from the interconnecting room next door. 

Meanwhile the attraction between the two is growing stronger and some passionate kissing (instigated by the h,) ensues at various moments. The h and H start to share a bit of their lives with each other in an attempt by the H to figure out why she appears to be the CEO's girlfriend when it is obvious she doesn't even like him. 

We find out the H was married, his wife dumped him, he slept around a bit but stopped and then focused on building up his security company. We find out that the h has been in the gossip columns for years, first as the girlfriend of a wealthy trust fund boy who died and then as a model. 

 When the h was with her first lover there were pictures of her doing outrageous things like being naked in an exclusive Italian hotel's fountain and lots of party photos. When he died she was very depressed for a long time and that was when the CEO decided she would be a suitable companion. He and the h went out every so often when the CEO was in the country, but when she tried to break it off, the CEO made some nasty comments to the h's dad and the dad panicked and begged her to continue the relationship.

The h's mum died when she was very young, so she grew up with her aunt's family - the dad apparently couldn't raise her on his own. (He really is truly pathetic and it just gets worse.) The H figures there is more that the h isn't saying because when he decides they need to let the CEO know that the h is dumping him for the H, the h won't do it. The h has some plot boiling and needs a week to complete it but both the H and us are in the dark as to what the h is planning and why.

They go back to London and the H tells the h he doesn't want to see her anymore. The h is despondent because she really is in love with the H by this time. So she decides to go over to his building to return his calculator that he left behind while staying with her. She intends to just drop it in the mail slot, but the H catches her and makes her tell him the whole story about her dead lover. 

It turns out that they were teenage sweethearts. The dead lover was one of the h's aunt's strays that she occasionally took a liking to and invited him to stay with the family which included the h. The DL's parents were very wealthy and gave him a lot of money and no parenting, so while the DL stayed at the aunt's to finish school, he and the h became very close.

Then he went to London with his errant mum and when she took off, he got involved in partying and drugs. The h had moved to London herself to live with her father, and she reconnected with the DL and got involved with his lifestyle for a bit, but decides the party scene wasn't her style and dropped out and yet she did not give up on the DL. 

 She tried to get him into therapy or get him away from his friends, but nothing worked. The hotel fountain happened because the DL was on some kind of drug high and was in the fountain in the middle of the night. One of the hotel employee's woke the h up to get him out and she only put on a robe in a hurry. While trying to get the DL to go back inside, he ripped of her robe and someone got a picture. Finally the DL overdosed and died and the h was pretty heartbroken that she couldn't save him. 

She decides the H is just another sensation seeker and leaves him. When the CEO calls to ask her out, she refuses and when the H calls, she refuses him too. The H tracks her down and makes her tell him the rest of the story, he figures out that the DL has nothing to do with why the CEO and she are dating. 

He tells the h that her dad said it was all his fault and he wonders what that means. The h explains that when her mum was ill 20 years ago, her dad embezzled money from his job to pay for her care. He had almost paid all of it back after the mum died, but got caught by the CEO's dad. The ledgers are still in the building basement and the dad is afraid the CEO knows about the embezzlement and if the h dumps him, the CEO will use the old embezzlement to fire and blacklist the dad. 

The h's plan is that by taking the lingerie photo shoots, which will be all over the place in a major add campaign, the CEO will dump her (he is really conservative and priggish but vindictive,) and she and her dad will be safe. 

The h also figures out who sent the threatening letter, it was the son of the man who used to have the h's dad's job before he was forced out of the company. He was old, ill and dying when he got his son to sneak the letter and the h's picture in. 

The H finds out the old guy was upset that he got retired from the company and the h's picture was a stab at the h because she had dated his son (the letter deliverer,) and gotten dumped by him for an aristocrat-- but the son told the dad that h dumped him, so the old guy was just venting his ire at losing his job and his son's supposed mistreatment by the h for the man who retired him. 

 The H helps things along by questioning the CEO subtly to find out he knows nothing about the embezzlement and then conning the CEO into destroying the old files by proclaiming them a fire hazard, so the CEO has them burned. The H and h celebrate by a round of passionate lurve clubbing and when the CEO calls to dump the h due to the pictures, the H proposes and the h does her own version of dragging the H off to her lair for a nice HEA.

This one was funny and the h and H had a really good repartee between them. The H compares the h to a hockey player with all her "bodychecks" - moves a hockey player does to stop an opponent- to keep him on his toes. 

 EO does a good job of playing out the mystery of why the h is stuck with the CEO and a great job on building the attraction between the H and h. The two are very well matched and the antics as they try to outsmart each other are pretty funny. Give this one a go if you like funny banter tinged with mystery and a very believable HEA.