I have a really hard 'rating' this book, given the reasons I like it and dislike it are completely separate issues, and I don't think one should reflect on the other. Dostoevsky very much deserves his reputation as a writer, being capable of capturing the basest aspects of humanity in a way that feels disturbingly familiar. 

But reading this book grates.

"Yuan," you might say, "this book is supposed to grate. The narrator is clearly written in such a way as to evoke feelings of disgust and pity."

Yes, and I completely agree. And Dostoevsky is able to do that to an incredible degree. But that is not the reason the book grates. The book grates because of Dostoevsky's general philosophy of humanity. In the introduction of this edition, Matlaw explains that this book was written in response to Nikolay Chernyshevsky's What Is To Be Done?, a book that inspired the socialist revolution in Russia. Dostoevsky was strongly skeptical of socialism, believing that utopianism required a certain nobility of spirit that was lacking in humanity. And thus he wrote this book, about a wicked spiteful man that would rather harm himself out of spite than go along with what others believe to be in his own self-interest. 

Dostoevsky thinks this level of spite is an intrinsic aspect of humanity. He frames it often as a desire for the freedom to go against his best interests. It's easy to see how this fits in neatly with the concept of original sin — it was in Adam and Eve's best interest to follow God's instructions, but they did not. And this aspect of humanity is so immutable and insurmountable that attempts at systemic change like socialism is completely wrongheaded. Perhaps, even morally wrong.

Morally wrong not because feeding the poor or alleviating suffering is morally wrong; no, Dostoevsky was well-known to be sympathetic to the poor and was not exactly well-off himself. But rather because he saw changes to the political and social system in order to feed the masses as counter to directing people to follow the Orthodox Church. (It's really interesting to read Dostoevsky talk about the Catholic Church in this fashion, as in the modern day, the Catholic Church is inherently conservative and staunchly against socialism. But Dostoevsky apparently viewed the Catholic Church and socialism as natural allies.)

Remember the first question; its meaning, in other words, was this: "You would go into the world, and are going with empty hands, with some promise of freedom which men in their simplicity and their natural unruliness cannot even understand, which they fear and dread — since nothing has ever been more insupportable for a man and a human society than freedom. Do You see these stones in this parched and barren wilderness? Turn them into bread, and mankind will run after You like a flock, grateful and obedient, though for ever trembling, lest You withdraw your hand and deny them Your bread." But You would not deprive man of freedom and rejected the offer, thinking, what is that freedom worth, if obedience is bought with bread? You replied that man lives not by bread alone.
—"The Grand Inquisitor"

Dostoevsky seems to believe that in ensuring that people are systematically fed, they will give up their freedom (that is, moral, cognitive freedom — the freedom to suffer!). The desire to be not be hungry and have basic needs met leads humanity by the nose; essentially, we are slaves to our bodies and our physical (materialist) desires. Dostoevsky calls for humanity to move beyond that in order to be spiritually satiated, and he angsts over the fact that people seem to be too weak to undergo the suffering to do so.

Dostoevsky, you utter nutter. He wants people to stop doing evil, but he doesn't want any systematic method to do so. He would rather the rich have the freedom to steal from the poor than to create a system where they are forbidden from doing so, because the true way to prevent wickedness is for people to turn to (the Orthodox) God. And the poor should rather encourage that the rich have the freedom to steal than to ensure that they themselves be fed, because they should understand that freedom is far more important! 

I am expressly asking you why your Jesuits and Inquisitors have only united for vile material gain? Why can there not be a single martyr among them, tortured by great sorrow and loving humanity?
—"The Grand Inquisitor"

(can't help but laugh at Dostoevsky's hilarious view of Catholicism)