Rating: 5/5

RICK AND THE YESHIVA BOYS

An excerpt from Rick Sandford’s novel The Boys across the Street is included in Kosher Meat, a collection of stories edited by Lawrence Schimel. The excerpt is titled “Isaac and Moshe” and corresponds to the first chapter, also titled “Isaac and Moshe,” of the novel. Both books were published in 2000. The first sentence of the excerpt is as follows: “The two little boys were sitting on the steps of a walkway across the street.” The first sentence of the novel is exactly the same except it does not include the word “little”: “The two boys were sitting on the steps of a walkway across the street” (3). Eliminating the word “little” makes a great deal of difference, doesn’t it? 

A quick comparison of the excerpt in Kosher Meat and the novel’s first chapter only turned up one other change in words. In the excerpt, Rick responds, “That’s stupid” to the fat man who yells, “The Jews killed the son of God.” In the novel, Rick responds, “That’s ridiculous” (5). 

Rick asks the two boys, “Do you believe in God?” They reply, “Yes—of course. Don’t you?” Rick responds, “Of course not” (4). This first chapter sets the stage for the rest of the novel. One of my favorite sentences is the same in both versions of “Isaac and Moshe”: “The two boys and I looked at one another over an abyss of more than twenty years, the boys concerned with their nocturnal emissions and I with the specter of fading potency” (12). 
 
I will remember the following passage for a long time: “I had the weird feeling of being an insect prior to dissection: there was such a sense of superiority in his tone, such disdain, such an incredible feeling of inconsideration toward anything non-Jewish. He had no responsibility to me whatsoever as a fellow human being. I was beneath contempt” (194). This passage occurs in the chapter titled “The Shooting,” in which someone shoots Rick in the neck with a BB gun. 

Sandford beautifully handles the motif of the ravens in the chapters titled “After the Fact” and “The Sacrifice.” He tells us, “I wasn’t sure how many baby ravens were in the nest at the top of the eucalyptus tree, but at least one of them was out and clinging to a branch” (218). He has “the feeling . . . that the parents were getting a little tired of this routine, and their cawing seemed to be impatiently imperative” (219). Sometimes Rick answers their calls with a “Caw” of his own, “a loud high-pitched noise with a slight trill from the back of my throat” (219). Eventually, Rick discovers that the baby raven has left his home in the eucalyptus tree. Rick still sees the parents and continues to answer their cries with one of his own. 

I’m going to miss sitting outside on the sidewalk with Rick and talking to the yeshiva boys. The interchanges between them, the banter, the disagreements about so many things, kept me turning the pages. Rick, a forty-year-old gay man, brash and confrontational, but not without a sense of humor, learns a lot from the boys, as I assume they do from him. Of course, that stupid, that ridiculous verse from Leviticus hangs over so much of the dynamics between Rick and the boys. 

I’m going to quote the epilogue of the novel in full: 
“At night, when I’m here in my apartment, I’ll suddenly hear the sound of the gate clanging across the street and then I’ll get up and go outside and invariably I’ll be able to see one or more of the Jewish boys, either going into the compound or walking down the street.
 Sometimes I recognize them as characters in my book, and then the idea of these people I have created—moving about as though they have their own three-dimensional autonomy—overwhelms me with proprietary warmth.
 I think what I feel is love” (278).