Article II, Section 2, Clause 2 of the United States Constitution provides that the President of the U.S.A. shall nominate and appoint officers of the United States “by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate.” 

Allen Drury’s Advise and Consent explores this rule to create a fascinating political thriller. Winning the 1960 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction, Drury’s work thrived due to his history as a reporter in the Senate during the terms of Roosevelt and Truman. Advise and Consent is a sort of political alternate universe, diverging from our history as the tensions rise between America and the Soviet Union. What initially seems to be just a story about a controversial Senate appointment soon reveals itself to be a critical and surprisingly progressive evaluation of United States politics and the forces that govern it. 

In the height of the Cold War, the President replaces his Secretary of State to promote peace with the Soviet Union, sparking a Senate uproar that threatens to destroy lives as the fate of the United States hangs in the balance.

While many characters shape the novel’s intrigue—how could there not be, with 100 senators—a few stand out. Bob Munson, the Majority Leader, allies with the President to push the nomination. Seab Cooley, the president pro tempore, leads the opposition driven by professional and personal grudges. Orrin Knox, a principled Illinois senator, grapples with the morality of the appointment. But in my opinion, the most compelling is Brigham Anderson, the young Utah senator chairing the subcommittee evaluating the nominee.

Haunting the narrative for the first half is the Secretary of State nominee Bob Leffingwell. Absent from the novel for approximately the first half, all the reader knows is that he is deeply controversial but adored by the media. When he appears, he seems affable and charismatic, but rapidly becomes a somewhat more sinister figure as the skeletons in his closet start to emerge.

The novel unfolds in four books: Bob Munson’s, Seab Cooley’s, Brigham Anderson’s, and Orrin Knox’s, in that order. 

Bob Munson’s section draws readers into supporting Leffingwell, aligning with the first protagonist’s perspective. The President appears sincere yet reliant on Bob, and political maneuvering initially appears entertaining and lighthearted.

Seab Cooley’s book delves into Leffingwell’s confirmation hearings, uncovering his past ties to a Communist cell at the University of Chicago. Three others were supposedly involved: a dead man, Herbert Gelman, called to testify, and a mysterious man going by the pseudonym James Morton. Although Leffingwell handily discredits witness Herbert Gelman, Cooley receives a private call from Morton, thus confirming Leffingwell’s involvement.

This is when Brigham Anderson’s book begins, marking the most compelling section of the novel. After hearing the truth privately from Morton, he begins to oppose Leffingwell, but obscures the reasons in order to preserve the reputation of the President. Accordingly, Brig faces intense media attacks as he moves to convince the President to withdraw Leffingwell’s nomination. 

Unfortunately, as a result of Anderson’s secrecy, Munson and the President doubled down on their support of Leffingwell. When Brigham is finally able to speak with them and reveal the truth, the President promises to rescind the nomination but secretly resolves to silence Brig. The solution comes from Munson, in the form of photographic evidence of a relationship he had with another soldier while stationed in Honolulu during the war. Although Munson begs the President not to use the photo to hurt Anderson, the President refuses to make the promise. Thus, handing the photo to Fred Van Ackerman, the President sets Anderson up for political and social ruin. Torn between his duty to his country and the secret that promises to tear his life apart, Anderson writes a letter explaining everything and sends it to Orrin Knox before committing suicide inside his office.

Orrin Knox’s book begins with Anderson’s suicide sending shockwaves through the Senate. Driven by anger toward the President, Knox becomes determined to stop Leffingwell’s confirmation. In the climax, the President offers to back Knox for the presidency if he supports Leffingwell, but Knox, after a fierce internal struggle, chooses principle over ambition, rejecting the offer to protect the country’s integrity.

Most notable in the novel is Drury’s portrayal of Brigham Anderson. In the 1960s, homosexuality was illegal in every state and still classified as a mental disorder by the APA. Nevertheless, Brigham Anderson—a gay man—is depicted not as a villain, but as an ideal: an attentive father, faithful husband, and “one of the few men in American politics with sufficient courage and integrity.”

Brigham’s arc parallels Bob Leffingwell’s: both are rising political figures with secrets threatening their careers. Yet where Leffingwell lies and scapegoats others to hide his Communist ties—framed as a moral failing—Brigham’s homosexuality is treated by Drury as morally neutral. Brig is a fundamentally good person. When his ex-lover, who sold him out, confesses, Brig forgives him. (It doesn’t matter. “A tall young man with haunted eyes got drunk in a shabby café in a little town in Indiana jumped off a bridge… No banner headlines heralded his demise, and far away in the beautiful city where ruthless men had used him ruthlessly for their purposes no one even knew that he was gone.” His lover dies too. They are both tragedies.) Drury once explained Anderson’s characterization, noting that “any kind of financial speculation or corruption would be so utterly foreign to Brig’s nature that he wouldn’t be Brig any more and the whole story would be wrenched so violently out of shape.” If his secret was any sort of immorality or wrongdoing, it would utterly betray Brig’s character, proving that his sexuality was not demonized by the novel.

Even in his death, his sexuality is not retracted out of some attempt to preserve his honor. Just before he commits suicide, Anderson contemplates, “in one last moment of rigid and unflinching honesty, he realized that it was not only of his family that he was thinking as he died. It was of a beach in Honolulu on a long, hot, lazy afternoon.” 

Throughout the novel, Drury never condemns Brigham; instead, his death incenses the Senate, which attributes his murder the President and Fred Van Ackerman. This tragedy becomes a key reason Orrin Knox refuses to support Leffingwell’s nomination, sacrificing his own ambitions to achieve the goal that Brig died for. Even the President, whose cowardice and patheticness drove Brigham to suicide, resolves that he would “give anything now to have [Brig] alive just because he was a good man.” When the President dies of a heart attack at the end of the novel, there is little love lost for him. 

At the end of these musings on how progressive Drury’s work seems to be, I do have to acknowledge the admittedly few grounds with which he fails. There are very few female characters, and even fewer with any substance. This is not entirely surprising due to it being written in the 1960s, but nevertheless is a drawback. There are, of course, many antiquated beliefs about Communism and Russia, but that has hardly changed much today. The only other downside that I encountered with this novel is the immense demand of the reader to memorize the names of characters and relationships, but the book does come with a helpful list at the front.

Overall, Drury’s work was a fascinating insight into the political creatures of the 1960s, and a deeply worthwhile read. Although the plot takes a while to begin, it quickly seizes you up in the tide as it truly begins to move. I shed a few tears over Brig’s suicide, and found myself deeply invested in Orrin Knox’s moral debate. While there were truly some evil characters, there were also many who could inspire hope and pride.

Tragically, the state of political affairs today has degraded. In many ways, his Senate seems to be a fanciful, idealized dream that cannot truly represent the government of today. Drury’s Senate works across the aisle for the service of the country, but today I truly cannot bring myself to believe that politicians work for anything that is not their own gain. 

As stated in the novel, “every once in a while the electoral process tosses to the top someone smart and glib and evil, without basic principle, without basic character, and without restraints.” It is hard to imagine a quote that is more apt to describe the current political situation than this. I wish I believed in the novel’s message that Fred Van Ackerman might face retribution from those dedicated to justice, but it is hard to maintain such optimism these days.

It seems a bit ludicrous to say that I long for the Senate of the 1960s, but perhaps Advise and Consent offers a bit of perspective that has been lost in modern America.

alternatively: i can’t believe the soviets won the space race in this universe. 0/5 stars.