Rating: 5/5

I have long meant to revisit this novel, one of the earliest Hardy’s that I read and always a great favorite with me. It had been long enough since the last reading that the book held surprises, which is always an added pleasure. What I remembered the most was the terrible incident that landed Mr. Henchard in his questionable situation, the auctioning of his wife at a fairground. (Not a spoiler, this is done in the first chapter of the book). From this bad act springs such a twisting tale of deceit and misunderstanding that it seems fate has oppressed this individual.

What makes this book such a tragedy is that there is not any real villain. Henchard is quick tempered and wrong in most of his dealings, but the harm he does is almost exclusively to himself. He is much too pitiful a character to represent anything truly sinister. He is a man who might have had everything good had he not destroyed it himself through jealousy, mistrust, and sheer pride. He might have had a friend in Farfrae, a good wife in Susan, and a daughter in Elizabeth-Jane, and perhaps this is the final tragedy, that he comes to realize this himself. 

Henchard regrets his bad acts almost as soon as he commits them, but fate and his own stubbornness prevent his regrets from making any difference. The lies and secrets he keeps eat into not only his life, but the lives of those who become involved with him. 

Henchard is willful and unbending; he attaches himself too easily, he wishes to be forgiving, but his nature is not that of a forgiving man. He wants to maintain that he is a man of position and character, but he is hiding a past that is immoral; he gives up drinking and he attempts to make amends as best he can, but he cannot alter the damage that has already been done. Self-destructive is the adjective that most comes to mind.

While Henchard is guilty of wronging others, it cannot be ignored that he is also wronged. As is so often the case, it takes but a reversal of monetary fortune to send the majority of those who respect him into a state that is quite the reverse. Every good deed, and there are many, is forgotten in the wake of his misfortune, and I found it appalling how little anyone seemed to grasp what such a stark reversal would do to the pride and self-image of such a man. He is utterly humiliated and left without a shred of dignity, although some of what he suffers is unknown to his main rival, Farfrae. 

The truth was that, as may be divined, he had quite intended to effect a grand catastrophe at the end of this drama by reading out the name; he had come to the house with no other thought. But sitting there in cold blood he could not do it. Such a wrecking of hearts appalled even him.

His parting words brought me to tears, which says much about the power of Hardy’s writing, for this is not a man that inspires emotional attachment or complete sympathy.

I think Thomas Hardy is one of the greatest writers of all time. I would place The Mayor of Casterbridge among his greatest works. He has an ability to transport the reader to a particular place and time that is uncanny. I feel I have been in the seedy bar in Mixen Lane and walked the hills and roadway to Budmouth. I have heard the Casterbridge bells tolling the wedding and felt the knife digging into the heart of a man who knows nothing of how to make amends without undoing them almost immediately. Perhaps just a man fated to fail.

But the momentum of his character knew no patience. At this turn of the scales he remained silent. The movements of his mind seemed to tend to the thought that some power was working against him.