Rating: 4/5

I found this book at a used bookstore a few months back. I love visiting used bookstores, as I never know what I’ll come across. This book leaped out at me, for it involved history and radio.

The book spans the roughly 60 years as radio began as a little understood technology that was Morse code only to what we experience today with FM &amp; TV. It focuses on three men: de Forest, Armstrong, and Sarnoff. The author walks through how the RCA corporation came to dominate radio &amp; TV from the 1920’s to the 1960’s. He also dives into the court cases around patents that eventually destroyed Armstrong.

All three men knew each other. de Forest was a PhD who had an enormous ego (the author uses de Forest’s own notebooks to illustrate this point). Armstrong was the inventor that made radio work &amp; strove to continually improve it, leading to FM. Sarnoff was self-made, coming up from nothing to eventually lead RCA. de Forest despised Armstrong, as Armstrong was the more knowledgeable &amp; never resting on his laurels. Sarnoff &amp; Armstrong were good friends for 20 years until Sarnoff started to put the company before friendship.

By focusing on the three men and RCA, we are able to watch how the world went from Marconi based wireless to FM based broadcasting. From barely hearing a Morse ‘S’ in the static from England to voice transmissions to space. Armstrong made the great leaps possible due to his unwavering devotion to the painstaking research. He delighted in making the impossible real.

The tragedy is how RCA went from promoting technical advancement to desiring only profits. AM to FM is a case in point. Sarnoff knew it was superior, as it was impervious to noise &amp; had greater fidelity. But it threatened their AM stations, so the public wasn’t allowed to have the latest technological marvel. RCA tied Armstrong up in litigation, while using FM as the audio portion of their TV solution. RCA was so powerful they had the FCC push the broadcast band of FM beyond what was then possible, in the bands we know of today. It was their way of pushing out the date when FM would begin to roll out. The resulting trials ate at Armstrong so much he committed suicide. A true genius driven made by the greed of a corporation, one run by his former friend Sarnoff.

RCA eventually fell apart once Sarnoff handed the reins to his son. My impression of RCA was the RCA Victor label of classical music as found on CD’s in the 1980’s along with the reputation of subpar gear. 

It is a wonderful book focused on a fascinating time, when radio changed the world.