Rating: 3/5

This was a difficult one to review. My previous read by this same author Oxygen was excellent, and I've been on the lookout for more Andrew Miller novels since then. This novel is set in 1763 and tells part of the story of that sexual conquest rogue, Casanova, who has exiled himself to In-ge-lan (as he pronounces it, for he speaks no English - why he has chosen London where the locals eschew strangers speaking strange tongues on a good day, and do far worse to them on a bad day, we never quite learn). We follow Casanova in his renamed guise as the Chevalier de Seingalt. Presumably the name change is to allow him some freedoms from his notorious reputation.

This book is bathed in a fog, clothed in cheesecloth, and is placed inside a labyrinth. For much of the time, I wasn't sure what was going on, at least where the core part of the story - our protagonist's pursuit of the elusive mysterious Marie Charpillon (who is referred to as The Charpillon. Why, I do not know) - was headed, it was all so twisted and tortured. Many things I still do not know.

The novel is in four parts, each segmenting a slice of Casanova's experiences over the course of something like six months, possibly a year. The second part, where he and his valet Jarba, take jobs building the London Story Bridge, is very strange. We are given no reason why they do this, and are left to wonder if it is some kind of strange psychological penance Casanova is remitting to himself for what happened at the end of part 1 (an ignoble attempt at seduction of The Charpillon, which ends in frustration, due to the inexplicable behaviour of not only the girl in question but her colluding mother, aunts and grandmother - who seem to be setting Casanova up for ridicule. But none of this is clear). 

Apart from the obtuse nature of the plot, there were some very amusing parts to this story. Andrew Miller has a wonderful turn of phrase, and I found myself smiling out loud at quite a few of his more charming turns of phrase. There was also quite a selection of terms I had never heard before, and which often weren't contextualised so you weren't sure if a flowerpot, a chamber pot or a chimney pot were being described. A random flick through the book, before it goes off to the charity store to be enjoyed by someone else, has me pointing out examples: fustian, zendale, epee, pikestaff. 

This was quite an intriguing read, and deserves more a 3.5 star review, if just for the lyrical way the story flows along. It's snake-like turns make for a charming read at times, and a frustrating read at others - I would have liked to have been clearer on some things which were shrouded in mist, including key turns of plot, intentions of some characters, and decisions by main characters which just seemed odd and inexplicable.

So a somewhat strange and strangely enjoyable read.