Rating: 4/5

Although this atrocity is before the timeframe of this book, it serves as a prolog that sets the tone for the grim story:  In El Salvador in 1932, the government responded to a strike by workers by massacring an estimated 30,000 people, or 4% of the population, in one week. 

The atrocity has become known as “La Matanza,” or “The Massacre.” In addition to the quote above, here’s more in the next 4 paragraphs quoted from the Zinn Education Project at zinedproject.org:

“On January 22, 1932, in the Central American nation of El Salvador, 30,000 people — most of whom were indigenous — died at the hands of Salvadoran soldiers for protesting the government and the oppressive policies of president Maximiliano Hernández Martínez.

In the 1920s, the price of coffee dropped steeply, threatening the oligarchs’ export business. To make up for their loss of profits, the ruling families took over even more land from peasants and cut their workers’ wages in half. Following elections in 1932, in which the government refused to seat elected members of the Communist Party, Salvadoran peasants organized a popular insurrection to demand better living and working conditions. Most of these peasants were part of the indigenous population. 

This event became known as “La Matanza,” or “The Massacre.” The military government established following La Matanza went on to ban every vestige of indigenous culture, including language, traditional clothing, and music. To avoid further persecution and murder by government troops, the indigenous people began to hide all outward signs of their identity.

La Matanza and the military rule which followed set the political tone of the next several decades in El Salvador, as military dictators followed one another into the 1970s.”

Now on to the book. I’ll start with two quotes that give you an idea of the author’s short, simple style of writing, and also help set the tone for the story. The characters we hear from are all women. Here are two quotes from the main character, a grandmother named Lupe, as she thinks:

“The children are company, but because they’re still little, they don’t mind playing by themselves, in silence. Only when they are sick do they cry. God has given me good children, I can’t complain. Sick ones, that’s true. Parasites eat them from the inside, and the children defend themselves by sleeping. Lucky that they have not been awakened. God is great.”

“I foresee the worst. When death comes, it alerts you before; it does not come all of a sudden. It always makes a loud noise as if it were riding a horse galloping on a path of stone, its hooves clattering on the stones, miserable death. It makes fun of us because it knows we cannot restrain its runaway horses. It looks for us and finds us always poor. There are problems in life. A child is sick, the beans have burned. A son wounded or dead. We are always losing in this game.”

The setting is a small rural town in El Salvador during the more recent civil war, roughly through the 1980s. The main characters are peasants with pigs, chickens, eggs and corn. Men are frequently absent for days on distant coffee and pineapple plantations. Kids drop out of elementary school to start working, many at age 7. 

In a way the story is not really about ‘a day’ Because Lupe thinks back through her whole life and various incidents and many tragedies. She particularly thinks of her oldest son who was killed by the civil guards. 

People are active in demonstrations trying to form agricultural cooperatives. The demonstrations are broken up by police and the guards always with violence and killings. Lupe’s village has a reputation for activists and the guards come trying to arrest the men. The men start sleeping out in the hills but then the guards start arriving to beat and mistreat the women so that the men will come home so that they can be arrested. The guards torture and behead people. In one scene an entire village is burned to the ground. In another scene the police and guards massacre a busload of mostly kids who had gone to a demonstration in San Salvador, the capital. The story is based on real events. 

In addition to politics and rebellion, a lot of the story follows the evolution of the Catholic Church and the arrival (or transformation) of priests who are activists. In the old days the priests were concerned only with the money they earned from ceremonies for ‘hatching matching and dispatching’ and the only advice they could offer was guidance on getting to a better life in the Next World. Over time the priests become activists and try to help peasants in THIS life as well as the next one. The guards turn on the priests. 

The paragraphs that follow contain additional historical information compiled and somewhat edited by me from Wikipedia. Note the complicity of the US in a lot of what has gone on: 
 
“The United Nations reports that the civil war [the timeframe of this book] killed more than 75,000 people between 1979 and 1992, along with approximately 8,000 disappeared persons. Human rights violations, particularly the kidnapping, torture, and murder of suspected FMLN sympathizers by state security forces and paramilitary death squads – were pervasive. [The FMLN is the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front that was backed by the Soviet Union and Cuba.]

The United Nations estimated that FMLN guerrillas were responsible for 5 percent of atrocities committed during the civil war, while 85 percent were committed by the Salvadoran security forces that were trained and backed by the US military during the Carter and Reagan administrations.

Elections were rigged so that right-wing leaders won. On 28 February 1977, a crowd of political demonstrators gathered in downtown San Salvador to protest the electoral fraud. Security forces arrived on the scene and opened fire, resulting in a massacre as they indiscriminately killed demonstrators and bystanders alike. Estimates of the number of civilians killed range between 200 and 1,500.

In February 1980, Archbishop Óscar Romero published an open letter to US President Jimmy Carter in which he pleaded with him to suspend the United States' ongoing program of military aid to the Salvadoran regime. One month later the Archbishop was assassinated while celebrating Mass. At his funeral a week later, government-sponsored snipers in the National Palace and on the periphery of the Gerardo Barrios Plaza were responsible for the shooting of 42 mourners.

The National Guard and the newly reorganized paramilitary ORDEN, with the cooperation of the Military of Honduras, carried out a massacre at the Sumpul River on 14 May 1980, in which an estimated 600 civilians were killed, mostly women and children. Escaping villagers were prevented from crossing the river by the Honduran armed forces, and then killed by Salvadoran troops who shot them in the river in cold blood.

On 2 December 1980, members of the Salvadoran National Guard were suspected of raping and murdering four American Catholic nuns. This incident received a lot of attention in the US press and an investigation by the military junta was demanded. Later, US Ambassador Robert E. White said that he could find no evidence the junta was "conducting a serious investigation". White was dismissed from the foreign service by the Reagan administration after he had refused to participate in a coverup of the Salvadoran military's responsibility for the murders at the behest of Secretary of State Alexander Haig.

The government began making ‘sweeps’ of rebels in rural areas. On December 11, 1981, one month after the "sweep" through Cabañas, the Battalion occupied the village of El Mozote and massacred at least 733 and possibly up to 1,000 unarmed civilians, including women and 146 children, in what became known as the El Mozote Massacre. The Atlácatl soldiers accused the adults of collaborating with the guerrillas. The field commander said they were under orders to kill everyone, including the children, who he asserted would just grow up to become guerrillas if they let them live. "We were going to make an example of these people," he said. The US steadfastly denied the existence of the El Mozote massacre, dismissing it as “leftist propaganda," until secret US cables were declassified in the 1990s.”

I know this ‘review’ has been more of a history lesson than a book review. But it’s good background if you decide to read this short, shocking book. And there’s a current events aspect to it. Although guerrilla activity has largely ended, urban and rural gang violence related to drug lords has replaced it and El Salvador remains a country with one of the highest murder rates in the world. There are El Salvadorans who have crossed through Mexico with great hardship and are standing along the Rio Grande right now waiting to get across. And apparently there are people who call themselves Americans who think that the Massacre at Sumpul River wasn’t such a bad idea.

The author, b. 1935, has written about 15 books including several collections of poetry. Only a few are available in English. One Day of Life appears to be his best-known work in both English and Spanish. Like so many Latin American authors, his writings got him in trouble with the right-wing dictators and military men, so he lived in exile in Costa Rica from 1972 to 1993. 

Top photo from archive.revista.drclas.harvard.edu “FMLN guerrillas on New Year's Day, Tenancingo, El Salvador, 1985. Photo by Scott Wallace”
The city of Santa Ana from fairobserver.com
The author from Wikipedia