Rating: 5/5

Nora Roberts with her flawless and delicate stroke of words have another magnificent romance in "Rebellion",my very first historical romance i have ever read by her and damn it..how i wish she could have written more!

The story takes place in 1700s where the war between Scotland and England will take place, the scots wants their true king on the throne and our hero, a royalty and proud of his name are Brigham Langston, Earl of Ashburn who will be one of the few to lead the scots to the war. Being a English man himself he is a man of honor and stands up for justice. His remarkable calm posture and patience is something i greatly admired for being a young man of 24, but he could be quite ruthless when needed to be. All that will be put to test when he travels to Glenroe with his friend Coll MacGregor, and gets bewitched by his sister, the spirited wildcat Serena MacGregor. The blossoming love between them was something they already from the start never could deny...and that`s what makes it all so much more beautiful!(dreamy sigh)

Why does Roberts create beautiful love-stories like these, does she know how my heart never stops with its double beating every time i open her books.That`s madness, and one of the very reasons Roberts are one of my top 10 favourite authors. Serena may have been too insulting and annoying with her hateful words towards Brigham at times, but she was a woman who stayed true to her heart. The scene in the forest beside a lake, when she takes her clothes off and seduces Brigham (and Brigham who wanted to wait for their wedding, which she DIDN`T know) i truly admired her as a heroine. She gave everything of herself and as a certain woman in love sacrificed her pride and honor to have that last moment with the man she loves, thinking that he would never come back for her and knowing that she would never marry nor love another. I nearly wanted to cry for Brigham when she thought that what he offered her was for her to be his mistress, which he NEVER EVER WOULD HAVE done! Even i knew him better than that! He is the one who much earlier than her knew that he had fallen in love with her...and i really wanted to hit her on the head for not realizing it. Brigham is such a unusual man and a very worthy hero. I swooned when he threatened to tell her father about their love-making when she refused his proposal of marriage. Ahh what a man! The side love-story between Coll and Maggie was so adorable and i loved it how clumsy he felt around her. When the war came i got blown away by much sorrow and horror for what had went though in this history of time...and getting really worried for Brigham`s and Serena`s and the other MacGregor`s safety. Nora Roberts never once in one second disappointed me throughout this epic tale of love, family and honor. With bright humor, passion and excitement Serena`s and Brigham`s love-story are everything for a Romantic-lover like myself, and soon enough i can`t wait to read the other books about the MacGregor family!