Rating: 2/5

Is it fair to say Russell Freedman transformed juvenile nonfiction in the twentieth century as much or more than any other author? I think so. Combining scholarly yet understandable writing with dozens of full-page pictures allowed his young readers a clear window into whatever era Freedman wrote about. An Indian Winter zeroes in on the American Midwest of the early 1830s. A connoisseur of global culture, Prince Alexander Philipp Maximilian of Wied-Neuwied, Germany, traveled to the United States in the company of Karl Bodmer, a Swiss painter he retained to capture a visual record of what they saw on their long journey up the Missouri River. Visiting prominent American forts and occasionally living with friendly Indians, Maximilian and Bodmer experienced an America no white man ever had, and Maximilian's journal gives insight into it.

 Fifteen years earlier the prince had explored Brazil's rain forests for two years, writing a well-received book about it, but in 1832 his desire to see the New World returned. By spring of 1833 Maximilian and Bodmer had reached the city of St. Louis and were ready to navigate the Missouri River into Indian country. They would move through lands inhabited by tribes both peaceable and hostile. Fort Union, Fort McKenzie, and other American strongholds protected settlers from Indians who would harm them, but robust commerce took place between the whites and Native Americans; as Maximilian notes in his journal, many Indians loved to buy alcohol. Bodmer's skills came in handy when he and Maximilian visited the Indians, especially the Blackfeet, Mandans, and Hidatsas. Initially hesitate to let Bodmer paint their portraits, the Indians became mesmerized by the Swiss painter's realistic depictions of people. Traditional Mandan and Hidatsa painting emphasized storytelling over form, and Bodmer's elegant use of line and color made him a celebrity. Chief Yellow Bear, the great warrior Yellow Feather, and the warrior chief known as Four Bears donned their finest ceremonial garb for the privilege of having Bodmer do their portraits.

 Maximilian reports in his journal about the tribal cultures he observed: the social hierarchy, recreations, and religion of the Mandans and Hidatsas. Yellow Feather and Four Bears took their own turns with Bodmer's art supplies, painting their proudest moments in war with tribal foes. They learned to emulate Bodmer's realistic style, and their self-portraits are included in this book. In March of 1834 a badly infected knee troubled Maximilian, confining him to bed, but his Indian friends came to see him daily. As the disease progressed it appeared Maximilian would die, but the timely intervention of a hired cook saved the prince and his leg. After convalescing during the ride back down the Missouri River, Maximilian and Bodmer departed from New York City for Germany. Bidding farewell to their Indian brothers was poignant, but the memories these Europeans had made were priceless.

 No happy ending was in store for the Mandans and Hidatsas. Once prosperous and powerful, they and other tribes fell victim to smallpox, a disease carried by American Fur Company steamboat passengers. Masses of Indian men, women, and children suffered terrible deaths. Four Bears, who had been kind and receptive to the white man, was furious at the sight of his people perishing all around him. He himself succumbed to smallpox a day after publicly denouncing the white man in the harshest terms possible. They hadn't spread illness purposely, but how could the Indians be sure of that? This was years after Maximilian and Bodmer's pleasant cruise down the Missouri, but it's sad that this epilogue is attached to their story.

 I'm not sure I understand the point of An Indian Winter. It offers a first-person look into the lives of Indians from a bygone era, but other nonfiction books do the same, with a more compelling central story. The end is sobering, but again I'm not certain what message is conveyed. I might consider rating An Indian Winter two and a half stars, but it's not elite as much of Russell Freedman's nonfiction is. If you enjoy reading history that moves at a relaxed pace, you'll get something out of this book. It's a unique slice of Americana.