Rating: 5/5

There’s a stillness I experience on completing a great book that defies description. For some time, I don’t feel like reading again. It happened to me after I finished 1984, with the Road, and a handful of books between. Now it’s happened again with the Ninth Configuration.

Readers who seek popcorn are bound to be disappointed. If you only examine the dialogue’s surface, much of it would probably appear unstructured, perhaps even boring. For such readers the action probably comes too late, and at too much cost to their time.

But here is the genius of the writing. There are many threads that swim just below the surface. Like the tension that builds in the madmens’ rantings, as Cutshaw’s efforts to avoid the truth draw him closer to that which he refuses to face.

As an atheist, a few times I became agitated. It seemed I’d slipped into a sermon. But then I remembered how puzzled I have always been by conservatives who respond emotionally to science, and decided I was being hypocritical. So I allowed myself to be drawn back into the narrative. And I was glad I did.

Beyond discussions of God, and passages that may, or may not have been intended as a missionary’s polemic, there were many engaging philosophical questions. These questions are sharpest when Blatty expressed them in a dichotomous form. It’s difficult to explain without spoilers, hence my vagueness. There are three examples that will sit with me for a long time. The use of violence to express compassion (during and following the bar fight), using a ‘mad man’s’ insight to cure insanity, and reaching out to another through suicide.

There were a few instances where I experienced the writing as a little heavy handed. Its hard for me to decide if that reflected my cynicism, or the novel. I feel the most profound points are often made obliquely, when the reader is forced to think, to grapple with ambiguity, and draw the connections themselves. However, for the most part, subtlety prevailed, and the few narrative intrusions were small and insufficient to detract from the work.

Many times I literally laughed out loud. The writing is just that witty. On that point, I have rated other books five stars that wouldn’t hold a candle to this book. But here is where the rating system is flawed. If you read a comic, then you are not going to judge it against Tolstoy, you are going to judge it against other comics. If you read this book as a psychological thriller, one aimed squarely at intelligent adult readers, then it deserves five stars. If you judged it against classics, then IMHO, it gets a very solid four stars. But it hasn’t had time to fill that shelf space yet. So its five stars from me!