Rating: 5/5

When it comes to writing some of the most powerful and harrowing pieces of holocaust literature then Primo Levi is right up there at the top of the list. The likes of Survival In Auschwitz and If This Is a Man / The Truce are books that should be read but are not enjoyable to get through. This novel, however, when compared to those works, has all the hallmarks of a thrilling adventure story, but still reminds us of the dark times that were endured during WW2. Basically, it's probably his most optimistic work; one that I found to be a real page-turner. 

Born into a Jewish family, Levi could not have foreseen the future that lay ahead of him. With the rise of fascism, the chemist/writer would get caught up in what seemed like a civil war in the German zone where Italians fought Italians and fascists fought anti-fascists. Levi was arrested for resistance activity, and by train he left Turin, passing the Mole Antonelliana, a major landmark building, and little did he realize he would pass the same building entering Turin again in 1945. He was a lucky boy, but then he wasn't; how can one truly escape what went before; the unimaginable horror - Auschwitz.

A work of fiction, but based on real events, Primo Levi, with dignity and passion, traces the journey of a group of partisan survivors who in the latter stages of World War Two make their way from the snow covered ground of Russia, through Germany then Italy, hoping to reach Palestine. Former soldiers Mendel and Leonid meet up with a band of rebels deep in the freezing harsh woods and marshes somewhere in Soviet territories, and luckily for them they are also Jews; men, women and children. Constantly vigilant for any unwanted German attacks, they move west, into Polish territory and navigate the anti-Semitism of both peasants and the Polish underground. News is spreading that allied forces are giving the Nazis hell, but the war here is far from over, and as they are confronted with the hostilities of mother nature and other war stragglers, they continue their quest for the holy land, to hopefully calm goodwill and harmony.

There is edge-of-your-seat tension during the battles; especially one involving the sabotage of a train, while Levi also gives us warm and compassionate moments between the group, where even love can blossom in the face of such adversity. If Not Now?, When, is most of all the tale of a journey, the journey itself goes though ever changing landscapes, where the usual markers of place of direction have been effaced. The partisan skirt towns, villages and roads have all no doubt seen better days, and communication with the outside world does not exist. A few even got the chance to sit out the war; an Uzbek makes his home in a crashed German plane without seeing any conflict, whist an arch-survivor nestled in an empty underground bunker has only the solitude of his own thoughts as to what's going on in the world out there.

This is also a story of memories, narrated by eye-witnesses whose testimonies serve much the same function as Levi's own in his other works. For the best part, the Germans remain off-stage; talked of, but only fought in small areas. The genocides surfaces in the halting recollections and dreams of the survivors; Mendel dreaming of home and wife, a normal life, away from the madness. Jews taking up arms is a real Levi strongpoint (he declared that he wanted to nail the myth prevalent in Italy at the time, that no Jews had resisted the Nazis); "our war is just", Mendel tells the Russians when capturing a German fighter alive after raiding an abandoned concentration camp; they feel the need to tell him they are Jews. But the desire for revenge is tempered with the demands of justice itself - "blood isn't paid for with blood, blood is paid for with justice". Yet it is hard for these people to give up their arms, and they are only with difficulty persuaded to do this when they reach the Italian border. The story would end with the joy of a birth, only to be followed by breaking news; August 6th 1945, and the Atomic bombings of Hiroshima. 

Like his heroes, Levi manages to escape death, returning home to his native city and family, and left the world with written works that are a testimony to a special kind of human spirit. An extraordinary man, who through lucid mediation relives his most unbearable experiences. This isn't as important a book as his holocaust memoirs, but for me it's still a masterpiece of WW2 fiction.