Rating: 5/5

2024 reread: Something I noticed on the reread of this novel is that the writing has changed in quality. This reads like literature. It’s ultimately still a potboiler, but the themes and ideas are given a lot more weight here and there’s a much greater care taken with the words and the incidents. I’m going to need a couple more books to check but I feel that somewhere along the line - and I think the Hawk Queen books may have catalysed that - Gemmell has gone from being a gifted and thoughtful storyteller to being a thoroughly great writer. 

——————————————————-

Through a series of misadventures, Druss and Sieben find themselves taking part in a siege while a Nadir tribesman is searching for something to help his people unite under one banner. This is similar in theme to Quest For Lost Heroes - a quest that starts off as one thing then turns into something else that appears to be trivial - but much more uplifting. 
Something that I've noticed in these more recent books is how Mr Gemmell has changed the way he writes about friendship. In his early books he spoke a lot about the bonds that form between people - almost entirely men, admittedly - and how they form and make us take responsibility for each other in times of crisis. In the last few books (this one was published in 1996) I've noticed that he's started to show friendship growing and developing after and making people feel obligated to help each other. It's mostly in the friendship between Druss and Sieben, two very different men with some very different views on things, but who understand that they share some core values. This sharing of similarities between friends and opponents is what drives this book and it reinforces the ideas of Legend, which was the rare fantasy epic that had no villains, just protagonists defending their own existence.
While I don't think it's as significant a book as, say, Lion Of Macedon, the stakes that Druss eventually discovers that he's fighting for render this book as being thought-provoking and highlighting the author's own clearly mixed feelings about war and conflict. That said, it's an exciting adventure story that invites you to think harder about its content.