Rating: 5/5

My favorite Dickens, very funny, but also satirically effective, suppressing brutal northern schools of residence. Peter Ackroyd says it may be the funniest English novel. Period. Dickens delights us in every detail, such as the miniaturist portrait painter Miss La Creevy, on capturing noses, "only to look out the window and wait for one": "Snubs and romans are plentiful enough, and there are flats of all sorts when there's a meeting at Exeter Hall; but perfect aquilines are scarce"(38). {But online, Roman and Aquiline are the same.]

 Another famous critic has claimed that Dickens fills with violence, which I hadn't really thought until re-reading this novel. The carriage to Yorkshire carrying Squeers and Nicholas and the five new boys abandoned to their care overturns, but in snow, causing fewer injuries. As the passengers tell stories at a pub awaiting a new carriage, one includes the Genius of Suicide, who never drinks in moderation because "that causes cheerfulness"(63). Another story tells of the Five Sisters of York, who have a window in York Minster which we've visited a dozen times, but never looked for that window. (Loved the old canon court, with three chairs on a raised dias, now used as a vestry.)

 Dickens helped close down abusive residential schools through his extensive account of "Public Schools" (in U.S., "private schools") like Mr Squeers' "Dotheboys" (which I pronouce "doth-boys," but may be "do the boys"). The scenes from the Northern Dotheby's Hall are both convincing in their detailed cruelty and devastating as satire. Dickens in his Preface remarks his amusement at several Yorkshire schoolmasters who claim they're the original of Squeers, so like him. CD remarks Squeers represents a class, not an individual: "where imposture, ignorance, and brutal cupidity are the stock in trade"(vii). In typical Dickensian irony, Nicholas is grateful at first for Uncle Ralph's finding him the teaching job. 
 London visitors may compare the Golden Square of the 1830's, with the Opera collonade (1732), and many foreign residents, especially musicians,"a region of song and smoke"(7). Ralph Nickleby's brother dies, but the cheap remnant convinces the widow she's victim of her husband's imprudence. Uncle Ralph finds nephew Nicholas a job with Squeers, whom he's assisted before. Nicholas is under the illusion he'll be teaching sons of aristocrats, while in fact Dotheboy's specializes in keeping kids all year, no vacations, so children whose step-fathers want them out of the way. As the coach approaches the town of the school, Squeers confides, "It's not a Hall. We call it that in London." Turns out, it's a one-story flat residence with no heat except in Squeers' residence.
 Nicholas leaves grateful of uncle's kindness, but Ralph's assistant, Newman Noggs, stands astonished into silence that his boss even had a nephew (35). Too shocked to speak, Noggs writes a letter which Nicholas opens to find himself offered a place to live should he come back to London--needless to add, Noggs does not live at uncle Ralph's.

 Dickens can be hilarious, here with the widow Mrs. Nickleby, mother of Nicholas and Kate, to whom she confides about young Frank Cheeryble, who's 'the most attentive man I have seen." To which Kate, embarrassed, says, coloring, "Surely you are not serious." To which Mrs. Nickleby, "I was never more serious. Surely his attention to me is most becoming, gratifying...You don't often meet with such behavior in young men..." Again, Kate, "Oh! Attention to YOU, Mama..."(640). Of course, Frank's object of attention is not the mother, as certified by a marriage at the end of the book. But Mrs Nickleby's always putting herself at the center of any event--wonderful satire on egoism.
 Another hilarious marriage joke based on old Arthur Gride, whose plan to entrap the young Madeline Bray is broken up by Nicholas, also her suitor. When Gride returns home, "Rumours having gone abroad, that Arthur was to be married that morning, inquiries were made after the bride, who was held by the majority to be disguised in the person of Mr. Ralph Nickleby, which gave rise to much public indignation at the public appearance of the bride in boots and pantaloons..."(738).
 
 
 Nicholas rescues the handicapped (or "retarded") Smike and they both leave after Nicholas is driven to beating the sadistic headmaster who starved the boys from greed and beat the boys for nothing. Huge John Browdie helps rescue Smike, and later on his own when the boy's recaptured by the sadistic Squeers, who arises to chase Smike--hours gone. Browdie tells Nicholas, "I ran him off his legs in a quarther of an hour, skimming along up to his knees in mud and wather, rowling into ditches, and bawling out like mad, wi' his one eye looking sharp for the lad..."(545). On this page John's laughter is a "contagion" communicated to Nicholas and one other. 
 The complex plot also satirizes the semi-professional theater of the day, in the Dover company of Crummles that includes the "infant phenomenon"--reminiscent of our own child actors, like Justin Biber, whom nobody satirizes now. Nicholas is hired as juvenile male lead and playwright-adapter of French plays to their minimal acting skills.
 When the Lark soars, I recall seeing and hearing one on grassy cliffs east of Weymouth, Dorset (50). We are treated to Yorkshire dialect from Tilda's beaux, Browdie. "Old wooman awa', beean't she?...Let'un gang on" and "Cum whoam, tell 'e, cum whoam"(89, 95) And "I'm reeght glod to see thee"(704).

 This is a lively, generous, complex-plotted book that will engage and amuse any reader with sufficient time not to feel rushed and burdened--i.e., most readers not reading for a college class. Other strands include the millenary business which Nicholas's sister Kate works in, and the machinations of the cruel "rich uncle," whose end is telling, as is his having fathered one Nicholas cares for better than he. Great irony at the end, Ralph Nickleby and Sir Mulberry Hawk getting their just deserts, as does, indeed, Dotheboys Hall school.

 Dickens ends the book with three marriages, the most unexpected being Miss La Creevy's and...I shall not add a spoiler. Near the end, he adds a connection to my first commercial book, "BirdTalk"2003, expanded in "Conversations with Birds: the Metaphysics of Bird and Human Communication"(Mach, 2023) English Blackbirds are inventive, diatonic vocalizers (p.96). Tim Linkinwater greets Nicholas's return, noting his caged Blackbird:
"Dick, the Blackbird. He hasn't been himself since you've been gone"(796). See my Facebook page "Birdtalk, Conversations with Birds" on 72 measures of a Dorset Blackbird's song notated (also 2023, p.96). See also online, habitabletree.com.