Rating: 5/5

It is the greatest irony that the murderers on death row will do anything to put off execution, they get their lawyers to make appeal after appeal, up to 20 years of them. Yet What time their victims get? What mercy did they show them? What guarantee of no pain on death were they offered? Were 'cruel and unusual punishments' - torture withheld. No. But they all feel entitled to all of that. But that's the story of all the killers on death row. 

Bill Jent and Earnie Miller. Innocence.   Not all people on death row are killers, there are those put there by lies which always, always involve police deception and usually threatening of witnesses who may not be entirely innocent themselves or are led by the police to believe they don't think they are and are threatened with prison themselves.

Bill Jent and Earnie Miller were finally proved to be innocent of murdering two girls only when witnesses said that they had been threatened by the police with prison andthe electric chair themselves. Nothing seems to have happened to the police who threatened the witnesses and set the men up. 

Ted Bundy. Guilt.  This is how James Dobson reportedly saw him, "He truly saw the man who did all those killings as another person, not the 'real' Ted Bundy. The real Ted Bundy was, in his mind, a liberal, an environmentalist, a guy who cared about women and women's rights. The killer was someone else." Poor Bundy had been influenced by evil porn said the US's "leading crusader against pornography'. Duped by an interview with Bundy, a living Satan. 

Marvin Francois Last words: "If there is such a thing as the Antichrist, it ain't one man but the whole white race. This man who killed 6 people and shot two more.  He had several convictions for violent felonies and with three accomplices, tricked their way into a house, robbed the family and then shot all 8 of them in the head so they couldn't identify him. 2 lived. He asked for his ashes to be taken to Africa. Senegal 'welcomed back their brother', how they could use that carefully-considered phrase for such an evil man I don't know.

"... and like many abused children, grew up to abuse his own kids". I really object to that. I was an abused child so were my stepsons. I know three women who were abused far, far worse than me.  One was repeatedly raped by her father and grandfather and had to live in a shed. One was beaten with lead pipe by her mother even as an adult. 

One, whose mother I knew well, beat one of her daughters to death over a night and morning, with a piece of two by four with nails. She then accused another daughter of the murder. Both girls had been sent out as young teenagers to thieve and also to prostitute themselves.

Those of us who were abused make more of an effort to show our children love because we know what it was like to be made to be made to feel unloveable. In any case, some killers grew up in good homes

David Washington.  The rarity of remorse.  Most of the appeals for clemency write that the person on death row has reformed and could be a useful member of (an incarcerated) society. The author writes that genuine remorse is so rare it makes the other prisoners uncomfortable. David Washington who was very remorseful had to be moved 

Thomas Knight Getting religion changes everything. Not.  Knight changed his name to Askari Abdullah Muhammad when he got religion and grew a beard which he said was against his religion to shave off. This was against prison rules and he was denied a visit from his mother who hadn't visited in 5 years. He said he would have it shaved on the way to the visit/ So he told the warder who explained the rules and why he couldn't just do it, "Man, when I get angry I go to stickin'". He later shanked the warder repeatedly until he died. A chorus went up, "Another one bites the dust" from other prisoners.

There was a lockdown on death row, items confiscated, handcuffs outside the cells etc. and the death row inmates retaliated. One shanked a guard, and another poured boiling water over one's face. Tear gas was used and things calmed down. Reform and remorse is beyond most of these killers.

Financial reasons for ending the death penalty and what could be put in place that is, for the non-violent, a more humane punishment I read an estimate of $4.2M and 20 years per appeal in a site on Texas and the death penalty. Prison islands far from land where there is a possibility of life and work for the non-psychopathic that don't need constant supervision would make people's lives safer ad their own lives more productive. And always the chance of parole, something to work towards. Otherwise it's like The Picture of Dorian Gray

A comment below says that the death of the murderer probably doesn't bring peace to the families, the living victims who will suffer all their lives. It might be true. Maybe nothing could. But maybe funds would help put their lives to right, help with all the lost income of a parent, help with the horrendous fees for counselling, help possibly setting up schemes to help other victims. That $4.2M in appeals could go a long way to helping not just one murderer escape an execution but may families to heal.

John Spenkelink"You can't do this, this is America! This is murder!" he shouted on entering the death chamber. The first man executed in Florida after the US reinstatement of the death penalty (and the second after Gary Gilmore). This is the first quarter of the book, and first thoughts on it. Spenkelink shot a man in the back, beat him and killed him. He did not deny this. Interestingly, both Spenkelink and Gilmore were white, although in later years it became obvious that black men were far more likely to be sentenced to death, especially if they killed white people.

The appalling behaviour of anti-death penalty protestorsDuring the time of the last appeals before the execution of Spenkelink, threatened the prosecutor's and the judge's families with shooting them, arson and various other murderous acts to the extent of the families having to be moved several times and with full time guards. This standing outside their houses with children in. So they would protect a murderer from execution but happy to murder the executioners. It's happened subsequently too. 

To sum up. If this a subject that interests you, this is a fair and exhaustive study of the process and individual cases, nothing generalised, by an author whose writing is equal to his scholarship, and who always puts every side of each case leaving you much to think about. And that's why it's a 10 star book.