Rating: 4/5

I absolutely loved this book! I gotta say the one thing that kept making me a little disappointed when reading this book is constantly hearing about how New England is a baseball team even with all the Celtics championships and the success of the Bruins. And it would seem even at the start of the Patriots dynasty, but this book is written before the dynasty starts anyways. I wish I lived in a time where that was the case as now it doesn’t matter how good the other teams are you will only hear about the damn Patriots (who I don’t even like) regardless of the situation. Get a star like Ceochet, Bregman, others, and a promising season ahead and somehow the Patriots are still on the news. Take me back to those times except I probably would hate all the losing. I’ve heard the story of the 2004 Red Sox so many times that it was interesting to solely hear about the Red Sox losing and the curse of the Bambino. Also, about some who believed in the curse and others who didn’t. Just everything about Red Sox Nation was very interesting however it did feel like some parts here could have been shortened to talk about other topics From random fans to the groundskeeper to media personnel’s like Peter Gammons. Hearing the painstaking details of many of those WS runs and the fallouts were interesting because there is much to some stories I had no idea. Like I’ve known about Bill Buckner, but I didn’t realize just how terrible the reaction was and also how it didn’t make nearly as much of a difference as people claimed it didn’t (they still very well could’ve lost regardless) and the tragic story of Donnie Moore for the Angels. I was surprised not to get more about the 1975 World Series and I did wish they dove more into that as well as the other World Series appearances (67 and 46). Like this and all my reviews the organization of the book could’ve been better because it jumped around the years so much. I loved getting to better know some of the players like Ted Williams and Jim Rice and especially their interactions to Red Sox nation, the media, Jimmy Fund, etc. The Jimmy Fund and the authors personal relationship to it was beautiful. I was astounded 90% of New Englanders knew about it and I wonder if that number is still accurate today. Hopefully it is and it is definitely one of my favorite Charities that I feel like I should support more and this book has made me think about that so I’m glad to have been reminded of it and hear of its origin and how it’s helped so many people and has helped so many more since I’m sure. Lastly, it was funny to read the last chapter along with other sections of the book hearing about how Fenway might be closing down and a new Red Sox ballpark may be arising. Now I’m sure Dan knows that he will never see the day the ballpark closes and I’m only 23 but I don’t know that I will as well. I had no idea the plans of potentially closing in 2001 but thank god they were proven false and now Fenway has become a historical landmark and is the still the best ballpark in baseball. I love Fenway park and this made me dream of going there once again this season especially in the beginning when he speaks of first going and the joy of it. I’m glad Dan and others such as Stephen King got to see the curse broken but it is sad so many never did. Now we get to see them as the most successful 21st century team as of now and hopefully that will only continue. I definitely need to read more from Dan both from the Boston Globe as well as his other Red Sox stories such as The Curse of The Bambino