Rating: 5/5

Second reading, and first of this new translation, which is breathtaking in its brilliance. As I said on my first review, this is a masterpiece not least for its shockingly modern portrayal of domestic violence - for example: 

From page 171-2: 

When she arrived at the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or she found the whole place in a commotion. The girls had left the worktable and were in the yard, looking upwards. She asked Clémence what was going on. 

It's Bijard,' she said. 'He's beatin' ‘is wife up. He was waitin' for ‘er under the archway, pissed as a newt. He kept punchin' 'er all the way up the stairs and he's still at it up there, in their room. Listen, can't you 'ear 'er screamin'?'

Gervaise ran up the stairs. She liked her washerwoman, Madame Bijard, who was a very plucky woman. She hoped she'd be able to make Bijard stop it. Upstairs, on the sixth floor, the door to the room was wide open and several of the other tenants were on the landing, shouting, while Madame Boche was standing in the doorway screaming: 'Stop that! We're goin' to fetch the police!'

Nobody dared venture into the room because Bijard could get really violent when he was drunk. In fact he was never really sober. On the rare days when he worked he'd set a bottle of brandy next to his locksmith's vice and take a swig every half-hour. It was the only thing he lived on now. He'd have gone up in flames if you'd lifted a match to his mouth.

'We can't let 'im kill 'er!' said Gervaise, shaking all over. 

She went in. The attic room was very clean, but cold and stark, stripped bare by Bijard's boozing; he would take the very sheets off the bed to pay for drink. In the fight the table had got pushed up against the window and the two chairs were upside down, their legs in the air. Madame Bijard was lying on the floor, in the middle of the room; her skirts, still wet from the wash-house, clung to her thighs, clumps of her hair had been pulled out, she was bleeding, and each time Bijard kicked her she let out a series of groans. To begin with he'd knocked her down with his fists, now he was stamping on her.
'You bitch! You bitch! You bitch!' he kept growling, grunting the word each time he gave her a kick, madly repeating it, kicking harder as his voice grew hoarser.

Then his voice failed him altogether, but he went on kicking silently, insanely, standing stiffly in his tattered smock and overalls, his face purple under his filthy beard, his bald pate covered in big red blotches. On the landing the neighbours were saying he was beating her because she'd refused to give him a franc that morning. Boche's voice could be heard at the bottom of the stairs, calling to his wife: "Come down, let 'em kill each other, it'll be good riddance!'

Meanwhile Père Bru had followed Gervaise into the room. The two of them tried to reason with the locksmith and edge him towards the door. But he kept turning back, saying nothing, foaming at the mouth, a murderous expression shining in his pale, alcohol-inflamed eyes. The laundress had her wrist twisted and the old man was thrown against the table. On the floor Madame Bijard was breathing more heavily than ever, her mouth wide open and her eyes closed. Bijard's kicks were missing her now, but he kept on trying, blind with rage, even hitting himself with his wild blows. And throughout this scene Gervaise could see, in a corner of the room, little Lalie, now four years old, watching her father as he battered her mother. In her arms, as if to protect herself, she was holding her baby sister Henriette, only just weaned. She stood there, her head wrapped in a piece of printed calico, very pale and solemn-looking. Her big black eyes were staring intently, with never a tear.

Eventually Bijard tripped over a chair and fell flat on the floor, where they left him to snore. Père Bru helped Gervaise lift up Madame Bijard, who was now sobbing violently; Lalie, who'd moved closer, watched her mother cry, already used to such events, and resigned to them. As the laundress went downstairs again through the now quiet building she could still see the girl's eyes, the eyes of a child of four, as serious and unafraid as the eyes of a grown woman.

‘Monsieur Coupeau’s on the pavement opposite’, shouted Clémence as soon as she saw her. ‘He looks completely sloshed.’ 

Coupeau was just crossing the street. He nearly smashed a pane of glass as he staggered through the door. He was dead drunk, his teeth clenched, his nose pinched. Gervaise could see at once the poison from Père Colombe's Assommoir in the polluted blood that discoloured his skin. She wanted to laugh it off and put him to bed, as she always did when he was lit up by wine. But he pushed her aside without opening his mouth and raised his fist as he brushed past and dropped on to the bed. He was just like the other one, the drunkard snoring upstairs, worn out with beating his wife. A chill came over Gervaise as, with a sinking heart, she thought about the men in her life, about her husband and Goujet and Lantier, and despaired of ever being happy.

 and then about 100 pages later… 

Little Lalie, the eight-year-old kid who was no bigger than two sous' worth of butter, kept house as well as any grown-up, and it was no easy job, for there were two younger ones to look after, her brother Jules and her sister Henriette, tots of three and five, whom she had to keep an eye on all day long while also sweeping the floor and washing the dishes. Ever since Bijard had killed his missus with a kick in the belly, Lalie had become the little mother of the family,
Without saying a word, all by herself, she'd taken the dead woman's place, to the extent that her brute of a father, no doubt to make the likeness perfect, now beat the daughter as he used to beat the mother. When he came home drunk he just had to have a woman to batter. He didn't even notice how small Lalie was; he hit her as he would hit a grown woman. A single clout would cover her whole face, and her skin was still so soft that the marks left by his five fingers would be visible for two days. The thrashings were shameful; blows rained down for the least little thing--it was like a raging wolf falling on a timid, gentle kitten, pitifully thin, who took it all without complaining, with a look of resignation in her lovely eyes. No, Lalie never rebelled. She might bend her neck a bit to protect her face, but she never cried out, so as not to upset the other people in the building.
When her father got tired of knocking her round the room with his shoe, she'd wait until she felt strong enough to stand up, and then get back to work, washing the little ones, getting food ready, not leaving a speck of dust on the furniture. Being beaten was just part of her daily round.

(and things get worse from there onward for the poor girl, but I do not have the heart (or the time) to type all that out too…) 

***First review***

A masterpiece. Brutal, angry, funny, sad. The final chapter in particular is extraordinary for its time, and absolutely devastating. The way he deals with domestic abuse throughout the book is jaw droppingly modern. 

I have not read enough Zola, I realise that now.