Rating: 4/5

4 Stars
Why do I keep reading this? It makes me feel things. 
This is probably the third time I have read this book and it is still one of my favorites. Every few years, I see it on my bookshelf and think ‘Why did I enjoy that book so much? It wasn’t that great.’ The story itself, doesn’t seem to exciting. It is about a high school boy, Jed, who meets a punk girl with pink hair, Gertrude, who tells him his dad is sleeping with her mom. Prior to this, Jed had a “perfect” life… perfect in the eyes of a teenage guy that is. 
When I first read this book, I was probably 14. I was extremely jealous of Jed’s life. He had “landed a major girlfriend” with a “hot body,” he got to drive his dad’s Camaro, he had a big group of “friends,” he had a great relationship with his parents who let him watch porn, he is a good athlete, it was everything a teenage guy could want. The second time I read this, I was probably 16 and still had the same idiotic view. Five years later, it is amazing how much my view of Jed changed. I hated him. He is an arrogant asshole. He thinks the world revolves around him. He is ‘friends’ with Bobby but thinks that Bobby is a huge loser and Jed “doesn’t know why he (Jed) is so nice to him(Bobby).” Bobby is loyal to Jed, but Jed treats Bobby like shit. Jed thinks he is the smartest kid in school and constantly comments about how smart he is and how dumb everyone else is. He knows Cassie (his gf) is only with him because of his car, but continues to stay with her because she has a body. When she gets a pimple, it bothers him. The list goes on. Now this book is written for a teenage audience, so I feel Mr. Weaver does a nice job of capturing how a teenage guy thinks. That being said, I still think people beyond teenage years, can still enjoy it for different reasons. 
There are a few flaws that I found in the book. Some things seem unlikely to actually happen (noticing a semicolon) or Jed does things for no reason other than to progress the story later on (picking up the marijuana). These things do not take away from the story much though and you can still enjoy it. 
At the end, Jed’s “perfect” life is now shattered, but he can work on building a better life than before and be a better person even knowing that unexpected events in life happen. As a teenager reading this book, I read it at face value. Being slightly older, I think it has a lot more meaning than I used to and it makes it that much sadder. This could be me just reading into it too much, but that is why books are great, there are many different interpretations for each reader. 
Don’t let the fact that this is a teenage book turn you away. It makes you feel. Anger, lust (younger), jealousy, hope, happiness, sadness. It’s a very short book that you can read in a couple of hours, so the fact that it makes you feel all that makes it a very good book. It has a lot of meaning and a huge unexpected ending and is overall just a great book. 
For a complete review, please check out my new website miketsbookblog.weebly.com
Thanks