Rating: 4/5

This book took me back to my tomboy, chubby, book-worm teenage version of myself. 

Best thing about those days not having a crush on boy bands, having ridiculous style, worst music taste, winning boys at the soccer games. It was coming to home from a long school day, devouring too much sweet pastries which could help you climb at the roof and dance all night, taking my books and locking myself to my room with them. At those days I discovered Agatha Christie books and my mean spirit. I read them at nights, appeared at the school with my vampirella image to lose the rest of my chances to attract any boy (don’t worry, I’d already lost it after kicked most of their asses! They had been already running away from me to cry to their moms.)
I read them at the school times, during classes and bribed my teachers with my amazing thriller collections to get better grades. Guess what! I became valedictorian!

But some of my friends and my family members started to steal my books so as a precaution I started to write the killer’s name in the middle of the book and I left the books those places they could have been easily snatched! (They thought they were so smart!)

It was painful experience to find your favorite Christie novel. I always chose Hercule Poirot over Miss. Marple. But some books were also deliciously thrilling and they truly gave me so much fun without those expert detectives! As my favorite book I always tried to choose between “Murder of Roger Ackroyd” , “And then there were none”, “Murder on the Orient Express”, “Five Little Pigs” and “Death on the Nile”

Now after watching the remake of “Murder on the Orient Express” (I highly recommend you to watch 1974 version of the movie adaptation with brilliant Hercule Poirot composition of Albert Finney. He created a more reliable version of Belgian detective! I have been never being a great fan of Peter Ustinov’s or Kenneth Branagh’s versions even though they are one of the greatest actors) and I decided to reread some Christie books to decide which one is my favorite. (At least I wasn’t drunk when I made my decision like the time I decided to reread Twilight and as a result I was saved to performed hara-kiri to myself.)

So the famous detective finds himself on the Orient Express with a killer on board because an rich American named Ratchett was stabbed 12 times! Their train is stopped by the snow storm. This is a complex, challenging, one of the most different cases of Mr. Poirot because any one can have a motive to kill Ratchett who lied about his criminal identity.

I remember that I changed my mind at least dozen times when I read this book at the first time. I am not going to advocate myself by saying I was too young, naïve and living without my spidey spider senses! But guess what, if I read this book at the first time RIGHT NOW, I cannot find whodunit again! So there’s no progression about my grey cells’ functioning capacity, sorry Mr. Poirot, I had eat more hard boiled eggs and stop watching Bachelor episodes which kill the rest of my remaining ones.

This was incredibly captivating, mysterious, smart, exciting book. I think it is my first choice of Christie books and I love to read over and over again! I’m not gonna give spoilers or send you hard copy of it( I cannot guarantee I can help myself not to write murderer’s name in the middle. Old habits die hard) So please if you didn’t watch one of the movies or you didn’t read any other Christie books, pick this one, enjoy it and send me Sprinkles cupcakes (at least a dozen) as an appreciation gesture.