Rating: 5/5

EDIT (RE-READ): Just re-read this and think it's one of the most perfect books in the world. I'm depressed because I feel like I've read most of Diana's catalogue - definitely all her great standalones. This was actually even more fun the second time around because I forgot most of the mechanics of the plot so was incredibly confused all over again, my favourite thing about Hexwood's structure is how it throws up recognisable "rules" to guide the audience through the weirdness of the first half and then it turns out all these rules were mostly misdirections too. 

A reading experience where you're constantly being knocked off balance and feel like you're tripping but also is a mixture of every trope/genre DWJ has been obsessed with throughout her career. It's her masterpiece! The second half is SO thrilling, like it's impossible to put down and I marvel at the way everything comes together every time! I'm also realising Mordion is the real main character of this book the second time around.....his storyline is just incredibly moving and I think the non-chronological structure is perfect when you read it as a trauma narrative that mirrors memory/how the brain fragments events to protect us (Yam literally saying the woods are "human memory"). Also one of her most romantic books in my opinion :') I LOVE THIS BOOK I LOVE AND MISS DIANA WYNNE JONES 

-- 

ah, my obsession with deadly brainwashed assassins with kind hearts (and who are sort of sexy) rages on!!

this book is maddeningly intricate and tough to get into, even by diana wynne jones standards. I gave up on it like 3 times previously but luckily softened after re-watching a lot of doctor who (my tolerance for mind-screw reality warping plots is now super high). the twists towards the end are just so delightful and actually made me dizzy - everything comes together cleverly and, by the end, i was fond of all the characters, which happens with every diana book i read. only she can manage to make something so epic in scale feel so cosy.