Rating: 4/5

Built over a three-century period, from ca. 1900-1600 B.C., and still standing mostly intact on southwestern England's Salisbury Plain, the great megalithic stone circle of Stonehenge is one of the best-known and most widely recognized artifacts of the Neolithic Age. By historical times, its origins and functions were already forgotten, and from at least the Middle Ages it was shrouded in legend and speculation. But serious archaeological study of Great Britain's prehistoric past began early in the 20th century. Though not himself a professional archaeologist, British-born Gerald S. Hawkins (1928-2003) became a pivotal contributor to that study; and this book, written for serious lay readers, is a landmark treatment of the subject. (I read it back in the early 90s, and found it fascinating enough to take five and 1/2 pages of handwritten notes on it!)

Hawkins' Ph.D. was in astronomy, and he became chair of the astronomy department at Boston Univ. in 1959. That gave him a unique perspective from which to approach his interest in the ancient and prehistoric past; and his research essentially jump-started the entire modern-day field of archeoastronomy. In a nutshell, he discovered, and convincingly demonstrated, that from the center of the monument, looking outward through any of the trilithons (which are very narrow, the space between the uprights averaging about a foot), any line of sight marks the point where the sun or moon intersects with the horizon at a significant point in an astronomical cycle. Most importantly, the trilithons that are oriented northeast/southwest pinpoint, respectively, sunrise on the summer solstice and sunset on the winter solstice. (Before the trilithons were raised, the same observations could be made by sighting along the older "station stones.") In a time before paper calendars, these observations would allow calculation of times for planting and reaping, and perhaps of special religious holidays. Also, the position of a stone moved by one hole each year along the circle of 56 "Aubrey holes" (named for John Aubrey, who first called attention to them back in 1663) would allow the observer to predict lunar and solar eclipses. These features are pegged to the latitude of the monument; these sightings would not be possible even 30 miles north or south of Stonehenge's position. It beggars belief to imagine that any of this is coincidental.

The discussion of the above phenomena involves a fair amount of technical vocabulary and math and some complex concepts, such as the moon's north-south "declination" between two extremes on an 18.61 year cycle, the effect of the tilt of the earth's axis and the "precession" of its orbit (all of which are allowed for in the layout; the monument's designers were not as ignorant as modern lay people typically assume that prehistoric people were!). But Hawkins manages to explain himself clearly enough so that even someone like me, relatively ignorant of scientific concepts, could follow the thought. Besides this, he provides a context of what we know about the prehistoric past of Great Britain, going back to the Ice Age, and on up to the cultures which built Stonehenge (and debunking the association of the place with the Druids, the Celtic priesthood --the Celts didn't arrive in England until the 400s B.C.); a lot of historical information about the legends, speculation about, and proto-archaeological study of the site through the centuries; and much data about the actual construction process. (Some of the stones used weigh 50 tons, and others, weighing up to five tons, were transported at least 130 miles from the only natural source. That's a feat of transportation unparalleled elsewhere in prehistoric Europe.)

23 black-and-white photographic plates of the site itself and different views and features of it (including some aerial views), grouped into two places in the book, greatly enhance the text, and Hawkins also provides various helpful diagrams and tables. There is an eight-page index, and about three and 1/2 pages of bibliography (almost all of books, but including some articles). As well as writings by 20th-century scholars such as V. Gordon Childe, J. Norman Lockyer and Alexander Thom, the sources cited include older writers, going back in some cases to ancient and medieval times, and even literary works that mention Stonehenge, like Hardy's novel Tess of the D'Urbervilles. Hawkins also adds three short technical appendices, one dealing with Callanish, a Scottish site that demonstrates some astronomical features similar to Stonehenge's. (Since 1965, a number of other prehistoric sites have also been shown to have been used for similar purposes.)

If you're at all interested in Stonehenge, or in the prehistoric world and its archaeology in general, I would characterize this as a must read! (It's an older book now, but one which lays a basic foundation which newer works can supplement.)