Rating: 5/5

As always, an anthology is only as good as the component stories, so I'll review those independently.

1. Rachel in Love, by Pat Murphy. Brain transfer between a child and a chimpanzee, what an interesting story. Definitely a thoughtful look at what makes us human. 8/10.

2. Dream Baby, by Bruce McAllister. This story makes a lot more sense when you view it through the lens of a society still grappling with the horrors of the Vietnam war. 10/10, but this was a difficult one to read, especially being in the medical field.

3. Flowers of Edo, by Bruce Sterling. A heck of a tonal shift from the prior story, but this one I really like. Set in Japan, just after contact with the West--an extremely interesting time. 9/10

4. Forever Yours, Anna by Kate Wilhelm. An absolute mindtwist of a story, I needed three read-throughs to try to get what was going on and I don't think I did even still. 10/10

5. At the Cross-Time Jaunters' Ball, by Alexander Jablokov. I really wanted to like this one more than I did. It has everything--time travel, an expansive, well-described, multiverse--but nothing really hits. 5/10 because of wasted potential

6. Dinosaurs, by Walter Jon Williams. What an interesting story. A heavily mutated and changed humanity in the far future, engaged in diplomatic negotiations where neither side can understand where the other is coming from. 10/10

7. The Temporary king, by Paul J. McAuley. Another whiplash story compared with the prior. Here, a humanity in the far future has largely reverted to medieval technology but the xenophobia remains...9/10

8. Perpetuity Blues, by Neal Barrett, Jr. The first of the novellas of this collection. What an amazing story, a real small-town growing up story but WEIRD. I loved this one. 10/10

9. Buffalo Gals, won't you come out tonight, by Ursula K. LeGuin. Native American mythology, not expanded upon, and in general a fever dream of a story. Another fantastic read from one of the greats of SciFi. 9/10

10. The Pardoner's Tale, by Robert Silverberg. It's fun reading old sci fi because you can see the germs of what came later from the same authors. This story almost certainly takes place in the same universe as Silverberg's full-length novel "The Alien Years". A fantastic read, both of them. 10/10

11. Glass Cloud, by James Patrick Kelly. I simply didn't get this one. I think the story is trying to do too much--a personal drama, an architectural drama....and I'm not even sure where the sci-fi part comes from. 4/10.

12. The evening and the morning and the night, by Octavia E. Butler. What an interesting story. A disease, autosomal recessive, that presents as self-mutilation but also special...talents...in carriers. The story left me wanting more. 9/10

13. Night of the Cooters, by Howard Waldrop. War of the worlds in a small Texas. This was a fun, vivid, one, if not particularly memorable. 7/10

14. Angel, by Pat Cadigan. An odd, sad, story about a misfit and her castaway friend from another world. 8/10

15. Shades, by Lucius Shepard. Another Vietnam-based story, good lord. This one is more mystical than the one prior, and I'm still not entirely sure about the middle part of it, but it's certainly not bad. 7/10

16. The Faithful Companion at Forty, by Karen Joy Fowler. I legitimately do not know what I read or what this story is even trying to be about. This one is a clear, and rare, miss by Dozois. 1/10

17. Candle in a Cosmic Wind, by Joseph Manzione. An absolute HELL of a story, about the last human on earth, and a terrible miscommunication and accident....10/10

18. The Emir's Clock by Ian Watson. A story that makes you think, about machine intelligence and human relationships. 9/10 but only because I want a sequel.

19. Ever After, by Susan Palwick. I wasn't expecting a vampire (?) story out of this fairy tale but I'm glad it came about. 7/10

20. The Forest of time, by Michael Flynn. I do love a good alternate history, and this certainly is one. A dimension-jumping man gets lost and finds himself in a very odd America....10/10

21. The Million-Dollar Wound, by Dean Whitlock. Another story best viewed as a visceral reaction to Vietnam (There may be a theme to this collection). 6/10 if viewed through modern eyes but considerably better when put in context.

22. The Moon of Popping Trees, by R. Garcia Y Robertson. Another story full of Native American mysticism and longing for a bygone world--but artfully done. 8/10

23. Diner, by Neal Barrett, Jr. Very different, but sharing common threads with "Perpetuity Blues" by the same author. The story feels too long, like its point could have come a few pages earlier. 6/10

24. All the Hues of Hell, by Gene Wolfe. Too many characters, introduced too quickly, and attempting to do too much. 5/10

25. Halley's Passing, by Michael McDowell. what an incredible story, about a serial killer who is not at all what he seems. I wanted so much more of this story. 10/10

26. America, by Orson Scott Card. A story about the butterfly effect and a story about how the relationships we make when we're young can change the whole world. 8/10

27. For Thus do I remember Carthage, by Michael Bishop. Best part of the story is the Title, the rest is just aimless faffing about without a point. 4/10

28. Mother Goddess of the World by Kim Stanley Robinson. A well-written, well-set, story, but I'm a little unclear what it's doing in a science fiction, as it seems to employ no science fiction or fantastical elements at all. It's certainly not bad, but I'm not sure it belongs. 5/10 (?)