Rating: 5/5

428-The SAS survival handbook-John Wiseman-Tool-1986

Barack
2022/07/23

The SAS survival handbook, first published in 1986. It is a complete course for the Special Air Service to prepare for any type of emergency. It presents real-world strategies for surviving in any type of situation, from accidents and escape procedures, including chemical and nuclear, to successful adaptation to various climates (polar, tropical, desert), to identifying edible plants and making fires. The book is very practical and illustrated with easy to understand line art and diagrams.

Special Air Service, Special Air Service (SAS) is the special forces unit of the British Army. The SAS was formed as a regiment in 1941 and reorganized into a corps in 1950. The unit specializes in multiple missions, including counterterrorism, hostage rescue, direct action, and covert reconnaissance. Much of the information about SAS is highly classified, and neither the UK government nor the Ministry of Defence has commented on it due to the secrecy and sensitivity of its operations . He gained worldwide fame and recognition after his televised rescue of all but two hostages during the siege of the Iranian embassy in 1980.

John Wiseman was born in London, United Kingdom in 1940. In 1959, 18-year-old Wiseman joined the SAS from the parachute regiment he had joined a year earlier, becoming the youngest person ever to pass the selection. He went on to serve in the SAS for 26 years, rising to the rank of Warrant Officer. Wiseman was also head of 22 SAS Operations Research, formed an anti-hijacking group called SP Team, and formed the SAS Counter-Terrorism Team (known for its involvement in the Iranian embassy siege). After leaving SAS in 1985, his first book was the SAS Survival Manual (published in 1986). Wiseman has since become a survival writer and consultant, and has appeared on television.

Table of Contents
1 - ESSENTIALS
2 - STRATEGY
3 - CLIMATE &amp; TERRAIN
4 - FOOD
5 - CAMP CRAFT
6 - READING THE SIGNS
7 - ON THE MOVE
8 - HEALTH
9 - SURVIVAL AT SEA
10 - RESCUE

This book is about how to survive in a variety of unconventional environments, which may be harsh natural conditions or man-made crisis situations. Before encountering these circumstances, you should be prepared. First and foremost, keep a pocket knife with you. The second priority is to prepare mentally and physically. Knowing these basics in advance may not be used in a lifetime under normal circumstances. But if you really need to use it, then the value of this knowledge will not be exchanged. The third prerequisite is a strong will to live. Only if you have a strong desire to survive can you rack your brains and find ways to survive. A more experienced person, if negligent, can also capsize in difficult circumstances. On the contrary, with a strong desire to survive, we may take the initiative to seek out all the knowledge, tools, internal motivation, or external support that increase our chances of survival.

Methodologically speaking, our preparation can refer to the Plan rule. P is protection, pay attention to the dangers in the environment and build temporary shelters. L is location. Send out your location as much as possible to help the outside world find your location as quickly and accurately as possible. A is acquisition, to obtain important resources such as water and food as much as possible, even if it is not used now, it may come in handy at some point in the future. N is navigation. It is best to carry a navigation system such as GPS. If you can accurately know your latitude and longitude, and can send it out, it will greatly reduce the difficulty of rescue.

One of the keys to dealing with special circumstances is preparation. We may already know when, where and how we will enter difficult circumstances, or we may not know when disaster strikes, but plan to prepare in advance. Every detail has the potential to make or break us. We can't be perfect, but we can simulate every detail iteratively. This kind of simulation may be planning in the mind; it may be collecting written and written data, learning from the experience of others; it may also be practiced in advance. Preparation itself does not guarantee success, but an extra preparation increases the probability of success.

The human body is magical. On the one hand, the human body has stricter requirements on the temperature, humidity and other parameters of the external environment. Therefore, we need to use the limited luggage we carry with us to create these environments as much as possible so that we can survive longer. But on the other hand, people's ability to adapt is extremely strong. Even if we don't reach the best state, we can overcome it for a short time. This kind of spiritual wisdom and adaptability is our ability to achieve more than other creatures. one of the main factors.

When it comes to camping in the wild, tents, sleeping bags, clothing, hiking shoes and other equipment must be considered. The mountaineering bag carried by an adult is about 60 liters, and the overall weight may be about 12KG~ 15KG . So it is very important to choose equipment that is as light as possible and durable at the same time. At the same time, moisture caused by sweating and rain must be considered, so materials with good air permeability are important. If a worker wants to do a good job, he must first sharpen his tools. That's why any sport, not just mountaineering, plays as far back as the gear goes. When personal skills and physical strength have basically reached a relatively high level, the influence of equipment possession is also increasing. Conversely, just having good equipment, but not using it correctly, is tantamount to a waste of money, and there is no way to fully utilize the potential of good equipment.

Any tool that can effectively locate , such as GPS, is essential. If you only rely on the mobile phone to locate in the field, if there is no power or no signal, the function of the mobile phone will be very low. And if you only rely on the compass, you may get lost because the positioning is too rough, or you can't see the sun. Only by knowing your exact latitude and longitude can you understand how far you are from your destination and how much you have passed from your starting point. Knowing where you are now, where you are starting from, and where you are going are the most important issues.

A wireless walkie-talkie is necessary even when only two people are traveling. Traveling in the wild is different from traveling in big cities, and safety is always the first consideration. If there is no way to afford equipment such as radio and GPS, then we would rather not go hiking and camping outdoors, because the lack of these equipment may put us in danger. On the contrary, when traveling in big cities, you can reduce the items you carry with you. After all, as long as you bring enough money, most problems can be solved easily. Different travel modes and destinations require different strategies.