Rating: 2/5

I was given this book as part of a post-grad course with an assignment to write about any insights into Canadian culture I found. Unfortunately, most of the insights in gleaned from this book are insights into the author's worldview. Although based on surveys, the book is mostly ideological leaps made by the author, skewing the survey results to back up his preconceived notion that Canadian and American values are diverging rather than tracking on similar paths. 

The basic premise of the book can be summed up in three sentences. "Postmodern thought is good." Canadians are more postmodern than Americans." Therefore, "Canadians are better than Americans." 

Like some other reviewers, I found the book quite biased, and I was left wondering about his surveying and statistical methods. One survey answer that showed a 2% difference between Canadians and Americans was deemed statistically and sociologically significant. The author would present data that contradicted his premise that Canadians and Americans are divergent in their values, yet would ignore the data, stating that his premise remained true just the same. Towards the end of the book, he presents findings showing that Canadian youth are becoming more conservative in values, similar to the US. Yet he ignores the findings and sticks to his own hypothesis. In a number of cases, I don't find that he follows the data to come to conclusions. 

One of the more obvious biases in the book is his denunciation of all things Bush. He has only negative things to say about the Bush administration (from an academic? No!!) and the implication is that the rather alarming findings about US society that he found is due to Bush. In short, he found an alarming trend toward nihilism, acceptance of violence, sexism and xenophobia among a growing number of US youth. The ironic thing is that the survey results he based these conclusions on were taken between 1992 and 2000 -- THE EIGHT YEARS OF THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION! Adams totally misses the boat in failing to ask what it was, if anything, about the eight Clinton years that would have caused such a seismic shift in American values. In general, I would recommend you avoid this book. If you want to find out about the trends in Canadian values, I would recommend anything by Reginald Bibby instead.