Now I mostly worry about Joshua’s chess. I worry about his rating and whether he’s done his chess homework.

his sedentary activity has displaced many priorities in my life.

Perhaps Josh doesn’t really like chess, I tell myself. Maybe I’m forcing it on him. When I ask him how he feels about the game he shrugs in a way that suggests he likes video games more. Then I have to wonder if you can really trust what an eight-year-old says he likes. I’m the parent; I must decide what’s best for him. But what is best?

I decided that it was time to get serious. I bought chess books and memorized a few openings. I went over the game that thirteen-year-old Fischer had played against Donald Byrne, in which he had sacrificed his queen to win twenty-four moves later, and I wondered how many more weeks it would take before I would be making such moves.

The more I looked, the less I saw.

contemptuously pushes ahead the king pawn.

“Chess is like war on a board,” 

In 1977, Bobby Fischer was offered a quarter of a million dollars to play a single game at Caesars Palace but turned it down: it was not enough money. President Marcos offered to sponsor a three-million-dollar championship match in the Philippines, and Bobby was said to have ten million lined up in commercial offers.

“I can’t make a living from chess, but I’ve devoted so much time to the game that I have no other marketable skill.

“Let’s see what you know, Mr. Grandmaster,” Vinnie taunted

He was concentrating so hard on his game that he didn’t seem to notice how cold he was.

The United States Chess Federation categorizes players by rating—as Class E, D, C, B, A, Expert, Master, or Senior Master. An A player has a rating between 1800 and 1999 and is among the top 17 percent of all tournament players.

just returned from a two-month visit with Fischer in California, but he walked away without a word when asked about it. Bobby is the libido of the game, a chess player who could call a press conference tomorrow and play a game for a million dollars.

David Shipler’s book about the Soviet Union, Russia: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams

Russia was catchwords such as “Cold War,” “Raskolnikov,” “vodka,” “Kremlin,” “Bolshoi,” “KGB,” “Anna Karenina,” “Iron Curtain,” “gulag.”