Rating: 5/5

Last saw a production of this play in 2020, one of those picnic on the lawn outdoor productions, kinda punky, kinda funky, wherein the boys are bewitched to be with girls but when they are unbewitched they get together with their Truly and Fated Intendeds, boys with boys and girls with girls. The most "queered" or gender fluid production of this play I have ever seen, which totally makes sense with all the messing around with gender/sexuality in the original text. Billy Boy, again, ahead of his time.

“My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Methought I was enamored of an ass”--Titania

A Midsummer Night’s Dream is one of Shakespeare’s early plays, written around 1595-96, what appears to be the tenth by the actor-turned-playwright, but considered his best at that point, and certainly one of his best loved plays ever. I read it this time because I had just reread Neil Gaiman’s Sandman, Volume 4, which includes his Eisner-award-winning fantasy tale about a production of that play with some speculation about a deal the young Will made with Dream of the Endless, to have Shakespeare write this play and The Tempest. Great comics fantasy back story.

This review was originally written during pandemic 2020 as some of my fellow country people were locking down and some were partying their little heinies off--what's really happening?! It's all fake news, this virus! Many were convinced (in spite of evidence of millions dead) that the whole thing was a hoax:

“Lord, what fools these mortals be!”

Both sides said this, I note.

I won’t give you a synopsis, since you are either familiar with it or won’t care, but there are several plots and subplots that revolve around the marriage of Theseus and Hippolyta. So right, it’s a romantic comedy, so it has to be about love and weddings and hookups and flirtations and rejections and delusions, not necessarily in that order. One subplot revolves around a conflict between Athenian lovers Hermia and Lysander, another about a group of six amateur actors, Peter Quince, Nick Bottom, Francis Flute, Robin Starveling, Tom Snout and Snug who have to act out their interpretation of the play "Pyramus and Thisbe" at the wedding of Theseus and Hippolyta. Play within a play.

In a parallel plot line, Oberon, king of the fairies, and Titania, his queen, have come to the forest outside Athens. The trickster character Robin Goodfellow, or Puck, is much involved in the playful mayhem involving love potions and other machinations. So there’s a play within a play, one commenting on the other, though we might ask: Did anything happen here, or is it all a dream within a dream? 

“Are you sure/That we are awake? It seems to me/That yet we sleep, we dream.”

Though surely no one at first read or viewing can claim they know what in the heck is going on with any certainty. But who cares, it's about fantasy and fun! Nobody dies in this particular confusion.

Themes include, duh, the vagaries of love--I love her and she ignores me but loves him, who loves another who ignores him, which is central to the comedy, of course:

“The course of true love never did run smooth.”

It becomes clear: 

“The lunatic, the lover, and the poet, are of imagination all compact.”

More themes include dreaming, theater, art, invention! The idea of performing a part or one’s identity. Or trying something out in the formation of identity. There are fluid sexual identities, silly jokes, and the blurring of reality and fantasy. And the supernatural/magical. And nature is central to this romantic comedy and its sensuality:

“I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine.”

So, yeah, it has lovely poetry, too!

Death, and grief are central to Shakespeare’s tragedies, but in the plays actors obviously “pretend” these scenarios, so in this play we have the traveling actors make fun of that process in the play within a play:

“Thus I die. Thus, thus, thus.
Now I am dead,
Now I am fled,
My soul is in the sky.
Tongue, lose thy light.
Moon take thy flight.
Now die, die, die, die.”

And there’s also some raucous, bacchanalian humor. Way fun!

But if you aren’t all that literary, take the word of Samuel Pepys, who in the mid-seventeenth-century said of it in his Diary that it was "the most insipid ridiculous play that ever I saw in my life,” though he admitted it had "some good dancing and some handsome women, which was all my pleasure." I won't fight with Pepys about that, in part because he is rumored to be dead. But how can I know?