Rating: 2/5

Reading this old book by Ms. Hampson reminded me of when I was a teenager reading these stories and thinking that all men treated you terrible because they loved you. What an idiot I was. But I thought that was true so I let myself be treated terrible for awhile. That is in the past though as is this book. What a scary read. I vaguely remember reading it and I am appalled at what I thought was romance was abuse. The heroine turned the heros marriage proposal down because she was 18 and her Father was a serial cheater and she saw her Mothers pain. Right after that her Father got into debt with this disgusting lecher and he forced the heroine to marry him and he would not have him arrested for embezzling. Her Mother had a heart attack and they had no money so she married the guy, who after the wedding was inebriated and walked into traffic and got hit by a lorry. The hero now thinks she is a disgusting gold digger. He marries a greek woman who was not chaste and had pillow friends and he is very bitter. They had a child, which the vindictive mother took with her when she killed herself in a car crash. Horrible story I must admit. The hero bribes the heroines boss to bring her to the island and leave her there. He will then marry her and have her produce a male heir to replace the one he lost. Of course the fade to black love scenes show that she succumbs each time to the passion. She is desperately trying to get off the island as she is held prisoner. She does get a letter to her sister and of course there is a terrible angsty scene when she decides she does in fact love her husband and returns to him before the boat even left the dock. There is an HEA and sunshine and roses and antiquities and greek passion and assorted other Harlequin tropes all in one short little book. Needless to say, I didn't really like it. The hero wasn't celibate of course which is a big no no for me but I was already involved in the narrative before I knew that and I started to vaguely remember the story and had finish it for that naive little teenager I was. Very bittersweet but I am glad I read it. I only gave it two stars because I hated the hero now that I am not 18. I probably would have given it 5 when I was young. Thank heavens I grew up.