Rating: 4/5

(read in french, under the title « Les survivants du Nevada »)

Aaaaah, the paradox of having enjoyed a book despite knowing it has some problematic issues...
Less than a week after the very good « Never Count Tomorrow » grabbed the title of best-read-of-the-year-so-far, « Reilly's Woman » already snatches it. As the french title lets you guess, the story is mostly focused on survival : after a plane crash, Lea and Reilly find themselves isolated in the middle of the desert. As the storm made them deviate from their original flight plan, they're unsure to be rescued. Cherry on the cake, Lea was hurt during the accident...

Well, it was an eternity since the last time I devoured a book like that ! Everything is here : tons of hassle, tempers explode, additional troubles... but also the growing alchemy between the characters.

Past the very slow first chapter, Janet Dailey quickly throws us in a crash scene that leaves us breathless (my fear of planes won't be helped by this one !). And it has dramatic consequences as well. Impossible to say more. Anyway, forget the rich heiress little problems and the lighthearted small-town romances, if « Reilly's Woman » was published today, it would undoubtedly be in one of the publisher's romantic suspense series. 

Because if the characters have survived the crash, there's no guarantee that'll last long. Partially thanks to Lea. Let's be straight : she can show herself so obnoxious she'll probably irritate more than one reader. But can we really blame a twenty-two, injured city girl, lost in the most unwelcoming place with a complete stranger, to be both nervous and not having the least glimpse of survival instict ? However, between her sudden, sometimes unjustifed tantrums and some really very stupid decisions, we can't forgive her everything. Reilly neither, considering how his patience is severely tested !
Luckily, unlike Lea, Reilly has an up and running brain. He's still not MacGyver, and apart setting a fire up and acting logical, he hasn't that much survival skills. He's more like in « damage control mode » than anything else.

So for sure, there are some tension between then, and not only because of their growing attraction. About this, the book may be somewhat old, but reveals itself quite steamy. Even if nothing much happens, between an horny Lea and a Reilly trying to keep a clear mind for the two of them we get some pretty sexy moments. We can clearly feel how strong the temptation is !

While she has taken the time to slowly start her story, Janet Dailey does the same for its conclusion. The novel doesn't ends with the ordeal.... Alright, the romance settlement is a bit rushed, but everything else in the epilogue is muche more developped. Not that bad for a 156-pages book, with a constant pace. And it's not like if we weren't used to see worse in the short Harlequins.

Now, if Lea's temper can really be a put-off, it's not the only thing. Knowing the book has been written by a white author for white readers more than fourty years ago, it was quite sure the representation of a Native character could possibly be inaccurate. To-read-with-caution, then. Being white myself, not being hurt by this book's content doesn't mean it would be the same for others, so here are the points that looked suspicious to me.
Lea often brings back Reilly to his origins, almost always when speaking about his survival skills, before knowing his life, presenting it as if « starting up a fire » was written in DNA, like « you're Indian, so that's natural for you ». She is also clearly aware to say some racist things to him when she's mad, but not when she says quite the same more calmly.
There's also a running joke around the word « squaw », about whom I've read Native people describing it as a racist and sexist slur. Would one of them really use it for fun ? I don't know. But because of this, when Reilly says something like « us, Indians, think this way... » it's impossible to not wonder if the character really express the concerned people's point of view, or the possibly-wrong author's vision of it.
These quotes may have hinted you about what comes next : the french translation uses the controversed terms « Indians of America » and more often simply« Indians », instead some translation of « American Indian », « Native American » or « Indigenous ». Alright, the text is old so maybe neither the author, translator and publisher were aware of the controversy at the time the book was released.
And of course, there are probably potentially hurtful things my white eye couldn't even notice.

Did that prevented me to enjoy my read ? Clearly not, because it's still a good, catchy, hooking survival story with romance, very well builded, never boring. Do you need to apporach it with caution ? You're the only one able to answser this question. As always with problematic books/movies/series/games, it's perfectly fine to enjoy them while being aware of their flaws, without denying the said flaws' existence. But's it's easy to say for a non-concerned person.

So, in another style and without plane crash, I'll end this review by talking about Robin Covington's Redhawk Reunion series, ownvoices books, so trustworthy representation (and as it's quite recent, you may even still find it in paperback !).