Rating: 5/5

❌ My advice to you: The movie and the book are two very separate and different things. So when you start reading this book, don't compare it with the movie. Don't even think about the movie at all while you're reading this.

Do that, and you'll enjoy this book immensely.
On the day she was born, Ella of Frell was given the gift of obedience by the foolish and careless fairy, Lucinda. Obedience. It was a gift.

Well, for starters... Ella, Hold your tongue

Kiss me.

Erhh...well, that's not such an unpleasant order **coughs** but uhh yeah. You get the point. It was the curse of compulsion. One which couldn't be overcome. Delayed, maybe, but even that came with a high price. Physical side effects, very unpleasant side effects. This was a new spin on one of the most recycled fairy tales that's ever been told. This is not a book to be analyzed. It's just a really great story, and to add to that, it was delivered in a wonderful way, with bold, and engaging writing.

  
    JUST ANOTHER CINDERELLA STORY
  

⏩ An evil step mother
⏩ Butt-ugly deranged and bossy step sisters
⏩ A handsome and wonderful Prince
⏩ Maltreatment, sabotage and trickery 
⏩ A ball
⏩ More sabotage and trickery
⏩ A pair of glass slippers
⏩ And some fairy magic

  
    THE EXTRAS
  

❎ A magical book for spying on people.
❎ A diverse and magical land of Ogres, Giants, and Elves. Sorry mouse people.
❎ An established relationship between Cinderella and the Prince before the night of the ball. I'm sorry, but I just never understood it. Cinderella spent one night with a guy and bada-boom boom! Love ⏩ Marriage ⏩ Happily ever after? I'm sorry honey

That's why I respect Ariel(well, really, the Disney version of Ariel), Princess Jasmine, and Belle most of all, at least they spent some time with their guys before hitching those rides. Between Ella and Charmont, letters were written, ideas were exchanged, and thoughts were shared. First came friendship, and then came love. All I can say is: How I loved those letters! 
❎ Ella's a girl with a little spunk. A heroine to love, admire, and adore.

Well she never said that. But she never took an order placidly. And of course, she took her revenge - revenge. Ha! How could I not love her? - whenever she could. After all, it's pure logic: You said get me a drink. You never said don't spit in it. 
❎ Lots of adventure and action. This book is looking for someone - people - to share an adventure with. We join Ella as she embarks on a quest, to find a way to get rid of her curse. Take it from me, it was a wonderful experience.
❎ Happily ever after. Let's face the truth. A fairy tale won't be as magical without a happily ever after. I won't even lie. I love it! You do too.