Rating: 5/5

I’m not saying Shakespeare was gay. I’m just saying the man wrote 154 sonnets and 126 of them are about how much he loves the world’s most beautiful man. The other 28 are about how his mistress is ugly and smells. Somehow, I hadn’t quite registered that “Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?” is about a boy! As opposed to the lines every woman longs to hear: “In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes, / For they in thee a thousand errors note, / But tis my heart that loves what they despise.” Or this straight burn: “My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun, / Coral is far more red, then her lips red, / If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun, / If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.” Be still my heart. Meanwhile: “O thou my lovely boy, who in thy pow’r / Dost hold time’s fickle glass, his fickle hour.” 

And yea, I get it, the whole point is that spiritual love is higher than sexual love. Be that as it may, love for a man, in these poems, is also higher than love for a woman.

I suppose it’s no surprise that Shakespeare was good. But God. Damn. The man was good. And sure, the whole “my poetry makes you immortal” thing is a little tired in 2025, but that’s only a small part of what these poems are up to, and anyway I’m pretty sure it was still fresh in 1598.

Sonnet 126, with its blank last couplet, stopped me in my tracks. Just empty space in parentheses expressing the ultimate futility of human language. It may be my favorite, though there are at least a dozen contenders:

O thou my lovely boy, who in thy pow’r
Dost hold time’s fickle glass, his fickle hour,
Who hast by waning grown, and therein show’st,
Thy lover’s with’ring, as thy sweet self grow’st,
If nature (sov’reign mistress over wrack)
As thou go’st onwards still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May time disgrace, and wretched minute kill.
Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure,
She may detain but not still keep her treasure!
Her audit (though delay’d) answer’d must be,
And her quietus is to render thee.
 (            )
 (            )

Because I could, I read the first edition of 1609 on my tablet (thank you Folger Library!). It took a little while to get used to the long s’s and u’s for v’s—as in: “If Nature (ſoueraine miſteres ouer wrack),”—but I thought the original spelling really did add something intangible and special to the experience.

In keeping with Elizabethan genre expectations, the sonnets are followed by a short narrative “answer” poem, A Lover’s Complaint. Frankly, I take issue with any modern edition that excludes it. It’s a gorgeous poem, and it struck me as absolutely integral to the whole. Don’t be deceived by its (relative) forthrightness. The poem’s theme is the power of language to injure and deceive, and it is that, more than the shift to a woman’s perspective, that recasts and deepens the infinite meanings of the sonnets that precede it.