Rating: 4/5

The author is the Chief Scientific Officer of Match.com and is a published scientist with her own scientific love scale. So she knows love. 

This book was first published more than 20 years ago, and then updated in 2017. The styles are clearly different. I found the modern update revealing but the arguments of the older book weak. 

So why do people fall in love, get married, then some have affairs and some divorce? And then some marry again? It turns out there are 3 separate neurological systems in the brain:
1. One for romantic passionate love
2. One for sex
3. One for Long term companionship

People who are in love for a Long time have fMRI scans done which showed areas governing empathy, emotional control and positive bias of their spouse are still together 4 years after falling in love. 

Women often initiate the first encounter by tilting their head, playing with their hair, looking just until the men notice them and quickly looking away, and smiling. And men don’t even know it. 

Divorce peaks at 3 year, and most remarry. Heart broken people only get over it in 3 years. People with more kids are less prone to divorce, as are older people. Despite the family-wrecking effects of affairs, people still do it. 

The older part tries to argue for an evolution of love. However, most animals do not ‘marry’ like humans. Only a minority are monogamous, and those only for the period between mating and young ones need care. Even chimpanzees and orang-utans do not practice it, so I think her arguments are weak here. The part about how love could have evolved, are rather boring because evidence is weak. 

More interesting is her description of the tribes people, how they have a mate but often also have lovers, how their children learn about sex from the adults from a young age, and how egalitarian hunter-gatherers are. Then farming happens and women became second class citizens because of lack of independent financial power. Now in the postindustrial world, women have their own jobs and assets and so unhappy marriages end, leaving existing marriages all happier.