Rating: 3/5

first i give this book five stars, but today i don't know just want to be re-read some books i like before and damn its one of the books i feel tooo good to give five stars so i just wanna fix that 3 STARS for the bad Philippe.

Lord of Desert with the weakness in his vital part.
I know him from once in paris and he like Brianne but if i'm not wrong Philippe in there no too clear about his feeling to her, so i'm little bit surprise and hate how deep his feel to Brianne in here.

i like so much with DP, even she has some bad arrogant jerk heroes who like to humiliate,insult and treat their women (heroine) so bad.
Not different with Philippe, its good book when you start to read but the last pages it so annoying. 

He meet with Gretchen, typical DP heroine virgin naive and beautiful of course. 
Soooo she attracted to him with good looking, rich, bla bla bla and ooooohhh so charming but she doesn't know that Philippe see her because Gretchen remind him about Brianne.

shit, suck right to be second best????

i don't get it why??? when Philipe after all time he spend time with Gretchen not realized his feel, or its because stubborn man code not want to admit his feel to her. So many proof for Phillipe taht Gretchen is the right woman for you.

But NOOOOOO, he still obssesed with Brianne, the dream girl for the big boy!!!!

I hate so much Phillipe when Brianne and her son come to palace, he avoid Gretchen never spend time with her again, live with his fantasy world where he, Brianne and her son is his family even reject that Gretchen is his wife, he said Gretchen is his secretary PLEAAAASEEEEE.... 

Phillipe is adult MAN not a boy or young man who can't see the difference how you behaviour can hurt other people, in here Gretchen.

"What did he think he could have with Brianne Hutton now, except friendship? She loved her husband. She grieved like a
widow since her arrival, after their estrangement."

OMG Phillipe you have no shame, you still have empty hope!!!!

"Gretchen was going to leave him. He would be left with nothing,
because that was all he could expect with Brianne Hutton.
He still adored Brianne, but she was married and so was he. If there had ever been a chance for them, it was far too late now. All she talked about was Pierce and how miserable she was since they'd
parted in anger."

Soooo if Brianne give you chance or if she not talking about her husband all time, what then??? you just left Gretchen like that for her??
He's like stupid man, so how if Brianne unmarried, he just divorce Gretchen and choose Brianne, something like that????
He must think Gretchen first,so whatever Brianne single or not, you married to Gretchen, remember that!!

its just like he choose Gretchen for second best because Brianne doesn't want him. :(

damn, and Philipe just say he still adore Brianne, nobody want her man adore another woman ever!!!

I just want Hero said if anybody from his past come back and want to together again he with strong belief mind and said no because no matter what i love this woman and can't leave her for anything in the world.

"She could not arouse me. Not that she knew I was even thinking of such a thing," he confessed. 
"But my body was dead when Brianne was near me. Of course, it did not help that she missed her husband and spoke of him relentlessly the
whole time," he chuckled. "Or that I could think of nothing but you, and my unspeakably terrible treatment of you, especially after you left me."

Why must he say like that, just say he can't aroused not add the reason why he can't it's like because Brianne spoke of her husband the whole time that make he can't aroused.

So when he said this :
"Brianne is my friend, Gretchen. She was never more. She never could be."

i still curious, "she never could be" its because she doesn't want phillipe or because situation both of them married, or because whatever Brianne free or not she never could be more because Phillipe still choose Gretchen.

I WANT GROVEL, but in this book nothing, and Gretchen soooo easy forgive him, makes you feel not satisfied!!
AMEEENNN.. enjoy read :)