Rating: 2/5

Anne Perry has been in my TBR pile for some time, particularly The Carter Street Hangman series which I have heard many good things about. The One Thing More was the first of her novels I have actually read, and it did not live up to the expectations set from the feedback of her other, better known novels. 

The story is set during a time of French civil unrest, with an uprising against the King. While that sounds right up my alley, the story unfortunately fell flat, and was tediously boring. My main issue is that I never grew to care about any of the characters. I did not love anyone, cheer for anyone, hate or even dislike anyone. It makes for a long story when you have no emotional attachment of any kind to any character. 

The very beginning of the book is confusing for a few chapters as you have to sort out how the characters are connected to one another and what is the root cause of the civil unrest. A prologue would have gone a long way towards letting the reader become comfortable earlier on in the story.

Perry uses phonetic dialogue to display how the commoners speak differently from the French upper class during a riot - I found this jarring as of course you are reading English phonetic dialogues, but you know the characters should have been speaking French. This was the only time I was pulled out of the story to think about languages - it was a distraction, yet added nothing to the story. 

The very last chapter was wonderful and had an unforseen twist. If only the rest of the chapters could have had an ounce of similarity I would have enjoyed this one more. As written, I rate it 2 stars ("It was ok" - Goodreads guidelines). 

Favorite quote: " 'If this is all there is, we'd better hang on to it as long as it's bearable. Few of us can cope with the thought of extinction.' He shrugged. 'Funny that: no matter how little a man thinks of himself, he cannot imagine the world functioning just as well when he is no longer part of it.' "

**This book was provided to me in exchange for an honest review by Open Road Integrated Media.