Rating: 4/5

I requested Wayne Koestenbaum’s The Queen’s Throat: Opera, Homosexuality, and the Mystery of Desire, because I read about twenty pages of it while staying at my friend Hanu’s house; I did that both because Ben Miller from Bad Gays podcast recommends it at least once a season, and because Koestenbaum has a new book coming out: My Lover, The Rabbi, the launch of which I plan to attend on March 17 at McNally Jackson. Hanu probably has The Queen’s Throat because they write about the history of the early modern theater and queerness. They mentioned to me that a recent Renaissance academic convention they attended is mostly queer people and Italians-who-study-early-opera. I like what I know about early opera– that is, mostly Julie D’Aubigny and her gender-bending and fencing. I am not really an opera person–my compulsive music-listening is poisoned by streaming services that let me have more pop-centric and country-girl queens whose songs I don’t even have to hunt down– but I discovered two years back my friend/lover of many years, Aalon, loves opera, as he does disco. Somehow he had kept this from me. He had me watch his favorite production of The Magic Flute a while ago. In Sophie Lewis’s Enemy Feminisms, she opens with a discussion of how she identified with The Queen of the Night, the evil but cool queen from The Magic Flute, and how this connects to feminism’s urges to reclaim even evil women for its purposes. Opera is full of dramatic women dying, who rule the ear with their noise until they go. I went to see Madama Butterfly with my husband in Berlin because I felt I should understand it; two years back, I saw a Zefferelli La Boheme. Opera is stagy, big, and inaccessible. I disagree with Timothee that it is destined for death, but it is an old art form that certainly had more fans in the 1960s; all live performance in the USA now seems intended for the rich. I will say that I feel for Kathy Mattia, Tracey Chapman, Patty Griffin and Shawn Colvin and Theda Hammel more or less what Wayne Koestenbaum seems to feel for Anna Moffo. Though when I listen to Moffo I get it. There’s something in a woman’s voice, celebrating freedom or mourning its loss. Only a woman’s voice? No– Stephin Merritt gives it to me too (his low voice, restrained and held close to the ground, contained, feigning untrained: “Judy Garland set us free”).

Koestenbaum is all into talking about how the opera, an institution involving gender transgression since its birth, became a domestic art form in 1905 when the record companies figured out how to imprison a woman’s voice and bring it home. Thus, a public spectacle–which might be observed in the standing-room section alongside other passionate listeners– could be contained to the home, where recorded music might sanitize the sick, educate the young, or comfort the infirm. Simultaneously, it could transform children:

“One parent writes to Opera News to describe an eleven-year-old boy’s peculiarly intense devotion to opera. This kid has an autograph book: Bampton, Moscona, Novotna, Tibbett…for Halloween he dresses as an astrologer, and made little predictions for all the guests, and here too he was very much at ease. What little predictions can we make about a boy at ease with opera stars and celestial bodies?” (79)

Koestenbaum spends his book investigating what it might mean to live through a woman’s body via the experience of listening to opera, disembodied–appropriating the subjectivity of a woman, powerful, indomitable, flawed and vulnerable to rupture, in place of their own potential sexuality or expression. 

Koestenbaum says: “The diva is allowed to sing but not for too long; she is granted the power to soar in a phrase, but only under certain conditions; and when the voice breaks down, she does us how beggared and partial the terms of her triumph have been.” (127) He is bringing this up in the context of operas that are written to be unsustainable, which break the voice.

Quote from Koestenbaum: 

“A tableau of two throats, Maria Callas’s and the opera queen’s, ends The Lisbon Traviata. While Callas, on record, spins “an elaborate web of coloratura,” Stephen, the opera queen, whose lover has just abandoned him, “throws his head back with her as she reaches for a climactic high note, but no sound comes out…Stephen’s mouth is open, his head is back, his eyes are closed. Callas is all we can hear.” By lip-syching to Callas, the opera queen is not brought closer to the magical realm of the vocal, the articulate, the expressive, or the open-hearted. In fact, the tableau convinces us that a passion for Callas has closed the queen’s throat, has taken away his power to love. While no sound “comes out” of the queen’s throat (the queen is reduced to the closet by his passion for the opera), Callas on record is singing Violetta, the consumptive courtesan. Stephen may regret that he can’t follow Callas into her hedonistic coloratura, but the subtext of Traviata reminds us that pleasure will kill Violetta as surely as, in homophobic scenarios of AIDS, it has killed gays.” –page 45

There’s something about the flapping throat, the open and vulnerable throat, silent but filled with someone else’s song, relating through the shared experience of obstruction, of desire, of doom, that I find poignant here.
Koestenbaum talks about assimilation, too; about the destiny of the closet, its inevitability, in a pre-Stonewall time when gay culture flourished but gay political rights were a matter of not being spotted. He feels his own opera-queenness has been obliterated by the opening up of other potentials–presumably, those of Sylvester, of Freddy Mercury, or of being a gay art critic. Not a drag queen, though he says “Callas appeals to the drag queen in me” (150). But he likes to look back at a half-invented past, at the bond between women artists and the gay men who aspire to their breaking-out. “Pasolini directs Callas as Medea, and she is attentive, obediently holding her hands to her face. These photographs attest to a specific historic configuration: the gay man venerating the theatrical woman and the woman responding gaily, the woman imitating the gay man and the gay man imitating the woman, the gay man directing and then listening and admiring, the man and woman collaborating.” But he also respects the moment that the diva-woman defies those who would direct or control her, such as when Callas walked out of a gala performance of Norma to protect her throat, defying the Italian president. Just walk out! Just walk out! You can leave! The closet, the structures. Callas said, “I see clearly what is right and wrong for me, and I do not confuse them or evade them.” May all women artists and gay artists see the same.