Rating: 5/5

UPDATE: Ha! Watching "The Residence" on Netflix — excellent murder mystery set in the White House, along the lines of Daniel Craig's "Knives Out" movies — and in a scene where the detective is basically hiding from civilzation in the Central American jungle somewhere, she is resupplied with canned food and a few books...including this one, (as well as — but harder to make out — a Penguin edition of Matthiessen's The Snow Leopard)!!

So kudos to those smart folks in Hollywood (or wherever) who acknowledge that there are smart folks out here as well — lovely bit of travel-lit trivia here, and a well-deserved nod to both Eland and the indestructible Ms. Murphy!

ORIGINAL REVIEW: So I have now finished Murphy's first three books in exactly backwards order, having read Tibetan Foothold, the immediately sequel to Full Tilt, back in 2018; and then The Waiting Land, the third book in what is in effect (but never actually described as) a trilogy, back in 2013, after an initial read in 1991! But reading them in reverse order in no way detracted from the delight of each book as a stand-alone — although if you're starting from scratch, I'd certainly recommend reading them chronologically. 

The full title, Full Tilt: Ireland to India With a Bicycle, is technically true, but a bit misleading. Dervla is out of Ireland before she's even finished her Foreward — literally before page 1 — and finally arrives in India a mere nine pages before her story ends. So this is very much the diary of a journey, not a travel guide to a particular destination, (something which apparently counts for the bulk of this wonderful book's several 2-star reviews). But what a journey! Turkey to Iran to Afghanistan to Pakistan to India, equally fascinating and — in historical perspective — heartbreaking. Iran before the Revolution...a still-innocent Afghanistan where Russia and America were just starting to compete for influence, (including scenes of a pre-Taliban Bamian and its still-intact, millennia-old Buddhist statues)...Pakistan just starting to deal with the concept of an independent Bangladesh, (including a visit to a pre-bin Laden Abbottabad)...a genuinely epic, "slice in time" adventure featuring an unforgettable, indestructible and endlessly witty Irishwoman.

And then...she arrives in Delhi, falls sick, and the book ends — indeed jarringly, if you don't know the rest of the story. But Dervla picks up her tale literally the next day in Tibetan Foothold:

"My first week in the capital was spent recovering from heatstroke; then, putting aside all thoughts of cycling during the months ahead, I began to make tentative enquiries about the possibility of doing some volunteer social work until November's coolness came to the rescue and I could start cycling again."

That second book — her "Empire Strikes Back," as it were — takes her to the foothills of the Himalaya, where she immerses herself in dealing with the problems of the just beginning Tibetan refugee crisis, (similar in so many ways to what is happening in Syria today). And in doing so, the 33-year-old adventuress discovers a greater depth and wisdom, finishing her story by noting that "it's strange to think that when I left Ireland I was seeking only the satisfaction of adventure and discovery — but now, after spending the first half-year 'travelling hopefully', I have realised that it is far better 'to arrive'." She then promises to return to work with the Tibetans again in 1965 — which she does in The Waiting Land, although moving to Nepal now, where the refugee problem itself has relocated.

As with her other books, Full Tilt includes innumerable insightful and/or hilarious quotes and observations, ranging from the wise:

 "This house reveals what some might describe as the poverty of Afghanistan, but what I prefer to call its simplicity, since poverty denotes a lack of necessities and simplicity a lack of needs."

...to the typically blasé:

"There's a small snake in the corner of this room but he also seems to be half asleep and, as I'm too exhausted to face the fuss and flap-doodle if I report his presence to the authorities, I'll chance his presence for the night: probably he's harmless anyway." 

But overall, I suggest you read any of these books and find your own favorites, (although you can read a few pre-selected gems in my reviews of her other books at https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... and https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...).