Rating: 5/5

I am still keeping my five star rating due to nostalgia.

I didn't remember too much of this one since it has been a long time that I have read it but once I started things came back into place.

Devnee Fountain...what a name. Althea in The Cheerleader didn't even get a last name...or parents for that matter.

They have just moved to town: Devnee, Dad, her mom and her brother Luke one year her junior who is still in junior high while Devnee is a sophomore at the high school. Devnee always wanted a tower room and it so happens that an empty house in town has such a tower.

Mrs. Fountain plans to decorate Devnee's room eventually to give it a coat of paint and brighten the atmosphere once her brother and father can get the shutters opened. Shutters on the outside...shutters on the inside.

Devnee feels something in the room and doesn't want to sleep there but her parents think it is just jitters at starting a new school the next day. Devnee is taken to her home room and paired up with "buddies" to help her learn her way to her classes. Three teens raise their hands once Devnee's schedule is announced since she must be paired with those who share her classes.

There is beautiful Aryssa, who is not very good at biology but who needs a sharp mind when you have curves in the right places and a mega-watt smile. Trey is a jock but not a dumb jock as he is also very smart to be a part of the academic team and Devnee thinks he's nice-looking enough. Her third buddy is Nina, a girl so rich and nasty she doesn't give Devnee the time of day so I'm wondering why she raised her hand in the first place.

Devnee meets a few other kids as well at lunch. Victoria is in her English class and she is very smart but also very sweet. William is on the same academic team with Trey and a few other extra curricular activities along with sports and he is very handsome.

Devnee can't believe she has made friends since she views herself as so plain and ordinary but all of that becomes shattered the one day she is running late to school. Devnee hears Aryssa and Trey talking about her and how glad they are free from her being all clingy to them for a day.

Aryssa needs a smart girl to copy off from in Biology and Trey knows how to get in good with Victoria by being "charitable" to the new students yet it seems he is all into Aryssa now because she is so beautiful. Devnee has such a low opinion of herself that she feels bad for wasting Trey and Aryssa's time so the next day she tells them she is adjusted now and they split from her fast as if she has the plague.

Victoria however still treats Devnee nicely and her English teacher Ms. Cort is still her favorite but it devastates Devnee so much that her wish to be beautiful is calling out to a certain someone in the shadows...

Soon the vampire is able to leave the shutters thanks to Devnee's dad and he offers to make Devnee beautiful just as she wishes for something in return...that is. Why should Aryssa with her false friendship be so beautiful on the outside when inside she is so ugly? The vampire knows what to say and poor Devnee wants so much she can't help but agree.

That's only the first little taste of what beauty can bring but pretty soon, Devnee wants more.

Yet so does the vampire...

I guess I can still kind of relate with lead characters like these but Devnee seems to have just a little more personality than Althea did in the first book. No one mentions Althea by name but she gets talked about as being a weird and creepy girl yet people went to those parties she held in the house when she got all of that cheerleader popularity.

I'm use to hypocrisy on all sort of levels...probably another reason I can still enjoy a book like this.

Aryssa, Trey and Nina are awful people in this book. I don't feel sorry for Aryssa at all except when it becomes clear Trey only wants her because she's beautiful. Nina's just a snob and I'm glad we don't get much of her.

Victoria and William are nice kids though. In The Cheerleader, some of the girls were not that bad but at least not as overly superficial as Nina or Aryssa. The boys were not as bad as Trey but still not as nice as William is in this book so the other characters in both kind of even each other out.

We don't get a lot of focus on Devnee's dad but her mom seems really nice and at times, I get why Devnee would be embarrassed but then again she's only fifteen. Her brother Luke isn't terribly annoying but then again little brothers treat older sisters like total pukes and that is also just what sisters do in turn.

Being an only child, I have seen past friends with their younger siblings and my cousins play off each other like that so I'm not a complete stranger to it...

The Cheerleader's ending was ambiguous but more on a bittersweet tone. The Return Of The Vampire ends ambiguously as well but it has hints that the outcome could be a shade more positive.

Wishful thinking but it shows that Devnee is a better character than Althea in the sense of her arc. I don't remember Althea being as prickly as Devnee when she's more under the vampire's influence until she has her revelation. 

The vampire is still the same BTW...still slick and evil. I'm still always puzzled into just how his powers work and all but I guess if you tried calling him a dijin it wouldn't have the same ring.

Go watch Wishmaster or the episode of Supernatural from season 2 called What Is And What Should Never Be and tell me I'm wrong...

In any case, I still adore The Cheerleader but I like The Return Of The Vampire just a smidge better.

You don't really need to read The Cheerleader to get the story of this book... it is kind of its own entity. If you haven't read The Return Of The Vampire, I highly recommend it and then you can give The Cheerleader a once over if you still have yet to read that one.