Rating: 4/5

I have indeed massively enjoyed Alone in an Untamed Land: The Filles du Roi Diary of Hélène St. Onge both with regard to simple reading pleasure and also (but very much importantly) because of the solid and appreciated historical realism with which author Maxine Trottier has chosen to always imbue her text (from France to what is now the Canadian province of Quebec, Hélène St. Onge's journey is heartbreaking, engagingly interesting and ultimately a new life full of hope and a marriage not of convenience, not arranged, but one based on true and lasting affection). In other words, yes, I have both totally loved loved loved Hélène's narrative voice and her (fictional diary-based) thoughts in and of themselves and have at the same time also much appreciated that her journal entries feel not only age appropriate in scope (that Maxine Trottier has Hélène St. Onge write like a teenaged girl and not like an adult masquerading as a teenager) but also appropriate for its historical time and place, that Hélène's words read like I am in the presence of a diary from the 17th century and not musings that albeit trying to show the past are actually more akin to present day words pretending to be of a bygone era, a very important and to be feted achievement in my opinion, for there is nothing worse for me than reading, than being confronted with and by a historical fiction text which deep down at its core does not really feel all that authentic. 

And therefore, and yes indeed, with Alone in an Untamed Land: The Filles du Roi Diary of Hélène St. Onge to and for me, Hélène St. Onge's diary (and yes, ALL of the characters featured therein, be they French, be they French Canadian, be their First Nations) present themselves as though I am perusing actual history, that I am reading bona fide reality and not anything either anachronistic or too politically modern etc. (even if for example, I might from my own 20th century knowledge regarding cowpox and that if one has had cowpox one is generally immune to smallpox know right form the onset that both Hélène and Kateri will not be stricken with smallpox and will therefore also be the perfect caregivers during smallpox outbreaks, I do not at all consider this in any manner as anachronistic, since this is knowledge a modern reader naturally brings to Alone in an Untamed Land: The Filles du Roi Diary of Hélène St. Onge and is not anything that is mentioned by Maxine Trottier within the text proper, within Hélène St. Onge's actual diary). Highly recommended and one of my absolute favourite installments of the Dear Canada series, Alone in an Untamed Land: The Filles du Roi Diary of Hélène St. Onge is textually and narrationally most defintely a five star read for me and the only reason, why my final and average ranking is four and not five stars is that I do miss that (and like with all of the Dear Canada books) the non fiction supplemental information and documents section does not also include a list of suggestions for further study and reading, as I do believe a bibliography would definitely increase the learning and research value of Alone in an Untamed Land: The Filles du Roi Diary of Hélène St. Onge (and of course the entire series as well).