Rating: 4/5

Have known about the book for a while. Only recently learned that it was about the Shoshoni tribe during the time of Sacajawea. Since that's what I've been reading, I decided to give this one a try.

It wasn't just Sacajawea that was taken by the Minnetarees in her youth. Another young woman about the same age named Naya Nuki was among those captured. Except Naya Nuki chose to escape from the Minnetaree village in North Dakota and follow the great Missouri River many miles back to her homeland in southwest Montana.

I was most impressed by Naya Nuki's incredible journey! In this book, she braves blinding blizzards sometimes with snowdrifts taller than herself, encounters wild animals like bears and wolves, and ventures through unknown territory perhaps belonging to hostile tribes. If her plan to rejoin her people had failed, she may have been able to take care of herself: Even at such a young age as eleven, presumably from the traditions of her nomadic people, she already knew how to find or make her own food, clothes, and shelter. I thought she might have been able to survive the area's harsh winters alone too, since her month-long trek happened at the start of one, around October or November. I thought it was interesting how she didn't make a fire at all during her trip, to avoid alerting enemies if any were nearby; it sounded like this was not unusual for Shoshonis to do, even eating raw meat during their brief hunting trips when they would come down to the plains from the mountains in which they lived, so they could quickly flee from any danger that might arise.

I think Della Rowland's The Story of Sacajawea, Guide to Lewis and Clark complements this book well. An interesting point from Rowland's book is that Shoshoni people have different names at different times in their lives. Naya Nuki (Shoshoni for Girl Who Ran) was the young woman's name when she returned to her tribe; in contrast, Rowland's book says Sacajawea is the English form of Sakaaka Wiiya, or Bird Woman in the tongue of her captors, the Minnetarees.

The book is written in the style of a travel journal, but in third-person instead of "Today I..." first-person. I don't know how many official resources there'd be for an author writing on this subject to draw from, but this book seems pretty factual anyways. I'd like to read more from Lewis and Clark's notes, because a quote from there is in the epilogue concerning the reunion of Naya Nuki and Sacajawea when the expedition met the Shoshonis. I wondered if another source the book could have used were some of the stories her people told when Naya Nuki's journey became a kind of legend among them.

I had a couple of questions on finishing the book. Was getting the captives back an option for the Shoshonis, especially when Naya Nuki returned with information about where they were being held? I think probably not. There's getting a group together, getting there, then getting the captives (if they were still alive), and then getting back. And I believe the Minnetarees also had firearms when the Shoshoni people did not.

My other question was: Why were the Minnetarees so far away from their camp? If this series has books on that tribe, I'd definitely check it out! Or if the series has an entry about the tribe(s?) that would spook buffalo herds and trick them into stampeding off cliffs. In any case, I would like to try another book from the Amazing Indian Children series.