Rating: 5/5

I was gifted this book nineteen years ago with a tipped in message encouraging me and six others who got the same gift to read the book and think about it. Although I have not been a child of divorce, I have had awful feelings about divorce ever since I was a young child. This was likely due largely to exposure to marital conflict in media, portrayals of divorce in movies, and a show that aired on TV during my childhood that I found profoundly disturbing, yet was exposed to in ways that felt unavoidable under the circumstances. It was "Divorce Court." Fortunately, I was able to talk to my parents about the show and that was a positive. 

I avoided the book for emotional reasons. I would get queasy every time I picked it up and skimmed through the book. Eventually, out of respect for the giver of the gift, I committed to reading the book for the reasons he stated: to gain knowledge, wisdom, and understanding of experiences that are difficult. 

I do not regret it--even though it was emotionally tough to get through the sadness of these true stories, put together to give us a picture of the psychological aspects of divorce, primarily from the children's perspective. These were written in a way that my pledge to read a little more than a page a day was accelerated because it was hard to leave a story before I had a resolution. The desolation and disappointment of these tender upended lives were emotionally disturbing still; yet, I felt like I was gaining knowledge that might help me have compassion.

Not to be all gloomy, there were inspiring stories of individuals who turned away from paths that led nowhere, behavior that was hopeless, relationships (their own) lacking love that they secretly yearned for.

I now have, as the giver predicted, a sense of understanding and something more: empathy. I feel like I have witnessed the suffering, despair, and discouragement of the children of divorce. And I have seen those shining instances of recovery, hope, and courage.

I recommend that you read it, notwithstanding that family life has changed so much since the longitudinal study was conducted by Judith S. Wallerstein and her Center for the Family in Transition.

Much is said of the courts and how they might do better. Maybe they have. Perhaps there is another book to read to fill in for the quarter-century gap that lies between then (2000) and now.