Rating: 3/5

Rounded up to 3 stars from 2.5 on GR.

The reason it took me so long to read this one is because I was dealing with an inconvenient bout of food poisoning. I would say stomach flu or virus but neither my husband nor my child was knocked down, so I doubt it was that.

That aside...this one was a very slow burn. Imagine lighting a really large firework expecting it to be a blazing display and getting...nothing. The saving grace to keep me from completely being bored with A Deadly Game of Magic was the lead up to the very last line in the book.

Four teenagers are coming back from a dramatic performance in Dallas to their smaller Texas town.

Being written in the early 1980s, two of the teens are boys and the other two are girls. Bo is meant to be the All-American manly man who plays football and goes hunting with his dad, he is only taking drama to beef up his college applications.

Bo wasn't expecting to do mime.

The other guy named Julian wants to have a career in dancing but the men in his family have been doctors going to medical school. Julian is quiet for a part of the book, but we learn that he is very much straight as he likes one of the girls, Lisa. 

Lisa has two older siblings who were high achievers in high school, so her parents put pressure on her to get good grades and do well in everything. When she was younger, Lisa wanted to be a magician, so she has no problem in performing but the not winning a competition and having to tell her parents is the more stressful part.

Teena has plans to be on the supreme court and is a very opinionated African American teenager who is not very impressed by living in this small town. She is probably the most annoying character always going around and either complaining or screaming.

The nightly drive back is hampered by a downpour of rain and flooding the roads when Bo's car ends up dying near the only house for miles on a stretch of road. The teens go up to the house to call Triple A and are let in by a couple who give them permission to wait in the house while they are going to a party. After they leave, Lisa and the others soon figure out that this...was not their house.

While waiting for assistance, an older woman knocks on the door and confirms that the house belongs to an older woman named Gracie Ella Porter, her neighbor that she came to check on because of the storm. Her late husband was a magician who died in a fire, and she moved here to start work as a medium but kept most of the magician's items from his act.

The neighbor lady leaves and soon, the inevitable happens.

After calling for Triple A and only getting through to Lisa's parents, the phone line becomes dead.

Just when you think it becomes a cliche, the tow truck comes to get the car hooked up and the driver offers to take the girls with him. Lisa suggests they all stay together as they heard another noise before he arrived and goes into the explanation that makes Sam, the driver, feel as if he is being pranked.

Sam offers to check the last room at the end of the darkened hallway and what he finds causes him to faint from terror. The teens go to get him some water and a wet towel but return to find that he has booked it and left the door open, the tow truck gone. That is when the lights are knocked out by the storm and they are left in darkness, scrambling for light from candles and matches.

That's when other noises become even sharper to their ears and the four teens find that they are not in the house alone. Given what they know, Lisa begins to wonder if it is a person they are dealing with or something far more sinister.

The only other thing I found to be enjoyable was that we get a dog scare instead of a cat scare when a big lost black Lab paws at the door to get inside from the rain. It immediately takes a shine to Bo, and we find out he is a dog person...aww. It adds a little depth to his character and makes him seem like less of a redneck jerk jock.

There are some suspenseful moments but mostly a lot of Teena getting on my nerves and the group making sandwiches in the kitchen that made me at times hungry and nauseous. All of this to lead up to the last act doesn't really paint a brilliant review but if your curiosity is getting the better of you, it may be worth checking out.