A brief survey of this book revealed that my sister and I had given it to our father for his birthday in 1994. It is a curious book that sails at a fair clip through Captain Cook's life. We'd seen some kind of exhibit about Cook in Whitby once when we were on holiday. Cook joined the royal navy in his late twenties after some years on colliers bring coal from north-east England to places in want of it. In the navy he participated in the conquest of Canada during which he was taught the rudiments of surveying- one of the curiosities of the time was that training seems to have been effectively by means of apprenticeship and an officer's skills derived from those he had served with. Cook, although just a warrant officer at the time had sufficiently demonstrated his skill as surveying to be appointed to lead a two ship expedition to observe the transit of Venus from Tahiti. They took with them Joseph Banks with two Swedes (gentlemen of that northern nation well acquainted with the principles of Carl Linnaeus rather than the vegetables), two painters, and sealed instructions.

On this voyage they observed the transit of Venus, surveyed the coast of New Zealand, ran aground on the great barrier reef and lost about a third of the crew to disease in Dutch Batavia too my surprise the Dutch were also prone to scurvy - so apparently they were no sauerkraut eaters either, this was a great success as typically half the crew might be lost to scurvy. Cook was committed to the health of his crew, insisting that they eat sauerkraut and wash their clothes when ever there was enough fresh water - so he could not help but notice that many of the crew after Tahiti had contracted venereal disease , brought to the island in Cook's opinion by the dastardly Spanish - except they hadn't, it was Yaws disease - in any case the afflicted men were treated with arsenic injections.

Cook was promoted and put in charge of a second expedition to find the hypothetical great southern continent consisting of theResolution and the  Adventure away from Cook's watchful eye on-board the  Adventure the crew skipped eating their sauerkraut and suffered from scurvy instead, given independent command the  Adventure skedaddled for home and got back to Britain a year before Cook who instead discovered South Georgia on his way back from Easter Island.

Generally among European states there was a tension between producing accurate charts and state security, part of Cook's work was correcting possibly deliberately inaccurate foreign maps, the Dutch even left some islands off their charts to discourage unwelcome visitors. There was some sense to this from a colonial point of view as Cook was trying to muscle the French out of Tahiti, while the Spanish had turned up there between his 2nd and 3rd voyages with a couple of priests and a cow or two to claim the island for his Majesty Charles III.

In Britain, Cook contemplated retirement but instead volunteered to lead an expedition to uncover the then mythical north-west passage, only now thanks to global warming emerging from the ice. George III, a kindly monarch, had been troubled by reports of the warfare on Tahiti, feeling that if the people were occupied with animal husbandry instead that they would be too busy to fight each other. Cook was commissioned to carry breeding pairs of livestock to the islanders as a rule they took goats in any case to provide milk for the officers. The beasts drink a lot and require forage and many die when they were allowed ashore at Cape colony. So when Cook starts to give out these well travelled animals to the people of Tonga he tries to impress upon them how inordinately expensive they are. The remaining livestock he gifted to the Tahitians and then sailing north he happened across Hawaii, where upon returning to the island from the north-west coat of Canada he was killed on the beach.

There's a good wind in the sails that carries Hough's narrative briskly along, but he never gets us close to Cook, who remains firmly in his cabin. This is slightly curious since in his introduction Hough makes claims for the distinctiveness of Cook particularly in his attitudes to the Polynesians (still, whatever Cook's own attitudes, locals were fired upon and sometimes killed though not always upon Cook's orders), and since not only are Cook's own journals in print but it is clear from Hough's text that there are enough accounts written by other participants on these voyages that he can point out when Officers omitted some occurrence from the official log. So the book strikes me more as an account of Cook's voyages than as a biography.

Many of the crew had picked up a bit of Tahitian language and much to my surprise (and perhaps theirs too) this was understood in New Zealand and Hawaii.

This being the 18th century the crew eat anything (apart from sauerkraut and Walrus steaks) that moves when ever they make landfall they also trade ship's stores, in particular nails, for sex where and whenever they come across women Sodomy was punishable by death under the articles of war, however Hough says, without offering evidence, that Cook turned a blind eye to instances of it. They trade Tahitian cloth to the Maoris for food, and Cook plants European vegetables whenever he gets the opportunity. One Taihitian was taken to Britain and then brought back on the third voyage, he also acquired a pair of Maori boys as servants.

Hough says that Cook's particular bad temper on his third voyage was caused, not just by reaching the age of fifty, but from having picked up a parasite on his second voyage which consumed his B vitamins leaving him depressed and ill tempered. This reminded me of the parasite one can apparently pick up from cats that once it has affected the brain leaves the sufferer inclined to take risks and to die in car accidents.

Hough is also of the opinion that the Hawaiians literally regarded Cook as a god and so were particularly annoyed when he returned, there is though apparently some debate over this. Hough presents European contact with Polynesians only from one perspective so they are all thieves, though Maori are in addition martial and inclined to eat people. Still a reader might feel that getting to know about these isolated societies might be a highlight of a book about Cook.

Cook left a widow in a modest two up, two down house on Mile End road- long since demolished, who outlived all their sons (who all ended up in the navy). I was left curious about the fate of the animals - did they thrive or were they eaten?