Rating: 5/5

This is the second volume in Stephenson's Baroque cycle.

At the end of the last book, Half Cocked Jack was a Galley Slave off the Barbary Coast, Eliza was making a run with her baby from the continent to London, and Daniel Waterhouse had Joined the Royal Court and taken a Mistress.

This book picks up several years later. Eliza is captured and brought back to France, Daniel's Mistress died of small pox, and Jack has been cured of the Syph by some sort of extraordinarily high fever, although it has left him with some sort of amnesia.

Jack joins a cabal of galley slaves with a plot to make themselves free. This plan inadvertently becomes embroiled with Eliza living back in France in the Royal Court. Her life is in turn interacting from afar with Daniel Waterhouse, who is involved with the Marquis of Ravenscar who is leading the newly formed Whig party in British Parliment.

This book follows Jack (literally) around the world, as he tries to get free from slavery and poverty, getting into all sorts of swashbuckling madcap adventures along the way. Daniel is just trying to get by and move to Massachusetts with the other puritans. Eliza is just trying to get revenge on the slave trade and failing that keep her family together.

This story is told as two novels, interspersed and shuffled together. The shuffling is well done, and you generally do not jump around in time too much. For all you OS nerds (like myself) out there, it is reminiscent of how two processes time share the physical processor together. Message passing and everything, as the various story arcs affect each other in surprising and interesting ways.

Historically, this book cover's the late 17th century war Between England and France, the reign of William and Mary in England, the Reign of Louis XIV in France, the Japanese Isolationism, the expansion of South and East Asian sea trade with Europe, Mexican Colonialism, and the Spanish Inquisition.

As ever, Neal Stephenson's writing style is entertaining and interesting. This book reads faster than the previous volume Quicksilver. Also, Neal Stephenson obviously traveled to many of the places he wrote about in this book. Many of the places in this book that I have actually visited (like Acapulco) are very accurately described.

I read this book because I am reading the Baroque cycle. All sorts of smart dudes in the know recommend that book series to me.