Rating: 5/5

This is the best book I've read in a while. It was so nice to read a romance novel that focused on the emotional connection and healing power of love instead of sex. There are no explicit sex scenes in this book, and it was awesome. So many new books have lost sight of the love in the pursuit of the lust and this book was a refreshing divergence from the norm.

Christopher, the Dragon of Blackmore, and our hero, is blind. Some reviewers thought the blindness was poorly handled and quit reading because they thought the hero would regain his sight. He never does. What makes this book awesome is that while our hero never physically sees again, he does learn how to appreciate and love inner beauty which cannot be seen by many that have perfect vision. I loved how his disability was handled, it made for a gripping and emotionally charged tale.

Gillian, our heroine, was terribly abused by her father. For a large chunk of the book, she is skittish and fearful. However, she slowly gains courage and she blossoms in the care of our hero. The transformation was handled in a way that was truly believable and kept me turning pages.

Both hero and heroine have physical and emotional scars from betrayal and abuse in the past and there are a few misunderstandings before they come to realize just how much they need each other. The story is not fast paced, but instead focuses on the passage of time and how the characters change and grow closer. Gillian's father is quite a villain in this story and I must warn readers that there is a scene where he humiliates the hero. For those who do not like when the hero is not indestructible, this book isn't for you. The hero has flaws and he struggles with them regularly. How he dealt with his blindness showed immense strength of character that made him one of the most attractive and wonderful heroes ever. 

I must admit that the supporting characters, Colin and Jason, stole the show. Colin is Christopher's gruff and somewhat smelly brother-in-law from Chris' first marriage. Wow, I adored him. He was so protective and endearing while trying to keep up his ferocious facade. I cannot wait to read his story. Jason is Chris' eyes and his squire. He is 16 and is one of the first to make Gillian feel comfortable. He is a sweet addition and I'm looking forward to reading his novella where he is all grown up, and lessons from his master help him find love.

This book is wonderful. I will be reading more by Kurland! 5 stars!!