Rating: 3/5

There is an awful lot one can say about The Last of the Mohicans, and most of it is not good. Cooper was among the first major American literary stars, a contemporary of Washington Irving. And he embraced his heritage, using both the history and geography of his home as the setting for his adventurous romances. Even so, he expected most of his readers to be Europeans, as is made obvious by the numerous footnotes explaining American flora, fauna, slang, and history to his overseas readers. These were actually among the most enjoyable parts of the novel.
		
For me, the dominant feature of this book was the contrast between the fast-moving plot and the stilted style. Few readers nowadayss will enjoy Cooper’s English. He writes in a kind of Augustan prose. Here is a taste:
Alice listened with breathless interest; and though the young man touched lightly on the sorrows of the stricken father, taking care, however, not to wound the self-love of his auditor, the tears ran as freely down the cheeks of the daughter as though she had never wept before. The soothing tenderness of Duncan, however, soon quieted the first burst of her emotions, and she then heard him to the close with undivided attention, if not with composure.
I typically enjoy the ornate prose of former ages. But I find very little to praise in the above passage. The staid and mannered style is just so discordant with the subject-matter—in this case, a kidnapped woman experiencing traumatic emotion. It is abstract, awkward, and at times not even sensible: What does it mean to cry as if you have never cried before?
		
Standing in contrast to this twee narrative voice is the plot, which is a genuine rip-roaring adventure. Indeed, I cannot think of any other 19th century novel with as much action, bloodshed, and suspense in it. Very little effort would be needed to transpose the story into a modern-day action movie (as, of course, has already been done). The story has all of the hallmarks of a summer blockbuster: an unflappable male protagonist, a damsel in distress (two, actually), a hapless character playing comedic relief, and a dastardly villain motivated by pure vengeance. If the prose was even halfway decent, it would be easy to imagine this book on a bestseller list.
		
Cooper’s treatment of Native American cultures stands out as noteworthy. By any standard there is a lot of racism and cultural chauvinism in this book. However, I believe that, in Cooper’s own day, The Last of the Mohicans was significantly more tolerant than most. Some native tribes, it is true, are depicted as little more than barbarous evildoers; while others (the Mohicans, notably) are shown to be quite admirable, if still not entirely human in Cooper’s eyes.
		
This ambivalence is expressed in the character of Hawkeye, a white scout who has chosen to live amongst his Mohican allies. While often seeming to prefer native ways to his own European culture, he also does not let a single opportunity pass by to mention that he is white. I mean this literally: he must mention his whitenesss 200 times in the book. It is actually quite comical, when it is not infuriating.
		
The artistic descendants of this book are the infinite stories, shows, and movies of frontier life. Hawkeye, in particular, has lived on in a hundred cowboys, gunslingers, and other frontiersman “heroes.” Cooper is undoubtedly important, then, for creating an archetype in American culture—though, for my part, this is a dubious legacy. In any case, I would not recommend reading this for its historical value alone. It will only be enjoyable if, like me, you can find the comedy in an adventure story being narrated as if it were The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.