Rating: 4/5

I think it’s funny that this book talks about love and forgiveness, and I don’t think I’ve hated any character more than I’ve hated Flavio. He told Carina that she was special because he was saving her for marriage. Apparently there were “others.” And then he says to himself that he just should have seduced her, he shouldn’t have saved her because obviously that’s what his mistake was. THAT’S how to correct what was wrong. Then, knowing she was married, he forced himself on her. And every single member of Carina’s family made excuses for him. He had to have had a reputation for Divina to approach him. Shouldn’t Carina’s brothers have been mad that this guy was stepping out on their little sister? Carina should be thanking Divina for saving her from this man. She really dodged a bullet, and it was thanks to Divina. (But here’s the thing about Divina- she slept with Flavio and then laughed- LAUGHED- when Carina discovered them. WTH is wrong with her?) Her mamma goes, he’s young, he would have settled down once the kids come. In my experience, it does not work like that. Besides, he HAS a kid on the way. Is he settled? Did he do right by the kid? And WHY would Carina be ok with having children with the same father as her sister’s child? She would have had to watch another woman raise a child who was a product of her husband’s affair. Like why is her whole family ok with this??? And the thing that eventually alienates her family from Flavio is the fact that he tried to kill Quillan. Not the fact that he’s been betraying Carina since he was 14. 

Her family didn’t accept Quillan partly because they wanted to respect Flavio’s claim. She moved 1000 miles away. I feel like that should qualify as her breaking off their engagement. That’s a pretty significant break up move.

Another thing I didn’t understand- Carina says she’s getting too old and should have been married by now. Why wasn’t she??? She had a fiancé. Not that I’m mad she wasn’t, since he was a d-bag, but I don’t understand it.

This boy would not know real love if it bit him in the armpit.

And at the end, no one acknowledges the fact that being unfaithful to Carina was wrong. Except sort of Divina.