Rating: 3/5

The Pale Horse is one of the solid mysteries by our queen of crime. The story is slow going, but the mystery plot is well-executed. The story is built steadily, even though action happens in the last third. The mystery is cleverly handled, and I was honestly surprised by the identity of the criminal. I didn't see it coming. I'm not sure if I missed any clues pointed in that direction in the middle because my mind wandered for a good bit. :) Still, the revelation pleasantly surprised me. My only complaint is that Christie didn't provide a detailed explanation about the role of the accomplices and how they became connected to the criminal; the brief account at the end felt insufficient. 

This mystery novel is more or less a standalone, although Goodreads categorizes it under Ariadne Oliver. The story is told from the point of view of the protagonist, Mark Easterbrook, the amateur investigator. There is limited police procedure, but to compensate for that, Inspector Lejeune makes a fair number of appearances. However, the misconception that this was an Ariadne Oliver novel gave way to disappointment because her presence felt negligible except for her role in imparting a vital piece of information that helps elucidate the mystery. I picked this story because of its reference to Ariadne Oliver. I have read all the other novels in which she appears and have found her delightful. So her scarce appearance was disappointing.

I enjoyed the story, overall. It was a good mystery novel, and Mark Easterbrook was a good amateur sleuth. And although I missed Ariadne Oliver, there were some interesting characters to keep me going. 

Having said that, I'd like to share a quote that struck me deep. 
Killing people. It makes you feel powerful and larger than life. It makes you feel you're God Almighty. But you're not. You're only a nasty bit of goods that's been found out. And when that fact's been presented to you suddenly your ego just can't stand it.
More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/