Rating: 5/5

Reading this messy, brilliant book gave me that strange impression you sometimes get with essayists – of encountering a perfectly modern mind that is trapped in the past, looking around with modern sensibilities and baffled by what it sees. The effect now is not one of genius, but merely of contemporary common sense, applied somehow, magically, anachronistically. At one point, during a close reading of Rousseau, Wollstonecraft adds an asterisk, and comments simply in a footnote: ‘What nonsense!’ Here you have the book in two words: a smart woman looking around at late-eighteenth-century London, and saying, What nonsense!

Yet despite the timelessness, its context is important. A couple of years before this came out, Burke had published his famous conservative critique of popular uprisings, Reflections on the Revolution in France, and Mary Wollstonecraft had been more or less the first to react, tearing off A Vindication of the Rights of Men just a few weeks later. She would be followed by many others (not least her occasional dinner companion Thomas Paine), but while the rest of them wittered on about inherent freedoms, she was the only one to look around and consider the novelty of extending those freedoms to the other half of the species. So this follow-up was written in a specifically revolutionary context, and was intended, as she says, ‘to effect a revolution in female manners’.

This general ‘down with the nobs’, anti-aristocratic sensibility is for Wollstonecraft a handy analogue for all that is wrong with female socialisation. She equates women with rich military officers, whose primary concern is to look dashing, or with titled nobility – for ‘wealth and female softness equally tend to debase mankind, and are produced by the same cause’.

A king is always a king – and a woman always a woman: his authority and her sex, ever stand between them and rational converse.

The point of similarity is the fact that both women and monarchs are pictured as separate, higher beings by ordinary men – but in the case of women it's even more pernicious because it's based on an underlying assertion of inferiority. A woman is ‘exalt[ed …] on a quicksand’ this reminded me, vertiginously, of Stoya talking about being ‘put on a pedestal in a trash can’ and polarised as either ‘a slave or a despot’ (a dichotomy still much in evidence today). She sees nothing but hypocrisy in the ‘paternal solicitude’ of men ‘who outwardly respect and inwardly despise the weak creatures whom they thus sport with’, since the angelic qualities which women are supposed to possess are, in fact, just euphemisms of their subordinate status. Today we might talk of ‘benevolent sexism’; Wollstonecraft talks about the ‘negative virtues’ ascribed to women, namely:

patience, docility, good-humour, and flexibility; virtues incompatible with any vigorous exertion of intellect.

‘I […] deny the existence of sexual virtues,’ she says. (‘Sexual’ at this time meant ‘belonging to the sex’, i.e. ‘female, feminine’.) Virtues are universal or they are meaningless.

But it's significant that she is calling for a revolution in female manners, since her main target is the women who aid and abet this behaviour. Like not a few feminist writers after her, Wollstonecraft wants to defend women from the unfair position they've been put in, but she is often more animated, one feels, by frustration at all the vapid bitches around her. She has no time whatever for women who have ‘chosen rather to be short-lived queens than labour to obtain the sober pleasures that arise from equality’, or who refuse to talk to men on intellectual even ground. ‘What arts have I not seen silly women use to interrupt by flirtation […] a rational conversation which made the men forget that they were pretty women.’ Often, to her disgust, this involves playing up their physical weaknesses for flirtatious effect.

In the most trifling dangers they cling to their support, with parasitical tenacity, piteously demanding succour; and their natural protector extends his arms, or lifts up his voice, to guard the lovely trembler – from what? Perhaps the frown of an old cow, or the jump of a mouse; a rat, would be a serious danger.

This is very funny. Frequently these critiques sound startlingly modern:

So ludicrous, in fact, do these ceremonies appear to me, that I scarcely am able to govern my muscles, when I see a man start with eager, and serious solicitude, to lift a handkerchief, or shut a door, when the lady could have done it herself, had she only moved a pace or two.

I can get that door myself! Who knew that was an argument that went back to 1792? It can be disheartening to realise, as you read this, how many of these issues are still with us more than two centuries later. But at other times you're made to feel, with a jolt, how much things have changed. She asks rhetorically at one point why there are no women who have become famous for their own merits and successes, for instance, and her speculation about women earning their own money is, for her time, pure utopian fantasy:

How many women thus waste life away the prey of discontent, who might have practised as physicians, regulated a farm, managed a shop, and stood erect, supported by their own industry […] ?

In the end, though, she understands exactly why women behave as they do – because that's how they've been taught. ‘[C]an they deserve blame for acting according to principles so constantly inculcated?’ she demands. After all,

the regal homage which [women] receive is so intoxicating, that till the manners of the times are changed, and formed on more reasonable principles, it may be impossible to convince them that the illegitimate power, which they obtain, by degrading themselves, is a curse…

…as reaction to the book would prove. She sums things up with admirable clarity. ‘If men be demi-gods – why let us serve them!’ If women are truly subservient animals, ‘it will be expedient to open a fresh trade with Russia for whips’. But if not…perhaps we can start acting like we're all human beings?

Wollstonecraft considers all of these social problems, ultimately, to be the result of ‘firmly rooted prejudices which sensualists have planted’; in other words, women are the way they are because it's more gratifying to men's sexual desires. Behind gender inequality lurks her bogeyman: ‘want of chastity in men’. Frustratingly for modern readers, she concedes that men ‘are certainly more under the influence of their appetites than women’ (a belief that had only emerged relatively recently), but whereas today our instinct would be to destigmatise freer sexual expression in women, for Wollstonecraft the solution is rather to suppress sexual expression in everyone.

This leads her to some strange places. She regrets ‘the depravity of the appetite which brings the sexes together’, and urges married women to ‘calmly let passion subside into friendship’. The ‘master and mistress of a family ought not to continue to love each other with passion,’ she asserts (which would certainly lead to some interesting self-help books today. Has your relationship lost the spark? GOOD). The armies of sex workers in Georgian London upset her; she refers to them, with barely-disguised revulsion, as ‘literally speaking, standing dishes to which every glutton may have access’. But her call for reserve goes much further than this: she also inveighs against women living together, talking too casually (she is appalled by French women who speak openly about having indigestion), and generally being ‘too intimate’. Her image of an ideal woman's life builds to a vision that now seems nauseatingly insipid:

Her children have her love, and her brightest hopes are beyond the grave, where her imagination often strays. […] The task of her life thus fulfilled, she calmly waits for the sleep of death.

Oh great, the sleep of death! You can see that Wollstonecraft has somehow argued herself into this awkward polarisation, whereby reason and intellect are good, and everything to do with feeling and emotion is consequently bad. This false dichotomy is something that feminism took a long, long time to shake off, and in some ways maybe still struggles with.

It's particularly interesting, because the events of Mary Wollstonecraft's own private life (she was shortly to suggest a ménage to Henry Fuseli and his wife, before going off to Paris to have a baby with someone out of wedlock) would belie these principles so comprehensively. So the impression in Woman is not of sexual desire's being written off, but rather of its being repressed, forced down, in a way that makes the book deeply psychologically interesting, even while it weakens its politics.

For modern readers, there is a lot in here that can be frustrating – her religiosity, her occasional flights of flowery rhetoric – but the overall impression is of a kindred spirit trying her best to use tired old language to say completely new things. And the arguments are still totally compelling. That this book was produced when and where it was already seems like a miracle; that it should be so funny and smart and engaging is more than there was any right to expect.