Rating: 4/5

I really liked this book. After reading all of this author’s other books, I was kinda cringing as to what this book might have in store, but I was happily surprised. 
The plot at first was a little confusing, but it still made sense. Sounds confusing right? That’s pretty much an idea of what the book is like: confusing and yet makes sense. It’s also pretty quirky, which I enjoy those quirky books that no one really hasn’t told. 
And as I’ve mentioned in other reviews of this author’s books, I appreciate the way she takes on real life issues in her stories. I like reading about different worlds, yes, but I also like stories that tell life as it is, no gloss over the content.
Speaking of content, this book was completely clean, which also surprised me given that only two of her other books were close to the level of this one. There wasn’t any of my personal nemesis the ‘f’ bomb, or any “scenes”. In fact, there wasn’t even kissing. (Which maybe I was kinda hoping for one kiss maybe in the end, but oh well. The romance was still super cute.)
Bit of randomness now…
Paliopolis sounded pretty cool. 
The Elf was awesome. Like, really amazing, and surprisingly very sweet. He was just so nice!
Marnie was sweet and hilarious. Her daydreams about things and her sarcasm and wit made her totally my kind of girl. But she was also sweet in the way that she was hurting, but really didn’t realize it until later, but yeah. Have to read the book, I guess, to get what I’m trying to say. Her character was superbly developed.
Max I thought at first was a bit of a jerk, but in the end he turned out to be super nice.
Ms. Slaight was just…she was something all right. A mess of something.  I really didn’t feel bad at all when she shot herself. I mean, yeah, she was sad and looking for love or whatever, but she went about it totally the wrong way. And to top it all off, she was physco, so there’s the end of the story right there. 
Jenna, I guess maybe she was supposed to be Marnie’s friend or something in the end? I don’t know. She just seemed kinda thrown randomly into the story, but hey, she was still a part of everything.
Skye…she was interesting and funny that she was such a big character even though she was dead. But even after hearing everything about her, I liked her. She seemed nice and not afraid to stand up for herself, and even after everything she’d been through, she still had Marnie and loved her. I thought that whole thing was just really touching.
So, I do need a bit of a spoiler for some things…  Ok so to find out that Ms. Slaight kidnapped Marnie, that was kinda strange. I mean I maybe suspected her, but it was still a bit of an “Oh, she’s the bad guy” moment.
The Elf’s whole chat with Marnie was super cute, the whole story about how he ended up falling in love her…just so cute.
Skye’s whole background with her foster dad….just….wow. Sad. I’d have probably shot him too. 
So anyway, yes. A nice read that I thoroughly enjoyed. It’s just one of those stories that you know you really won’t ever forget because it’s one of those quirky, intriguing, and surprisingly sweet books that just grab at you and really never let go.