Rating: 5/5

Well, this was great fun! Murder is Easy seemed to be Agatha Christie having great fun as well, more freewheeling outside the confines of Hercule Poirot or Miss Marple. Even the Bells and Motley is mentioned here, which all Christie fans will be familiar with if they’ve read her wonderfully atmospheric Mr. Quin stories, featuring Mr. Satterthwaite. All throughout, I felt Christie was giving a quaint nod of sorts to her legendary paramour across the pond, Mary Roberts Rinehart. While the immediacy of the narrative is non-reflective, the reader certainly gets that had they but known vibe by the end of this one.

The premise is a dandy: a man going home to England meets an old auntie type on the train he finds himself on due to his preoccupation with winning a horse race. After mentioning to Luke Fitzwilliam that Miss Pinkerton has a friend whose son has just joined the police force in Palestine, he reveals to her that he too, had been a policeman, in the Mayang Straits. This opens the floodgates, as Miss Lavina Pinkerton reveals she is on her way to Scotland Yard, because she suspects several recent deaths in her village of Wychwood-under-Ashe to be murder; moreover, she knows who committed them. Her conclusion in regard to how she knows this seems very superficial, very aunt-like, causing Luke to smile and peg it as harmless imagination. But later, he discovers she was run down by a hit-and-run driver on the way there, and further, the man she named as the next victim, Dr. Humbleby, has suddenly perished.

Well, of course Luke must find out if there’s anything to it; he liked the old gal, and is perhaps feeling guilty that no matter how preposterous it may have sounded, Miss Lavina Pinkerton may have been onto something. And for the reader, the fun begins. Luke heads down to Wychwood under pretense, imbedding himself in a strange little village full of more oddballs and secrets than an episode of Midsomer Murders. And of course there is the dark-haired and bewitching Bridget Conway, smart and infuriating; and of course quite wonderful, were it not for her intent to marry the pot-bellied Lord Whitfield.

This is breezy fun, with a very unusual romance, some strange and eerie goings on that seem part of a Mr. Quin story, and some real excitement and danger when Luke brings in Superintendent Battle because he’s finally got it figured out — he thinks. But Bridget may have other ideas.

Fun and exciting, pleasantly romantic yet in an unusual way — and with an unlikely romantic pairing, Murder is Easy is a refreshing little mystery. Though I guessed who the real murderer in Wychwood was much earlier than either hero or heroine, and I suspect many others will, this one is about the fun of getting there, and it is that.

Overall Murder is Easy is a delightful change of pace from Christie. Often cited as a 1939 release, it was actually serialized in The Saturday Evening Post, beginning in November of 1938, the same year Rinehart’s fabulous The Wall was released. My book is the exact one shown here, a 2017 edition, but it has 261 pages. By no means a brain teaser, but more a fun vacation with murder, mystery, romance, and a weird little English village, Murder is Easy is everything a light mystery should be. Highly recommended!