Rating: 1/5

I found this book really insufferable, and I'm not really sure why. I think it was the style in which it was written. It was just too old-timey in a cutesy kind of way. The story was told in a rather detached, reminiscent way that kept me from caring much about the plot. I had to force myself to slog through this one. I figured that it just had to get better, but it really didn't. 

The book as a whole was just depressing. I really do appreciate all the hardships that the settlers and pioneers went through, but it was just the manner in which this story was told that bored me. Everything falls through for poor Abbie, the main character. It’s like she says “now I can do this, now everything is going well,” etc.—and then something really bad happens that crushes all her plans. There are definitely many instances of things happening which she cannot control, but at times she just didn't pursue her goals enough. She could've had music and art lessons along with her daughters, couldn't she? She could've traveled with her daughter, but she said she was too old. She was not too old! In this spirit of persistent martyr-complex, Abbie is a wee bit insufferable at times. The characters Eloise and Grace are even worse, though for different reasons. Grace says that she is all for rights and progress, and then she shows herself to be racist and prejudiced. There is also some xenophobia toward their neighbor, but that could've just been an attempt to show the attitudes of the time. 

There was just something 'off' about many of the characters. I don't think I liked or truly felt invested in any of them. Abbie's stoic and unaffectionate husband Will, for example, isn't mean, he's just not very considerate or demonstrative. He's probably supposed to be the strong, steady type, but it just annoyed me that he doesn't really seem listen to Abbie's feelings or take them into consideration. 

There were some good values championed in this—such as commitment and hard work—but, nice messages or not, I still can't say that I enjoyed the book. There were a few quotes that I liked, though: “marriage was not the fulfillment of a passion,—marriage was the fulfillment of love. And love was sometimes pleasure and sometimes duty” (125).“There are only two things that can help us,—and that’s our courage and our love” (125).“It takes faith and courage and love and prayer and work and a little singing to keep your spirits up, but we’re going to do it” (126). The ending struck me as a little weird. Overall, this was just a dull, depressing story. It's interesting that there are actually many elements within this book that are also in Laura Ingall's Wilder's Little House series: grasshoppers, pieplant, delaine dresses, wild weather, etc. However, even though they are written for kids, those books are so much better than this. If you want to read a wonderful pioneer saga, I recommend those.