Rating: 5/5

As the title promises, John Rechy offers a single day in the life of Amalia Gomez, a Mexican-American woman living in a Los Angeles neighborhood that's just starting to slide. Amalia awakens to a vision of a large silver cross in the sky, but this kind of miracle is hard to process, as her hard life has led her to expect only disappointment. 

"She could not remember a time when a desirable choice had been presented to her, something she would look back on and even suspect that it might have altered the lines of her life. Nothing."

Following this waking miracle, the novel presents a day in crisis as we learn more about Amalia's circumstances and traumatic past. She lives in a too-small apartment with two teenage children, who are growing into uncertain trouble. Her live-in boyfriend, Raynaldo, didn't come home after a fight last night, something related to an encounter with another man that Amalia doesn't want to remember. Her oldest son, Manny, has died in prison, and money is always a concern.

Still, Amalia is proud, proper and beautiful, although that last attribute seems to have caused her more trouble than joy in life, as recounted in her rapist, deadbeat exes. As she worries about every problem surrounding her, she wonders her neighborhood and the city, grabbing lunch, searching for a lost friend, going to confession, and revisiting the terrible upbringing in a Texas slum that led her to this point.

Amalia's narrative is self-serving and repetitive. It can be a bit wearying at times, but all the little evasions, defensiveness and tributes to the Holy Mother gradually build up to reveal the monumental facade that Amalia has built to protect herself. Her obliviousness and propriety are a defense mechanism, one that leaves her sadly unable to connect with her children, to share the trauma that she's experienced, which is deeply tied to their own. 

She is an unreliable narrator, to be sure, and there are hints that her recollections are rose-colored, that she is choosing to omit her own irresponsibility and selfish decisions. (This is especially true if you've read Rechy's "Bodies and Souls," where part of this story is told in slightly different format.)

Still, Amalia seems correct in noting that she never really had a choice in many of the formative moments of her own life. That changes some as the book builds to its powerful ending: she makes choices, including some difficult ones for her children and her household. It's a short book, but a moving, meditative one.