Rating: 3/5

Bowles is great at atmosphere and at building tension. He is less good at providing satisfying resolutions to the tension he has built, particularly in his novels. I think he is a much better short story writer than novelist, but I'm glad to have read his novels.

This book, like his others, is set in North Africa. It's Morroco on the eve of an uprising against the French Colonials. One interesting thing here is that, though the French are central to everything that's going on, there are basically no French characters in the book. They have nothing to say. Instead, we follow three main characters. 

First, there's an Arab teenager, who turns out to be the main character of the book. He seems naive, but is also uncannily knowing about things. He is a purely devout Muslim, and he sees things from a perspective that the Nazarines (Americans) cannot understand. Nor, as it turns out, can the revolutionary Arabs trying to overthrow the French. Thus, apart from his father who beats him mercilessly, he stands separate from everyone else in the book. He represents the old ways, which are both incomprehensible and pure.

Then there is the expatriate American novelist. He loves the Arab world for its stasis, and thus dislikes the ways in which the French occupation have corrupted it. He doesn't recognize that, without the Colonialization, there would likely be no opportunity or place for himself in that world. Still, he would like to be able to cling to the old ways, simply to observe them. 

Finally, there is an American woman who is a traveller. She is probably a member of the Communist party, but its unclear how deeply involved she is. Her sympathies are for her ideas of progress and the people, but she has basically zero understanding of either, and thinks that everything should change to fit her view of the world, even though she doesn't have any clear idea of the world as it actually is.

The writer and the the woman have an odd romance. It's clear from the outset that he has the hots for her, and is very gentlemanly about it. She, on the other hand, loathes him, though she keeps his company. Her loathing grows and grows, but like everything else with her, its based on a misconception of him and even of herself. 

From this description, it may sound like she is a shallow character, but I actually thought her development was excellent and she was a more fully rounded character than the writer. And the characterization of the teen is quite remarkable.

Based on all of the above, I should have liked the book more than I did. Unfortunately, I found the structure a bit odd, and I thought the resolution unsatisfying. It did not have the harrowing ending of The Sheltering Sky, which was horrible but inevitable and oddly beautiful. Instead, it just sort of ended, and while the major character conflicts came to rest, I felt left with the impression that they were only set aside, and not actually resolved. (Can't go into more without deep spoilers which would still only give my opinion.)