Rating: 4/5

"The Winter's Tale" is a play by William Shakespeare, originally published in the First Folio of 1623, it was possibly written in 1610 or 1611. Labelling this play is not easy – it features elements of Shakespeare's comedies and tragedies alike, and shows traits of the Greek romance as well. 

It is definitely one of the more complex plays, featuring a rich cast of characters, several jumps in location and time, and in general a lot of deep discussions about a variety of themes. Therefore, I wouldn't recommend this play to someone who is trying to get into Shakespeare, but if you have some experience with the Bard, feel free to check it out, because it is quite enjoyable and features the iconic stage direction "Exit, pursued by a bear".

The main plot of "The Winter's Tale" is taken from Robert Greene's pastoral romance "Pandosto" (1588), but let me tell you that Shakespeare actually made some sensible changes, like cutting out the sub-plot of a father lusting after his daughter. Probs to homeboy for that. ;) 

"The Winter's Tale" is essentially a tale about the King of Sicilia, Leontes, and how his jealousy leads to the destruction of his own life and family. Leontes is accusing his wife Hermione of cheating on him with his childhood buddy, Polixenes. Moreover, he accuses Hermione of treason, believing that she has been plotting his murder. After fruitlessly defending herself at the trial, Hermione gives birth to a daughter, and dies. Leontes refusing to acknowledge the child, orders Antigonus to abandoned it. This results in Perdita growing up away from court and being raised by a shepherd. 

While the title of the play might not stir any associations for readers today, Shakespeare's contemporary audience would have expected an old wives' tale or a "ghost story". The title would have emphasized the expectation that this play tells an incredible, not necessarily realistic story, which might display some things out of the ordinary – *coughs* like the resurrection of a character pronounced to be dead. ;) 

However, the play is called "The Winter's Tale" and not "A Winter's Tale", so Shakespeare might have had a particular story in mind. (?) At the beginning of Act II, Hermione begs her son Mamillius to tell her a story, and he replies: "A sad tale tale's best for winter. I have one/ Of sprites and goblins." (II.1.25) The story that he then begins to recount actually mirrors parts of the overarching play – Leontes becomes the man who "dwelt by the churchyard", and even the "sprites" are present in the vision that Antigonus has of the dead Hermione. 

Another interpretation, my favorite one to be quite honest, is that the title suggests that Leontes is creating winter within and around himself after losing his family. It definitely plays into the idea that this play is about the fragility of human happiness and how easily it can be snatched away. The first half of this play is predominantly destructive (Leontes accusing his wife, and her following death), whereas the second half is predominantly creative and restorative (his reunion with his family). The sudden and violent blows of fortune that struck Leontes, deepen and widen the play's image of life as a lasting storm – how suddenly winter may follow upon the joys of spring and summer.

The most interesting observation that I took away from this play is the shift in Shakespeare's narrative in his later plays, compared to his earlier ones. The most remarkable feature of "The Winter's Tale" is its jump in time, cutting the play into two halves that are seperated by a period of 16 years. This is very unusal, a huge portion of his plays cover a period of a couple of days or months at most, but not years. I was really surprised to learn that Shakespeare might have written the role of the Chorus, Time, for himself. It is the Chorus who announces this jump in time at the beginning of Act IV, proclaiming that "Your patience this allowing, I turn my glass, and give my scene such growing", letting scholars believe that Shakespeare referred to his scene in the literal sense. It is a nice little theory, and I like picturing the Bard getting in on the action onstage as well. ;) 

Another narrative choice that sets "The Winter's Tale" apart from most of his earlier plays is that Shakespeare tried to rouse a feeling of wonder in his audience. Usually he lets his audience in on every secret, by passing on and showing them the vital pieces of knowledge to understand the plot at hand, plot twists really weren't his priority. In "The Winter's Tale" however, he does not merely decline to do so, he straight off tries to lead the audience utterly astray, by making Paulina proclaim the death of the Queen, even though the latter is still alive.

One interpretation of this play, that really blew my heads off, is that we may see in "The Winter's Tale" the whole scheme of Dante's  Divine Comedy. Especially if we're focusing on Leontes' spiritual journey. In Acts I-III we are given the Inferno, the hell which Leontes builds in his own mind. This hell, this winter is created and sustained only by himself. Next, at the end of Act III and the beginning of Act V, we are given glimpses of the Purgatorio, Leontes sixteen year period of repentance and penance. And finally, in the remainder of Act V, we have the Paradiso in his reunion with daughter, wife and friend. I love this analysis because it shows what a universal story "The Winter's Tale" is, and I really love cross-textual studies. 

Overall, I really enjoyed how rich the story was and how many different interpretations it opened up. It won't become a favorite of mine, because it lacks humour and brilliance, but it's definitely a vital read nonetheless.