Rating: 5/5

The Black Sheep is a wonderful book. I adored it really. Gingie(we met her in A Wilder Name), is a famous rock-star. She comes from a family of accomplished people and never fit in, music is her life and that is what she knows best. The practical details of life like money etc is taken care of by her manager Vince and other people. She is friendly, sweet and unpretentious mainly because of her friends and family. She loves taking care of people and doesn't care about what the world says, in a word oblivious but her heart is in the right place. After yet another blow-up with her record company Vince sends her to live in an island in Italy with his younger brother Roe.

Roe was born to famous parents but never liked the life and the toll it took on his family. While Vince started controlling his environment, Roe just let it go and has spent the past 14 years taking tours to Africa. He hates the lime-light and after having to save his half-sister from a drug over-dose he is depressed and only wants some peace and quite and not to baby-sit.

Gingie and Roe's first meeting is hilarious, when she is stopped by the customs and Roe is shocked by Gingie. She is not what he expected. Gingie is 31 years old and has been treated as a child through-out, but now she wants to take control of her life.

She is shocked and confounded by what she feels for Roe, and so is Roe. He does not want to be with Gingie. But both have shocks in store. Gingie loves life and people and Roe is totally opposite. A few days into her stay Gingie's friend drop in as well and poor Roe can't get his peace.

I loved their journey together, it was sweet, hilarious and lovable. Poor Roe when Gingie says that she need some advice on whether to sleep with him or not, he falls off the hammock. Gingie is honest and a celibate rock-star to boot. Roe never really had a chance against a hurricane against her.

Loved seeing them fall in love and how Gingie makes Roe open up about his life, takes care of him. Roe can't seem to say no to her at all.

Amazing book!!