Rating: 4/5

This second volume of Douglas's autobiography covering his time as Justice on the Supreme Court was published posthumously. It will be quite interesting to anyone with an interest in constitutional law and this historical period in the United States. It covers the entire 35 years that Douglas spent on the Court, and he seems to have been in the thick of national politics, at least to the extent that he served such a central role himself and had close relationships with most of the presidents who served while he was on the Court, including FDR, Johnson, Truman, Kennedy. He also knew Eisenhower fairly well and then there was the the attempt of Nixon through Ford to have Douglas impeached from the Court, so he had a certain intimacy with those presidents as well. There are many reflections on these men along with the discussions of the law and the justices he served with.

But this is really not an autobiography in the sense of talking about the writer's personal life. There is almost nothing about his family, his loves, lovers, disappointments, hopes, dreams, and so on. It is focused on his views of the development of constitutional law through cases, controversies, and people. His view and knowledge of the people who shaped this period is included but the point of view is that of Douglas as an observing and evaluating eye of others rather than as a person reflecting on his own life that we get here. 

There are chapters on several areas of constitutional laws that saw important development and controversy during his time on the Court. There are chapters on the presidents (and his evaluation of their quality), the chief justices (and his view of their relative ranking), the advocates who came before the Court (and his evaluation of their ability), the judicial conferences, the law clerks, the press (and his evaluation of their quality), and a chapter on the attempt to impeach him from the Court. Douglas published many books during his life and the book is very readable. The Publisher's Note at the start of the book suggests that Douglas had put in significant time in the draft of this book. It does seem polished but there is a sense in which it is a collection of chapters rather than an integrated whole. Very much recommended to those who have an interest in our national history and the development of constitutional law during the time that Douglas was on the Court. 

Having just read The Brethren: Inside the Supreme Court it was also interesting to see how the two books compared. Douglas does not address that book at all and his focus is quite different than Woodward and Armstrong's. He does not try to answer anything in that book, if he even read it.