Rating: 5/5

2024 review:

I’ve always considered The Chronicles of Narnia to be one of my favorite series of all time, and one of the most foundational stories in my spiritual life outside of the Bible itself. Considering this, it seems like a horrid oversight to have never reviewed it as a whole. I’ve reviewed my favorite of the series, The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe, but I’ve never discussed the other six installments. Below you’ll find my brief thoughts on each book in the series, in publication order. While I love some books more than others, the entire series is a 5-star series for me. I can recognize some of its flaws, but those flaws don’t lessen its impact and importance for me.

One quick thing to add. We often call the Narnia books “Christian allegory,” but Lewis balked at this description. He himself described Narnia as an imaginative supposition. Suppose there was a world like Narnia, where talking animals and creatures of myth dwelled. Suppose Jesus decided to come into that world as He did into ours, and that the form of a Lion was the one He chose for this incarnation. But there is no one-to-one correspondence between the characters and events in these books, and figures and events in Christian doctrine. There are parallels, but not reflections. Thus, this is not a true allegory. Lewis never meant it to be. 

The Lion, The Witch, and the Wardrobe: 5 stars

Is this a perfect story? No. The dialogue can be stiff. There’s a bit of an outdated view on gender roles., and what some have called passive sexism, as viewed in the 21st century. Santa Claus makes an appearance, and that throws some readers out of the story. But to me, Santa coming onto the scene is a powerful turning point in a world where it is “always winter, but never Christmas.” And the rest of the story, especially everything said about and done by Aslan, has been incredibly significant to me and my faith for decades. The way he takes Edmund’s place on the Stone Table, even after Edmund had betrayed Him, is one of my favorite ways to explain Christ’s crucifixion to kids. While a child might not relate to Judas Iscariot, they can all relate to Edmund, both in his betrayal and in his redemption. I love the breaking of the Stone Table, and the way Aslan breathes life back into those turned to stone by the Witch. I love Edmund’s development, and I especially love how, when the Witch is accusing him before Aslan, Edmund just keeps his eyes focused on Aslan and lets Aslan handle everything. It’s a tale that means so much to me. Is Aslan safe? No. But He is good. He’s not a tame Lion. Aslan is a fantastic portrayal of Christ.
“Safe?” said Mr. Beaver; “don’t you hear what Mrs. Beaver tells you? Who said anything about safe? ‘Course he isn’t safe. But he’s good. He’s the King, I tell you.”
“He's wild, you know. Not like a tame lion.”

Prince Caspian: 4 stars

One of the slower books in the series, and one that I remembered the least about prior to rereading. But there are some very important scenes here. I think specifically about when Lucy sees Aslan and wants to follow Him, but the others doubt His presence. Not only do they fail to learn from their mistakes in the first installment, with the exception of Edmund, Lucy fails to take a stand and follow Him anyway, even if that meant following Him alone. It’s a powerful warning to follow Jesus, no matter what. But then Bacchus shows up, and that completely threw me out of the story. I know Lewis wove in these mythological beings for a purpose, but this particular inclusion was difficult for me to wrap my head around. I did appreciate the story more upon rereading, but it’s still not my favorite.
“You have listened to fears, Child,' said Aslan. 'Come, let me breathe on you. Forget them. Are you brave again?”
“You come of the Lord Adam and the Lady Eve," said Aslan. "And that is both honour enough to erect the head of the poorest beggar, and shame enough to bow the shoulders of the greatest emperor on earth. Be content.”

The Voyage of the Dawn Treader: 4.5 stars

Prince Caspian, now undisputed King of Narnia, is on a quest to find the seven missing Telmarine lords when Edmund, Lucy, and their horrid cousin Eustace join him aboard the Dawn Treader. This book has so much more spiritual depth than I remembered, but a lot of the key scenes were still fresh in my mind. The transformation of Eustace, both literal and figurative, is a stunning one. The journey to the End of the World in search of Aslan’s Country contains some of the loveliest, most spiritually profound descriptions I’ve read in fantasy. And I can’t neglect mentioning the unequivocal hero of the story in my opinion: Reepicheep, the bravest and most clear-sighted of all mouse kind. I adore him in this book, and I enjoyed the entire story so much more than I remembered or expected. In this book we also get what is essentially the spiritual thesis for the entire series.
"Are -are you there too, Sir?" said Edmund.
"I am," said Aslan. "But there I have another name. You must learn to know me by that name. This was the very reason why you were brought to Narnia, that by knowing me here for a little, you may know me better there.”
“Oh, Aslan,' said Lucy. 'Will you tell us how to get into your country from our world?' 'I shall be telling you all the time,' said Aslan. 'But I will not tell you how long or short the way will be; only that it lies across a river. But do not fear that, for I am the great Bridge Builder.”

The Silver Chair: 4 stars

Ah, Puddleglum. This is one of the weirder stories in the series, in my opinion, but there’s, again, some wonderful spiritual depth here. The evil is more subtle and insidious than in prior books, the story a bit more muddled. But purposely so. If not for the the climax here, when Puddleglum the Marsh-wiggle takes a stand against the villain and proclaims some lines that resonate with bravery, it would be among my least favorites in the series. I honestly feel a bit conflicted about it. But as it stands, those lines speak so deeply to me that I can’t rate it any lower.
“Suppose we have only dreamed, or made up, all those things-trees and grass and sun and moon and stars and Aslan himself. Suppose we have. Then all I can say is that, in that case, the made-up things seem a good deal more important than the real ones…That's why I'm going to stand by the play world. I'm on Aslan's side even if there isn't any Aslan to lead it. I'm going to live as like a Narnian as I can even if there isn't any Narnia.”

The Horse and His Boy: 4 stars

This story is so much richer and more powerful than I remembered. I actually recalled finding this installment boring, almost to the point of disliking it. That is absolutely not the case any longer. There was a ton of spiritual depth to be plumbed in regards to identity and pride. I’ve been listening to the C.S. Lewis Book Club Podcast alongside each book, and the second episode for The Horse and His Boy was packed with so many wonderful insights that I had to listen to it twice. I have never in my life re-listened to a podcast episode. I can’t recommend the show highly enough. They’ve been utilizing the Medieval cosmology presented in the book Planet Narnia (which is now on my TBR), and this book related to Mercury. Knowing that, and the characteristics that are demonstrated in response to Mercury as a theme, made this book make so much more sense to me on a profound, spiritual level. All of the characters here were interesting, but I related most to Bree.
“Child,' said the Lion, 'I am telling you your story, not hers. No one is told any story but their own.”
“Do not dare not to dare.”
“Please,' she said, 'You're so beautiful. You may eat me if you like. I'd rather be eaten by you than fed by anyone else.”

The Magician’s Nephew: 4.5 stars

I’ve always been a fan of The Magician’s Nephew. It’s tied with The Voyage of the Dawn Treader for my second favorite in the series. I think the creation of Narnia is one of the most beautiful scenes I’ve ever read in fiction. The idea of Aslan singing everything into existence is simply lovely. I have to say that reading the books in publication order made this prequel story even more meaningful. Diggory and Polly are both wonderful characters, and I’ve always loved the Cabby and Strawberry the horse, as well. We meet Jadis here, in all her malevolent glory, as well as Uncle Andrew, whose lesser evil is no less distasteful. It’s just a wonderful story, with the same powerful symbolism present in the rest of the series.
“Now the trouble about trying to make yourself stupider than you really are is that you very often succeed.”
“Oh, Adam’s sons, how cleverly you defend yourselves against all that might do you good!”
“For what you see and hear depends a good deal on where you are standing: it also depends on what sort of person you are.”

The Last Battle: 4 stars

This book is so hard to read. It’s tragic, and feels futile for much of the story. And yet, it’s also one of the most beautiful depictions of heaven and even death I’ve come across. There’s so much darkness, and so much encouragement. It feels like it gives you emotional whiplash. It’s one of the least enjoyable books for me, for that reason, and yet I know it’s also one of the most important. My biggest issue with this book is what has been titled by Neil Gaiman “The Problem of Susan,” and I wish Lewis had given us more to work with there. But in terms of finales, The Last Battle is hard. But it is good. 
“In our world too, a stable once had something inside it that was bigger than our whole world.”
“I have come home at last! This is my real country! I belong here. This is the land I have been looking for all my life, though I never knew it till now...Come further up, come further in!”
“All their life in this world and all their adventures in Narnia had only been the cover and the title page: now at last they were beginning Chapter One of the Great Story which no one on earth has read: which goes on for ever: in which every chapter is better than the one before.”

I got so much out of this reread. Every time I revisit Narnia, I love it more. It makes me hunger for a world more real than this one. I sometimes forget that we’re living in the Shadowlands, but Narnia never fails to remind me. Something that added to my reread experience tremendously were the podcast that prompted the reread in the first place:  The C.S. Lewis Book Club Podcast. The hosts shared such a wonderful blend of literary commentary and spiritual insights. If you’re thinking of reading (or rereading) any of Lewis’s fictional works, I highly recommend this podcast. It’s just wonderful.

"Further up, and further in!"