Rating: 4/5

Children are no longer being born, anywhere on Earth; and the choices that people make when all hope seems lost are at the heart of P.D. James’s 1992 novel The Children of Men. James may be better-known for her detective procedurals, but in this novel she makes a successful foray into the field of dystopian science fiction.

The word “dystopian” fits well here; as this novel begins, humankind faces annihilation. In this instance, however, the instrument of humanity’s destruction is not a nuclear war, or the ravages of a new and incurable disease. Rather, the human race has, suddenly and inexplicably, become infertile. Since no new human beings are being born, there is no need for atomic superweapons or exotic viruses to bring about the apocalypse. All that is needed is time, and eventually the human race will age out of existence, pass from the earth.

As of October 1995, not one new human life has come into the world. 1995 has come to be known as Year Omega, or simply Omega; and in the twenty-six years between Omega and the time in which the novel is set, initial optimism – that surely modern science would find the cause of this worldwide mass infertility, devise a remedy, save the day – has given way to a pervasive pessimism, a grim waiting for the end. It is a slow-motion apocalypse that reminded me of Nevil Shute’s novel On the Beach (1957) , in which the people of Southern Hemisphere communities like Melbourne, Australia, knowing that the superpowers of the North have destroyed each other with nuclear weapons, can do nothing other than wait for the clouds of deadly radiation to drift south.

The society of The Children of Men has changed in a variety of ways as an aging population looks ahead to human extinction. Playgrounds and other reminders of children have been removed. The carriages and prams that women wheel along the streets of their towns and cities hold dolls that take the place of the human babies those women never had the chance to bear. Births of kittens and puppies are celebrated as elaborately as births of boys and girls once were. The children of Year Omega, themselves known as “Omegas,” have been pampered and idolized since birth, and seem markedly different, in deportment and behavior, from the rest of the population. There are even gangs of Omegas, known as “Painted Faces,” who roam the countryside and waylay unlucky travelers for use as victims in a bizarre, consciously primitive ritual of human sacrifice. The psychological impact of the slow-motion calamity that is Omega is well emphasized.

I originally posted this review to Goodreads back on New Year’s Day, 1 January 2021, and you will understand why I did so when I quote to you the opening sentence of the novel: “Early this morning, 1 January 2021, three minutes after midnight, the last human being to be born on earth was killed in a pub brawl in a suburb of Buenos Aires, aged twenty-five years, two months and twelve days” (p. 3). It was interesting to return to The Children of Men on a New Year’s Day that marked the end of a year that certainly felt apocalyptic. The 2020-21 period was the kind of time when dystopian literature was definitely hitting too close to home. 

The character from The Children of Men who writes down that opening sentence is the novel’s protagonist and sometime narrator, Theodore Faron. I say “sometime” because the novel shifts back and forth, somewhat awkwardly, between entries from Faron's diary and third-person narration.

An Oxford don and historian who has spent his career studying the Victorian era, Faron is completely and self-consciously non-heroic. He is a deliberately isolated man, whose marriage ended under tragic circumstances that reflect the novel’s premise of a world without children. He teaches his classes, lives comfortably, and waits for the end. 

Yet Faron, for all his self-willed isolation, also has important connections to the political changes that have occurred in Great Britain since Omega. Constitutional monarchy and Parliamentary government have given way to the autocratic rule of a Warden of England; and the Warden, Xan Lyppiatt, who rules with the help of a small and elite Council, is Faron’s cousin.

Under the Warden’s rule, England has a nominal stability that is lacking in much of the rest of the world; but that stability comes at a price. Men are subjected to compulsory testing of their semen, and healthy young women must undergo regular and intrusive examinations of their theoretical fertility. An all-powerful State Security Police monitors citizens carefully, and older people who are no longer productive are expected to participate in a ritual known as the Quietus – a mass suicide that the government claims is voluntary. The state runs sex shops that are meant to enhance the flagging drives of a rapidly aging population. 

And the more one reads on, the grimmer England seems under Xan Lyppiatt’s wardenship. The Isle of Man has become an island prison where all those who commit crimes are unceremoniously dumped; like the island of Manhattan in John Carpenter’s science-fiction film Escape from New York (1982), it is completely unregulated and ungoverned, and the inmates of the Man Penal Colony are left to create a hellish little world of their own. People from other, less stable countries are able to come into England as “Sojourners”; but the Sojourners are consigned to do society’s dirtiest work, have virtually no rights, and are subject to deportations when they turn 60 years old and have thereby, in the government’s view, aged out of “usefulness.” I am over 60 years old now, and therefore that last little detail is the sort of thing that makes one think.

Faron’s resolute inaction is disrupted when a young woman named Julian asks him to use his status as Xan’s cousin to speak to the Warden of England. Faron agrees, but Xan dismisses Faron’s pleas for reform, saying, “Your position is no different from the rest of Britain. You desire the end but close your eyes to the means. You want the garden to be beautiful provided the smell of manure is kept well away from your fastidious nose” (p. 99). 

What would it be like to have grown up with a close relative who later became a ruthless dictator? It was interesting to hear Faron recall a youthful conversation with Xan, in which Xan expressed an interest in going first into the military and then into politics:

And what he had spoken in that seemingly casual conversation, had it even then been part of a plan? He was right, the army did take him. He became the youngest colonel for 150 years. He still had no political allegiance, no convictions beyond his conviction that what he wanted he should have and that when he set his hand to something he would succeed. After Omega, with the country sunk in apathy, no one wanting to work, services almost at a stop, crime uncontrollable, all hope and ambition lost forever, England had been a ripe plum for his picking. The metaphor was trite but none was more accurate. It had hung there, overripe, rotten; and Xan had only to put out his hand. (p. 152)

Faron subsequently finds himself propelled into a cross-country flight with members of a rag-tag rebel group that calls itself “The Five Fishes,” under circumstances suggesting that humanity’s destruction may not be as inevitable as it once seemed. One woman is pregnant, and therefore represents a hope for humanity's continuance. The later passages of The Children of Men show Faron and "The Five Fishes" travelling across England, trying to keep the woman and her unborn child safe from Xan and his operatives: "His instinct...was to put as many miles as possible between them and London, and to keep to the original plan to hide in deep and remote country. Every mile from London seemed a mile towards safety" (p. 208).

James was a life peer, a devout Anglican who held a Conservative seat in the House of Lords - and I sense some Tory disapproval of trends in the society of her time. At one point, Theo recalls how "During the mid-1990s the recognized churches, particularly the Church of England, moved from the theology of sin and redemption to a less uncompromising doctrine: corporate social responsibility coupled with a sentimental humanism. Rosie [a popular evangelical preacher of that time] has gone further and has virtually abolished the Second Person of the Trinity together with His cross, substituting a golden orb of the sun in glory, like a garish Victorian pub sign" (p. 50).

Does James think that her England needs to abandon that sort of neo-paganism and get back to the old-time religion? It certainly sounds that way.

Politics aside, however, The Children of Men builds suspense well and is a very fast read. Alfonso Cuarón’s 2006 film adaptation – titled simply Children of Men, omitting the direct article for reasons of which I am not certain – also tells the story well, with Cuarón’s characteristic long takes and a very fine cast (Clive Owen, Julianne Moore, Michael Caine, Chiwetel Ejiofor, Charlie Hunnam). 

Whether you have seen Cuarón’s film or not, James’s novel provides, for devotees of dystopia, a suitably grim journey into a bleak future. I’m just not sure whether the real-life day on which this novel begins was quite the right time at which to be starting this particular book.