Rating: 4/5

TV Commercial: Does your husband and the men of Athens just want to wage war? Do they ignore your pleas for peace no matter how long the Peloponnesian War has been going on? Tired of your men's stupid decisions in such a trying time? Do you wish to end it? Well women of Athens, you are in luck, we have the solution for you, withhold sex from your husbands and lovers, that will bring them back with their tails between their feet and a signed peace document. 
Women of Athens: Would that not just create divisions between the sexes and a sort of war between the citizens?
TV Commercial: ehhhh, most likely. But, their idiocy must be stopped.
Lysistrata: You have got a deal! I am starting now. Women let us meet! My time has come to convince you to withhold sex so we can have peace. This cannot possibly backfire. 

Now that that is aside, THIS IS NEITHER A FEMINIST PLAY, NOR A PACIFIST ONE. I understand why modern readers might interpret it as such, but at the time it was written,and many years after, it was clear that the view was that women were a nuisance that needed to be protected from themselves. It basically begins with these lines: 
 LYSISTRATA
 There are a lot of things about us women
 That sadden me, considering how men
 See us as rascals.
CALONICE
 As indeed we are!

Not the greatest sentence for a supposedly feminist play. 

Now this is also quite a crude play, maybe even more so than the Bard himself. In it men walk about with erect penises for no other reason that them being denied sex and unable to control erections. We have a woman that sort of teases her lover by saying she will do him and them promptly bringing a bed, a mattress, a pillow, a blanket, some oil, and then ends up running back up to the Acropolis where the women are holding out. Their oath to not have sex tells them not to do a certain sexual pose that apparently was popular back then. 
I would say this play is a bit offensive to men, not as much as women, but it does dictate that men cannot function unless their penis is inside someone's vagina. That kind of does them a disservice. 
Here's a few reasons why it is not feminist:
-The first lines of the play as written above. 
-Majority of women, except Lysistrata, are presented as voluptuaries. 
-A magistrate arrives and starts spouting about how women are hysterical and that men should keep better hold of them. 
-He proceeds to also claim they have too much of a liking to wine, promiscuous sex, and for some weird reasons, exotic cults. 
-There are two women with these names: "seed-market-porridge-vegetable-sellers" and "garlic-innkeeping-bread-sellers". 
-Lysistrata uses a woman for her beauty to distract the men enough to have them sign peace. 

I did laugh nonetheless, I prefer to read it as satire, it makes the funny and cringe worthy moments all the more fun.