Rating: 5/5

(re-sharing this from my ig as it is Sahni's Birth Anniversary today) 
(actualy written on 24/5/21)
𝙏𝙖𝙢𝙖𝙨 - 𝘿𝙖𝙧𝙠𝙣𝙚𝙨𝙨. Inspired by Bhishm Sahni's own experience during the partition, this story is set in Punjab, just before the Partition. One instance of the communal riots that ravaged our country at the time. The account is of merely 5 days, but of 5 dark, terrifying days. Sahni captures a bird's eye view of the riots and how they were inextricably connected with lies, politics and economics. He weaves together the horrifying stories of various characters, - Hindu, Sikh, Muslim and even the District British Commissioner. There's no single protagonist, the riot itself is the protagonist.
We start with Nathu, who was paid to kill a pig, unaware of the real reason behind it. This becomes the spark provoking the fire of communal violence that would come to ravage the town.
Mankind goes beserk because of terror. People do the unthinkable because they believe it's the only way to survive. The way the best of friends can no longer trust each other. Some people who'd die to save their religion and honour and others who gave it up to save their lives. The hesitation of a rioter when about to kill someone he knew. An old Muslim lady giving refuge to Sikhs in her house. How 15 year year old Ranviir is brainwashed into murdering every Muslim possible. Iqbal Singh who turns into Iqbal Ahmed overnight to save his life. The British commissioner who loves Indian culture but doesn't care enough to try to stop the riots from taking place.The blame game played by all the political parties. In a moment, how people are refugees in their own houses.
This is a poignant story of humanity and hatred. Bravery and cowardice. Kindness and cruelty. Betrayal from the most trustworthy and loyalty from whom you don't even know. It's chilling and uncomfortable, frightening and depressing but I will still ask you to read it. Because it shows how paranoia makes one do the unthinkable. The smallest of misunderstandings lead to murders. How all humanity is lost, all ideals, all the claims of  brotherhood are lost in the face of terror. And, the instances here remain true to this day.The players change, but the story remains the same. 
लगता है शहर पर चीलें उड़ेंगी। आसार बहुत बुरे हैं।