Rating: 4/5

I saw an arts programme with a bunch of London showbiz luvvies singing the praises of a noble-savage type character called John Healy and his ‘wonderful’ autobiography ‘The Grass Arena’. On the one hand I was intrigued, on the other hand I know that London always bigs-up London (boxing and football being good examples of undeserved reputations) so I approached the book with trepidation. 

Warning: The life stories told in the book are truly shocking and harrowing. I’m sure it is no spoiler (unless you don’t read publisher blurbs or advertising) to tell you it is about a vagrant alcoholic who eventually turns his life around. The shock is the level of violence that Healey’s fellow street-based drinkers level on one another. Sure, they are begging and stealing from civilians all day every day, but it is for each other that they reserve their worst crimes. And this is where my doubts arise about the nobility of this savage, Healy. Is alcoholism enough of an excuse to be joining in with the horrific beating and maiming (sometimes to death) of the first one to pass out from drinking each day? Though Healey rarely if ever initiates the violence, how credible are his claims that he joined in so as not to stand out and be the next victim (actually, he becomes a victim of these beatings as much as the rest of the them)? No-one can accuse Healy of a surfeit of compassion or empathy, that’s for sure. To be fair, Healy himself says that he was no longer human, during this period of his life. And he blames nobody apart from himself, which is an important thing to say. If anyone expects to find that Healy and his fellow savages are ‘victims of society’ then forget it. These tales occur when there is full employment in the U.K., and any one of them could get a job in ten minutes (no questions asked) at the Labour Exchange. There was also no shortage of housing (some of the drinkers / stealers fighters retained their homes, even though they spent all day on the ‘grass arena’). No, the decisions to drink and sleep rough (for those that did) were life decisions underpinned by alcoholism. Ie the homelessness and joblessness did not come first. They did not drink to blunt the pain of sleeping in the cold, or any other cliches. They drank therefore they were. Sadly, and to my great shame I have some insights into this world and the decision making that goes into it, so I recognised the faulty thinking that helped Healy descend into hell. Alcohol is a terrible mistress. Truly terrible. And the things it makes you do cannot be explained. 

Like many beggars, thieves and con-men Healy is a great story-teller. Apparently this book is not a case of a middle class editor turning a pigs ear into a silk purse. Healy really did write it as is. Well done him - just a pity about the subject matter and the life he lived to get it!

Finally, though I hated the depravity of many of the stories, I had to give the book four stars (and if not fours stars, then five). I have to admit that at the end I wanted to know what happened next… (hopefully no more violence!).