Rating: 5/5

If you like to read, and like to live with books, you learn that some books wait, shyly, for a mutual friend to say “I think you two might like each other.” Sometimes the fix-up doesn’t work — you just say yes, you take your chances — but when it does you feel grateful to that friend, forever, that he knew you like that. Knew the two of you, you and the book.

Manny at Book Soup is one of those friends. Book Soup is on Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles. Everything around it keeps closing, but Book Soup remains, independent, ornery, seen it all and has lived to tell about it. A few months ago I saw they had Norman Mailer’s OSWALD’S GHOST on the front desk, by the cash register. I knew that Manny loved Mailer and asked him about this book. “Just read it,” he said. So I bought it, making a big deal about its being a real book, with pages, and a cover, and that real book smell (I like my Kindle, and have many titles on it. But Kindle books don’t smell.) I thought — am I that interested in Oswald? I am old enough to remember the sight of Jack Ruby shooting him in the gut, live, in 1963. But six hundred pages? When there are so many show business biographies to read, and books about the Holocaust?

It’s a winner. It’s not about Oswald, not really, but about Mailer’s novelist’s attempt to force him into being a character in a narrative that makes any sense at all. There’s a blankness to Oswald, in death as in life, and OSWALD’S GHOST is the perfect title as it’s the ghost who is the author’s opponent. He goes to Russia, gets the KGB to open files, interviews the sinister set of kooks attached to the case. He tries to make sense of the Warren Report, and of the terrifying creature known as Marguerite Oswald, or Mom. By the end Mailer isn’t convinced that Oswald did or didn’t do it, and it’s his triumph as an artist that by the end you don’t care about that. Because you have been all over the world with a marvelous companion, one who can go off on the occasional tangent but always finds his way back to home, with a bagful of new stories to tell. Mailer took on Oswald, as he took on Marilyn, because as an American author of his time he felt he had to drag them into the ring with him, and see who was left standing. Two people, about whom the truth could never be known, facing a great writer with his dukes up.
And so, on to the Hitler book … (CASTLE IN THE FOREST)
(One interesting supposition of Mailer’s … he feels that Oswald could hardly have intended to be shot by Ruby, and that his goal might have been to have a Day in Court, during which he could air his not entirely crazy views about the workings of the secret world. He was, as Mailer sees it, a not very interesting young man (he was twenty-three when he did or didn’t pull the trigger) who knew it about himself, who hated that it was true, who tried to make it not be true and the rest is — history, as seen, invaluably, by Norman Mailer.
Thank you, Manny.