Rating: 3/5

Shadows of Doom, the 2nd book of the Iron Tower Trilogy, finds the alliance of men, elves, warrows beset on all sides by the forces of the Dark Lord Modru. The High-King Galen, the elf Gildor, and the warrow Tuck must make their way through the treacherous Dimmendark in an attempt to rally the Host of Pellar. Along the way they meet the dwarf Brega. He joins our heroes' bringing humans, dwarves, elves, and warrows together to face the darkness. 

The heroes face numerous perils on their journey. They are forced to flee through an abandoned dwarven kingdom where a great evil lurks (sound familiar?). They must avoid the forces of Modru as they make their way south yet through all the danger, they are able to decipher Modru’s plan. If Modru is able to succeed, then the world will end, and an age of darkness will reign. Having this knowledge forces the heroes to form a desperate plan of their own. But is there enough time? 

Shadows of Doom continues the fantasy tropes and hero journey started in The Dark Tide. The book continues to borrow themes and elements from earlier authors creating a pretty standard story of good vs evil. The heroes continually find themselves in dire straits against overwhelming odds forced to change plans and attempt ever more desperate escapes. Yet they are able to survive and carry hope to the people of Mithgar. 

One element that I would have liked to see more time spent on was the narrative shift to the warrows, Danner and Patrel, as we see them survive the fall of Challerain Keep and return to find that the war has come to the Boskydells. This sets up another good vs evil fight that I wish we could have seen more of. 

This is a 3-star read for me. I got exactly what I expected in the 2nd book of this series. Heroes journeying through a dark and dangerous landscape in an effort to rally the people to fight against pure evil. This is a typical 2nd book where everything looks grim for the free people of Mithgar as Modru and his evil plan are ascendent. This is what I expect, and this is what I got. This is a fun and entertaining story, but the reader should be aware that they are getting a standard and predictable fantasy story