Rating: 4/5

After reading Patrick French's scrupulously researched and compulsively thorough study of V S Naipaul, I was prepared to like this book less. Some passages were fictionalized, as was pointed out by French and confirmed by Paul Theroux. After reading both books I find myself drawn more to this one, however. French seems accurate and fair, but Naipaul's character is not as vividly drawn. Naipaul has much of the same persona in both accounts, and there are no great discrepancies that stand out.

The main distinction between the books is this is a personal memoir, not a professional biography. Paul Theroux knew Naipaul intimately in a variety of settings, where French knows him only through his interviews and papers. The difference is a significant one. Naipaul likely may have wanted it this way. By cooperating with Patrck French on an authorized biography it gave him a chance to set the record straight. The irony may be that nothing much was changed between the two portraits.

Naipaul was legendary in his snarky treatment of those he considered fools (i.e. most people), his uncompromising critique of places and things, scathing sarcasm and perverse humor. This made for scenes of both mortifying and hilarious encounters with almost everyone he met. He was not merely a misanthrope, curmudgeon or egotist; he had an deeply anti-social streak. Theroux's later feud with Naipaul does nothing to discredit his account of the friendship they shared, or this book.

In French's interpretation of the two men he draws a picture of Theroux as a perennial hanger on, and was tireless in his correspondence with Naipaul, who doesn't return his letters or interest. Here it is suggested the relationship was more symbiotic. In Paul Theroux's version of events he is not a sycophant, although he looks up to the famous older writer as a model and mentor. At an early stage in their connection, Theroux strangely contemplates initiating an affair with Naipaul's first wife Pat.

Theroux shows how little Naipaul changed as he visited and corresponded with him over a thirty year period. At times the portrayal becomes less flattering. It reflects Theroux's further acquaintance with his elder, and Naipaul's later decline. It is sad to see how the years go by. Eventually Theroux comes to believe he is equal to or better than his master. He criticizes the manner that Naipaul cut off former ties, but realizes friends are chosen for their kindness not for their virtues.

Some have seen this book as a poison pen missive, or literary retribution from an abandoned friend. There is this aspect, when Theroux tells how Naipaul's second wife Nadia split them apart after the wedding. But the essence of the work is a labor of love from a dedicated friend and admirer of a great writer. Theroux feels he owes his early success to the belief and support he was given as a young man. In his memories of Naipaul there is an abiding compassion and at times even a sense of awe.