Rating: 3/5

I’m 35% in and man it better turn out that the OW that the MMC cheated with and later married was the one who orchestrated the exposure of his affair to the FMC. I want her tarnished in his mind. As I don’t feel like she should be cherished or have gotten away with it. And it better turn out that the roommate Tracey or the dead boss’s victims or wife are the true murderer. Because so far it’s a boring story. 

As for the MMC, I usually don’t like lawyers in stories, but I don’t like him because he’s manipulative and selfish. He loves the FMC but he never really gave her or his marriage to her a chance. And the way he describes his feelings and marriage to his affair OW sounds like she was boring and easy. Not passionate or exciting. She was just like him and made him comfortable. While I normally wouldn’t hate that, he also makes his marriage to the FMC sound like a roller coaster ride with a child. But when the FMC points out his own behaviors it’s clear he never respected her enough to actually let her in. She was for s e x only and that makes me disgusted with him. So I’m waiting to see how these two mysteries in the story are revealed and not so much if this couple actually gets back together. Ugh. 

Lastly, did the MMC not investigate how his affair was exposed? Wouldn’t you want to know before just up and marrying someone without knowing who’s all up in your business sneaking around it like that. My eyes would always look at the affair person suspiciously when something like this conveniently happens. How would the letter writer have known he would be there at that exact time otherwise? Smh. These details better get resolved at some point in this book. 

This is why I don’t read mysteries, because I have no patience waiting for the answer to come out. Reading romances you always know that no matter what the story is about, it will always play out to a loving end. Mysteries are always sucky because even when you are sure of the culprit, the author always whips out a surprise on like the LAST page to make you feel stupid. That is not how real crimes work. After all the evidence gives you one answer there is no “surprise” twist with a whole new villain at the last minute.

FINAL UPDATE 

First this story is well written and I did like it and it held my attention. Having said that, the MMC never redeemed himself in my eyes. He had an emotional AND physical affair with the OW no matter how much this other says otherwise. Kissing is an exchange of bodily fluids and is equivalent to P in V intercourse. It IS physical cheating if you kiss another person like that outside of your marriage!!

The MMC having been caught does own up to everything but a physical affair because this is always the fine line they plant their flag on. Lol. But the best part is that the OW was their too during the confrontation and clearly states that she would have had a physical affair if the MMC had allowed it despite knowing the FMC and that he was married. Nice! 

The FMC asks the MMC point blank if he loves the OW (again while she is there to hear it) but all he says is he is married to the FMC. Great show of commitment but not of his love for the FMC. The FMC wraps herself in her dignity and divorces the MMC disregarding his claims that he doesn’t want a divorce. In his defense he was sending the OW away when he was caught so he couldn’t be tempted anymore and so he could stay true to his marriage vows. Still not romantic in my eyes but it is respectable of him. 

Anyway, years later my problem with the MMC is he never went after the FMC once he no longer had the temptation of the OW. Not before the FMC divorced him, not after the divorce, he marries the OW and gives his affair respectability by doing that, not after she conveniently dies, not in the three years after her death. IN FACT he was actively NOT letting himself think of the FMC because he felt MORE guilt than love for her. His guilt stopped him in every point that he could have saved his marriage or pursued the FMC after the death of the OW and I’m supposed to believe that he always loved her and didn’t want to live without the FMC??

Of course I’ve mentioned above my thoughts on the mystery and it was correct for the murder but no answer was given for the secret messenger. That was a cop out on the authors part. I will stand by it being the OW and I HATE that the MMC doesn’t ever accept that and feel that horror alongside his supposed guilt. He deserves to suffer for his selfishness and his weakness. He was critical of the FMC but never tried to make his marriage work. He had an emotional and physical affair with a past lover he never told the FMC about and then STILL married her when he was single again. 

When he FINALLY returns to the FMC’s life it was NEVER because he wanted her. He used her situation as an excuse and then put his feelings on the table up to a certain point. He was never fully honest with the FMC about why he ended up married to the OW but his thoughts all lead to it being easier to be with her then his supposed love of his life the FMC. That is the only relevant point of this story 

As for the FMC I liked her all the way up until the last 2% of the story. She was strong on her beliefs that if he had truly loved her than he would never have strayed. And she is absolutely right. But in that last little bit she turned a complete 180 and started saying that no one is perfect and she can forget a flawed man. What?!? He never explained ANYTHING satisfactorily and after he left her and did ABSOLUTELY NOTHING to prove himself or win her back besides a few I’m sorry’s, she chases after him and begs him to take her back. 

This whole book burned itself by the last few pages. The author f#€ked up. Yes this a book from 1995 harlequin but it was a terrible ending. The majority of this book was taken up with a crime that was so easily solved it was a ridiculous waste of time. This is why I don’t read mysteries and I should have avoided this book. I was absolutely invested in the main couple which is the only positive of this author’s work. She definitely had me on the hook which shows she can write well. But the plot bombed as far as I’m concerned. And lastly, the s e x scenes are all vague or fade to black or skipped over until the end. Not a lot of details and short intros into them. In other words, boring. Good luck.