Rating: 4/5

Marion Chesney wrote six six-volume series: Six Sisters, House for the Season, School for Manners, Travelling Matchmaker, Poor Relation (my least favorite series), and the Daughters of Mannerling. I know that later publishers lumped her books together in some semblance of non-chronological order, but these were her groupings. 

Minerva is the first book in the author's foray into serious series, and after reading her older works (I'll get around to reviewing all of them at some point), I can see why this series won an award at the time. At least from what I remember of the library version I read back in the day, I think I saw some acclamation of that sort. In fact, it is such a higher caliber of writing in character development and interaction, as well as historical details and a much tighter plot that I feel like she worked on the first two books of this series for a while before it went to print.

In her six series, only Six Sisters and Daughters of Mannerling concentrate solely on the protagonists. The other series have the running background plotline of a group of servants, or spinster sisters, or other sideline characters who are really the main characters of the series and who serve to help the love story along. Of these two series, although the Daughters of Mannerling was Marion Chesney's last attempts at historical romance forever and is slightly more sophisticated, the Six Sisters is a funner and livelier series, with each of the sisters having distinct and developed roles and personalities.

Minerva is the oldest of a clan of six sisters and two twin brothers and has taken care of them all in lieu of her hypochondriac mother. She is energetic and possessed of that self-righteous character of the Christian-who-has-never-erred. She takes this martyred air with her all through the book and finds herself knocked off her perch in the vain and superficial society of London and by, of course, falling in the love for the first time in her life. Her falling for Lord Sylvester is almost par for the course, given that he is urbane, smooth, wise-cracking, elegantly dressed, and confident -- oh, and almost twice her age. For a young, slightly arrogant, religious woman wrapped up in the cloak of her morals to be knocked off her soapbox by life and to be rescued by a supreme leader of the fashionable world who urges her to confide in him "like a brother"-- it is not a stretch of the imagination for sparks to fly. It is formulaic, it is predictable, it is also vastly enjoyable in the way that a good formula for fiction has been for hundreds of years.

The change in Minerva is probably jarring for some readers -- she not only falls off her moralistic perch, she also has a very PG love scene with Lord Sylvester (when it appears that he may die in a duel) in which she very definitely breaks all rules of propriety and decorum and loses her virginity (before marriage!). This is also, unfortunately, probably quite true to form as Marion Chesney seemed to be telling us in her usual tongue-in-cheek observations on religion and life.

Lord Sylvester was more fleshed out than a majority of Marion Chesney's former heroes and has any number of interactions with Minerva, from their meet-cute first encounter to his noble "she's too young and innocent for me" conversation with his good friend.

As usual for the author, the secondary characters never fail to delight, from the father of the sisters, the Vicar Armitage, who is simple, worldly, and mad for the hunt, and yet, in his own way, more sympathetic to the common people than any religion-mad clergy, to Lady Godolphin, the female version of the vicar. Lady Godolphin is full of funny malapropisms, irreverent, clutch-fisted, but eternally optimistic, youthful, and ebullient. 

In other words, if you're looking for a contemporary historical fiction, this book probably will fail to deliver. But for an older, traditional historical romance, this one is excellent, and jam-packed with any number of delicious and accurate historical facts.