Rating: 3/5

Rumpelstiltskin is the story of an old miller who tells the King that his daughter has the gift of spinning straw into gold. As the King hears such a marvelous art, he takes the miller’s daughter into his palace and locks her in a room to spin all the straw into gold. The poor miller’s daughter has not idea how the straw could be possibly be spun into gold, she feels so sad and starts crying. Suddenly, a small man comes to the rescue but he asks something in return. The first time she gives him her necklace, then her ring but the third time she doesn’t have anything else. The King has promised to marry her if she turns the third room into gold; the little man accepts to help her for the last time if she gives him her first child when she becomes Queen. The miller’s daughter marries the King and after a year she has a beautiful baby. The Queen has forgotten about the little man, until he reappears to take the Queen’s child. The Queen starts begging and crying that the little man takes pity on her. He gives her three days to guess his name, if the Queen does not guess the little man will take the child. After three days of saying all the names she knew, the Queen’s despair grows bigger and send one of her helpers to search for more name. When the helper was walking through the woods, the helper hears the little man sing and saying his name…Rumpelstiltskin! At the end the Queen tells the little man his name he disappears and the Queen keeps her baby. This particular version by the Brothers Grimm and illustrated by Donna Diamond of 1983 has some full-page illustrations with realistic details and characters. Other pages just show objects or a single character providing more attention to the text. These paintings look almost like black and white photographs but they are actually pencil drawings. They represent clearly character’s expressions. All versions I have read are very similar throughout the plot of the story and few discrepancies could be found between them. In this version the messenger that Queen sends to the woods is a man, the Queen has a child but they don’t say if it is a boy or a girl. All the names that the Queen tells the little man are different from other stories. Rumpelstiltskin song says: " Today I brew, tomorrow bake, after that, the child I’ll take. The Queen will have to play my game, for Rumpelstiltskin is my name!" Also, Rumpelstiltskin complains about the Devil telling his name to Queen and at the end, Rumpelstiltskin stamps his foot so hard that his right leg went deep into the ground and then he pulled his left leg with both hands so that in his fury, he tore himself in two. (I am really glad that they did not illustrate that part of the end!)
This ending was the most gruesome of all and the least child friendly. For a traditional literature book for children some of the language is violent and some of the scenes are cruel. For example, the miller gives his daughter away by lying, the King locks the miller’s daughter and threatens her to kill her, the greediness of the King is obsessive and no one ask the miller’s daughter if she actually wanted to marry the King!
It is a entertaining story although I found this to be the least engaging since the illustrations are probably not very appealing to children. In my opinion I think this story does not portrait a good message at all.