Rating: 5/5

I love this book. The first book I read by Pam Munoz Ryan was Esperanza Rising which I was assigned to read by my team at school for a contest held near the end of the year to answer questions about the books on a pre-determined list. Something to encourage kids to read. Hell yeah we read, there were MEDALS.

Anyways. I love this book. Esperanza Rising was approached with a groan and a sigh, but Ryan's style of writing hooked me into the story quickly. And the same happened in Becoming Naomi Leon.

Naomi Leon is a great girl. She's innocent in a way, but she still knows what's happening around her. She's protective of her younger brother, Owen, who has a shorter leg than the other and therefore teased a lot at school. Naomi also has a unique hobby: Soap carving. It was an interesting little bit added to her character, and made her all the more real... Naomi also worried a lot, if I remember, a little neurotic and perfectionist, but that's okay. She still loves her tiny family all the same

Naomi lives in a trailer home in California with her great grandmother, who is a fiesty old broad, not taking lip from anyone and supply the two siblings with the love and kindness they never received from their missing father and vagrant mother, Skyla. But then Naomi and Owen receive a surprise: Naomi's mother just pops out of nowhere and wants to whisk Naomi away with her new boyfriend, Clive, to live in Vegas with her. Of course Naomi refuses, because she doesn't want to leave Owen behind (and great-grandma of course) and because she knows that her mother only needs her to babysit Clive's daughter Sapphire (that's not her real name by the way, Clive was just a jerk who changed it on his own whim). Great-Gram argues with Skyla, saying she would do anything and fight for custody of Naomi and Owen. Then before Skyla can do anything, Naomi and Owen are whisked away down to Mexico to hide from the harpy Skyla and Clive. It becomes quite an adventure for everyone, and I was into it too, hoping that Skyla wouldn't catch up to the kids and Great-Gram, because she stayed out of their lives long enough, why should she be allowed back into her kids' lives after being basically abandoned to do whatever she wants?

 I was so happy that Naomi and Owen reunited with their lost father. It didn't bring a tear to my eye, but it made me so ... happy (yes I reused that word two sentences in a row. Sue me.) And to tie up loose ends, Great-Gram gets custody of Naomi and Owen. Insert cheers of hurrah!

All in all, this is a good read. I'd recommend it to people who want a brave girl who sticks by her family (which seems to be a common theme in Pam Munoz Ryan's books so far...) and has a happy ending.