Rating: 4/5

Here's the best way I can describe "Sent for You Yesterday." While most books try to draw you in to a world by telling you about events, people, places, etc., this one keeps you at a distance. In this book, you never feel as if you could join the community or even find out what really happened, because you didn't live there during the time when the events occurred. You are forever an outsider.

Interestingly, to the extent that the book has a narrator -- and it doesn't, really -- it's "Doot." Doot is the nickname for a 30-year-old African American man who grew up in a Black neighborhood of Pittsburgh called Homewood. He's come back in the 1980s (I think) and is visiting with older relatives and their friends, and they tell him stories of the old days. Those stories are the heart of the book. But this conventional-sounding formula makes the book seem much more accessible than it is. Doot is a totally minor character who's briefly noted in the beginning because another person named "Brother" is mentioned as the person who gave Doot his name; and then Doot is in the last one-fifth of the book in the role of the pitcher into which these stories are poured by the older generation in a mixed-up flow of reminisce, rumor, and drunken daydreams and nightmares.

People are saying this boy reminds them of James Joyce. It reminds me of Faulkner. First, it's a hermetically sealed area -- in this case the African-American neighborhood of Homewood, on the edge of Pittsburgh, which is an entire universe in a maybe 10 square blocks. You've got people telling the same stories over and over for decades, but from slightly different perspectives until the full story emerges. You have people who are outcasts even within their little society, such as the Albino brother. You have a ton of repetition, a ton of slang, a healthy dose of the Bible but also of sinning. It's Faulkneresque, but in a Black community in the North.

Now, it is it good? Well, it's impressive, but it's not pleasurable to read. It's funny, angry, imaginative, full of riffs on life and with creative descriptions that beautifully reflect what must have been the things that people in that world saw and did. For example, two young skinny boys with pot-bellies in the way boys have them are described as having "watermelon" stomachs, with ribs as fingers reaching down to hold the watermelons in place. Or games of chicken at the railroad tracks are described with such intensity that they bring back my own much-less daredevil kid days, and the feeling of power when you conquered a fear.

But it's really hard to work through the language of the book. The language flows like a stream of consciousness, or often actually the subconscious mind in which ideas meld together, some real and some imagined. Much of it is choppy phrases stuck together into impressions, rather than complete thoughts. It's hard to know what's real and what's imagined. Many times, people are talking but quotes aren't used, so you have to read it a few times to realize it's banter in a bar or on a porch. You're told something happened, usually something tragic, but you're not sure it really happened, and you don't find out until later how it happened.

And while the language is impressive in a jazzy, impressionistic way, I find that its difficulties actually pull me away from the characters at times. You want to feel for the people in this story, the generations from about 1920 through the 1970s living in Homewood. Life was hard and was limited by prejudice. They deserved better than they got, and you are reminded of their essential goodness to each other, their humanity as shown by their humor and occasional visions of beauty in a sunset, their need to keep their community alive by telling and retelling stories.

Homewood was about as middle class as African-Americans could get at the time, and they were relegated to manual labor at rates about half of the rates for whites. John French, for example, was acknowledged as a great hanger of wallpaper, but he couldn't get steady work from whites, just scrap jobs when they needed an extra hand. He mostly spent his time drinking cheap wine and looking for stuff to steal from white homes. John was married and had several children, including Carl, a rambunctious kid who played on the train tracks, sneaked peaks at naked girls and had no ambitions (because society wouldn't let him have them). Carl's best friend is an albino boy named Brother, who mostly sings, whistles, and shucks-and jives. Brother is even less disciplined than Carl because he's got no parents and lives with an elderly couple, the Tates, who can't track him very much. Brother and Carl are lifelong friends who mostly spend their time drunk or on drugs, when the latter came to Homewood in the 1970s. They form a trio with Lucy Tate, also not the Tate's child but also taken in by them, and she and Carl have a romance that starts with sex at age 13 and remains for their entire lives, though they never marry nor have any kids. Also moving through the story is Albert, a gifted jazz and blues piano player, who is killed for sleeping with white women, a killing that Lucy witnesses and never forgets, and which serves to remind Carl and Brother that they will never get equal treatment.

So, on the one hand, you're sympathetic to the injustices of job discrimination, corrupt police, inadequate housing and resources, bad schools, and so on. Even when someone does something that makes no sense, there's sense in the person's head about it. Samantha has a kid per year for a dozen years and with an endless array of men. On the surface, she's a sex-crazed slut, basically. But then you get inside her head and learn that she has visions about an apocalyptic battle of the races, so she's trying to make as many African-Americans as possible for the crisis. It's not how I'd run my life, but it's certainly one way to see the world.

But on the other hand, everyone in the book sits around drinking most of the time. There's no sense of building for tomorrow, for coming up with a plan, for working collectively on anything except the day-to-day. A few people are obliquely referred to as successful, but this is because they got out of Homewood and moved elsewhere, sending back a Christmas card or (in the case of one woman) coming to visit her daughter a couple of times a year in her glamorous clothing. Carl goes into service in WWII and does well, and then he comes home and starts taking art classes using the GI Bill. But he quits when one teacher tells him that, though he's talented, there's no place in art or in graphics work for a Black man. Rather than trying to find out if that man is right, Carl quits the next day.

There's no such thing as success within Homewood, and that's why you have so much trouble feeling like you can be a part of this book. You'd never want to live there, and if you did it would be very hard to feel the affection for it that the characters do, unless, like them, you lived their your entire life.