Shakespeare does what Shakespeare does: He demonstrates great insight into human psychology, including capriciousness, hypocrisy, and inconstancy, while giving eloquent voice to rage and despair. The princes are not the principals. The auxiliary characters are the principals, especially Bastard and Constance, while Hubert also adds significantly to the depth of the play's themes.

Narratively, it starts somewhat absurdly, and ends rather anti-climactically--and I don't care whether the death of John is staged as a spectacle and treated as a dramatic climax, it's really just a terminus to the play and not particularly tragic in itself. But this is not to slight the play. The play's worth is not in the skeletal framework of its narrative, the interest is not wholly in the question of who will win and who will lose, and it is quite suitable to present history as a series of events that hinge on chance circumstances. Thematically, one of the principal points is to display how shifting and unpredictable alliances, public sympathies, and natural forces can bend our destinies this way and that; dynasties are founded or foundered by fickle fate.

Two other interesting thematic threads are: how commodity overthrows integrity, and the question of whether physical attractiveness equates to nobility of spirit while ugliness accords with baseness.

Bastard gives voice to the play's outrage at the dishonor of commodity (i.e., material gain's triumph over honor):

"That smooth-fac'd gentleman, tickling commodity,--Commodity, the bias of the world; The world, who of itself is peised well, Made to run even upon even ground, Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias, This sway of motion, this commodity, Makes it take head from all indifferency, From all direction, purpose, course, intent: And this same bias, this commodity, This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word, Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France, Hath drawn him from his own determin'd aid, From a resolv'd and honourable war, To a most base and vile-concluded peace."

George Orwell saw in this a fair reflection of the political realities of his own world in 1942, and so of course I see in it a reflection of our world today as well, as this is presumably timeless.

But in typical Shakespearean fashion, though Bastard is prompted to think and speak cynically...

"Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail, And say, There is no sin but to be rich; And being rich my virtue then shall be, To say, There is no vice but beggary: Since kings break faith upon commodity, Gain, be my lord!--for I will worship thee."

... yet Bastard is uncorrupt in act, as he is the one who chose the opposite, giving up material gain and security in favor of honor.

Regarding the virtue of beauty, the play's perspective at first appears ambivalent, seeming to endorse it in word, but subtexually undermining the same, particularly through Hubert, more noble in deed than King John yet singled out for the cruelest of assignments because his rough appearance suggests--wrongly--that he is cruel. He's not the only example, but he's the most prominent.

Along the way, Shakespeare engages is his accustomed wit, including punning seamen for semen, and contriving a couple of contrasting dilemmas, one in which a city must choose the rightful king by observing a war and naming the winner--thus the winner will be their champion--and a new-married princess who must choose sides between those she loves--thus the winner in their conflict will be her hated enemy.

Of Shakespeare's other plays that I've read, this most directly reminds me of King Lear and Richard II.