Rating: 2/5

Presumptuous now comes to mind. In the 1990s, I read Peter Matthiessen’s Killing Mister Watson and then Far Tortuga; and though I didn’t fully understand those books, I’ve always appreciated the author’s creativity and writing abilities. Now in 2021, I’ve just finished At Play in the Fields of the Lord, and it feels prsumptuous of me to suggest how this novel might be different or even better. With admiration for the author’s talent, here goes.

With At Play in the Fields of the Lord, Matthiessen creates a chaotic world in a South American rain forest, a world featuring a collection of failed characters in a variety of minor conflicts. Missionaries (one Catholic, two others best defined as anti-Catholic) battle for the minds of the Indians. Those Indians battle among themselves. The local comandante battles to control his territory, and two mercenaries battle with everyone, including each other. 

Throughout, I was able to visualize the author’s chaotic world, but throughout, I felt the narrative itself was also chaotic as if Matthiessen occasionally had lost control, often spinning the story into multiple directions. A jumbled timeline and an overly long hallucinogenic trip are a couple of examples. Critique #1: Matthiessen paints a vivid picture (both realistic and impressionistic) of a South American world, but his story about chaos is itself sometimes chaotic.

Next point. The characters, an unpleasant lot, are mostly ineffective at accomplishing anything. As a reader, it’s no fun to spend time with them. Only Billy, the young son of a missionary, is an appealing person, but he, while important, plays a peripheral role. 

All the adults use others, each with suspect motives and shady morality. The comandante wants to control the natives, and the mercenaries want their financial reward to help enforce that control. The missionaries use religious converts to build up competing headcounts with little regard for the Indians’ salvation. The two couples show little affection with their spouses using each other to score argumentative points with no ability to resolve differences. Critique #2: Matthiessen portrays the various conflicts well, but the characters’ suspect goals and pervasive questionable morality ultimately create a heavy, wearing reading experience.

Last point. Because many characters do not speak English, much of the story is told by the narrator, not through direct interaction and dialogue. Imagine watching a movie with much of the story presented by an off-camera, voice-over narrator. As a result, I often felt a step removed from the action as if I were reading a strange travelogue, not a novel with living characters. Critique #3: Because of the language differences, Matthiessen must have his omniscient narrator tell much of his tale. As a result, that tale comes alive infrequently.

So, for me, At Play in the Fields of the Lord, has a chaotic story structure, a collection of unpleasant people, and a narrator removed from the action. The result is a book I didn’t enjoy. By the end, I was saying, “Can’t everyone just leave the Indians alone?” In this novel, Matthiessen has achieved a lot; he has created an imaginative world with plenty of lessons to be learned about human nature. I just didn’t want to spend time in his world. As noted, given the author’s accomplishments and reputation, excuse me for being presumptuous with my critiques.