Rating: 4/5

This is all I ask is a very very nice romance, that I loved reading for the first 2/3 of it. In fact, if I was to rate it objectively I might rate it with 5 stars, but since all this rating/reviewing system is about how I feel about it, I can't give it more than 4 stars, or 3 and 1/2 to be exact.
The story, as it has been described already here is that of Gillian's of Warewick, shy and timid and physically abused by her father marrying the evil, hard-hearted warlock Christopher of Blackmoor. As it is obvious, Chris turns out to be no evil warlock, but a blind and recluse, once proud, warrior. Gillian, under his tender treatment of her's overcomes her shyness and falls in love with him and he with her. But before they live happily ever after, they have to fight her evil father who wants to hurt Chris.
The story is simple and very forward, but also sweet and tender and I really enjoyed reading how their trust and love developed day by day (although Chris could have resisted a little longer before he fell for Gill's charm). 

But, I had two major issues with the book and they are exactly the same I had with Stardusts of Yesterday; it has nothing to do with the story or the predictability of it which I don't mind a bit. It has everything to do with the overly flowery language that Kurland uses in those two books (didn't find the same in The very Thought of you nor in A Dance through time which I both love) and my personal preference of having the heroes openly profess their love to each other at the very end of the book. For me, when the heroes say their respective "I love you"s to each other, this is where the story ends. I might have the patience of reading another 5 or 10 pages of epilogue on how they lived happily ever after or about 30-40 pages of hunting down the villain before they can live happily. But to read for over 120 pages, in between of which only 3 pages of fight/action exist, of character development (Gillian overcoming her shyness even more and Chris becoming even more confident that he still is a warrior) is something I am extremely BORED to do. I found myself skipping most of those pages, until I reached the fight scene which is 10 pages before the end.

Taking in mind the PG rating of this book and the way I was never tired of reading enough I love you's from the hero to the heroine when I was in my teens, I can only deduce that this novel is targeted mainly to the younger audience. More cynical readers will have little patience with so sugary a writing style. Also, those as myself, who want their male hero dark and brooding will firstly love Chris, but soon become disappointed as in a few pages after the middle of the book he fiercely claims "Don't lean out the window. You're liable to fall and then where would I be?" only to answer by himself "Bereft" a couple of lines later. Pleeeeeaaaase.... What more is there to read after that???