Rating: 2/5

I don’t give low ratings very often, and I’m pained to give a Hornblower book a two star rating, but I had to do it. Unfortunately, I simply did not like Lord Hornblower. It would be impossible to discuss how I feel about the book without including spoilers so: warning, spoilers ahead.

Lord Hornblower takes place during the final phase of the Napoleonic Wars when there weren’t any large scale naval operations taking place. In order to give Hornblower some action, Forester gives him a rather difficult task. Hornblower is sent to the coast of Normandy to deal with a mutineering British ship-of-war. This section of the book was decent, though nothing special. I must admit that the conflict of interest between officer and men in a mutiny, though it makes for dramatic storytelling, is not a situation that I much enjoy reading about. 

However, the story after the mutiny is much worse.

Hornblower leads a harebrained scheme to foment a revolution against Napoleon, starting in Le Havre and theoretically expanding throughout France. Our beloved naval captain becomes the military governor of Le Havre and his time is occupied with frustrating Napoleon armies, inspiring the war-weary French citizens of Normandy, and making the newly-arrived Bourbon exiles welcome in their home country. This whole plot was far too unbelievable for my taste, and it just wasn’t interesting to me either. Unfortunately, it gets worse.

Captain Bush, one of the main characters in the series, is killed quite suddenly about half-way through the story. Initially, I refused to believe that Bush had died, but it eventually became inevitable that he was dead. What makes his death particularly appalling is the manner in which it is told by Forester. He dies in a scene which is off the page, so to speak. There is no emotion, no impact imparted in his death. The whole situation just doesn’t make any sense to me.

Another frustrating element of this story is Hornblower’s treatment of his wife Barbara, who comes to join him in France. He treats her rather coldly, and when she is given an independent opportunity of her own to be a hostess at the Congress of Vienna, Hornblower blows her off. I suppose this behavior is in-line with Hornblower’s character and the times, but it’s still frustrating to read about. 

While his wife is off in Vienna, Hornblower visits his friends in France from Flying Colours; Marie and the Count. Hornblower rekindles his affair with Marie, and it is from this point on that I had to force myself to continue reading the book. While Hornblower is in France, Napoleon makes his return from Elba. During the Hundred Days, Hornblower leads a guerilla war in the interior of France along with Marie, the Count, and the ever-faithful Brown. At this point in my reading, I had no idea what Forester was thinking when writing the book. This sub-plot was even more unconvincing than Hornblower becoming Military Governor of Le Havre. I had lost all interest and credibility in the story by now and merely rushed to the end. Marie’s death, which was designed to be emotional and dramatic meant nothing to me, in a twist of irony when considering Captain’s Bush’s pointless death earlier in the story.

In summary, I found Hornblower’s contrary behavior annoying again and found many of his actions frustrating and implausible. Frankly, Brown was the more interesting character in this book. I wanted to like this book like any other Hornblower (particularly because I have a hardcover copy of the original edition which I bought from my library booksale), but unfortunately this was the worst book I’ve read this year. For those reading through the Hornblower series, I still think you should read this book, but I can only hope that you will enjoy it more than I did. If you do decide to avoid reading Lord Hornblower, don't worry because you're not missing much.