Rating: 4/5

I have finished the trio! 
First some background: In real history, Edward Of March becomes Edward IV and marries a commoner, Elizabeth Woodville who then demands favors and offices for her extended family making her very unpopular. She had many sisters.
In Mr. Y Robertson's series, the entire clan of Woodvilles are called Wydvilles or Weirdvilles and characterized as a coven of witches determined to foil Edward's love, Lady Robyn who has slipped from our time into his time. All their efforts to send her back to her own time fail as being a witch herself and determined to be with her love, she always finds her way back.
In this one, her co-worker, a thoroughly engaging character from our times hitches a ride to the middle ages, saving Lady Robyn's hide more than once. Lady Robyn finds herself pregnant. Mad King Henry is captured by his wife, Queen Margaret, formerly in exile in Scotland, now trying to get back the throne for her child son. She rampages the countryside finally coming to the gates of London. With the backing of Lady Robyn the citizens refuse to surrender. Meanwhile Lady Robyn has to get past the Wydville witches to get a message to her knight errant to come rescue the city.
This novel ends leaving the reader hung up. We do not get to see Lady Robyn's baby born. We do not get to find out who wins this ongoing battle for the heart of Edward. so far, Lady Robyn has his heart and in this "alternate" history that is the way the author chooses to leave it.
Except for Lady Robyn's participation this novel is otherwise true to the history of the time as the entire sequence of events laid out in the novel are exactly as recorded in history. Lady Robyn is a made up heroine with no real place in history.
On the one hand, I hate being hung up without seeing how events played out. On the other hand, given real history, I see no other way the author could have ended this sequel other than leaving the reader hopeful events play out well for Lady Robyn.
I also congratulate this writer for his talent in getting into the mind and heart of a woman.I really feel like a woman had written this entire series rather than a man.