Rating: 5/5

Revived review

R.I.P. Charles Portis 1933-2020

creator of Mattie Ross, who will live forever

*******

Finding a novel which you can recommend to everybody is really not easy. Look at these totally five-star novels :

Lolita? nah, it’s about a paedophile

Ulysses? absolutely not, too hard, and no plot

Moby Dick? you kidding? recommend this and lose your friends!

A Clockwork Orange? – it’s not even in English!

Trainspotting? – see Clockwork Orange

Memoirs of Hadrian? See Ulysses, only also, it’s Roman

Blindness? it’s horrible!

But here is True Grit, which I recommend to all goodreaders. (Are there any badreaders? Is there a Badreads.com? What do they do?) 

True Grit is as salty as a bag of salt salted by extra-salty salt. It’s deadpan and hilarious. It was almost buried by one dreadful movie version, the first one, then rescued by a wonderful version. I don’t usually rush to read the bookofthemovie but the voice of 14 year old Mattie Ross whose story this is is brilliant :

Rooster talked all night. I would doze off and wake up and he would still be talking. I did not give credence to everything he said. He said he knew a woman in Sedelia, Missouri, who had stepped on a needle as a girl and nine years later the needle worked out of the thigh of her third child. He said it puzzled the doctors.

Mattie’s lack of any sense of humour along with any reasonable sense of self-preservation makes a violent story into pure comedy. The collision of the great Falstaff-as-Terminator character of Rooster Cogburn and the innocent-but-uncanny Mattie is a kind of love story. Love has many faces. Rooster is not any kind of role model for a young person. The whole thing reminds me of the ballad “On the Trail of the Buffalo”, especially this verse

Well the working season ended, but the drover would not pay
He said “You went and drunk too much, you’re all in debt to me”
But the cowboys never did hear of such a thing as the bankrupt law
So we left that drover’s bones to bleach on the hills of the buffalo

It took me several days to read this short novel because of one thing and another, but also because after a few pages I would just like to stop and savour it. It’s a fast read but I was slowing down all the time. 

“Who is the best marshal they have?'

The sheriff thought on it for a minute. He said, 'I would have to weigh that proposition. There is near about two hundred of them. I reckon William Waters is the best tracker. He is a half-breed Comanche and it is something to see, watching him cut for sign. The meanest one is Rooster Cogburn. He is a pitiless man, double-tough, and fear don't enter into his thinking. He loves to pull a cork. Now L.T. Quinn, he brings his prisoners in alive. He may let one get by now and then but he believes even the worst of men is entitled to a fair shake. Also the court does not pay any fees for dead men. Quinn is a good peace officer and a lay preacher to boot. He will not plant evidence or abuse a prisoner. He is straight as a string. Yes, I will say Quinn is about the best they have.'

I said, 'Where can I find this Rooster?”