Rating: 4/5

My Name Escapes Me by Alec Guinness
A great work

Alec Guiness was one of the best actors in the world.

Alas, he is best known around the world for his role in one of the Star Wars movies.

In this diary, Alec Guinness seems to have a low opinion of the episode.
When asked about a possible new role, he says that he would never play in Star Wars again.

The actor talks about colleagues, friends, fans, travels and much more.
Sometimes there is a sadness coming out, at other times the descriptions are funny.

I would not want to see another rendition of Marilyn Monroe by Warhol.

He is chased by a few fans and Alec Guinness is concerned that his dogs might attack and then he would be prosecuted for guarding his privacy.

We learn about Peter Ustinov and a joke he makes about Alec Guinness, which is only 60% true.

But the author does not mind and appreciated Ustinov, who is less acclaimed for his serious roles, unfortunately.

A man comes to ask for an autograph and says that his grandmother will be enchanted.

I have first listened to the tapes about twenty years ago.
They were on loan from the British Library and I recall taking them on the shore of the Herastrau lake, where I walked my dog and heard Alec Guinness.

There are references to some critics.
One has a favorable chronicle in which he says...

Alec Guiness is almost unrecognizable...

Says the great actor
For he did not act in that film

The passages about the dogs present another face of the man, who is tender, loving and heartbroken over the illness of his pets.

This work is full of interesting details.
For instance, the reader learns about the necessity to have a stage that is higher than the audience, yet not too high.

Goat and horse skin make the voice of the actors accessible to everyone in the theater.

Alec Guinness is in awe with the ancients who created arenas where twenty thousand people could attend a play.

The reader gets to know through this diary a wonderful man, modest, kind, gentle, loyal, erudite, humorous and gifted with a soothing, magnificent voice.

A great work