Rating: 1/5

According to GR, one star is "did not like it." While I didn't have the strong feelings of dislike I have had for other books I've one-starred, I certainly didn't care for this. It was a real trudge to read, particularly in comparison with the first two instalments of the trilogy. No longer a child, the main character is now married with a home of her own in London, and yet she acts more like a spoiled brat than she did when things were really bad. 

Anna is called to Berlin to attend her mother who is a coma after a failed attempt at suicide. Obviously not a happy homecoming, but I got tired of Anna's constant self-pitying whining. She doesn't like the hotel (like British hotels in postwar England were so great?), the people--be they German, American or British--her mother's second husband, and spends the entire time feeling either put-upon (why me?) or left out. Not even being instrumental in waking her mother from the coma helps her feel better about being there, because no one gives her enough attention for it. Her jealousy of Max, her older brother, made me feel like I was watching Annie Hall, which is not a compliment. Konrad offers to let her stay at their home, but she wants to get away from everyone and hide in the hotel, where she focuses on how drab and dirty everything is and how unpleasant the proprietor is, either (according to her) nosy or rude. When I finished the book I realised she was there for less than a week, it's not like she was stuck on hospital visiting duty for a month or something.

The text is also repetitive to a tiresome degree. I don't know how many times she rang the changes on the idea of "I must write about all this"--and immediately feels guilty about wanting to. Over and over and over. A better writer would give us that message without repeating the same exact words to the point of exhaustion. Anna was very obviously her mother's daughter--which would have enraged her, but then the truth often does.

I finished the book because it was short and because I didn't want it to get the better of me, but I can't recommend it, unless depressing, dysfunctional dynamics are your cuppa. They aren't mine.