Rating: 3/5

Hazel Holt's biography of Barbara Pym is mainly an echo of 'A Very Private Eye', which I read earlier in the month. There is, of course, a lot of crossover for obvious reasons. There is also a lot of crossover in terms of quotations from letters and notebooks. 

Holt was a friend of Barbara Pym's, was one of her literary executors, and helped put 'A Very Private Eye' together so perhaps that is no surprise either. It does have more too it to, especially on her relationships and helps contextualise 'A Very Private Eye' too. It is though a biography written by a friend and so one should perhaps approach it in that light.

It is full of quotes - from Pym and from friends of Pym - which means that Holt's own text is probably two thirds or a half of the book which does make you wonder what the point of it was when 'A Very Private Eye' exists. I think it might have been better to merge 'A Lot to Ask' and 'A Very Private Eye' together and call it a biography. This book was published in 1990 and is, I think, out of print whereas 'A Very Private Eye' is still in print so effectively two books that should be one book are becoming one book by default. 

That isn't to say I didn't enjoy it. I did but I think reading 'A Very Private Eye' and 'A Lot to Ask' so close together was probably a mistake. 

The one thing I did note was, having read 'Jane Austen's Bookshelf' by Rebecca Romney, was how close Pym came to joining 'the Great Disappearance' of women writers in the late-1960s through to the late-1970s. Romney writes well on the different ways a popular writer can disappear and Pym was at risk of vanishing from publication because fashion meant her books were seen as too gentle, too old-fashioned in the counter-cultural world of the late-60s. 

She was saved by a sudden interest in her work that came from a TLS article on the under-appreciated writers of the 20th century, where she was the only living writer to be mentioned twice: by Lord David Cecil and Philip Larkin. Up until that point attempts to get her new work published had failed starting with the abandonment of her by Jonathan Cape who had previously published her novels. Tom Maschler at Cape comes out of this book as something of a minor villain. So, she never disappeared and - it seems to me at least - she is going through another renaissance. Probably just because the work is so good and there aren't a lot of books like hers. 

I think Anne Tyler says it best:
"Who do people turn to when they've finished Barbara Pym? The answer is easy: they turn to Barbara Pym."