Rating: 2/5

I've read many a gratuitous tome, but none as tedious—if also occassionally beautiful—as Daniel Martin. This book seems to have been written solely for the satisfaction of its author, a man who has already written his best work and is looking to exorcise his art through itself.

Despite its ingenious usage of the formal (and experimental) oddities that Fowles is known for, Daniel Martin does not offer much in the way of a narrative. Instead, it is a work focused on the angst and self-absorption of its eponymous protagonist that may best resonate with middle-aged white men like him, behind the cover of a humanistic quest for a true self and an art that may be true to the self. It is a contemplation of the present against the inescapable past, of a post-war sense of alienation and existentialism: overcoming a 'Victorian childhood' and its Freudian implications; grasping the critical, literary and political spirit of the twentieth century; and exploring what it means to be 'English'—or even alive—at a time of immense rupture. It is also an exploration of constructs, a metafiction inviting one to conflate the author and the protagonist, both attempting to write novels they possibly can't. 

These are themes Fowles explores in amidst a paradoxically dizzyingly static plot, the overall effect of which is rather dull. About 200 pages into this book, I was sure it was going to replace 
  The French Lieutenant's Woman
 as my favourite Fowles, but the charm and momentum is soon lost—to an uppity tale studded with sexism and casual racist remarks no less. I quite enjoyed Fowles' analysis of Hollywood, as well as the piteous folly of his times  "All that my generation and the one it sired have ever cared a damn about is personal destiny; all other destinies have become blinds...the enormous superstructure of hypocrisy and the clouds of double-talk emitted in the (still incomplete) process must make us stink in the nostrils of history."  ...which he was all too rather ahead of his time to be making. However, the protagonist was a tad too chauvinistic and used the word "vibe" far too often for my liking. Most importantly, the love story was too unwieldly a combination of trite and cumbersome to end in anything but disappointment. 

For all its faults, Daniel Martin alternated between dull and engaging often enough for me to keep reading, although it did take me a whole week to finish it. There was much to underline and go over, but spaced far apart enough to discourage a favourable understanding of the whole. This is definitely not Fowles at his best, much rather a cautionary tale against success—both literary and literally.