Rating: 4/5

4.5

Wanted to give it 5 stars so bad, yet alas, I can't! There just seemed to be this gap in logic on Duncan's part after the climax occured, and I suppose he has some reasoning for it, but I just don't get it. Won't discuss it yet for the sake of spoilers, but I'll get more into that when I expand my thoughts. 

*After thinking thoughtfully about thoughts*

There is only one tiny little paragraph with spoilers. Everything else is SPOILER-FREE.

Now that I've had time to think about the roller coaster ride Acceleration took me on, I still feel similarly about what happens. I would highly reccomend it to just about anybody looking for something fast-paced, interesting, well written, rather original, on-the-edge-of-your-seat kind of read that can even be humourous! Not Deadly Cool kind of comedy (the murder is being taken more seriously in this book). Just the fact that the awesome characters have personality!

So, we follow our seventeen year old protagonist Duncan, who is working a summer job at the Toronto Transit Lost &amp; Found, and when looking for a lost book to read, he stumbles across a diary containing the messed up psyche of a man who sets fires to buildings, and tortures animals, and later documents said atrocities. Then, Duncan comes across his later entries, where Duncan finds that he's stalking a woman on the train when he's heading home, and that he may be planning on killing her. Taking matters into his own hands along with his sidekick Vinny, they plan on figuring out who wrote the diary, and save the woman's life. 

Now, said mystery above is well thought out, with great little facts about serial killers when *le gasp* our heroes use their brains and go the library! I loved learning more about the psyche of serial killers, so that alone was a plus. However, I also found my one complaint in this book during the mystery.

*SPOILERS* So, when Duncan finally stops our possible killer from killing the women he was stalking by almost dying and getting hit by a train, Duncan is in the hospital, recovering from his injuries. Then, he decides to keep the journal information between himself, Wayne, and Vinny. Um, I (kind of) get why you're not telling the police, but how about the women being stalked? If I had been the infatuation of a potential serial killer, I would've liked to know. END OF SPOILERS*

Everything else however, is fantastic. The plot is fast-paced and engaging, the characters are all vivid and 3-D, mystery is well paced and UNPREDICTABLE (a reoccuring problem I find in many YA mysteries - these killers are way too obvious), I couldn't put it down, and the entertainment value is so high! 

With Blood Red Road, I gave it 5 stars, but not in the sense that it's amazing and life altering. It's amazing in terms of entertainment value, plotting, and interesting characters but it's not powerful or moving like THG. BBR is the equivalent to Acceleration to me, however I do like BBR more. 

Seriously, go out and get this book. There's an e-book, your library and or bookstore - give it some love! Since it's a MUCH older book (October of 2003 - about 8 1/2 years ago!), it clearly doesn't get as much attention as it deserves.