Rating: 5/5

2022 Review
I think Worth is an Enneagram 1. 

2019 Review
I really, really love the scene with the affronted Regent, swooning Judith, and indignant Worth. One of my favorite moments, on par with the kidnapping scene from Faro's Daughter

2018 Review
I know I say this about every Heyer couple, but Judith and Worth might be the best. They've got that romantic tension thing going from the start. So swoon worthy.

2016 Review
As a general rule, I try not to edit reviews once I've written them. There are a lot of badly written reviews from me....mainly from when I was younger. That is what I thought about the book then. If I were to read it now, I would probably think very differently. 
HOWEVER, for Regency Buck I'm breaking that rule. I re-read this book yesterday and fell in love. I love all the characters. I love the mystery. I love the humor. I love Judith's flair and how eccentric she is. I love that she is friends with Beau Brummell and rubs shoulders with royalty. In summary, I think my original review is ridiculous and I can't believe I didn't immediately recognize the merit of this book. Maybe I just wasn't in the right place for it. Judith bumps up the list of Favorite Heyer Heroines to take her spot besides Sophy, Frederica, Mary and Arabella. This book was so much fun. I'm so glad I took the time to give it another shot. (Though lets be honest...I'd re-read anything that had Heyer's name on it, even the books I originally rated 1 star)

Original review below. 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Deserves somewhere around 3.5 stars, so I rounded it up to 4. Not quite up to a 4 star par though. 

Unlike most Heyer books, which I tend to get on a whim, I picked up  Regency Buck  (what a stupid name) because, according to this quiz http://quizilla.teennick.com/quizzes/... 
I was most like "Judith Taverner". I had no idea who she was or what book she came from, but when I re-took the quiz a few months later and go the same answer...well, I decided to google the name and give the book a try.
Honestly, I'm not sure whether I ought to be slightly offended or daringly amused at being compared with Judith. I definitely saw several similarities, especially with her actions (in fact, if you could combine Judith Taverner and Frederica from Frederica you might find yourself with a character slightly similar to my own!) The story, though, was a bit too melodramatic and thespian for any "striking" comparisons (I have never been kidnapped, defied society by driving my own carriage, or taken snuff O.o) 

 Plot: 
After their Father's death leaves them with a strange, unknown guardian they have yet to meet, Judith and her brother Peregrine decide to defy their guardian's wish and travel to London to meet him. Along the way, they stop in a town where a boxing match is going on and Peregrine persuades Judith to extend their visit. While there, one of the spectators mistakes Judith for a country-girl and kisses her! Furious, Judith and Peregrine arrive in London to ask their guardian's help in revenge...only to discover that the rude man from the boxing match is their guardian, Julian St. John Audley, the Fifth Earl of Worth! "an arrogant, insufferable dandy!"

 Thoughts 
Though the beginning was interesting, the book was slow and kind of boring for the first half, but picked up quite nicely once Judith figures out that someone is trying to kill Peregrine. Peregrine was a nice enough character, exceedingly amusing at the end, who was just enough of a character to add to the story and not enough to be to memorable. 
 I felt about the Earl of Worth a lot like I did for Alverstoke in  Frederica . At first I despised him and was happy to keep despising him till the end, but the less I found myself relating to Judith, the more I like him. By the time the end came around, well, he has made it on my list of Favorite Literature Guys. What particularly recommended him, as a Heyer hero, was that there aren't entire paragraphs devoted to his "other lovers". No "hidden" allusions to his past flirts or "the delicate women he shared much more with" (YES! Some of her heroes are described that way. Absolutely nasty.) that isn't to say Worth didn't  have some "secrets" but we didn't have to read about them! (The extent of it was him telling Judith once that "You aren't the first pretty girl I've kissed!")
Their romance was kind of unlikely, but so were their characters 
Most of the characters were kind of unlikely, the story was really quite dramatic, but I enjoyed it. Not the best Heyer, not her worst. It falls in the middle with a great many of her books. There is a bit of a mystery tied up in this one which made it fun.
Though honestly, upon reflection, I deny having much of anything in common with Judith except a tendency to something for the sake of doing it.
This book actually took me quite a while to get through it. So be prepared, there are several boring parts and I wouldn't recommend it for a "first time Heyer reader", but if you have read a couple of her novels and are looking for some more, it is fairly good.