Rating: 5/5

History is only important if, by surveying it, we are able to account for the past and shape the future. 

A scarred and grumpy old man lives alone in a small village in France, in December 1840. The date is important: it marks the end of an era, the return of the body of its exiled emperor back to France. The local priest is interested in the past, but the old man is unwilling to revisit his own contribution to the Napoleonic Wars.

 He had an air of brooding and large, sad eyes. At times he appeared to be crippled with rheumatism and rarely left his room. His right hand had been maimed in some sort of accident. Two fingers were missing and the remainder were bent over a scarred palm, reddish and unsightly. The hand looked like a claw and did nothing to increase his popularity among the children.
He was supposed to have fought in the wars of the Empire, but he never told stories, like some other veterans in the district. 

Delderfield launches a provocation to the reader : is the war to be glorified for its feats of strength and endurance and tactical cunning, or is it be condemned for its brutality and wholesale destruction? And who will be the ones to pass judgement? The victors who want to justify their own cause or the losers who tried and failed in their campaigns. Napoleon is probably one of the most controversial and most influential figures of modern history, and an attempt to capture the spirit of this time in a single novel seems like a daunting proposition. Delderfield far surpassed my expectations with the present story not only through the quality of his prose but, more importantly, by changing the focus of the narrative from the generals and politicians to the people on the ground, the grunts who marched from Lisbon to Moscow and back on their feet.

 “Where did you serve before that?” he asked.
Jean told him, the old familiar recital – Italy, Egypt, Marengo, Austerlitz, Jena, Eylau and Friedland.
“Ah, yes,” mused the Emperor, grasping his riding switch with both hands extended behind his back, ”at Aspern-Essling as well: I saw you in the churchyard.” 

The story begins with Gabriel, a young man with artistic inclinations who joins the army before he could be conscripted, shows some talent for marksmanship and is sent to join a company of voltigeurs (sharpshooters, skirmishers) on the banks of the Danube in 1809. It’s another important date: Europe and France in particular are exhausted by constant warfare yet Napoleon has become an almost mythical figure for his ability to win every battle he engages in. Here at Lobau that portrait is about to be tarnished.

Gabriel’s first experience of war is mostly traumatic as the fabled leader is repulsed for the first time in an attempt to cross the Danube and Gabriel is caught in the crossfire, kills his first enemy in a botched attempt to hide and comes to rely on the men in his company, six other soldiers from Gascony that look and act more like rogues and bandits than heroes. The most important lesson Gabriel has to learn is survival, and Old Jean, Nicholas, Manny, Louis, Dominique and Claude are the ones who teach him.

 “A veteran has rules about these things,” said Jean. “With a good soldier it is arms first, food next and loot third. The order of importance should be obvious even to a fool. What good is a knapsack of gold if you can’t defend it? What good is a pocketful of precious stones if you die of hunger so that some other rogue can rifle your corpse?” 

I would like to compare this novel with ‘Band of Brothers’ but, since I haven’t read that novel yet, I would only mention that Delderfield manages to bring to life these characters and the period through the careful integration of personal accounts from the archives that he studied and used extensively in his story. He keeps the presence of famous historical figures to a minimum and, while he is very good at giving context and tactical appraisal of the battles Gabriel and his band of voltigeurs engage in, the focus is always on the direct experience of the man in the field or on the march.
And that experience is rarely a pretty or glorious feature. A hard won victory and a period of garrison duty in Schonbrunn is followed by the brutal murder of farmers by a deranged veteran; a long march towards Portugal is marred by skirmishes with partisans in the mountains, causing the first fatality among sergeant’s Jean’s band and revenge killing of innocent villagers by French troops; a silly order by a novice officer leads to the capture of the men who are sent to England as forced labour prisoners. The perils and the long periods of living close to one another tighten the bonds between the voltigeurs and open up the eyes of young Gabriel, who tries to chronicle his experiences through a series of drawings and paintings.

The novel is unusual among historical novels also through the strong portrait of the women involved, like the English lady trapped in a loveless marriage who falls in love with Louis or Nichollete, the sixteen year old cantiniere who follows the army and adopts Old Jean’s troop as her clients and protectors. Born on the battlefield to an unknown father, Nicholette knows no other life and decides to take over her mother’s cart when the old harridan dies on the Danube.

 He was now legally married to a cantiniere and wedded, by preference, to a nomadic life in the ranks, condemned to wander up and down Europe until a bullet or a sabre singled him out and gave him the answer to all the questions he had been asking himself since childhood.
But in the meantime he was well enough satisfied. He had comrades, robust health and enough food and drink for present needs. He also had this child with fragrant hair and an odd regard for him that amounted almost to respect. He looked down on her with a quiet smile.
“I’ve always wanted you, Nicholette, all my life.” 

Nicholas, Nicholette, Gabriel and the others join up on the ill-fated Russian campaign, and the novel reaches new heights of immersive, convincing story-telling as the men’s disillusion with war is exacerbated by the mismanagement of the army and by the deadly retreat through winter blizzards. Only the fortitude of veteran Jean and the devotion of a badly hurt Nicholette will ensure some of the troupe survive, yet more pain and more death lies ahead.

 It was twenty years since a battle has been fought on French soil. 

After a detailed account of the battle of Leipzig and more loss of life among the voltigeurs, only Old Jean remains a steadfast supporter of the Emperor, even on the eve of his first capitulation of Fontainebleau. Gabriel is almost numbed to the psychological torture of seeing all his friends blown away, yet he is aware that this is the only life he knows now. A short period of royalist persecution of the veterans from la Grande Armee in Paris, makes Jean and Gabriel more than willing to fight once more for Napoleon, at Waterloo.

 All men are reluctant to destroy their own idols. It is so much easier to make excuses for them. 

It’s easy in hindsight to condemn Napoleon for the butcher’s bill and for the poor decisions that left France ruined in the end, but Delderfield tries to explain the adoration the common soldier had for their ‘little corporal’. The few direct appearances Napoleon makes in the novel reinforce the image of a man who remains involved in their lives, even as he later treats them as disposable chess pieces on the field of battle. The most pertinent observation is the one that Napoleon was not the one who initiated most of these conflicts. He was forced into battle by successive alliances of the most powerful monarchs in Europe, who felt threatened by the ideals of the French revolution and by the progressive laws coming from France.

Another particular aspect worth noting in the novel, as we move from Lobau in 1809 to Waterloo in 1815, is how much the face of war has changed in such a short period, from a honourable pursuit that follows established rules of conduct to something ‘more relentless and unforgiving’ that gives no quarter to a defeated foe and makes little difference between combatants and non-combatants, a change that Gabriel finally acknowledges with ‘an act of atonement for a murder done long ago’ and with a final turn of his back on war. 

Until that final fateful day in 1840 when he is forced to revisit his past through the sketches and paintings he managed to salvage from the past campaigns, Gabriel has steered clear of these thorny considerations. In the end, what remains alive for him is not the reasoning for war or the details of the battles themselves, but the company of the men who walked by his side in his youth.

The others had come and gone. Gabriel recalled and cherished their characteristics, Manny’s gay laugh, Louis’ good temper, Nicholas’s quiet cynicism, Dominique’s doglike fidelity, but Jean was different, he was the epitome of them all, of all they had endured, of all the leagues that they had tramped together in the last five years. 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

Right now, I rate this Delderfield novel as one of the best efforts I’ve read in the historical genre [comparable with ‘Birdsong’ by Sebastian Faulks], much better than the Richard Sharpe series by Bernard Cornwell, who lost points for me for being long-winded, hero-worshipping in the cases of both Sharpe and Wellington, rabidly partisan in his support of the British and his denigration of the French. Cornwell is excellent in his description of battles, but much poorer in characterization. Delderfield may be a British author, but he is a lot more even-handed in his portrait of la Grande Armee.
I plan, sometime in the future when my waiting list grows shorter, to try his Swann Saga that starts with ‘God is an Englishman’ .