This version of Jack and the Beanstalk appears to not deviate much from the widely told tale of a boy traded his mother and his own supposed "only possession" for some magic beans, which leads Jack on unusual adventure up into a different setting that has houses a giant and some other notable "creatures." Folklore is largely associated with telling tales and doing so with a lesson embedded in the story. This particular folklore appears to follow along the lines of, you reap what you sew, in the sense that the giant supposedly stole goods from Jack's family and in turn met a tragic end; however, the reaping is a rather harsh ending for the giant, which is another reoccurrence in folklore. Sometimes the events can be rather odd and/or extreme within various tales that "teach lessons;" however, this particular version of Jack and the Beanstalk does not include many gruesome features, other than the giants poor tendencies and the tragic end of the giant. The text is not complex and appears to be to the point in its telling of the story. There are additions, however, that make the story have a bouncy appeal, such as the possibly familiar line of, "Fe, fi, fo, fun," which is a line the giant uses that follows with an additional sentence ending in rhyme. The text ends on a familiar note as well that states, "and so Jack and his mother lived happily ever after"- a common ending for fairytales and possibly other categories that are associated with folklore. The illustrations appear to be done in watercolor and most likely another art form as well and help establish setting, reinforce the text, and show character development as well. For instance, the text states that, "the giant commanded the hen to lay a golden egg and the little hen clucked and laid him an egg;" however, the illustration allows one to see that hen has supposed sweat drops falling from its face, indicated that the hen was nervous and most likely did not want to be within that setting. Overall, the story is a a straight forward (even for a folklore) retelling of a classic tale that has many versions printed ad published, yet allows one to see the possible appeal of the well-known tale.