Rating: 3/5

3.5*

The story was good, until the end which was meh. Weak and contrived conflict at the end, but still HEA.

Poor Gaby, who had everything materially but no parental love.

SPOILERS 

Gaby was adopted! But the de Wolffs were just terrible people! It's horrendous how they treated Gaby during her sickness and after death, and to leave Phyllida stranded?! I hope her father gave them a good telling off!

Initially I had thought Phylly's mother was keen to marry her off to dull Philip; imagine my and Phylly's surprise when mother said good that Phylly had rejected his proposal because he didn't suit her. Tgen she went on to describe a man who WOULD suit Phylly and her description. ..I like! Because it described our hero exactly! 

Thank goodness Pieter was in Madeira at the right place and time; not only did he swoop in to Phyllida's rescue, he also gave her a week of holiday in and around Madeira! Pieter was a fast mover; he was grabbing Phyllida's hand and not letting go just a couple of days after meeting her hehe. And kisses of course. I loved hiw he took charge if the situation and looked after Phylly so beautifully. ..just as her mother described her udeal man!

The romance cane through in the little touches he gave her, and what's with his sleepy eyes haha! He was always napping wherever and whenever, a survival skill I guess since he could be working at all hours being a delicious Dutch doctor hehe!

In this story, family was very much involved in the romance; Pieter contrived to make Phyllida visit his home in Leiden, by plotting with her family! Her mother and youngest sibling Willy were invited along for a fishing and flowers trip, so it'd be so good if Phyllida could keep her mother company while the guys fished! It's a transparent plot but it worked! Her family was a delightful one.

Pieter bought Phyllida's mother EVERYTHING in the tulip catalogue at Keukenhof!!!

It was a fun read but really the Other Man Philip and Other Woman Marena ruined the story for me at the end. There's no explanation as to who Marena was to Pieter...he's 39 and Marena 19; how did they even meet and just why was he so indulgent with her nonsense, giving her spending money too! Obviously he's using her to make Phyllida jealous! But Philip was also there to make HIM green eyed! I found it puzzling Pieter seemed to throw Phyllida to 
Philip. Poor gal could be forgiven for thinking Pieter was trying to get rid of her!

All that angst and misunderstanding (Pieter-Marena, Phyllida-Philip combo) felt de trop and dragged the story out.

Otherwise it could easily be a great 4* read for me!