Rating: 3/5

Now after simply adoring many of the later instalments in Alexandra Day's Carl the Rottweiler series, I have to admit that I was and still remain more than a bit underwhelmed by the first book of the series, by Good Dog, Carl. I do think that in general, God Dog, Carl is a sweet (albeit for some parents, perhaps also a touch unnerving) story, full of fun, whimsy and mischief. However, neither Alexandra Day's narrative nor her accompanying illustrations have managed to completely charm me like I have been "wowed" by for example Carl's Summer Vacation) and Carl's Snowy Afternoon. For the illustrations in both of these later Carl books are truly magical, wonderfully bold and really truly do capture the cuteness, fun and typical characteristics of a family Rottweiler, whereas the illustrations in Good Dog, Carl seem (at least to and for me) a bit bland and washed-out in comparison. They are well-executed, and both humorous and sweet, but lack the whimsy and colourful expressiveness displayed in the artwork of many of the later Carl the Rottweiler books. 

And yes, I also do tend to find the stories (the plot lines) in the later books a bit more appealing and interesting (realistic) as stories in and of themselves. Now that is not to say that I did not truly enjoy "reading" about Carl and Madeleine's escapades in Good Dog, Carl. I have no moral or philosophical problems with the fact that the mother lets the family Rottweiler babysit Madeleine, and it always amazes me that there are actually unenlightened, moronic individuals who not only vehemently despise Good Dog, Carl, but actually seem think that it is somehow dangerous and should in fact be censored and even removed from library shelves (for example, one obviously brainless patron at our local library recently left a comment requesting that this supposedly dangerous book be removed). Honestly, Good Dog, Carl is a fantastical and fun children's picture book, and if any parents think or believe that leaving a baby alone in the care of a dog is correct parenting (and would even remotely consider imitating this), they have major pre-existing mental health issues that have not been caused by the book, that are not the fault of Good Dog, Carl. 

However, I guess it is also to a certain extent the fantastical elements in Good Dog, Carl that have made me enjoy it rather less than some of the later Carl the Rottweiler books I have read and adored. Many of Carl's and Madeleine's escapades in Carl's Summer Vacation, Carl's Snowy Afternoon and even Carl's Birthday are quite close to reality; they portray actions, interactions, games etc. that children and Rottweilers (or dogs in general) do engage in and often engage in together (sliding down a slide, fetching a baseball, the dog pulling a sled). And one of the reasons I love these above mentioned three books so much was/is because of the nostalgia, of seeing illustrations of a Rottweiler that could so easily have been the Rottweiler(s) my family owned when my siblings and I were younger. The story depicted in Good Dog, Carl, however, they did not create (and does not create) that same sense of nostalgia in me, as none of our Rottweilers would ever have let us swim in a fish tank, nor would they have known how to give us a bath and dry us with a hairdryer (and thankfully so).

But of course, I would still and definitely recommend this generally charming wordless (or rather, nearly wordless) picture book to and for anyone who likes dogs (and yes, both adults and children). But really, if you are going to be reading Good Dog, Carl, you should also take the time to read and enjoy some of the later Carl the Rottweiler instalments (as both the stories and the illustrations do much improve as series progresses).