This book didn't turn out as I expected. This book is considered a prizewinning exemplar of the microhistory genre so coupling this fact with the title, I thought it would be an in-depth exploration of the life-cycle and worldview of the typical miller, a representative member of the peasantry whose thoughts and joys are often tossed to the wayside of books on regnal lists and aristocratic lineages. 

Well, this book's hero was anything but typical. Instead, he was a singular guy, with a one-of-a-kind all-encompassing, fiery passion in life, which was to proselytize loudly and earnestly to his flabbergasted, scandalized village neighbors about his rather bizarre and flummoxing conceptualization of the universe, which was as follows. The universe, in his heretical view, curdled like cheese, the universe was cheese that came into being, and in this cheesy cosmos, worms sprouted out as the first life, and these worms were actually angels. Of theses worms that oozed out of the cheesy stratum of materiality, the greatest of all these worms, he said, was God, with emphasis that God came from the cheese as the same time as other worms. A lot of pages of this book was spent illuminating this theology, so if this doctrine appeals religiously to you, do pick up this book. This would-be theological founder was definitely fired up to spread his vision-- he was the type of person who could twist any conversation into a prolonged debate on his pet subject.

This vocal preaching then caught the eye, and the ire, of the religious authorities of Italy. Sensing a challenge to their ecclesiastical authority, Menocchio was duly summoned for an interrogation by a council of the priests, prelates, bishops. By all accounts, Menocchio seemed to enjoy this interrogation, as it unexpectedly opened a chance for him to air his views on the divine before a captive audience of learned men, all of whom were hanging upon every word he said (if only to prosecute him for it). His lone convert and disciple was set free on the grounds of naivete or simplemindedness. Alas, Menocchio himself was decidedly sane. At the end of this, Menocchio was sentenced to two years in prison for blasphemy. 

This book succeeds as a microhistory because the author was able to extract the social factors and influences that in some ways led to the formation of Menocchio. This included things like the collision of oral tradition and ability to read and write previously inaccessible texts, the publication of a vernacular Bible, the heraldry of an age where theological challenges, such as the Anabaptists, were rife and people were beginning to support religious movements that called for simplicity and moral revival. This is an interesting book about a figure who could have been lost to the mists of time, and, of course, the overpowering focus on regnal lists.