Rating: 5/5

My recollection is that when I first read this over 50 years ago it was the plot and characters that most impressed me. (I was studying history, so that probably makes sense.) This time around, the prose held sway, as might be expected for a writer who was also a poet laureate.

As many reviewers have noted, it is a long book, and a brisk pace is not one of Warren’s concerns. Typically I am one of those readers who is prone to anguish over what appears to be a dearth of talented editors with blue pencils, striking out entire pages. More words does not equate to a better book, dammit!

But in this case, there is nothing to pare away. The pace is just what it needs to be. It is not a story to be rushed. 

ATKM is a thinly disguised rendering, as told by one Jack Burden, of the actual career of Huey Long (Willie Stark in the book), a Depression-era populist politician in Louisiana. Jack is in many ways the polar opposite of Willie. Where Willie grew up dirt poor, Jack was born into a family of wealth and connections. While there is a distinct synergy between the two, neither can escape the weight of his past.

Although Jack and Willie are the primary drivers of the story, there is an extensive cast backing them up, informing their actions, and framing their interpretations of events. In Jack’s case this extends to a Civil War era ancestor about whom he wrote, but did not complete and submit, a PhD thesis.

It’s a mesmerizing book. Before I share some of my favorite quotes, a heads up about one thing: The book was written in the 1940s about events in the 1920s and 1930s, and in keeping with the language of the time, the N word appears fairly often. 

 “Man is conceived in sin and born in corruption and he passeth from the stink of the didie to the stench of the shroud. There is always something.”  Where the “something” is a bad act that can be used as political blackmail.

” And what we students of history always learn is that the human being is a very complicated contraption and that they are not good or bad but are good and bad and the good comes out of the bad and the bad out of the good, and the devil take the hindmost.”

” Reality is not a function of the event as event, but of the relationship of that event to past, and future, events.”

And similarly:

” They say you are not you except in terms of relation to other people. If there weren't any other people there wouldn't be any you because what you do, which is what you are, only has meaning in relation to other people.”

” You have to make the good out of the bad because that is all you have got to make it out of.”

And finally:

” If you could not accept the past and its burden there was no future, for without one there cannot be the other.”

LBC