Rating: 2/5

Well. By the end of this, I kept laughing and loudly proclaiming "NO ONE TALKS LIKE THAT!". The sex scenes in particular were cringingly funny and I ended up having to skim through them. 

I have read a lot of Mallery and she's hit or miss for me. My problem with her is usually characters and plot, but up til now, her writing has been easy to read and feels natural (doesn't take you out of the story). Not the case for this one. It was first published in '92, so I'm guessing this is one of her first books? Her writing gets a lot better than this over the decades. 

Other than that, it was ok. I keep waffling between 1 and 2 stars. But I did finish it with only minimal skimming, so I guess I'll stick with 2. 

But yeah, there were problems. It was overly dramatic at times. The nurse/patient relationship (followed by boss/employee relationship) were both uncomfortable. It really felt like Logan was taking advantage of Melissa too many times (ick). Especially with at least 2 scenes where he (briefly) physically stopped her from leaving (um . . . yeah). 

Wendi (the 12 year old) was completely unbelievable and didn't feel like a real child at all (which is often a problem with books that have children as side characters, so it's not just Mallery). 

Melissa had some back story, but it never gets shared with Logan, so that was odd. All of their really deep conversations were about Logan and his issues. 

His ex-wife Fiona is a cardboard cutout of a character. Zero depth, acts like a 2D Bad Woman, while Melissa is soft, sweet, domestic, loving - a stereotype of the Girl Next Door. 

I did get some good laughs out of this. Like with Melissa, who is often described as having "curves" and not being model thin like Fiona, how she's not beautiful (which is implied to be at least in part because of her not being thin). When we finally find out that Melissa has "10 or so" extra pounds I literally laughed out loud. Ten pounds. Yup. Ten pounds is what stops her from being thin. Ten pounds is part of what makes her not beautiful. Ten. Freaking. Pounds. 

And then the ending.  

Where we flash forward 2 years to see the happy family in the hospital room after Melissa has given birth to twins, a week (yes, a week) after graduating with her Master's Degree, with her perfectly loving and well adjusted (now) 14 year old step daughter in attendance, and Melissa still manages to make what sounds to me like a sexual comment to her husband (because of course that's what you're thinking of after pushing two human beings out of your vagina). 

Yeah. It was a little much. 

So not the best Mallery book for sure. But good enough to finish.