Rating: 5/5

This evocative and whimsical book is remarkable in more than one way.
It meanderingly plays with facile thrills, pulpish manly antics, vulgarity, the grotesque and the nonsensical but remains essentially serious and meaningful.
The plot seems disjointed and is often aimless but in the end I thought (unlike some reviewers) that Shepard managed to pull his stuff together and that that resolution was provided. I may have missed the significance of some of the happenings but I think some of the most repetitive over-the-top vignettes and angsty outbursts could nevertheless have profitably been edited out.

About those vignettes, there are some seriously awesome scenes in this book. The crazy sort of awesome. It'd almost be worth reading for a handful of the best.
The author's style is remarkable as well, very flowery for the genre. I often found it over-the-top and distracting when it comes to banal descriptions but it suited very well the numerous irruptions of the unreal in the story.
Life During Wartime is so colorful and intense that other books seem dull in comparaison.

For those wanting to wet their toes, the beginning of Life During Wartime is a self-sufficient short story.
If you feel like continuing, the following chapters are rather weak in my opinion but the second half of the book is worth the set up.

As to the subject matter, I'll drop a few light SPOILERS.

It's first and foremost a surreal Gringo war story. But it's also thematically similar to A Scanner Darkly, except that it's a superhero-ish fantasy (complete with happy-ish ending) and that's it's philosophically upbeat in the way that surreal authors are wont to be.
You all know about Gringos and war but for those who don't know A Scanner Darkly, it's a bit soapy and it's got drugs and manipulation in spades. The fates of many characters are depressing. Also, drugs.

Precognition is important in this story with all that it implies (non-linear plot, visions, existential angst and so on).

Another remarkable thing is the way in which fantastical elements overlap with irrationality caused by crazy but mundane circumstances.
In the beginning, I didn't realize I was reading fantasy.