Rating: 4/5

Anthony Powell, writing roughly from the 1950’s to the 1970’s published a 12-novel cycle under the name, A Dance to the Music of Time. Inspired by a famous painting, the books are grouped together in four Movements, based on the seasons of the year. This volume, Spring is the first movement. Spring being the time as living things emerge, Powell begins the process of introducing us to what will be some 500 odd named characters. Many flit in and out and one quickly comes to understand which ones bare the most attention. For example, there are 5 important school mates in these books, all will stay with us at least as for as book 5, which is where I am now. To review: First movement, Spring, 3 books, to be read, 9 more books, grouped into 3 more movements. 

The narrator of the journey is Nicholas Jenkins. Giving us our first clue about how to read these books. Jenkins is vaguely related to the Jenkins of The War of Jenkins’ Ear. A quick look into the war, will tell you that however serious it was to the troops on the front lines, it has more about it to make one think of Gilbert and Sullivan. Jenkins will be our eyes and ears, and we are not to take all of this as that seriously. Satire is a frequently used word in many of the reviews. Thinking about it had me remembering the Isherwood quote, I am a Camera. Jenkins is our camera, frequently with a lot of judgement and reflections, but mostly our man on the scene.

Other frequent comparisons are with the more famous cycle Search of Lost Time, by Marcel Proust. Both are long, very observational and mostly the internal point of view of the one narrator. At this point I was struggling with Proust, he is far wordier and as often to no obvious purpose. I do not think that Powell was writing to the same degree of literature as art and it is too soon to tell if he also is making a point. As of now I am not sure that a Proust/Powell analysis is either that valid or important. 

Almost all of our characters are moneyed, but out narrator is less certainly of the moneyed set. His exact social standing is never fully explained. Indeed he rarely tells us much about himself. The historic period in Spring is immediate post-WWI. None of our school boys seems to have had much interest in what had just ended. They have family members engaged in the treaty negotiations, but no one in their set seems to have lost family members, or had any dreams of Army service as a way to glory. What few mentions we have of the military are barely respectful. Another theme, for the moment in the back ground is women. The potential for them as sexual partners is about what you would expect from a privileged boy’s school POV. No one parents seem to still be in their first marriage. Divorce seems very common and never a cause for school boy shame or social ostracism. 

Powell is an engaging writer. It is rare for me to smile at any of the school boy hi jinks, and it is hard to know what if anything will become important. I am in for the duration. That sounds grim when this has been anything but. So far this has been a literary ride through a select part of the English country side. My companions are, so far, not that elite, though members of the elite they are. It is the quality of the writing that is keeping me here. So far there is little in the way of foreshadowing to suggest great event are brewing. It is enough to watch as characters, and the character list grow and the widening cast of people are observed living their lives.