Rating: 5/5

The air has been freshened… 
 ….with this gorgeous book. 

In “Oleander, Jacaranda….A Childhood Perceive”, (a classic-historical-memoir- (133 pages) was first published in 1994. 

From the beginning we learn that Penelope went back to visit Cairo in 1980…..to see the house she grew up in and contemplate the child she was. To try to piece together the past and present. 
It’s as though she was pulling weeds and planting flowers in childhood memories and adult understandings at the same time — bridging the perception (as a discovery) from being ‘the’ child … and being ‘the’ adult. 
She said:
 “I look back in dismay. There has been a lot of unlearning to do”. 
Growing up, Penelope had been caught between two cultures. Her parents were divorced (a huge taboo for the day). 
Lucy, a governess, was Penelope‘s prime caretaker from the age of two months. 
The impact of that relationship was primal. 
Penelope stayed in touch with Lucy throughout her entire life

 “When you do not know what to expect of the world—when everything is astonishing— then anything is possible and acceptable. Children are aliens in a landscape that is entirely unpredictable; they are required to conform to the dictation of a mysterious code while finding their way around a world which is both dazzling and perverse. I wanted to see if it was possible to uncover something of this experience”. 

Growing up in Cairo during WWII had its challenges. Penelope was growing up in accordance with the teaching of one culture and surrounded by all the signals of another. Egypt was her home, and all that she knew, but she realized in some perverse way that she was not truly a part of it. Her family was English. And it was clear that she was never allowed to forget it. 
“To be English was to be among the chosen and saved; to be the other was simply to be the other”. 

…..The writing is stunning — with many descriptive thought provoking- reflective sentences to savior:
 “It was possible to feel acute and entirely detached pity”. 

 “There was cold, which was beyond anything I would have thought possible. In the famously hard winter of 1947 the snow came in through the blitzed windows at Harley Street and May in unmelting drifts on the stairs. Staying with relatives somewhere in the country, I used to creep into bed with all my clothes on. At my boarding school on the south coast you had to break the ice on the dormitory water jugs in the mornings before you could wash. I thought I would die of the cold: it would have been a merciful release”. 

 “I am walking with Lucy beside the canal. This is one of our regular afternoon walks, a favorite with me because halfway along the canal there is a mimosa tree, from which Lucy allows me to pick a sprig. I bury my nose in the powdery yellow balls, guzzling that strange fragile smell. Further along there is a place where children from the village bathe in the canal, stark naked, hurtling themselves from an overhanging branch, throwing up great plumes of foaming brown water. And there I am in my cotton dress, my sun hat, my lace-up shoes, and my socks; I stare with fascination and with envy”. 
Her stare of envy was also one of great ignorance. The canals were open sewers, used for washing clothes and cooking utensils, for watering animals, for urinating and defecating, for drinking. They were the habitat of the snails which harbored bilharzia, the deadly debilitating disease of the Egyptian fellaheen. Many of those children would have had trachoma, the eye complaint which causes blindness. Only a small portion of them received primary education”. 

…..The themes of displacement and privileged were eye-opening —as the daughter of British expats.

…..There are more than a dozen black-and-white illustrations included:
…..The Bulaq Dakhrur house photos —wedding photos —a tea party for repatriated prisoners of war in 1943— The adorable little Penelope playing on the beach with your dad in Sufi Bishr— the swimming pool at Bulaq Dakhrur— etc. 

…..The overall joyful Intriguing reading experience should knock any dubious doubtful memoir reader off their feet. 

This was the ‘perfect’ redemption book from the recently downward spiral of disappointing novels. 
It was also the perfect slim paperback to read during my rest-week in Capitola-by-the-sea. (both from bed and sitting on the beach) 

Many thanks to Diane Barnes. I loved her review—commented so—and she was kind enough to send me her copy. 
Sooooo….
we’re doing it again— 
…..TRAVELING a wonderful book with the Goodreads community. Whose next? 
To whom shall I mail this copy? Happy to mail this book to the next person who desires to read it — then pass it on again …. 🤗

Just Beautiful…..a first rate memoir!