Rating: 1/5

What bothers me:
Mara is SUCH a special snowflake who thinks that she's above everyone else, especially her sister (Aimee) and her niece (V).
"Getting into Yale wasn't a total shocker."
"But I'm convinced that my parents brought me into this world to compensate for my older sister, Aimee, who was eighteen and skidding down a road to nowhere."
"Aimee is now thirty-five and can't stick to one decision about her career, geographic location, or sexual partner."
"Besides, she [V] acquires a new bad habit in every town. In Vermont, she lost her virginity to an eighteen-year-old harmonica player." Losing your virginity is now a bad habit!
"Aimee has always been the Screwup. V, the Unrealized Potential. And me, the Only Hope."
"We do not, I repeat, DO NOT talk about sex, much less orgasms, in the Valentine household."
"I could tell by her smirk that she was thinking I'm a hand-raising, teacher-hugging goody-goody. But I didn't care because I'd already decided she was a class-ditching, chair-in-the-principal's-office-warming deadbeat."
"Not to mention that in the month since our split, he'd transformed into a male slut and was sleeping his way through the sophomore class."
"I've never been sure why James didn't go to college. He's one of the smartest people I've ever met."
"'Yeah, I'm a real refrigerator slut,' V said. 'Take out the "refrigerator" part and you're right on target.'"
"I knew I was being a bitch, but V had asked for it."
"I hope she has a biiig case of herpes, too." So just because your EX-boyfriend is dating someone else, you wish that she has an STD...
"I nearly snorted at the mention of 'strong morals' and 'Travis Hart' in the same breath..."
"I tried to distract her by pointing out our favorite Internet mismatch. The beanpole mama's boy and the butternut-squash-shaped mama." Way to make fun of your customers.
"And, besides, V has made this bed for herself- let her toss and turn in it." No. She does not deserve to be made fun of and insulted in such a derogatory way.
"Well, Mom, skanky is a term for a dirty slut who's riddled with sexually transmitted diseases. You know, a girl who'll drop her thong for every guy in school."
"I do not wish a fever and swollen glands on anyone." Yet you wished that a girl would get herpes earlier... Symptoms of herpes includes blisters that break, leaving painful sore taking weeks to heal. You can also have flu-like symptoms (including fever and swollen glands).
"Then I'd tell myself, No, no, I haven't done anything with James, especially not like what V did with Travis. So I'm still innocent, right?"
"Less than a day later, V realized her potential with Travis Hart in the boys' locker room of my high school, which left me with only one hope: that V would get the hell out of my life."
Um, he's your ex. It's not your business.
"How could she say this to me? I have been a freaking ambassador for this high school for nearly four years!"
"I'd always assumed I was brought into this world to give my parents award ceremonies and Yale bumper stickers and everything that Aimee didn't provide them."
"Why can't you control yourself? ...I mean, why do you have to say whatever goes through your head? Why can't you control your emotions?"
	1) "'Why don't you leave me alone?' I said... 'I don't like your attitude,' Dr. Hendrick said. 'Well, I don't like your attitude, either,' I said."
	2)"'Will you shut up already?... Didn't you hear me? I don't want to talk right now.' ...I clenched my fists. 'You don't know what my deal is?'"
	3)"I chucked the remote control at V. She dodged it, so it smacked against the wall and split open."
	4)"Then I shoved her, much harder than she'd pushed me because she stumbled backward."