Rating: 2/5

I can’t remember where exactly I heard about this book, but I’ve seen the author’s name around and heard that this series of six sisters was clean so I thought I’d give it a try. I liked the overall story; unfortunately there were just too many things that bugged me. In a way it reminded me of the movie Grease, where the nice moral girl is transformed and becomes more worldly. Those kinds of stories just make me sad, it’s sad when someone gives into peer pressure and changes who they are in order to “fit in”. This was just an odd one for me, I didn’t really like or dislike Minerva. She is pretty confused about who she is, but is loyal to her family and will do her duty to find a husband to help provide for them. As for our leading man, Lord Sylvester, I did like him. While he is supposedly a rake, he seemed to have more manners and morals than some of the other men. The best parts of the book are when they are together, they had good chemistry and Sylvester does have a certain charm about him. 

There are two groups of guys who are put off with Minerva and decided to do her harm. One group of four plan to rape her, while the other group of three just plan on making her fall in love and then humiliate her by shunning her. Her father is a cheat and creep (even though he is the town vicar) and come to think of it there are no moral men in the entire story. Which is just sad, I would hope there were at least some moral men back then, but in this case Lord Sylvester is the best we can get. It seems that in books like this when there are guys (or girls) with morals they are the ones painted in a negative light, which doesn't make sense and is kind of sad. 

There is a lot of detail I the book in regards to the people’s attire and their habits which I guess is interesting, but at times kind of dragged a bit. The ending felt rather rushed, considering how much time was spent on the rest of the story. It is almost like the author had a page limit and realized she was reaching the end and just hurried and wrapped everything up. While at times the story was enjoyable and again I did like Sylvester and Minerva together, I don’t think I’ll be reading the rest of the series, I didn’t really care for any of the side characters in the story and don’t see the point of continuing on.

Content: There is one love scene, that is very short (like a paragraph) and not graphic.