Rating: 1/5

this was so bad!! 2 main reasons:

1) most of sappho's relationships in this book (platonic as well as romantic!) are with men. sappho may have loved men, but loving women was a central theme in her life and legacy. to have her pine over one man for the entirety of the book is honestly offensive! as she goes through trials and tribulations she thinks only of him. the relationships sappho does have with women are much less central to the book. there is mention of her being involved with praxinoa, a girl who has been her slave since childhood, but it's written as more of a friends-with-benefits type deal, or of girls who grew up together experimenting more than any real romance. the only romantic relationship sappho really has with a woman is with a priestess isis, and that ends in a major betrayal. sappho's platonic family relationships are also troubled - she does not get along well with her mother, her daughter, or her sister in law. i found a lot of internalized misogyny in the way sappho interacted with and thought of other women that was honestly crushing. does erica jong really think so little of her own gender? this book was an insult to sappho's memory. finally, to have sappho end up living on an island, happily ever after, with alcaeus and aesop was crushing! sappho is known for her love of women, not of her domestic desire for men.

2) bad writing. the prose itself was just not good. I also found the characters to be really one-dimensional, especially the antagonists (especially rhodopis). no one really changed or grew throughout the book other than sappho. the ending also felt very rushed, and not really connected to the rest of the story. phaon came out of nowhere, and the idea that sappho was so distraught over what he did that she would contemplate suicide? after all that she had been through, all the time she spent pining over alcaeus? just unrealistic. again in terms of writing style: nothing was done subtly at all. i especially hated the way the author talked about aesop and his fables. very heavy-handed. also, the book felt very didactic, like erica jong was trying to teach me about ancient greece rather than write a compelling novel. there was also a lot of repetition, and a lot of plainly stating emotions instead of leaving the reader to infer.

based on the cover and title of this book i had high hopes for this book but it did not deliver! i think there were some beautifully constructed individual phrases but i found most of this book to be poorly written and a disappointment to sappho's memory.