Rating: 5/5

"The Osterman Weekend" is yet another timeless classic by the Master of Espionage, Robert Ludlum. If I remember correctly, I had read this book sometime around 1989. This is the continuation of my journey back in time, into the world of Robert Ludlum which I had started in July 2016 with "The Scarlatti Inheritance". As I had expected, "The Osterman Weekend" was much more exciting and enjoyable now as my own knowledge and awareness about the human psychology simply adds to deeper levels of understanding of the intrigue created by Mr. Ludlum in this book.

"The Osterman Weekend", written in 1972 is of a completely different flavour to its predecessor "The Scarlatti Inheritance". And yet, it solidifies Ludlum as a game changer in the genre. This book shows that though the genre is "espionage", Mr. Ludlum is extremely versatile in exploring a completely different era, setup and environment while continuing to deliver undiluted intrigue.

The story is set in a remote location somewhere near New York, USA. The main premise of the plot here is "lies and deception". It starts with simple thread and slowly Mr. Ludlum spins out layers and layers of deception the reader has no clue what is the reality and what is the deception. This story is one of pure psychological battle. The protagonist, just a pawn, who happens to be the unfortunate individual who was a potential tool, nothing more than that. I guess "expendable" is the word I learnt during my teenage years from Mr. Ludlum.

The "Osterman Weekend" is all about trust issues and how simple planted lies can break down years of trust in the blink of an eye, break down solid relationships built over years. The dialogue and the narration of the book is more about what's left unsaid, or rather, what lies beneath what's actually being said, the insinuations, the suggestions, the veiled accusations. What will draw you deeper and deeper into the cesspool of the plot is how anyone can be manipulated. This book is exactly like the "tentacle" in the book. It takes hold of you slowly, and then keeps grasping you till you find it difficult to breathe. You will know it's happening and the only way to save yourself is to race through to the end.

This book is definitely a signature Robert Ludlum work. Deeply intriguing as the entire thrill and suspense is created through extremely well researched, delicately plotted and deadly manipulative deception. 

Once you finish the book, you will realise that maybe, just maybe, one (or few) of your own relationships burnt down because of some "Osterman Weekend" had played out in the real life. Or maybe, it can play out before you even realise its happening.

This is a book that you MUST read and continue your journey into the abyss of the world of Robert Ludlum.