Rating: 4/5

I have read Wiesel's Night Trilogy and other books by this marvelous man and author. I believe I have given 5 stars to everything else I have read, but the others address surviving the Holocaust in a more direct manner and with less symbolism. I think that the most significant clue to understanding this narrative lies in the title. It it not The Judge, but The Judges. Five travelers flying to Tel Aviv are forced to land ( perhaps at the hand of their tormentor ) at a remotes airport. Jean-Paul Sartre used the identical situation in his play “No Exit except that his characters are already in "hell". Ultimately told that one will be killed so that the others may live, the protagonists begin to analyize not only do they deserve to live, but do they WANT to live. I believe that Wiesel has always been looking at why he survived the Holocaust; did he survive the Holocaust with the capacity for joy and the desire to live, and what must a survivor do to merit survival? There is always the question of why an omnipotent god allowed the Holocaust and all the atrocities of WWII to happen..... For myself I have resolved this problem via the conclusions of Epicuris. I can believe in a loving god who weeps at what man does, but is incapable of intervening in the lives of man. Perhaps "heaven" is a place of love, complete unity with others and god, and rest. It would be easy to make the "captor" into god who is judging these people who like all of us have remained silent when they should have spoken and behaved selfishly in response to others when we should have given freely. The "captor judge" is not god, for Elie Wiesel would not kill God to render a point. He is simply an evil man who perhaps deserves to die more than the others because he has presumed the role of " god - king " condemning one other human to die. This is a difficult book to read because of its symbolic nature and because it makes one think about whether we deserve to live and / or want to live. At 77 this is a question which comes to my mind more often than I would like. Kristi &amp; Abby Tabby Childless Cat Lady.