Rating: 4/5

Annie Raft, is woken at 4 am by a car pulling up outside her home. She looks out of the window to see her 23-year-old daughter Mia getting out of the car and embracing a man who she doesn't know but whom she believes brutally murdered two campers some 18 years previously. She telephones her friend and lover, local doctor Birger Torbjornsson to tell him what she has seen and later discovers that the man she saw is Johan Brandberg, the youngest son of a local family.

Through Annie Raft, Birger Torbjornsson and Johan Brandberg the reader is transported back to Midsummer's Eve 1974, when Annie and her daughter, then 6 years old, arrived by bus in remote Blackwater where they are to move into a commune with Annie's lover, Dan Ulander. When Dan fails to meet the bus, Annie and Mia set off on foot to walk the four kilometres to the commune. En route they spot a young man coming in the opposite direction but he does not see them. Dan has given them a rudimentary map of the area but they are soon lost . When Annie spots a tent she decides to go and ask for assistance only to find the bodies of a young man and woman brutally stabbed to death. The identity of the young woman is soon established, but nobody can figure out why she was killed, who did it or who her murdered companion was. The mystery lasts for almost 18 years. 

The unsolved murders makes the small community of Blackwater infamous, bringing it a lot of outside interest but has negative affects on its residents. So when Annie and Mia later decide to settle in Blackwater all their lives are haunted by the incident. 

This book is portrayed as a thriller but it is told at a somewhat sedate, methodical pace with the author resisting the temptation to add to the body count. Instead Ekman concentrates on the effect the murders have on the community and the rich eerily bleak countryside thereabouts. In fact she creates a landscape that as equally as important to the plot as its human cast. Clear-cutting of the forests is a fairly central issue but this not a political bandwagon. Rather the plot purrs along at a slow steady pace threading its way through the seasons and the complicated lives of the people present. 

When Dan fails to meet the bus Annie and Mia are forced to take a path that leads not only to the dead bodies but one that will also have unforeseen consequences, mirroring the way that decisions that we all make when we are young can shape our futures. This is no doubt particularly true for people live in small villages where everyone knows and are likely to be in some way related to each other. In fact it is Mia who eventually reveals the identity of the murdered young man despite only being a child at the time of his death.

The novel is not without some imperfections. In particular Johan is never properly investigated by the police despite the fact that he left home on the night of the murders and never returned to the village. Come to think of it, the whole police investigation seems to have been pretty haphazard. Similarly Johan's sex sessions with the woman who helped him to get away seem to be a little out of keeping with the rest of the novel. However, that all said and done, the author has created a gloriously rich and thoughtful page-turner that deserves to be read.