Rating: 4/5

The majority of "Advise and Consent"'s mammoth 760 pages are intelligent, explosive, and magnetic, and would have warranted nothing less than a 5-star rating -- a very rare quality for what is essentially a page-turner.

But in the last 200 pages, author Allen Drury begins to lose focus and lose steam, and as a result, the book starts to lag. This is so frustrating, given the sheer magnitude and awesomeness that the book began with and carried straight through towards the end. What a shame.

"Advise and Consent" tells the story of what happens in the US Senate when the President of the United States startles the world by nominating a controversial wild-card named Robert A. Leffingwell to the position of Secretary of State. It's a decision that sends shockwaves through Washington, and the flabbergasted senators are left with the task of either supporting Leffingwell or attempting to stop him. To add to the confusion, soon information is brought forth that Leffingwell may - or may not - have been involved with the Communist Party at one point (remember: this book came out at the height of the Cold War).

"Advise and Consent" is told through the points-of-view of four main characters: Democrat Bob Munson is the President's always-loyal right-hand-man who the President entrusts to see that Leffingwell's nomination gets passed; Seab Coolley is an ageing battle-axe Republican Senator whose firebrand ways cause lots of tumult on Capitol Hill, despite his essential faithfulness to his fellow senators, regardless of what side of the aisle they sit on; Brigham Anderson is a Democrat who nonetheless is driven by acting out of fairness first and foremost -- and his fairness tells him to go against the President and try to defeat Leffingwell; and Orrin Knox is a senator who does what's best for the senate and for the country, but who can't shake the bitterness over losing the Democratic Presidential bid against the President who he is now forced to obey. While Munson's, Coolley's, and Anderson's books burst with electricity from page one, Orrin Knox's book is much less interesting, much less realistic, and becomes stricken with sentimentality. It is also - inexplicably - the longest of the four sections, and as such, it is such a disappointment to blast through over 500 pages of unique literary excellence only to be brought down with a thud for the last chunk of the novel.

But this is still a great novel, and one which must have raised a few eyebrows in its day (I won't say why, but let's just say that Brigham Anderson has quite the secret). Drury has based much of what has happened in "Advise and Consent" on the lives and actions of real US politicians, but even so, the man has a knack for creating characters that we are interested in and who we come to care about. Even Seab Coolley - so set in his right-wing ways, and causing so much trouble for the Democrats - is likeable. In fact, he's lovable, and was my favourite character in the whole book, for his Zeitgeist bravado, his cunning intellect, and his surprisingly humane side that continued to pierce through again and again as the book progressed.

With over 100 characters in total, "Advise and Consent" in a one-of-a-kind book which, in the end, falls short of being a perfect novel, but most of it actually was perfect. The first 500 pages of Drury's Pulitzer Prize-winner are something I will remember fondly and carry with me as being one of the most biting, gripping, and enjoyable reading experiences I've ever had, and this is still a novel I would recommend - without hesitation - to everyone. It's a true time capsule of the 1950s political climate in America.