Rating: 4/5

One of the things I've come to realize (perhaps, again) in my reading (and re-reading) of Zelazny's books is that one never really knows what to expect from Zelazny. If you come to one of his books fresh - no preconceived notions, no idea what it's going to be about - you find that it could go just about anywhere. The previous book I read was straight-ahead sci-fi set in the almost-present (as of the time of writing) and the few before that were heroic high fantasy with mythological creatures and magic predominating. Then I came to Eye of Cat, which I'd read in '91 but didn't remember a thing about. This book is also sci-fi, though it incorporates Zelazny's often-used love of mythology (in this case, Native American). It's set in the (far) future where space travel is common (though the book takes place solely on earth), aliens are around, as are technological wonders ("trip-boxes," a type of teleportation unit, play a big role in the plot). The book is about Billy Blackhorse Singer, the last Navajo, who has managed to live a really long time. He's collected alien species from many worlds and brought them back to earth to be studied. (It's a bit of a zoo, to be honest.) That's all backstory. The plot, in two parts, tells of an alien who's coming to assassinate someone, and Billy is part of a group (though he works solo) brought in to prevent that from happening. Part of Billy's plan is to use a shape-shifting alien (dubbed "Cat") that he's brought back from another planet long ago, and who he has come to suspect has sentience and isn't "just an animal." The second part of the book involves Billy being hunted by Cat. A fairly standard plot in anyone else's hands, but Zelazny really excels at telling these stories in a unique fashion. Like many of Zelazny's books, this one is short (180 pages), but so, so densely packed. Zelazny's prose style has often been described as poetic, and that's very evident here. The descriptions are haunting, the musings on life and religion thought-provoking. And the writing is gorgeous; many actual poems are embedded within the structure of the novel. At times slipping into an almost-stream of consciousness narrative, and occasionally switching viewpoints, it's wonderfully told. And yet, there's something undefinable that prevents me from giving this one five stars. At times, I felt the language, beautiful as it was, overwhelmed the story being told. Still, this is a superb novel and one I'd definitely recommend. An oddity about my copy, which is a SF Book Club version: the text is not right-margin justified, which makes it look odd and somewhat unprofessional. No idea what the reason behind that might be, but it was jarring enough that noticing it brought me out of the story at times.