Rating: 4/5

That’s what a fortune is for, to support the lawyers who defend it for you against depredation. Professionally speaking, I don’t entirely agree with Wolfe here, but I must admit there is a grain a truth in it. It is certainly pithy and witty.

This is the 4th Nero Wolfe novel. After completing the 27 NW books I own, out of 44, I am now filling in the gaps in my collection, and I’m reading them as I receive them. I noticed a difference in Archie’s character in this book - he is more sophisticated and charming than in the 3 previous novels. Likewise, Inspector Cramer’s character has taken on practically all the nuances it will contain for the next 40 years. I chuckled when Cramer comments in this book that “I’ll be ready to retire in another ten years.”

It all starts when a young man, Llewellyn Frost, hires Wolfe to investigate the murder of a model. He is concerned for the safety of his cousin, Helen Frost, (for whom he has more than cousinly feelings) who was a coworker of the dead girl. Archie gets irritated by Wolfe’s eccentricities and his reluctance to work, and he makes certain suggestions to the client about how to get Wolfe to visit the scene of the murder. It’s hilarious. Also hilarious are the interactions between Wolfe and Llewellyn’s father, Dudley Frost. Dudley is — hmmm, how would I describe him? He talks a lot, he’s a fool and an idiot, and anyone who knows Nero Wolfe knows he does not suffer fools, gladly or otherwise.

’Ah.’ Dudley Frost smiled at me broadly, with understanding; he transferred it to Wolfe, and then back to me again. ‘You seem to have gone to a good deal of trouble around here. Of course I can see that that was the best way to get your threat in, to arrange for a call with my son in your office. But the point is —‘

Wolfe snapped, ‘Put him out, Archie.’

According to Helen Frost’s mother, Calida Frost, the only way to shut him up is to give him good Irish whisky. Perhaps Dudley is smarter than he appears.

Speaking of Calida Frost, there is a marvelous play on words at the heart of the solution. I’ll not give away any spoilers, but if you love puns and word play, you’ll appreciate it. This isn’t one of my favorite Wolfe &amp; Archie adventures, but it’s definitely above average.