Rating: 4/5

Rebellion is a Highlander historical romance from writing queen, Nora Roberts. This was actually my first time ever reading a book by NR and I was honestly a little wary going in, just because I didn’t know what to expect. But I was so impressed with this and had a great time! This blended romance with the action of the Jacobite Rebellion so well and I just flew through this story! Apparently this book is part of her MacGregor family series, which has multiple books, but this one was told generations in the past so I’m not too sure if any others in this series are historicals as well. 

This story takes place in Scotland in 1745. We meet Serena MacGregor in the prologue 10 years prior where she sees her mother attacked by a band of Englishmen who come into their home. After that, Serena’s hatred for the English doesn’t waver over the years. But when her brother Coll returns home injured with his very English friend, Brigham Langston (an Earl), and Serena is forced to tend to Brigham’s wounds…things get complicated. Brigham immediately is very taken with Serena while she’s the more stand-off-ish one. I enjoyed this brother’s best friend romance with her trying to hate him solely based on him being English, but also super drawn to him. Brigham and her father Ian MacGregor are both gearing up for the Jacobite Rebellion and we see quite a bit of action and setup leading towards the Battle of Culloden. We see Brigham earn the trust of the MacGregor family, he even seeks vengeance for her mother, and wins Serena’s heart. 

This has some really lovely romantic moments between Serena and Brigham. We do even get steamy scenes, while not super descriptive the scenes also aren’t fade-to-black or closed door, which was a nice surprise! I liked how Serena calls Brigham “Sassenach”. I loved seeing Serena’s conversations with her mother throughout the book. This was just a great balance between the romantic moments and all the action of the rebellion. I also love when books feature a great family, it’s always nice to see good parents in historicals!