Rating: 4/5

To enter the novels of Narnia is not unlike taking the first few steps through the titular wardrobe itself. As a good fantasy ought, it pulls you from the world around you into a new realm of possibility, or magic and mystery, of epic quests filled with fierce battles and friendships that withstand even the darkest of hours to keep hope burning bright. Over the years I’ve returned to C.S. Lewis’ The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe having read it myself as a child and then again to my own children when they reached an age to follow along. Each time I find the journey to be just as magical, yet increasingly more joyful as I can bring a new young reader into the world for their first time and experience the magic with them. I can remember many days of reenacting scenes from Narnia with my oldest in our apartment living room when she was 6 and we even went for Halloween as Lucy and Mr. Tumnus. The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe is a delightful story to kick off a rather delightful series that isn’t without issues but never fails to bring a smile to my face. How can you not love beavers dispensing whiskey to kids to get them to sleep or a Santa passing out weapons, and for a story of good and evil the series does a fairly nuanced look with morally grey elements. A tale of good and evil, warfare, betrayal and redemption, bravery and hope, and a tale that has lasted for generations.

  

First published in 1950, Lewis wrote The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe for his granddaughter, Lucy Barfield, and dedicated the novel to her. Her namesake becomes one of the great fantasy characters, a young, kind, and brave girl who is ‘a good leader’ at a time when most fantasy leads were still boys. For the uninitiated, this first story takes the four Pevensie siblings—Peter, Susan, Edmund, and Lucy in descending age order—out from under the bombs of the London Blitz into a magical world where The White Witch rules with a ruthless and violent grip on the talking animals and spirits who live there. A world where it is ‘always winter and never christmas,’ but the arrival of these ‘Daughters of Eve’ and ‘Sons of Adam’ may be the spark to light the fire of revolt and liberate Narnia. If they don’t get caught by the witch first…

The first in the series, it isn’t necessarily Lewis’ strongest writing and at times it may feel a bit dry for children (at least in the modern day) whereas the style feels more fluid in later books. Still, it is magical, fun and full of unforgettable characters like Aslan, a Father Christmas who hands out weapons, and my personal favorite, Mr. Tumnus, who was Lewis’ initial idea for the tale all the way back when he was 16 with ‘a picture in my mind — of a faun carrying an umbrella and parcels in a snowy wood.’ The infamous lamppost, the symbol of light that connects the two worlds, also preceded the novel with Lewis walking home from Malvern pub one snowy night with fellow ‘Inklings’ J.R.R. Tolkien and George Sayer, commenting that the imagery of the lampposts aglow in the snow would be perfect in a novel. It is also rumored to have been in response to Tolkien’s insistence that a lamppost was not suitable for a fantasy novel. While this may be just a rumor, Tolkien did write something similar about electric lights in his essay 
  On Fairy Stories
:
‘The electric street-lamp may indeed be ignored, simply because it is so insignificant and transient. Fairy-stories, at any rate, have many more permanent and fundamental things to talk about. Lightning, for example. The escapist is not so subservient to the whims of evanescent fashion as these opponents. He does not make things (which it may be quite rational to regard as bad) his masters or his gods by worshipping them as inevitable, even “inexorable.” And his opponents, so easily contemptuous, have no guarantee that he will stop there: he might rouse men to pull down the street-lamps.’
Given the competitive nature between the two (and the Inklings at large) I’ll choose to believe Lewis put this in just for the dig. It’s more fun that way.

‘The whole story, paradoxically enough, strengthens our relish for real life. This excursion into the preposterous sends us back with renewed pleasure to the actual.’
—Lewis, On Stories: And Other Essays on Literature

Fantasy is often thought of as escapism, yet Lewis takes the children from his tale from one war into another. They escape the bombings to a quiet home in the country but quickly find themselves running from the White Witch in Narnia and doing battle with great beasts. There is a sense of Lewis demonstrating that war is inescapable and hardships follow us wherever we go, but there is also an impression that we cannot try to avoid evil and must confront it. In Narnia the children are able to be the heroes, to stand up to evil in a way they could not against the Nazi bombs falling upon their city, and it is empowering. ‘Fairy tales do not tell children the dragons exist. Children already know that dragons exist,’ G.K. Chesterton once wrote, ‘Fairy tales tell children the dragons can be killed.’ And in Narnia, children learn that evil can be conquered, wrongs can be righted, and redemption can be had. 

‘All shall be done, but it may be harder than you think.’

I’ve always loved the character Edmund, such a shit in the first book but later one of the best characters (Eustace follows a similar trajectory later on). He initially sells out his siblings to the White Witch for a taste of Turkish Delight—a food that was made with sugar which would have been hard to come by under WWII rationing and also would remind him of good times. I enjoy how it is in keeping with Fairy Tale tropes that eating food within the fairy tale is always a bad idea and we see the Turkish Delights become a symbol of temptation. But, with the love of family that is willing to take him back, Edmund is able to find his redemption.

‘We have nothing if not belief.’

There is a very moral message underpinning much of this novel and many are quick to point to it as a Christian parable. One can read it this way, of course, or enjoy the surface fantasy, and I think both are held fairly well in his text. In An Experiment in Criticism, Lewis writes:
‘We sit down before [a] picture in order to have something done to us, not that we may do things with it. The first demand any work of any art makes upon us is surrender. Look. Listen. Receive. Get yourself out of the way.’
Lewis argues for approaching a book by allowing it to consume us and wash over us, not to approach it with the intent to pick it apart on the first go and I think this is also the best approach to a first read of Narnia. But one cannot escape the Christian stories going on either. Aslan as a symbol for Jesus and the resurrection for instance. But in his article Sometimes Fairy Stories May Say Best What’s to Be Said, which appeared in the New York Times in 1956, Lewis states that the story is itself just some images that made a fun story and were never written with the total intend to be a “Christian fairy tale”:
‘Some people seem to think that I began by asking myself how I could say something about Christianity to children; then fixed on the fairy tale as an instrument; then collected information about child-psychology and decided what age-group I’d write for; then drew up a list of basic Christian truths and hammered out “allegories” to embody them. This is all pure moonshine. I couldn’t write in that way at all. Everything began with images; a faun carrying an umbrella, a queen on a sledge, a magnificent lion. At first there wasn’t even anything Christian about them; that element pushed itself in of its own accord.’
Of course, later on Lewis would write in a letter to a friend a much more Christian focused idea of creating Aslan:
 ‘[Aslan] is an invention giving an imaginary answer to the question, ‘What might Christ become like if there really were a world like Narnia and He chose to be incarnate and die and rise again in that world as He actually has done in ours?’”’
The idea of Aslan as a Christian symbol for God is quite clear in later novels too. Lewis does have a religiousness but even if religious stories aren’t your thing this story is still just as fun. I also greatly appreciate the effort towards a moral greatness where characters can be flawed but still not bad. It’s quite refreshing. ‘People who have not been in Narnia sometimes think that a thing cannot be good and terrible at the same time.’

Okay, sure there is an element where Lewis gets criticism for some not great moments around women. Lucy is assured her bravery isn’t questioned when told to stay out of battles but that battles get ugly when women are involved. Which, okay??? What? Sure, battles are pretty ugly when men are involved too. And there’s some pretty old timey “my damn wife” style of humor around the beaver couple which didn’t age great, so be advised. Yet on the whole it’s pretty fun still. 

I have long loved The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe and I am thrilled to find that I enjoy it again and again with repeat readings. While not the strongest in the series, it makes for a good start and plenty of good fun. Especially when you share it with others. 

4/5