Rating: 4/5

So I feel the great Georgette Heyer Splurge winding down here ― a woman can only take so much of the constraints of Polite Society before she hares off and immerses herself in gory urban fantasies with kickass heroines ― but at least I'm ending on a high note here.

Judith Tavener, age 20, and her brother Peregrine, aka Perry, age 19, decide to leave the Yorkshire countryside after their father dies, to enjoy the London season with their newly inherited wealth. The only thing standing between Judith and Perry and a good time (other than their country manners, but lots of money does tend to overcome the snootiness of the ton) are the limitations imposed by the unknown guardian their father appointed in his will, since they're both underage. But they assure themselves that they can undoubtedly handle what will certainly a retired gentleman in his dotage. So, armed only with their guardian's name, Lord Worth, and their undoubtedly very handy funds, off they go to London.

On the way they stop in a town to see a "mill" (boxing match) and have a few unfortunate encounters with a condescending gentleman, who mocks them, jokingly calls Judith "Clorinda" when she won't tell him her name, steals a kiss from her, and deftly avoids being challenged by Perry. Much to their dismay, once in London they find that this insolent gentleman is their guardian, Lord Worth.

The rest of the book deals with the battles between Judith and Lord Worth for the upper hand in their love/hate relationship ― she tends to react to every request or instruction from him by doing exactly the opposite ― and the series of near-deadly "mishaps" that begin to befall Perry. Judith is wooed by several fortune hunters as well as her cousin Bernard Taverner, but it's not clear for a long time whether Lord Worth, her cousin Bernard, or someone else is trying to get Perry out of the way so that Judith will conveniently inherit the family wealth.

Judith is an independent sort, driving herself around in a high-perch phaeton (which most women of the time couldn't or wouldn't handle):

 

Lord Worth has a sardonic wit and a tendency to make provocative statements:'My name is not Clorinda!' snapped Miss Taverner. 'I wonder that you should care to call up the recollections it must evoke! If they are not odious to you ―'

'How could they be?' said Worth. 'You must have forgotten one at least of them if you think that.'

She was obliged to turn away to hide her confusion. 'How can you?' she demanded, in a suffocating voice.

'Don't be alarmed,' said Worth. 'I am not going to do it again yet, Clorinda. I told you, you remember, that you were not the only sufferer under your father's Will.'Beau Brummel also makes a few cameo appearances to good effect:'Excellent, Miss Taverner!' murmured Mr Brummel. 'You are so apt a pupil that if I were only ten years younger I believe I should propose for your hand.'

She laughed. 'I cannot suppose it possible. Did you ever propose to any lady, sir?'

'Yes, once,' replied Mr Brummel in a voice of gentle melancholy. 'But it came to nothing. I discovered that she actually ate cabbage, so what could I do but cut the connection?' Regency Buck is one of the more enjoyable Georgette Heyer books I've read. It's a comedy of manners, with an understated* romance and lots of dry humor. Maybe it was this understated, witty humor that reminded me so much of Pride and Prejudice, but I figure that any book that makes me feel like I am reading something Jane Austen might have written, clearly goes into the "win" column. 

Minus one star for Lord Worth's highhandedness and Judith's stubbornness, which leads her to make some pretty idiotic decisions. Judith gets quite impulsive and obstinate in her determination to not knuckle under to Lord Worth's instructions, but even when she clearly would have been better off doing what Worth requested, you have to admire her determination, in that day and age, to order her own life.

*"Understated" is pretty much my go-to definition for Heyer romances. You get a smidgen sexier with Venetia or Devil's Cub, but most of the joy in reading Heyer is found in her witty dialogue.