Rating: 5/5

My son and I are currently working through this with the accompanying DVD and workbook. I've never drawn from life before (only from two-dimensional photographs), but already a few lessons in, I've been doing so (see images below, which were done in an 8-day period)! Progress is impressively rapid with this method. I've never had more fun with a book! We're using this as a homeschool art curriculum and will continue to use it through the 2012-2013 school year.

I think of this main text as the "teacher text." It has long but interesting explanations about how the right and left hemispheres of the brain function, and how to access the parts needed to draw what you see. This is overkill for younger students (which is why I recommend the accompanying workbook as a "student text" since it gets down to the bare-bones of drawing.) The author divides drawing into 5 basic skills: the perception of edges, the perception of spaces (negative space), the perception of relationships (sighting perspective &amp; proportions), the perception of lights &amp; shadows, and perception of the whole. The DVD will give you a crash course of the book. I highly recommend viewing the entire thing before beginning to draw, as it makes the material in the book so clear and your progress will be rapid. The book will allow you to dig deeper into the concepts briefly presented on the DVD.

One of the interesting things about this book is that its principles can be applied to other creative endeavors beyond drawing. I see applications for writers here, too.

Here are some of my own drawings so far:

Lesson 3 of the DVD: My Hand (perception of edges)
 

Lesson 4 of the DVD: Chair (perception of negative spaces)

Lesson 5 of the DVD: "Doorway" (perception of relationships)

If you want a hassle-free way to get all the drawing materials you'll need for this book, go to the author's website. We love the Portfolio Workshop Kit.

See my related review for the workbook that goes along with this main text here.