Rating: 3/5

Okay, you know how when some people get overwhelmed and stressed they have little relaxation habits? Well, my habit is to sleep. As soon as I even think of the entire task that needs to be done, I’m halfway through counting sheep. So with the job of packing, moving and unpacking I felt myself start to drift and quickly grabbed Thorne’s book. I can now honestly say the woman cured my narcolepsy, but raised the one simple question I plan to ask should I ever meet her, How does she sleep? 
 
Reminiscent of Satan’s School for Girls, the plot intentionally revels in cliché’s. Aware of the path that’s being treaded upon, Thorne accepts what has been and swiftly makes it her own. Taking what could easily be seen as an urban legend, the story delicately moves away from the norm, embarking on forbidden territory. Perfect! 
 
Thorne’s style of writing is fearless. With little concern for what is expected, she writes what intrigues her and that passion shows through. The pace in the book is concise, moving you along at a fluid, yet terrifying speed. I never even felt the need to shout once to hurry it along, a miracle in and of itself. The atmosphere in the book is murky and, at times, foul. The air is constantly changing, leaving impressions that crisscross between the smell of fresh baked sugar cookies and expired meat left in the summer sun. The only problem with the story and style is that there was more description than dialogue. 
 
The characters in the book were about as interesting as the State of Address, another problem. The romance felt pushed, the evil nuns banal, and the players trivial. Granted, I could still read and enjoy, but I did so resentfully. Had Ms. Throne spent a little more time on her characters and a little less on her descriptions of the gargoyles, these characters might have been memorable. 
 
My rating? I give it a 3 . Even though the characters fell flat, this book is still worth reading and definitely worth buying. Buy it used and see what Halloween is really about! 

-As reviewed for Horror-Web.com