Rating: 3/5

(Updated 12/18/19)

[1987 Futura (UK) mass-market, with art by Terry Oakes. I'd meant to order the cheesy-awesome Zebra edition, but this one's not bad, and sets an entirely different tone. Weird how a cover painting can totally change my expectations going in.]

While I dug the small, backwoods town-setting where everybody knows each other (and their personal matters), the overabundance of tertiary characters and side-plots to keep track of distracted a bit from the main story concerning the sudden, mysterious construction of a new house that has everyone abuzz. Unbeknownst to them, however, some sort of evil force is emanating from the building, slowly infecting the townspeople with murderous impulses. It's up to one 12 year-old boy (because of course it is) with psychic abilities to convince others that the house -- or a presence within -- is responsible for the hot new fad taking over the community of everyone murdering the shit out of one other. 

It was definitely a good thing during that regrettable era of all those haunted town infestations throughout the Carter and Reagan administrations that there was always at least one kid who was smarter than the adults. Otherwise this problem might still be plaguing the U.S. today. Fortunately across the pond there seemed to be more capable adults in positions of authority to handle these sorts of supernatural snafus.

For a no-frills 80s midlister, this provided some decent chills and was pretty entertaining overall, but it probably would have benefited from a tighter focus on fewer, more fully-developed POVs that the reader could connect with as opposed to the near-constant head-hopping. Still, a better read than the typical Zebra-published title from the era. 

3.0 Stars.

BTW, glad to see Capricorn Literary reissuing forgotten old horrors like this one (I picked up their digital version for easier reading while at work*). And especially for introducing more fans of the genre to underrated authors like D.A. Fowler and Allen Lee Harris.

*Just kidding, of course I wouldn't do that when I'm supposed to be working. I got it to read while driving to work. Wish people would quit honking and flipping the bird at me, though--it's very distracting. What's their deal? Damn book-hating bastards.