Rating: 3/5

Tim Severin, writer and filmmaker, made a name for himself in the late 1970s by sailing a leather boat across the North Atlantic. That feat of endurance and seamanship was to demonstrate, à la Thor Heyerdahl, that a 6th century Irish monk, St. Brendan, could have indeed made his legendary seven-year voyage to and from America.
Since then Severin has retraced other celebrated voyages: Sinbad, Ulysses, Jason and the Argonauts. To show that the ancient Chinese (like the Irish) could have reached America he coaxed a bamboo raft most of the way across the North Pacific. He used a replica 19th century prahu to retrace the explorations of Alfred Wallace through the Moluccas. It was, perhaps, in the wake of Darwin’s contemporary that Severin heard about some of the exploits of the region’s indigenous fishermen.
In Search of Moby Dick is subtitled “Quest for the White Whale” but it is soon apparent that Severin was also looking for other fish. On Pamilacan, a small island in the southern Philippines, the fishermen showed him how they leap into the sea holding a massive iron hook and stick it into an eight tonne whale shark. They use the same technique to catch manta rays and, until recently, regularly performed the trick on 12 to 20 tonne Bryde’s whales. The hook jumpers have enough respect for the tail and jaws of an angry sperm whale to leave that species well alone, but the men of Lamalera, at the eastern end of Flores, north-west of Timor, regularly paddle out to sea to match their wits and small craft against the might of the leviathan. When not hunting whales they go after the smaller fry of hammerhead sharks and manta rays.
Having seen and described his share of blood in the water, Severin retires from the chase, somewhat virtuously refraining from further participation. But he understands, and he would have the rest of us understand, that when these Filipino and Indonesian fishermen are not blessed with fairly regular catches then they and their impoverished communities go hungry.
Between Filipino hook jumpers and Indonesian whalers, Severin takes his readers on a short visit to Tonga. There he encountered an old Polynesian harpooner, a latter day Queequeg, and his successor, as it were, a handsome young Tongan whale-watching guide. This excursion into the more traditional territory of Herman Melville and Moby Dick, while providing some insight into the historical and social background of Melville’s characters, did little to assist Severin in his search for the white whale. The modern Polynesians had not encountered such a beast, “nor even heard of one”.
Yet white whales do exist. Apart from the relatively small Beluga (“white one” in Russian), it is known that bull sperm whales can age with a greyish-white about their heads. Mocha Dick, the original upon which Melville based his fighting whale, was said to have been “as white as wool”. Everywhere, Serverin asked about sightings of white whales. On Pamilacan he was told of a white whale shark larger than any specimen known to science. The fishermen also spoke of the “bursahon”, a giant white manta ray, far too large to even contemplate catching — besides, such folly would bring bad luck.
But it was in the Indonesian archipelago, from the people of Lamalera, that he finally heard about a Moby Dick: a belligerent, white sperm whale. A very large animal, it more than once came to the aid of its harpooned fellows. It was said to have attacked whalers’ boats, smashing or swamping them with its tail. The locals believed this creature, which has a certain mythic status, appears whenever their Christian community suffers some disharmony. Wisely, Severin did not delve too deeply into this aspect. Whatever the mystic trappings attached to the white whale, Severin has no reason to doubt that at least one Moby Dick really is patrolling the seas.
Long may he reign.