Rating: 2/5

Wolfe on the Prowl
Review of the Bantam Kindle eBook edition (April 28, 2010) of the Farrar &amp; Rinehart, Inc. hardcover original (August 14, 1935)

  The roof of the old brownstone house on West Thirty-fifth Street where he had lived for twenty years, and me with him for the last seven of them, was glassed in and partitioned into rooms where varying conditions of temperature and humidity were maintained—by the vigilance of Theodore Horstmann—for the ten thousand orchids that lined the benches and shelves.

This is my second read of a Nero Wolfe mystery and I do not enjoy this character or his Watson. Wolfe is arrogant about his deductive powers, obsessed about orchids, beer and food and gives the appearance of being mostly disinterested in justice. A lot of that arrogance rubs off on Archie Goodwin who does the legwork for the housebound detective while running about town in his “roadster” (I don’t remember the specific car model ever being identified). Quirky and confident is not always appealing. 

This case begins with the deaths of two Harvard alumni in suspicious circumstances. A large group of Harvard men had brought about the crippling fall of a Harvard freshman in a hazing incident. This same group now thinks that the disabled man, who has become a popular author in the meantime, is taking his late revenge on them all. First by committing the murders and then by following them up with threatening notes. 

The mercenary Wolfe brings all of these frightened men together as the league of the title and proposes to them that he will solve their various fears and concerns for fees which will be adjusted to each man’s ability to pay. Most of them agree, and you already suspect that the situation is not quite what it appears to be. In a sense, Wolfe is scamming his clients. Saying anything further would be a spoiler.
 

The cover of the first edition hardcover published by Farrar &amp; Rinehart, Inc. in 1935. Image sourced from Goodreads.

Although I usually enjoy reading classics from the Golden Age of Crime, the Nero Wolfe mysteries don’t provide enough enjoyable protagonists or sufficient mystery for me to continue the series. 

On the Berengaria Ease of Solving Scale® I would rate this as a 3 out of 10, i.e. "a reasonably easy solve", as it becomes evident fairly early on that Wolfe’s explanation for the situation is going to be drastically different from what the plot seems to suggest. 

Trivia and Links

Promotional poster for the 1937 film adaptation. Image sourced from Wikipedia.

This 2nd Nero Wolfe book was adapted as the 2nd Nero Wolfe film The League of Frightened Men (1937) directed by Alfred E. Green and starring Walter Connolly as Nero Wolfe. You can see the entire film on YouTube here. Author Rex Stout disliked the film’s portrayals of his characters so much that he refused permission for further screen adaptations for over 30 years until a first Italian language TV series adaptation in 1969 and then several TV movies &amp; series thereafter.