Rating: 4/5

This book is a marvel. It's well written. It clings very closely to the trade of a speculator, and barely touches on any personal life. For example, we only learn that the narrator has a wife when someone tries to use her to hook him into a stock manipulation. Everything focuses on the markets, and how the narrator interacts with the markets.

The technology, and the law, have changed enormously. But one of the central points of the book is that fear, greed, hope and ignorance will drive the markets for as long as humans make trading decisions. It's true that the advent of computerized trading robots may take those emotions out of some trading nowadays, and may lead to problems of their own. But those factors still weigh as heavily on the markets as they did at that time. And I don't think I've ever read a better explanation of how each of those things can impact trading decisions and price movements.

As with many memoirs, the beginning is the most electric, and has the most personal interest. Here, we start with his experience in totally unregulated "bucket shops," where the businesses operate on extremely high margin, and actively take positions against their customers to fleece them. People still accuse some online brokerage houses of working the same way. And the explanation of those mechanics showed me, for the first time, how it might still be possible (though much more sophisticated nowadays).

Even more extraordinary, given the feeling of authenticity throughout this book, is that it is a fictionalized account. Lefevre was a journalist. Apparently, he spent a few months with one of the leading speculators of the day. He talked with him, got to know him, and interviewed him extensively. The book is a distillation of that experience and those interviews. More than anything else, I think this book captures the mindset of a trader, and that is why it is still so admired. It's well worth reading for anyone interested in trading, or generally in Wall Street.