Rating: 3/5

This is a mixed bag for me.
It is well written but very dated in its ideas.
Men are allowed to whore around and have control of finances etc.
A woman's aspiration is marriage.
The author has tried to make the heroine strong, she has control of some finances and has worked hard to keep her family, caring for her brother and she to an extent resists the Hero BUT she does become annoying and at times I wanted to bang their heads together. She never wants to marry.
The writing also has some dated terms, her abigail, for example is a ladies maid but this is not explained.
It is at times very tell not show, so paragraphs of description of scenes, though important ones are written for the reader to see.

The Hero. 
The Hero and heroine had a dalliance 5 years ago until the heroine remembered he was a man-whore so she pulled the brakes.
He says his reputation is exaggerated and to an extent it is but there is a huge ongoing other woman situation.

Spoiler
X
X
X
X

The Hero is working with another woman in the spy business.
He's happy with this arrangement as it keeps the heroine safe from his enemies, the French, as they will believe his interests lie elsewhere.
The problem with this is she is for a start an ex and wants more, even telling the heroine this.
Also the whole of London and half of Brussels also think he's with the other woman.
Especially when he escorts her places and pays for her clothes and flirts with her at parties.
So it's not surprising that the heroine isn't going to believe any flirtation he does with her and take him seriously.
In the time apart, 5 years, the Hero goes off to war. He later comments on an unnatural 3 month celibacy, waiting for the heroine to come around so I'm thinking he was with others while they were apart.
The heroine gets engaged to another man.
Also after they play their game of I want you, I don't want you, she kisses other men.
He also kisses other woman.

No details of intimate scenes other than the Hero and heroine.
The sex scenes, especially the first, blurs the lines of dubious consent.
He does use brute force in the situation, she finds herself trapped in a room with him.
Propriety of the time makes it difficult for her to just leave and she was stupid to have ended up in this situation but she does say no several times as he proceeds.
But again it's a mixed message as although she pushes away, verbalised no she also melts at his touch at times and ends up begging him or at least calling out his name.
So was he right all along as she wanted it really?
She later says she didn't but in the heat of the moment she gave mixed signals but I don't think he'd have stopped if she hadn't.

The Hero regularly looses his temper and says rash things and even spanks her with his slipper at one point.
The heroine pushes his button deliberately at times.
I found myself seeing both POV but it's hard to relate it to modern thinking as things have changed so much and yet not....

The heroine has huge daddy issues over infidelity and the Hero at one point admits that he lied, blackmailed etc to have her and says that due to her issues it was the only way.
But I couldn't help but think that it also made so many issues for them when he knew she didn't trust easily and had he flaunts this other woman and if she accepted him then she looks like a chump for ignoring the cheating as he hasn't explained his work situation and says he doesn't want a future with other woman but then is witnessed kissing her or leaving her room when other woman is on a robe with nothing underneath. Total mixed messages, situations are not always explained.

So enemies to lovers, sort of.
He's painted as being besotted with her and determined to marry her from the start.
I think if I'd been the heroine I'd have left the country too.
Extra story regarding her brother which I assume continues elsewhere.

HEA.