Rating: 4/5

I picked this book up from a used bookstore without realizing that it was the fourth (?) in a series. However, I didn't have any trouble due to not having read the first installments and ended up really enjoying it. At times I couldn't even put it down! Though I wouldn't quite put it at a five star rating.

The opening scene was rather odd so it had me worried that the rest of the story would follow suit, but it was actually really enjoyable. It did take a long time to get to the murder mystery part of things, which is usually something that bothers me, but I didn't mind that at all. The details were interesting, though I can't speak to whether or not the cultural and manga details were accurate or not. Given that I'm a comic book fan, I found it quite strange that the manga were referred to as magazines quite often, but since I'm a comic book fan and not a manga fan I have no way of knowing if that's actually what they're called. Maybe it was an early 2000s thing?

On that topic, some aspects of the story were definitely outdated. A word for transgender individuals that is now considered a slur was used multiple times, though it was in the "that was the language of the time" way and not genuinely intending to be harmful. However, that could be triggering for some to read so I figured it had to be mentioned. R*pe is also a concept that plays into this story, though through a couple of manga issues that the main character is studying and a briefly mentioned backstory for a relative of another character as opposed to it actually taking place during the time of the story to one of the "real" people. Though the description of the manga stories are not obscene in the sense that they spell out every aspect of the horror, they would be enough to trigger somebody who is sensitive to such a topic, I think. And other mentions of the non-consensual content of the manga drew my mind back to those scenes in a way that made it kind of difficult to get past them in the sense of forgetting them.

The story itself as a whole was really enjoyable, though, and the author's writing style was just as enjoyable as the story itself. I was successful in figuring out the solution (to put it that way to avoid spoilers) from fairly early on, but there were enough twists and turns that made it not completely obvious and I had a few other suspicions to go along with it. What kept the rating from five stars, though, was that the main character was occasionally annoying in her behavior... and downright stupid in others. Like, painfully stupid. That did get on my nerves a bit at times, but it wasn't enough to stop me from having a great time with this book and rooting for the main character to get to the bottom of things. I think another reason why I enjoyed it so much was that the topic was really different from the usual murder mysteries. It was a unique, well-written story that I would definitely recommend to others!