Rating: 3/5

I am a great fan of the Regency, and Jane Austen and Georgette Heyer are my most frequent re-reads. Unfortunately, I have found all authors attempting the period after these two ladies to lack. I don't know how it is, but even when they get the period right, and even when they make an attempt at actual plots, there's always something missing. That thing that makes you excited about the hero. That makes you swoon a little for him. That thing that makes your heart beat a little faster, when all misunderstandings are cleared up and hero and heroine get together at last. That thing that makes you cackle like an idiot at their last bit of witty banter, before they ride off into the sunset. You know the thing I mean. There's no word for it, but you know it when you experience it. Most literature in the genre penned after these two ladies is apparently aware of the thing but, unable to reproduce it, just replaced tension with sex and called it a day. Chesney doesn't exactly do that, but I'll say right up front that that thing was lacking here too. 

So okay, on to my actual review. First of all, the good bits:

1) The period felt like the period

All too often writers in the genre are unable to make their books feel like they happen in the past or in England, often both. If they are funny, they sound like American sitcoms. If they are historical, they're all over the place. So this did feel like Regency England-ish. There are some inaccuracies, and some situations seemed really inappropriate for the time, but I'll be generous and say that the general feel was all right. 

2) The set up was interesting 

I know there's the well-worn romance trope of rake meets bespectacled bluestocking and they make sweet love. This seemed like an interesting variation on the theme. Minerva is not bespectacled or a bluestocking. In fact, she is quite beautiful, but is also extremely preachy and prosy and a goody-two-shoes so holier-than-thou that she disgusts people in droves. I liked that the author made her flaws have consequences other than attracting the hero. She really was annoying with her preaching, and it was a character flaw that was realistic. 

3) It had amusing and varied side-characters

I liked Lady G., and the vicar, and altogether there was a great variety of characters that felt alive and were funny and colourful, which is what you want reading a book like this.

4) It had something approximating a plot

Romance of this kind often doesn't follow normal plots, and is instead focused on incidents that further relationships. The challenge is to make these incidents amusing or exciting or both, and to thus keep the reader interested. This novel is semi-successful in accomplishing this.

5) It is funny

I had a few laughs with the author and it made reading this novel an enjoyable experience.

Now to the bad:

1) The characterisation is inconsistent

Minerva is a straight-laced prude. It's literally her main characteristic. It's what makes Minerva Minerva and not her flighty sister. It is what sets her apart from the whole of society and though I didn't like this about her, I did grudgingly admire how she was willing to defy the whole of society to stick to her principles. So it seems beyond unbelievable that she would get around as much as she does in this novel. She is absolutely aghast at the notion that her sister and a man who was courting her and was obviously on the brink of proposing to her would have kissed, yet allows herself to be kissed by Lord Sylvester repeatedly, and eventually goes to his house on purpose to get laid. The transition from one state to the other doesn't happen by way of any revelation or character development. I was a little confused as to what she believed by the end, and was disappointed that she'd let go of her principles because of some guy. She should have been given a better reason to do it, or not done it at all. Otherwise, this is not character development but, frankly, her exposure as a complete and utter hypocrite. 

2) The characterisation is lacking

So the romantic hero in any romance is so, so, so important. The great romances that have prevailed over centuries are what they are in part due to how interesting the hero was. How funny, how manly, how heroic and, often, how transformed he was by the heroine. I realise that Chesney did not attempt another Heathcliff or Rochester or Darcy here. But neither did she accomplish a Lord Damerel, Lord Vidal or Lord Salford either. I think Heyer accomplishes her heroes by writing them with some consistency: their dialogue sounds uniquely their own, and they are uniquely cleverer and wittier than any other man in the novels in which they appear. Not so Lord Sylvester in Minerva. Yes he has occasional flashes of wit, but Chesney keeps telling us he is dangerous and a rake, and aloof and haughty, while showing him constantly good-humoured, a little silly, at times horny, at others full of avuncular advice. This characterisation makes him an uneven character, and robs him of any great impact. 

3) It lacks a good arc

What I would have really liked is for one of them, if not both, to have undergone some sort of journey. They should both be changed by the end in ways that are clearly defined and a logical consequence of the experiences they have had with each other. This, unfortunately, does not occur here, and it is unclear why they fell in love with each other (other than horniness on both sides), or how either of them deserves a happy ending.

4) They are not agents in their journeys

This is probably the biggest plot problem in the novel. The conflicts that are set up as a result of bad choices, poor communication or misunderstandings are not resolved by good choices, good communication or the clearing up of their misunderstandings by the MCs. Rather, it is the side-characters who have the most agency, come up with various plans and execute them. It is their will and motivation that moves the plot along, and Minerva and Lord Sylvester just entangle themselves in them, either unwittingly or because the minor characters intended it so. 

By far the biggest problem was the letter that Minerva's father pens on her behalf to summon Lord Sylvester back. In essence, how am I to trust in a happy ending that was engineered by other people? A happy ending, moreover, that occurs despite Minerva's willingness to believe that Lord Sylvester was the sort of man who could make such a bet, and Lord Sylvester believing that it is plausible for Minerva to one day climb into bed with him and the next verbally abuse him? Clearly they don't know each other at all and, what is worse, lack the tools to communicate effectively with each other. I see divorce in their future.

5) It didn't make me feel anything 

I enjoyed myself reading this novel, for the most part. And it did make me laugh. But the romance left me entirely cold, unfortunately. 

So, to sum up, in my harsh assessment of a genre I actually really love, I find this a mediocre entry. I have read far, far worse, and I do appreciate the good parts, but I wish it was more. I sort of feel the author could have achieved more, because she has the wit and the writing ability. Though I am not tempted to immediately read the next one in the series, I might check out other writing by this author.