Rating: 4/5

Can a perfect world exist?

In an exploration of the dangers of capitalism, violence and the essence of being human, Ballard tells the interesting story of Paul, who follows his wife to an ultra-capitalist business park called Eden-Olympia, substituting the infamous David Greenwood, who ended his stay by going on a murder spree and committing suicide. Paul takes on the role of detective, and as the story unfolds and more and more becomes clear about why Greenwood did what he did, a veil of perfection is lifted of Eden-Olympia, revealing its darkest secrets.

The premise, which is absolutely great, initially was what made me take the step from seeing this on goodreads to actually buying it, some 3 or 4 years later. However, it was not the plot-driven spectacle I had imagined: one of its main flaws I would find to be the book's length, and subsequently its pacing in certain areas - here, it was filled with awful details that would make every reader shudder in disturbance, probably giving off the vibe the book was going for, but also making it at times just slow and dark and negative and "Oh, I really don't want to pick this up again". This is a really dark, really disturbing piece of extremely postmodern (I think) fiction, critiquing what we have come to as a world, with all our technology and capitalism, without sounding like an old angry man. Or, else, like an old angry man that could write beautifully: Ballard shapes an atmosphere like very few other, and uses the most eloquent language. However, at times, the dialogue felt a bit disjointed and almost fake, creating a distance between it and the reader, and making the latter disoriented within the story. This might also be why the characters were a bit flat, but I would certainly not think this can be excused: the story was wonderful, but I experienced Ballard's characters to be flat and disengaging.

This is a reading experience like no other, providing many interesting ideas about society and its potential perfection, violence, crime, capitalism, and technology, but also a slow, sometimes boring, and occasionally disengaging one.