Rating: 5/5

This book is almost like a modern adaption of Jane Austen's Emma (I stress the ALMOST). 

Olivia is like that character Daria 

It's not a girly girl cliché formulaic romance or chick lit. It's an abrupt Coming-of-Age journey that's edgy, funny, with some angst, drama and loads of humour.

The protagonist Olivia, is a mealy mouthed, sarcastic, pretends-to-be-indifferent, bitter, DON'T-MESS-WITH-ME bada$$, but beneath that tough exterior it's pretty obvious she's extremely vulnerable and a product of her upbringing (ditzy mother, absent rich father etc). 
She's also intelligent, funny and caring (albeit she grows into a caring older sister role gradually).
She reminds me of Jane Austen's Emma, who challenges and exasperates the older Mr Knightly.

PLOT: After her father and stepmother's death, Olivia must take care of her little half-sister who is completely different to her (she's sweet, girly and cute). She receives assistance from her (late) father's colleague (and executor of his will) Dennis, who is a well established lawyer. Dennis suffers Olivia's sarcasm and bad treatment patiently. And similar to Mr Knightly he endeavours to lookout for Olivia. He's protective without being overbearing or controlling. 

The author also manifests Olivia's predicament far better than most author's who portray all young adults to be concerned only with clubbing, shopping, sexual exploration and drugs i.e a stereotype of student activity. In this novel we can feel Olivia's betrayal and understand where she's coming from when she explains its the “lies” rather than the actions which hurt her (regarding a certain person). And that such betrayal can obliterate attachment.

BADA$$ HEROINE. SARCASTIC. FUNNY. 

I enjoyed how the author has a love triangle in the book without making the "other" (competing love interest) the ultimate BADDIE EVIL guy. Both "love interests" have their merits but one is clearly not ready to settle down with ONE female (if ever). Of course if the book followed the cliché - then the tall, dark handsome playboy would forsakes all for the fair heroine. Thankfully this is far more realistic.