Rating: 5/5

Even though I distinctly remember reading this book in sixth grade, I thought I hallucinated it for the longest time.

(Fourteen-year-old Cloyd was trouble. Trouble to himself and everyone else. He'd grown up without his parents, without schooling, half-wild and alone in remote Utah canyons. Sent by his tribe to a group home for Indian boys, his feeling of isolation turns to desperation - and even more trouble. But high in the majestic mountains of Colorado where Cloyd is taken to live with an old rancher, he finds a small carved turquoise bear in an Indian burial cave. Secretly renaming himself Lone Bear, Cloyd calls upon the strength of his ancient ancestors - first to do battle with his own hostilities, but finally to discover the magic power of an old man's love, and the secrets of living in a world he has just begun to understand. An IRA/CBC Teachers Choices book
Notable Children's Trade Book in the field of Social Studies
Mountain &amp; Plains Bookseller Association Children's Book Award) ~ Blurb from Goodreads

I thought Cloyd was a pretty interesting character. So it's very clear that Cloyd has a lot of issues (including severe depression and loneliness, trust issues, and so on), but it's also clear that these issues seem to stem from him having little to no adequate support in processing them, let alone overcoming them. So when he does actually receive some support and does overcome his issues, it's all the more heartwarming and satisfying. Not only that, but the way the novel characterizes Cloyd makes him feel like a real person. 

I also liked how Walter grows and changes too. For example, Walter used to forego eating regular meals after the passing of his wife, but when Cloyd came to live with him, he had to pivot to planning and cooking actual meals. While his growth as a character isn't as drastic as Cloyd's, the growth he does experience really allows him to stand out and add to the realistic and down to earth tone this novel is going for. 

I think keeping things simple for the most part was a smart move. While there's a minor antagonist (whom I'll talk about in just a bit), there's no five billion subplots or anything like that. It's mainly about two broken people living together, trying to overcome their issues. It may not seem like enough material to fill an entire novel, but it actually does manage to have plenty of compelling conflict, character development, and intrigue.

Honestly, the only real problem I had with this novel was Rusty the Bear Hunter. So he's the closest thing this novel has to an antagonist and he only shows up every once in a while (and I do mean, every once in a while). But even when he does, he really doesn't leave that much of an impression because his only real character trait seems to be, "I want to hunt bears and I'm really good at it." Now, I don't need to know every single thing about the guy, but maybe allowing the character some moments for the story to flesh him out a little more or making the moments where he does appear more interesting and impactful would've really helped. Yes, Rusty compliments Cloyd in chapter twenty for rushing to the helicopter in order to get Walter medical attention as fast as possible and agrees to help out with the horses and whatnot. But, it's the only real piece of character development he receives and it just comes out of nowhere, making it feel extremely rushed.

Overall, Bearstone was a delightful novel chock full of simple charm and great characters and I'm glad I was able to rediscover it.

Overall Grade: A-