Rating: 5/5

update on my 3rd or 4th read: i dont understand how this book manages to feel slapdash and written on a bar napkin but also like flaubert-level precise down to each individual letter. nothing happens/everything happens. for my money this time the fight between norwood and the two random guys in the philadelphia trainyard is the best scene. it's like don quixote flavored potato chips

been on my rear end with a herniated disc for a week so i turned to my version of comfort food. i can see a criticism of portis that experiences his books as really well-turned shaggy dog stories -- a boob wanders off in the world, bumps into things, wanders home. that's more or less what happens in all of his novels, with some tweaks to the formula (although i haven't read Gringos yet). but that's all that really happens in the odyssey. what portis shares with homer is the pure beauty of his language, although portis' beauty is this perfected mid-century american arkansas parking-lot fatalism. i dont know how charles portis will sound/read to someone not as proximate to the world his characters move through, but god damn i love the dude.

some illustrative joy:
Tilmon said “Tee-hee-hee.” His tongue fell out as if to receive a coin.
The bread man began to rumble with quiet laughter. “That coyote or whatever he is, a wolf or something, every time he gets up on a clift or somewhere with a new plan, why the Road Runner comes along on some skates or has him some new invention like a rocket or a big wrecker’s ball and just busts that coyote a good one.” He laughed some more, then fell into repose.
In a minute or two his face clouded with a darker memory. “Noveltoons are not any good at all,” he said. “It’s usually a shoemaker and a bunch of damn mice singing. When one of them comes on I get up and go get me a sack of corn or something.”
Soon it was so thick with flour dust in the car that he had to slam one of the doors back and stick his head out for air. The trouble was, two of the sacks had broken. After he caught his breath he dragged them over and pushed them out. The second one snagged on the bad door and hung there for a moment blowing flour up in his face. Then he began flinging sacks out, good ones, till he got a cramp in his neck. The train entered the
A bow-tied man across the aisle, not much himself but maybe some pretty girl’s father, was watching him. Norwood stared back. The man looked up at the light fixture on the ceiling to calculate its dimensions and efficiency. There were no girls on the train, no women at all, only these clean men. They bathed every day, every morning. He caught another one looking at him down the way.
She had black hair piled up high and dark tiger eyes. She came back and gave the counter a quick wipe with a blue sponge that had one cornflake riding on the stern. She looked at the dime and nickel in his hand.
There was a man in a Mr. Peanut outfit in front of the Planters place but he was not giving out sample nuts, he was just walking back and forth. The Mr. Peanut casing looked hot. It looked thick enough to give protection against small arms fire.
“Do they pay you by the hour or what?” Norwood said to the monocled peanut face. 
“Yeah, by the hour,” said a wary, muffled voice inside. 
“I bet that suit is heavy.”
“It’s not all that heavy. I just started this morning.”
“How much do you get a hour?”
“You ask a lot of questions, don’t you?”
“Do you take the suit home with you?” “No, I put it on down here. At the shop.”
“The one in Dallas gives out free nuts.”
“I don’t know anything about that. They didn’t say anything to me about it.”
“He don’t give you many, just two or three cashews.”
“I don’t know anything about that. I work at the post office at night.”
“Well, I’ll see you sometime, Mr. Peanut. You take it easy.”
“Okay. You too.”
The air smelled of electricity and dirt.
Fatigue and unhappiness were in their faces, as of young men whose shorts are bunching up. 
He has little pig eyes that glitter and burn with malice.