Rating: 5/5

I am naming this an all time favorite as it is Heinleins own response to all those misguided self-righteous 'literary critics' and college lit professors who needed a scapegoat in popular fiction for a twenty year period of time.

There are reviews here at Goodreads that obviously have been written by those readers so tainted by the 'legend' of Heinlein and his misanthropic misogyny, jingoism, and racism that they fail to recognize or can only grudgingly admit there is much more else to RH and the knocks on his character are mostly unwarranted. Heinlein was either ahead of his time or just out of sync with the contemporaneous version of Political Correctness (years before that term was widespread) or some other zeitgeist. 

A very well written storied view of the near future of a world ruled by corporations. Indeed, the the corporations are the form of government and their security and espionage arms battle for small to large gains. All this is backdrop for technology run rampant to the extent that some humans are cloned/engineered/manufactured to one extent or another. Friday is such a girl. Her purpose in life is to 'serve' one of these intelligence/espionage entities and she accepts her lower class/caste state with a certain equanimity that becomes fundamental to the story when she thinks she's overcome this prejudice. 

Violence and terror permeate this story in a way that makes one wonder if a glimpse into a crystal ball was granted to Heinlein of the beginning of the twenty-first century. Everything that has been ascribed to being 'wrong' with the author as a human being is pretty much addressed by him via this story. He leaves no doubt as to his stance on what the true evils of the world his era faced and what was coming nearer in the world we dwell in today. Racial and gender equality are obviously important to Heinlein and that and any other form of bigotry is reviled by this author in a clever and demonstrative story. Other ills of the 20th century political and social get a similar damning treatment, much of it subtly and as part of the fabric of the novel.

Should you not be a fan of speculative/science fiction, futurism, or other 'fantasy' type writing, don't worry, read this one book anyway!