Rating: 5/5

10 January, 2008
Well, if you're making your list of top villains ever, you can't put Samuel Whiskers on the list without Anna Maria. Just because she doesn't appear in the title, is no reason to slight her contribution.

***

17 August, 2025

In July we had catastrophic flooding from a system that poured vast quantities of water down upon us, here in Central NC. In 14 days at the start of July, we received 15 emergency texts: mostly for flash flooding, but there was also a tornado in there. The topsoil was washed away in many places in our plot, in our neighbor's yard, water coming through the culvert washed away everything from the side of his house to the trees and bamboo at the back of his acre. One 40 foot tree, in the lowest point in our yard was uprooted from the sodden soil. The Eno, behind us all, reached a height of 24 feet, higher than in hurricane Fran. The high tide mark on the trees at the footbridge was incomprehensible. I am poor at judging distances, but I'm guessing high tide was more than 80 feet from the normal bank there, just upstream of the wastewater treatment plant that was to be moved to higher ground per a grant awarded under President Biden, and which was canceled under President Trump.

***

19 August 2025

I am indulging in comfort reads. I have tremendous respect for Potter: for changing her name, for pursuing the art that pleased her, for envisioning what her books would be, for living life the way she wanted and for doing a public service with her farm. Mostly because she is so very bloodthirsty. There is little lasting damage, but quite a bit of terror (albeit on an appropriately small scale). There are villains (well, "predators"). A certain amount of foolishness and foolhardiness. Overall, high marks for plausible, relatable behaviors in a way that Pooh or Peter Pan never come close to. The Victorian men writing for children go all in on the idealization of innocent childhood. Girls are maternal love interests, and there aren't many. The women writing at the time are pragmatic: kids can be difficult and also charming, and the mothers are frazzled, often parenting without partners, meals have to be prepared, clothes mended, vegetables grown, houses cleaned, incomes earned.

There are no doubt very many writers of the era who don't fit this neat dichotomy, I know that, even if I don't immediately call them to mind. It's a foolish position to take, probably, but I am feeling foolish today so why not?

Library copies, because my local keeps them in a basket on top of the four-foot bookcases, whereas my own are here somewhere and probably inaccessible.