Rating: 5/5

Eden is touted (by Noel Perrin, among others) as the writer to turn to when you've finished Jane Austen. I can see that. I'll make one strong suggestion, though: read them in the order they were published, not the order they were written. That means reading The Semi-Detached House first.

Like Austen, Eden will suddenly turn on the laser for a paragraph or so, producing something you want to read to anybody else in the room. Here's the long opening paragraph of the second chapter of The Semi-Detached House (and look how it establishes several characters):
 "Here is poor Willis coming to see us," said Mrs. Hopkinson, from her commanding position in the window, to her two girls who were drawing and reading at the secluded end of the room. The girls looked at each other with a slight expression of dismay. Willis was not a favourite; he had married their step-sister, and it was thought a great thing for the Hopkinsons, when Mr. Willis of Columbia House, which boasted of a lodge and an entrance drive, a shrubbery and a paddock, and a two-stalled stable, and every sort of suburban magnificence, married pretty Mary Smith, who lived merely at No. 2, without a shilling of her own, and dependent on her step-father for a home. So when she became Mrs. Willis of Columbia House, and of Fenchurch Street, where Mr. Willis duly transacted some mysterious business that appeared to produce a large return of profit, the Hopkinsons thought her a very fortunate young woman, and so she thought herself, till she found out that she had married a man who was by profession a grumbler. He had a passion for being a victim; when he was single, he grumbled for a wife, and when he found a wife, he grumbled for the comforts of a bachelor. He grumbled for an heir to Columbia Lodge, and when the heir was born he grumbled because the child was frail and sickly. In short, he fairly grumbled poor gentle Mrs. Willis out of the world, and then grumbled at her for dying. But still her death was a gain to him. He took up the high bereaved line, was at all hours and in all societies the disconsolate mourner, wore a permanent crape around his hat, a rusty black coat in the city, and a shining one when he dined out. He professed himself "serious," and proved it by snubbing his friends when they were prosperous, and steadily declining to take the slightest interest in their adversities.

And here's a description of the semi-detached house (Pleasance) the day after a successful dinner and party:
 Pleasance did not wear its usual cheerful aspect that morning; the drawing-room had that deplorable 'last night' look belonging to rooms that have not received the morning attentions of the housemaid. The chairs looked as if they had been dancing all night, and had rumpled their chintz covers, the books seemed to have fallen off the table in their sleep, and the music appeared to have quarrelled with the pianoforte in an attempt to place itself on the music stand. Only one shutter had been partially unclosed, and through the crack there came that struggling ray that ought to be light, but looks very much like dust. 

Back to the review. There's a good deal of Austen to the feel of these books, especially with the comedy of manners of families with marriage-age girls, and the wider social satire. There is also a deal of Dickens, including the author's love for most of the characters, and the masterly narrative of good-hearted people trying to treat each other well, with due rewards issued. The studied poetry of several set-piece descriptions (like the two quoted above) is quite like both authors to which I would compare her.

Did I tear up in the payoff scenes of both books? Yep.

I'm giving this two-volume collection five stars, but here's why I suggest the second book first. (I should explain that she wrote the first one around 1830, but didn't publish it. She wrote the second and published it in 1859, and it did so well that she dug out the earlier book and published it the next year. Both were quite successful in their day, and stayed in print for about a hundred years. Then she dropped out of memory for a couple of decades.)

Anyway, The Semi-Attached Couple is the story of a newly married couple and their misunderstandings, and of the circle around them (many unmarried) and their contributions to or detractions from the situation. It is not as carefully structured as the second book, and has a bit less in the way of showy paragraphs, but its main problem is that all the characters are behaving poorly at the beginning. We sense that some of them SHOULD be the protagonists, but they are rather ill-prepared for the role. They get their feelings hurt too easily. They underestimate their friends, they misunderstand intentions if given even the slightest opportunity. They are mostly rich, spoiled, over-indulged, and cranky. Some of them are deeply self-centered, and some are actively destructive of anybody they see as a rival. In the early passage that kept me reading despite my complaints (and here goes the laser I mentioned), one of these is described:

...Mrs. Douglas had never had the slightest pretensions to good looks; in fact, though it is wrong to say anything so ill-natured, she was excessively plain, always had been so, and had a soreness on the subject of beauty, that looked perhaps as like envy as any other quality.
 As she had no hope of raising herself to the rank of a beauty, her only chance was bringing others down to her own level. "How old she is looking!" -- "How she is altered!" were the expressions that invariably concluded Mrs. Douglas's comments on her acquaintances; and the prolonged absence of a friend was almost a pleasure to her, as it gave her the opportunity of saying after a first meeting, "How changed Mrs. So and so is! I should hardly have known her; but then, to be sure, I have not seen her for a year--or two years," etc.
 People may go on talking for ever of the jealousies of pretty women; but for real genuine, hard-working envy there is nothing like an ugly woman with a taste for admiration. Her mortified vanity curdles into malevolence; and she calumniates where she cannot rival.

I read on, but in fits and starts, with weeks between chapters on several occasions. There was always some scathing satire to enjoy, and fine writing touches; but the characters did not hold. Still, I persisted. I read on.

And I was right to read on, because at about the 80% point of the novel the protagonists finally get their acts together and protagonate. Good impulses are acted upon, really hard choices are made, dangers struggled against, and hearts of gold are uncovered where only plated tin had been in evidence heretofore. At the end of the book I was sold on the writer, and turned immediately to the second, which I finished in a few days.

The second book also centers on newlyweds, but they are quite happy, though a diplomatic assignment sends him to Berlin, while she languishes in suburbia, pregnant. (That term isn't used, in fact. She is frail, she is ill, she is in interesting health. The modern reader only knows she's pregnant when she sends for the midwives. There is a paragraph that implies she might be pregnant, but it is a paragraph about ridiculous fantasies, which undermines the hint.) Again there are many unmarried young women, and unmarried young swains, and some older singles, likewise, and a family of con artists, and other dangers lurking about. In this case, though, we fall in love with the young couple pretty quickly, and then the author goes about proving that if love can't conquer all, it can at least occupy large swaths of enemy territory.

I can strongly recommend these two grimace-free volumes, which should be forever in print. Which reminds me to once again thank Noel Perrin's book A Reader's Delight, which brought this volume to my attention. As soon as I post this review, I'll be taking the book down to join sixteen other previously-read volumes, which Perrin's little anthology of reviews brought to my attention. (Leaving me now with, alas, only half a dozen more to read.) It is true that he preferred Couple to House; but no-one is perfect.