Rating: 4/5

The first three chapters of this book paint such a dark picture of life within the context of this book, it is almost enough to put you off the story straight away. For this reason, I feel it does take a good few chapters to get into the book and you have to persist with it. However, once you are in, you’re hooked.
This book is historical fiction set in the mid 1700s and covers a time period of at least 10 years. Due to the time period this book is set in Gavin uses some really fantastic vocabulary throughout the book, which, if you were reading the story with children, would provide such great talking points as well as supporting the vivid imagery Gavin manages to create in this novel.
Gavin develops a wonderfully complex narrative throughout the story, weaving the lives of the characters in and out of each other so that there is no one main character, but each is vital to the outcome of the story. The first half of the story is predominantly character building and setting description, and Gavin manages to create very rich and complex characters. Again, this provides so much content for a class who might study the book as the descriptive language used for each character and setting is outstanding. In addition, it draws together a visual which is so vivid it undoubtedly captures you in the book as a reader.
The second half of the book is much more focussed on the plot. Despite a 9-year time gap in the book and subsequently new characters are introduced, the bulk of the ‘action’ in the story happens in the second half. Without the deep character construction from the first half of the book it would have certainly lost some of it’s impact. 
I thoroughly enjoyed reading this book, despite disliking it immensely at the same time! This is definitely due to the fact that Gavin does not shy away from cruel characters, villains and heart-breaking story plots. However, as previously mentioned the depth of character created and the complex plot twists means you cannot put this book down.
Careful study of different sections of this book would provide rich vocabulary, imagery and content for use within the classroom, however, this is not a story I would chose to read with anyone in primary school, or lower secondary, depending on the child. Some of the topics/issues in the story require a mature mind to approach it and take enjoyment from it. Otherwise, I would be concerned the book could be too distressing for children. An unusual yet brilliant read nonetheless.