Rating: 4/5

I will also do a video review here at my channel: http://www.youtube.com/magicofbooks 

"The Miller's Dance" is book 9 in Winston Graham's "Poldark" series. It's 1812, Napoleon's armies battle in Spain, and the political climate in Britain is tense. The Poldark family takes everything day by day, worried about the safety of Geoffrey Charles, and the future of their family. Jeremy and Clowance continue to struggle with love and heartbreak, while the old Warleggan feud continues between George and Ross.

Be warned, the further I get into this series, the more SPOILERS I will incorporate.

I found "The Stranger From the Sea" to be a bit of a slow-burn catch up sort of book, where I felt a bit frustrated by the time spent filling in the ten year gap. With "The Miller's Dance," Winston Graham jumps right into events without the need to play catch up. Jeremy continues with his mining venture and still pines over the loss of Cuby, who it seems might end up marrying Valentine. Clowance returns from London after the refused proposal from Eward Fitzmaurice (damn girl, I'm still upset with you). She and Stephen finally clash after a series of incidents with Stephen that culminates with the fight between him and Ben (god, I love Ben!). I'm so glad the marriage appears to be off. I was always a bit iffy about Clowance/Stephen. Never felt like they were right together. Ross and Demelza welcome a new baby, though it's a big stress on Demelza's health (dear god, I thought Graham was going to pull a shocker and have Demelza die by childbirth). And is George having regrets about marrying Harriet? In some ways they are suited, but in others, not so much. I'm still shocked Morwenna produced that idiot John Conan. And yah, surprise marriage between Geoffrey Charles and a Spanish girl. I'm still waiting for Graham to tear out my heart and have Geoffrey Charles die during the war.

Okay, can we talk about the big thing that happens at the end of the book? So...the Three Stooges as I'm going to affectionately call them (Jeremey, Stephen, and Paul) decide, "hey, we're all angsty young men, let's rob a money box in a coach." Say what? I'm just perplexed by this whole thing. Especially Jeremy! Now, Stephen, we've known for a while how selfish he is. He wants to totally posses Clowance. All he cares about is money. And he'll do whatever he can to get both. I even understand Paul's motives to some degree, but still, I'm a bit surprised with Paul. But Jeremy...Jeremy freaking Poldark! I want to scream! This is the son of Ross Poldark! Ross did some pretty stupid things in previous books. He illegally plundering a sinking ship. He broke Jim Carter out of jail. He rescued Dwight from a French prison. All of this Ross never did with malice or with selfishness. Ross always seemed to understand right from wrong and when it felt appropriate to go against the law in the name of helping others. So I'm utterly shocked by the selfishness in the coach heist from Jeremy. And I'm sensing bad things to come. The novel ends happily. The heist went according to plan, but it can't be that easy, can it? I feel like Stephen is going to somehow mess all of this up. He's notorious for causing chaos and conflict and I feel like he's going to make a slip remark to somebody or do something to personally harm Jeremy.

Overall, I liked this book quite a bit better than "Stranger From the Sea." I felt like there was more going on, and like I mentioned, Graham jumped right into events without explanation. The Napoleonic War is intensifying. Young people are doing what young people do. People are getting older. Very excited to head into the next book.