Rating: 5/5

I remember, a long time ago I read this when it was first published in 1994 - I was a social history student at Swansea Uni - and my lecturer told me this book was a 'departure for Hobsbawm'. I never quite or fully understood what she meant back all those years ago. My second re-read, and I still do not understand what she really meant, although being older and allegedly more wiser, I still fail to fully grasp her meaning. However, what I think she meant was Eric Hobsbawms stance on Soviet Russia; he more or less takes strips from the Eastern Bloc and what it lead to, and what was most interesting believes that an experiment like it will never happen again. This is coming from a famous Marxist historian whom was a Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) member. He takes an objective stance on the state-planned economies of the Soviet Bloc, and whilst Soviet Russia was one of the countries that had escaped the stock market collapse of 1929 and the Great Depression that followed it due to its state-run five year plans that saw Russia become an industrial power house, it didn't stop the collapse of the Berlin Wall and the disintegration of Soviet Russia between 1989 and 1991, where this book ends.

It is an aptly titled book. The Twentieth Century, or at least starting from 1914 through to 1991 (hence why it is called 'short') was probably the most bloodiest but also the most technically advanced century ever. Two massive global conflicts, a major economic collapse during the inter war years, the rise of political extremes that sparked off the second world conflict, a period of economic growth after the second world war that has never been equaled, the 1960s counter-culture wave, and the collapse of the Soviet Bloc characterises these years. Eric Hobsbawm writes in a manner that is not too academic or dry, but this book is packed full of interesting researched facts and analyses, and the chapters on the arts, stemming from the early 20thC (avant-garde) right through to 'modern-art' (however we interpret it today) were really insightful. Both art forms are tied into the eras they were developed in, more or less being mirrors of the society that they inhabited.

The final chapter I found really hit a chord that resonated loudly. Eric Hobsbawm explains the collapse of the 'golden years', the years following WW2 that saw unprecedented economic growth and prosperity, from the 1970s onwards that never saw a return to the growth on the same scale. At the time he finishes his study in 1991, the world looked quite bleak even though the collapse of the Soviet Union saw a 'victory' for free market economies and the stagnation of state planned ones. He becomes quite prophetical and also quite depressed (if that is the correct world to use) about the future; he more or less predicted our current economic woes - that we have hit another, quite severe, slump, something inherent in free market economies he claims. I would like to read what Eric Hobsbawm would make of our current world situation, and seeing as this historian is still alive (according to wikipedia he is an impressive 94 years old), and has lived through this century that he writes about would be more than interesting. Great history.