Rating: 3/5

Having seen the famous film with Audrey Hepburn, when I stumbled across the book (there's a book?) I picked it up and read it with curiosity. It is well-written, but a few things came to mind during the reading.

What struck me most was the fact that "Sister Luke" becomes a nun for all the wrong reasons. I say "wrong" because for Gabrielle/Luke, becoming a nun is a means to her own ends: to be a nurse, to research and treat tropical diseases, to go to the Congo. (Or at least the Congo she dreams about, which turns out to be very different to the actual place.) In this day and age, "Luke" (named for the Evangelist who was a doctor, heavy-handed irony on the author's part) would simply have studied medicine and become a doctor, and probably cocked a snook at her father and married Jean into the bargain; in 1920s Belgium, a nice little bourgeoise girl could do none of those things, so she takes what she percieves is the only option open to her, by becoming a nursing nun. Not one word about any spiritual devotion to God, or Christ, or even Mary; not one word of feeling that she has an actual religious vocation.In fact, when she makes her vows we are told she privately admits to God that she doesn't think she can stick with it for life, but "for as long as I can."(Foreshadowing, anyone?) Throughout the novel, in all her struggles to adapt and conform to a life that she really does not feel fitted for, "Luke" sees herself as the hero/victim, doing her best within the bounds of a strict religious order--but an order that she voluntarily joined. She's not pressured into it by family expectations, nor does she seek refuge in active service to salve a broken heart--her desire to be a nurse in the Congo apparently was stronger than her affection for the man her father disapproved of anyway. (He disapproves of her choice to become a nun, too--perhaps he could see her choices more objectively than she herself could, recognising his own drive and purpose in his daughter.)

There is indeed a Belgian nursing order which at that time wore the habit described in this book, and its strictness is borne out in some French/Belgian films (I direct the interested reader to some of the later episodes of Bruno Cremer's Maigret TV series, in which the Inspector encounters a mystery in just such a Catholic hospital). However, it wasn't the only nursing order out there; just as "Luke" discovers there are English and Irish girls who crossed the Channel to join this nursing order, surely she was aware of, and could have joined, a milder order even if it meant travelling to do so. But of course Belgium controlled the Congo in those days, and for Luke, going to the Congo and working on tropical maladies was the entire point of the exercise. Not so much "all for Jesus" as "all for the Congo." 

For another view of monastic life, I can recommend In This House of Brede. While the Benedictines of that novel (and in real life, along with the Carmelites and other orders) do indeed use a "discipline", it is made of knotted cords--not "metal chains with hooks." For a (voluntary) convert to Catholicism, Ms Hulme seems to have injected quite a lot of anger into the narrative.