Rating: 5/5

I gave this book five stars not because of literary style or readability but because of IMPACT, on a very personal level. The theme here is FORGIVENESS: it's meaning, it's affect on our lives, and its limits or limitlessness.
I did not choose this book. My 87 year old Aunt Dominica lent it to me and asked me to read it. She had recently read it and was hungry to discuss it with someone. I look forward to that exchange.
This book is divided into two parts. The first section (a mere 98 pages)is the true account of young Simon Wiesenthal as a Jewish prisoner on work detail under Hitler's rule. This is not another telling of the horrors of day-to-day existence in a concentration camp, but rather, the telling of an exchange between himself and a dying S.S. officer, who wishes to speak with "a Jew" so that he may confess his crimes against the Jewish people, and be absolved/forgiven, so that he may die in peace.
The remainder of the book is the response of fifty-three noted persons (theologians, holocaust survivors, political leaders, writers), to the author's experience. The responses were surprising to me. I thought the answer to the author's question was simple, "Should he (could he)have granted forgiveness to the S.S. man?" My initial response was, "But of course, forgive everything." And though I still feel this way, the responders brought up so many issues that I had never considered. Can forgiveness be granted by one not directly harmed by the inflicter? Must forgiveness include restitution to be complete? Are there some crimes so vast as to be unforgivable? What is our responsibility? What is our GUILT? I agree with Matthew Fox that "sins of complicity" are killing our planet. This story applies to TODAY.
I close with a story offered by one of the respondents, Christopher Hollis; 
"According to an old medieval legend the Apostles assembled together in heaven to recelebrate the Last Supper. There was one place vacant, until through the door Judas came in and Christ rose and kissed him and said,"We have waited for thee."