Rating: 5/5

The memoir, Growing Up written by an outstanding author named Russel Baker, takes the readers to a nostalgic journey of his life as a curious young boy living in the rural Virginia to a determined writer. The memoir starts from a scene of his eighty years old mother (lying down in the hospital bed); despite being an energetic women in the early days and being a strong advocate of feminism, she has grown old and become senile. By looking at his senile mother, Russel recognizes human infirmity and aging over time, ending up thinking about his past childhood and his overall happy memories with his mother. Gazing upon his mother, Russel thinks about his parents and children of his own, wondering about his mother’s life and the harsh but blissful childhood filled with passion, hope, and joy. 

In this memoir, there are two main overarching themes. One of the themes that are indirectly addressed throughout the examination of Russel’s life is the notion of an ideal women. According to Russel’s mother, men are very uncivilized and are brutes, therefore need women’s guidance for their future success in terms of the prosperity of their career. His mother, Lucy defines an ideal women’s job as to guide their husbands and live virtuous lives by doing their necessities. Russel’s inexperience with women leads him to believe in the fact that an ideal wife and a girl friend (partner) are there for separate purposes. 

Another theme that is indirectly addressed in his memoir is the idea of success. Half of his life takes place in the era of Great Depression in America where many lose their jobs and are unemployed. Throughout Russel’s childhood, his mother pushes him to make something out of himself, believing hard work will result in success. She wants her son, unlike his father, to have a stable job, earn a living, and be able to sustain a family. 

Russel’s life is not always filled with blissful memories. He remembers when he ended up bursting in tears after hearing about his father’s death. There was also a time when Russel was struggling and was deeply depressed; not able to withstand the fact that his mother was going to get married with another man due to his unworldliness. There were times when he felt sympathy towards his mother, who sacrificed her allowances to buy Russel a beautifully striped green suit. 

When World War II breaks out, Russel joins the naval pilot force and finds himself a girlfriend called Mimi. Frankly, Mimi is not an ideal girl in which Lucy has been expecting. Lucy, afraid of the fact that Mimi may not devote her life in supporting Russel and because she believed Mimi would not be the best match for his beloved son, she ends up rebuking Mimi. In order to stay loyal to her mother, Russel breaks up with Mimi. 

Russel, having his heart broken from their breakup, unintentionally teaches his mother a lesson on the importance of happiness in a person’s life. 

Russel’s life may not be the most privileged and blissful, yet his mother tries her best to provide him with great memories of childhood and tries to give him the best education possible with the money right out of her pocket. From his mother and his step father’s support, Russel gets accepted to the John Hopkins University where his momentum of becoming a writer flourishes and develops. He gets a job in the Baltimore Sun as a police writer after graduating. 

If I was a critic, and was to give points on this memoir, I would score it, 5/5. The main reason is because the author does not start the book in chronological order (from his childhood to his adulthood) like most of the memoirs in the bookshelves, but instead utilizes some rich forms of writing such as flashbacks (literary device) in order to make the memoir more sophisticated and amusing to read. The book is highly recommended to those whom are interested in reading about a person’s life. People who are struggling with their lives and wants to know that they aren’t the only ones having a hard time, because the book not only contains blissful memories of Russel Baker, but some dark instincts of human practicality. The book is also highly recommended to those who would like to learn new ideas and ways of succeeding; starting from the bottom with nothing, and ending at the top, succeeding. This richly written memoir not only teaches about life, but the ways on how to act appropriately, and to appreciate your parents. Be thankful of what I possess and be thankful for what my parents have sacrificed.