Rating: 5/5

“A Cat Abroad” is the 2nd book of a trilogy. I have read all 3 books, recently finishing the last one.

What can I say? I loved all 3 books, each in its own way. This trilogy is not only a story about a remarkable cat. It is more than that. It is a humorous memoir, which will make you laugh (and sometimes cry). It is also a very entertaining travelogue, telling about interesting places with great food and wine, places the average person rarely gets to visit and usually just dreams about. First and foremost, however, this trilogy is a love story, no not between a man and a woman, but between a man and his cat. It is a love story so big that Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet” has trouble to compete with it.

“A Cat Abroad” can be read alone, but I recommend reading book 1 of the trilogy, “The Cat Who Went to Paris”, first. Book 1 tells about how the author, a young bachelor, who shied away from any commitment, for whom the word “love” was, more or less, equivalent with the word “sex”, and who clearly disliked cats, came to be the dedicated and loving owner of a cat, or rather the dedicated and loving human, owned by a cat. The tiny handful of a kitten his, then, girlfriend presented him with was a love at first sight and raised all fatherly instincts that had been sleeping in the depth of the author’s soul.

As to “The Cat Who Went to Paris”: As much as I loved this book, it, at times, made my hair stand up straight. Only a man (or should I say a bachelor without female supervision :-)) could get the idea to leave his cat by a hotel swimming pool while teaching a workshop, or let his cat out of a hotel room window to venture over the roofs of Paris. And only a man would feed his cat (not solely, yet on a regular basis), whatever he himself is eating, be it gourmet food including such things as champagne sauce, be it ordinary pizza, or be it chocolate ice cream. Men!

In book 2, “A Cat Abroad”, the author has somewhat matured. He is now in a meaningful, long-term relationship with a female human. Even though the two of them keep their own apartments in New York, they decide on spending a year in a remote village of southern France, sharing a rented house, from where the family of three (that is, the two humans and Norton, the cat) venture out for trips to Italy and Spain. “A Cat Abroad” is a sheer delight for anyone who is interested in historic places and different cultures (including their food and wine), no matter whether or not he or she is a particular cat lover. (However, I’ll bet that most readers will, by this time, have fallen in love with Norton, the very special cat.) And during “Cat Abroad”, my hair stood up straight only every once in a while, as I had, meanwhile, come to trust Norton not to get lost where just about every other cat would have. I did, however, continue to worry about Norton’s diet.

And if you are as enchanted with “A Cat Abroad” (and “The Cat Who Went to Paris”) as I was, you will probably want to read book 3, “The Cat Who’ll Live Forever”, in which you will learn, as you might have guessed, that cats, unfortunately, do not live forever, at least, not in flesh and blood. Book 3 is quite different from books 1 and 2., and it is a bit sad, as you also might have guessed. Nevertheless, it would be quite a pity if one missed this book. It is definitely worth reading, and I am glad I read it. 

I found it difficult to decide which book of the trilogy I enjoyed the most. I think it was book 2, "A Cat Abroad".