Rating: 5/5

~ No apology for writing this review ~

It is customary, I have noticed, in writing a review, to preface it with some sort of caveat. But there are times, and surely the present is one of them, when to do so is manifestly unnecessary.

For some time - I am now forty-one and in the full flower of my southern metropolitan Xtian manhood - I had been feeling the need to review this admirably conceived book with increasing urgency. And when not only my wife and her four sisters, but the vicar of my Parish, approached me with the same suggestion, I felt that delay would amount to sin. That sin, by many persons, is now lightly regarded, I am, of course, only too well aware. But I am not one of them. On every ground I am an unflinching opponent of sin. I have rebuked it in others. I have strictly refrained from it in myself. And for that reason alone I have deemed it incumbent upon me to issue this review.

I propose in the first instance to deal with the central protagonist of this superb volume. Augustus Carp being, as one might justly demand, A Really Good Man - is an increasingly rare beacon of light in these dark and sinful times. Commendably pious, and a staunch crusader against sin in all its myriad forms, he is blessed not only with a healthy appetite, but is in the fortunate posession of an admirable girth - a full one yard measured around the waist (fully clothed of course). 

Nor is that all. Always an untiring campaigner against lechery, drinking, smoking and the saltatory arts, Mr Carp nevertheless succeeds - despite frequently being compelled to bear the heavy cross that P* sees fit to set upon him - in rising not only to the level of senior Sidesman (a position previously enjoyed by his late father at St James the Less, Camberwell; St James the Lesser-Still, Peckam Rye; and laterly at St James the Least-of-all, Kennington Oval) but also ascends the ranks of the Kennington division of the S.P.S.D.T (Society for the Prohibition of the Strong Drink Traffic) and the N.S.L (Non-smokers League).

That Mr Carp's unstinting efforts in providing moral guidance to weaker souls should be assailed so frequently and so greivously by the vicissitudes of metropolitan life is, sadly, to be expected. From being the victim of a despiciable Portugalade poisoning, to having his burgeoning career in Xtian commerce so unjustly cut short, Mr Carp's many unfortunate set-backs serve only to strengthen the reader's own sense of indignation against the injustices of this earthly realm.

Surely then, in these days, when the sordid flicker of the cinematograph lures courser-fibred souls from the higher pleasures of the Athanasian Creed - and indeed of edifying volumes such as this one - nothing is more urgently required, at every level of society, than the noble example set before us in his own words by such an exemplar of moral fortitude as Augustus Carp, Esq.

*Providence