Rating: 5/5

WHAT'S YOUR FAVOURITE WOOLF?

Because I finished “Mrs. Dalloway” and I must say it exceeded (all) my expectations and has been giving me much more than “To the Lighthouse” - although the latter already had a maximum mark in my TopFav.

Many times I’ve heard of modern classics which once read turned out to be terrible flops; but Woolf's Mrs. Dalloway made me regret I postponed it for so long.

But perhaps it was better this way: in order to understand all the implications of Mrs. Dalloway you need some experience as a reader, and a certain degree of cultural knowledge.

The plot is one of the simplest: it famously begins with: “Mrs. Dalloway said she would buy the flowers herself”. The flowers that she uses to decorate her house, because on that evening she’s going to give a party to which all members of London’s high society are invited.

However, the fact that Clarissa Dalloway goes out to buy flowers (could that be the reason I appreciated this novel more than To the Lighthouse, which is essentially set inside a house?) opens up a wide perspective on every person who might interact with Clarissa, every person hearing the sound of the Big Ben watch, every person who looks at something else that another person is looking at too, such as, for example, a motorbike passing by.

These signals are used in an almost inaudible way by Woolf as triggers to "jump" into the mind of each of her characters and record their flow of thoughts. The characters are followed on the street, inside the shops, at the doctor, in the intimacy of their homes… everywhere, till the evening party in the Dalloway House.

So, at the party everyone converges in some sort of general confusion, and the circle closes with a reflection on life, on the passage of time and how we evolve in the long run, on the unfortunate life choices, on eternal love.

A reflection expressed for only a quarter (the social etiquette and generally normal dialogue doesn’t allow it): but we readers are lucky, since we have also had access to the other 75% that swirls in people's minds.

Because literature is not quite like a movie where you (only) see scenes, action and movement, in which people speak for the spectator to understand.

I’ll use a quote from Neil Gaiman I saw running on social media recently to explain this concept better: “Fiction gives us empathy: it puts us inside the minds of other people, gives us the gifts of seeing the world through their eyes. Fiction is a lie that tells us true things, over and over.”

And in this (as, of course, in many other things), Virginia Woolf was a master.