This book was very informative and contained a lot of useful information. I definitely learned a lot. For example, it is better for someone my age (mid-twenties) to have disability insurance than life insurance. I had previously been thinking about purchasing a life insurance policy but after reading this book, I will instead look into disability insurance. Also, when the time comes, it will be better to have a life insurance policy for either my husband or I (whoever has the higher salary), rather than both of us. Previously, I believed we should look into life insurance for both of us, but it really isn't necessary at this stage in our lives and careers.

I also learned more about the hidden costs of purchasing a home and what a huge undertaking it is. I currently rent, and after reading this book, I anticipate continuing to rent for a long time. I have often heard people say, and believed it myself, that renting is simply throwing money away but now I no longer believe that to be the case. Owning a home is a very serious commitment and undertaking. After you pay all of the fees to close on the sale of a house, you have to pay to maintain it and pay property taxes, which can be quite costly. As of right now, if there is an issue with my apartment, I call my landlord and let them handle it. If someday my husband and I decide we would like more space, we will look into renting a house. After reading the chapter on mortgages, I am extremely cautious about buying a house. I am surprised at how lightly some people seem to take home-buying and the stigma that surrounds those who choose to rent. 

The only thing I did not like about this book was that the information was a bit dated. Though I picked up the revised and updated version, I believe this book was originally published in 1996, when the economy was still booming. Some of the author's advice seems more appropriate for individuals coming of age in the pre-recession economy. Since the Great Recession, I believe that there has been a huge shift in how Millennials live and view the world. I feel that Millienials are shifting away from the more luxurious lifestyles our older counterparts aspire to and are happier with less. This book didn't discuss frugality or frugal living at all, which I think is going to become an essential way of life as the world continues to change. It mostly emphasized investments, which I think is great information, but perhaps information better suited to an older crowd. Though I personally invest in a SIMPLE IRA through my employer, I do not need to know a whole lot about investing right now. The author also doesn't give a lot of advice. She seems to be saying, "Here are the facts and the information you need to make a decision" but doesn't get much into advice.

Overall, I believe this is an essential read for young people. It gives young people a bigger picture, and provides a ton of information on topics that can seem boring or intimidating. I think the information laid out in this book is crucial for Millenials to understand, and I honestly wonder how many of us actually put in the time to truly know and understand our finances and how we should be planning for the future.