Rating: 3/5

Hmm. So I did read all 119. Most are sonnets, along with several longer poems. About 30 or so are also included in Vita Nuova, which I had just read. Several are poetic conversations with contemporaries and their responses. All of these are about love, typically playing with the personification of love as the god Amore, and the rewards and suffering that come with his taking over one's heart. They tend to be extreme in emotions, although sometimes the implication is clearly playful, especially in poetic conversations where letters written to Dante may ask his advice as the foremost expert in everything about love, and he responds in kind, obliquely, not quite addressing the impossible main questions. Perhaps it’s all playful, but it seems to be mainly sincerely trying to capture the emotional experience of love. The object could be Beatrice, but Dante certainly has religious and philosophical experiences and meanings in mind too. 

Not sure what to make of it all, and I hope reading Petrarch is a little different. These are all on the same theme and they felt a little repetitive reading them as I did, in sequence and kind of quickly. At least few stood out from the others. There are some marked changes in tone, especially with the four longer poems are known as Rime Petrose (C-to-CIII in the link above) where Dante’s love interest suddenly becomes cruel and heartless, as if “made of beautiful stone”. I liked Vita Nuova, which means I guess I really liked the mix of poems with the prose commentary there. Here I had trouble figuring out what to make of these. Just putting the experience in my pocket for now.

-----------------------------------------------

56. Rime by Dante Alighieri
originally composed: 1283?-1308?, collected later, here edited by Michele Barbi, 1960
translation: from Italian by Kenelm Foster &amp; Patrick Boyde, 1960
format: 119 poems, on website: http://etcweb.princeton.edu/dante/pdp... 
read: Nov 16-19
time reading: 4 hr 18 min
rating: 3