Rating: 4/5

Zhuangzi has been labeled a "Taoist" since the 2nd century B.C., but what the hell does that mean? Sima Qian started this whole thing of calling Laozi and Zhuangzi "Taoists", like they shared the same world view and argued the same ideas. Wrong! Laozi and Zhuangzi really need to be taken as separate representations of different ways of thought, distinct not only from each other but from the wave of "Confucians" (another label courtesy of Sima Qian in the 2nd century BC) to come after Confucius himself.

Zhuangzi was a contemporary of Mencius. He probably lived in the state of Song, where the exiled Shang clans were allowed by their Zhou conquerers to quietly carry out their sacrifices to their ancestors under careful scrutiny. In a way, we might say a glimmer of Shang cultural values is coming through in Zhuangzi's writings, which are so characteristically different from the Zhou inspired Confucian thinkers.

Regardless, Zhuangzi doesn't like utility. He doesn't like language, but is a master of its use. He never offers solutions to problems, he only hints at them. He's a performer and a trickster, and so hard to figure out what the hell he's getting at.

But what he seems to be saying is that maybe the only things in life worth knowing are ineffable. How can you ultimately "know" something? And as soon as you put what you know into action, you immediately limit other possibilities. Zhuangzi wants to leave you in a state of uncertainty, in a state where you're open to any number of possibilities. If he instead provided answers and solid explanations, the power of potential would be cut off. You might think these answers would provide stability, but for Zhuangzi what is lost by the provision of answers is no stability at all. For Zhuangzi, the only way to answer questions is to shift between them, to wander in the realization of the myriad explanations for any question. And therein is power and wisdom - not in assigning names or defining hierarchies or learning the Rites or in learning how to be a gentleman.

These are more of my lecture notes from class discussions of the "100 schools" that are helpful to reflect on if ever you read this book (or re-read it, as the case may be). My one big suggestion if you read Zhuangzi (or any of these books really): Take them on their own terms and try hard to separate what the author is trying to say from all that over 2000 years of other people have said about what the author is trying to say. It's a hard thing to do, but very rewarding if you can do it!