Rating: 5/5

A rich, twice widowed lush who likes to bully people, especially her mousey secretary and wimpy son, hires Marlowe to find a valuable coin, a Brasher Doubloon, and the ex-nightclub entertainer daughter-in-law who the old bat suspects of having absconded with the rare gold piece. In the course of his investigation, Marlowe encounters the usual cast of noir characters: losers, drunks, low-life criminals, corrupt rich people, blackmailers, brassy broads, tough cops, a frozen-eyed henchman, and dead bodies. So why is The High Window a great novel? I'll point to some characteristics that apply to all Chandler's writing.
1. Word Painting: Read one of Chandler's poetic passages describing the Los Angeles street scene ca. 1940. Loneliness, alienation, and despair with an underlying tension, an excitement that draws Marlowe, and the reader, onto the mean streets, from the wealthiest mansions down into the dumps and dives. A glossy surface covering the rot. No one before or since has done it better than Chandler.
2. Characterization: Many of the characters could be stereotypes but Chandler focuses on details, especially psychological tics and physical quirks, habits, dress, mannerisms, which make the characters memorable. And that begins with Marlowe, who, to paraphrase Chandler, is a tough guy who walks the mean streets but is not himself mean. Marlowe operates according to a code of honor, the ethics of his often-despised profession and something approaching gallantry. He's a knight-errant in a modern world. And he's smarter, indeed much smarter, than the average snoop.
3. First person narrative and dialogue: Chandler created a unique voice and made it believable, and he raised the wise crack to a high art. And the erudite Marlowe can crack wise about Hemingway—in "Farewell My Lovely"—and Samuel Pepys diary in "The High Window". He can smoke a pipe and work chess problems like Sherlock Holmes while guzzling cheap booze like a typical pulp fiction shamus. 
The only downsides to reading Chandler are the occasional racial and ethnic slurs, the sexism and homophobia that are typical of the period. But those things we despise are part of Marlowe's world, and any attempt to portray that world without all its "warts" would be unauthentic. In sum, the greatest compliment I can pay to Chandler is that, as a writer, I learn something about my craft each time I read him.