Rating: 1/5

98% of the time I LOVE Aggie. Agatha Christie is my "go to" gal when I'm in a reading slump. Like a hot rich Brazilian man under the covers, you know you're not going to be disappointed. Well, usually. But there is the rare DUD in her collection. And if I can relate it to the above analogy of the sexy South American, this book is the equivalent of hopping in bed with this Brazilian hottie and discovering that OOPS...he pooped the sheets!

Sorry, but "Easy to Kill" by Agatha Christie was a surprise frothy lumpy turd. Aggie girl, why you have to go and done that? This book is a skipable one in her collection. Now, I will never give up on Miss Christie, but this book left me going "really?"

It starts out thrilling enough. A retired cop meets an excited spinster on the train to London who is on her way to report what she feels is a series of murders in her small town. She said she knows the next victim and wants to report it before anything else bad happens. Our cop Luke later discovers that his spinster friend was run down by a car on her way to Scotland Yard. Also, the "victim" she predicted, a doctor, is found dead in her village! Luke decides to investigate and goes to the town where he meets crazy cast of character caught up in the folklore of tales of witchcraft.

It started great and quickly went downhill. None of the characters are interesting (except maybe the spinster, and shes killed off right away). There are a buttload too many characters. I couldn't keep track of them all, even though there is a handy character list up front. there seemed to be no logic at all. Also, it is WAYYYYY too repetitive. She repeats the same information OVER AND OVER again. It became annoyingly exhausting. To top it all off, I EASILY predicted whodunnit. I was hoping it would be a red herring and I would be shocked to learn who the killer was. But nope! I was right!

If you are a fan of Christie and have read all her stuff except this one, or if you haven't read Christie, or jeesh if you have any taste at all you can throw this one on the top of the TO GOODWILL pile. Sorry, Aggie.

P.S. If you happen to know a hot Latino man who ISN'T going to be a dud who leaves milkduds, send him my way, STAT!