Rating: 5/5

My exploration of children's literature which I couldn't read as a child continues. Yesterday, I decided to pick up 'The Kingdom by the Sea' by Robert Westall.

The story is set in England during the Second World War. Harry lives with his parents and his younger sister. Every day the Germans send bombers and they explode bombs on his town. One day the air sirens ring loudly. Harry and his family pack their things. Harry reaches the air raid shelter first. But before his family joins him, the bombs start falling. As the book describes this –

"The whistling of the bombs was rising to a scream. Harry began to count. If you were still counting at ten, the bombs had missed you. The last thing he remembered saying was 'seven'."

When Harry regains consciousness, he discovers that his house has been reduced to rubble and his family has been buried in it. Rescuers come and help Harry out. He seems to have only minor scrapes. But his house is gone and his family is gone. He decides to take whatever he has and leave the town. When he is resting in the beach, a dog joins him. The dog doesn't seem to have anyone. The name tag says that his name is Don. Harry and Don become friends. What happens to them and the adventures they have form the rest of the story.

'The Kingdom by the Sea' is a gripping story. British children's literature writers are famous for setting stories during the war and narrating the story from a child's perspective, and Robert Westall does that brilliantly here. The writing is spare but beautiful and the pages just fly.

There are many people that Harry and Don meet during their travel adventures, some good and some bad. My favourites among these characters were Joseph, the man who lives near the beach and regards himself as a child of the sea, Artie, the gunner from the British army who befriends Harry and is kind to him, an old woman who lives in a big mansion whom Harry helps and she invites him to stay as a guest for a while, and a Vicar who leaves food and other things for strangers inside a train coach with a note. There were other fascinating characters too, but these four were my favourites.

There was a mention of Don Bradman and Wally Hammond in the story which made me smile. There was also a mention of Field Marshall Montgomery ('Monty') and I was happy to read that. I read Monty's 'The Path to Leadership' when I was in school and it was very inspiring and I loved it.

These lines from the book made me smile 😊 

"They listened in silence to Bruce Belfrage reading the news. The news wasn't very good, as usual."

It is 2026, and nothing much has changed. The news still isn't very good 😄🤦

The story has a huge surprise in the end which I didn't see coming, and the ending is complex and unexpected and it was a bit sad too, atleast for me.

I loved 'The Kingdom by the Sea'. Robert Westall wrote this book based on his childhood experiences and based on things that he'd seen and heard at that time. It shows in the story because it feels very authentic. Westall is a two-time Carnegie Medal winner (Carnegie Medal is the prize given every year to the best children's book in the UK) and this book won the Guardian Prize. He seems to be one of the great British writers of children's literature during his time. Looking forward to exploring more of his work.

Sharing some of my favourite parts from the book.

"He felt... he felt like a bird flying very high, far from the world and getting further away all the time. Like those gulls who soar on summer thermals and then find they cannot get down to earth again, but must wait till the sun sets, and the land cools, and the terrible strength of the upward thermal releases them to land exhausted. Only he could not imagine ever coming to earth again, ever. Back to where everything was just as it always had been, and you did things without thinking about them."

"Harry remembered something his dad had said about dogs in air raids. They suffered terribly with their ears, because they could hear ten times better than people. The sounds were ten times as loud to them."

"On the edge of sleep, Harry thought how right it felt, to be bedding down under a boat again. With the dog. It felt like the only way he had ever lived now. Other bits of him seemed to have dropped off during the day. He tried to think of Dad and Mam and Dulcie and the old days, but the pictures wouldn't come. But he didn't worry. They were buried somewhere, deep and safe in his mind. He'd be able to think about them again. Some day. For now he had the sound of the sea, and a full belly, and warm blankets. And Don. And for the first time, that was enough."

Have you read 'The Kingdom by the Sea'? What do you think about it? Which is your favourite Robert Westall book?