Rating: 4/5

Here's a blog post I've written on letter #9.

In the previous letter, we left John Paston I after hearing from his loyal friend John Damme that his estate is in danger and that some men are plotting against him. Damme said that a man named Partridge and his friends have been saying that Lord Moleyns will overtake the Gresham manor soon, and that a lawyer called John Heydon has been encouraging him to do so. Damme also said that Margaret had received a note that she should disarm the men at Gresham so as to allow an amicable surrender of the estate, a request she promptly refused.

In this letter, which was written almost two months after Damme’s warning, specifically in February 15, 1449, we see that Margaret has been dispossessed and forced to leave Gresham. So much for that crossbow order, I guess. Only if she could send it back. Now Margaret is taking refuge in the manor of Sustead with Damme’s wife.

She begins this letter by mentioning some men named Barow and Hegon who now occupy Gresham, the former seemingly residing there as a supervisor. She decides to communicate with them through her servant Kate, who delivers a message to Barow. This latter says that he would like to meet with Margaret, a request that she accepts granted that he comes to Sustead. The men come by the same afternoon and she keeps them waiting at the gate for some time. When she walks to them, she apologizes for not being able to welcome them inside, a strange apology and insistence on social decorum for the men who took over her estate. I think this shows her observance of hospitality and the Christian doctrine of turning the other cheek. Anyway, Margaret is aware that the men are here to “please her” (17), which means to comfort her, that none of their men back at Gresham were hurt. Margaret doesn’t trust them because she says that she found them “untrue in other things” (17). Here she is establishing the degree of ethos she could extend to these men. She is effectively telling us that we shouldn’t count on anything they say. What follows is one of the most subtle debates in the book. Think about it. You are negotiating with someone who took over your house and has power over you.

Barow seems to be a smart man as he tries to wiggle his way out of the situation. He swears to Margaret that “he had liefer than 40s. and 40 that his lord had not commanded him to come to Gresham,” which I guess means something like I would have rather been given a thousand bucks than taken that order from Lord Moleyns. He is using hyperbole as means of persuasion. This makes for an interesting appeal afterwards when he adds an apology to it saying that “he was right sorry of that that was done” to Paston (17). In short, Barow uses a combination of logos and pathos. Margaret responds with what appeals to her most, empathy, reminding Barow that he is one who “should have compassion” on John because he himself was “disseised” once, i.e. dispossessed (17). After having expressed his sympathy, Barow starts defending his masters, both the Lord of Suffolk and Moleyns, saying that they contrived to take over Gresham based on false information that was given to them. Margaret tells John that she knew who the rat was, but she doesn’t divulge his name in front of the men. The footnote tells us that it was John Heydon. Margaret says that they talked about other things but it would be too tedious and cumbersome to convey all of it in writing now.

Then she begins with matters of the heart, expressing her worry for John and asking him to be careful and always have some trustworthy men around him. She also counsels Damme, who’s seemingly residing with Paston in London at the time, not to come back to his estate until things cool down a bit. She urges John to send her word about how he is doing “for by [her] troth [she] cannot been well at ease in [her] heart … till [she] hears tidings how he don” (19). This tells us how much she loves and cares for John.

Margaret’s narration to the scribe is circuitous. She comes back to the subject of Barow, who told her that most of their belongings at Gresham have been sold. She insists on their lack of credibility as she states that “meseemeth by them they would fain please me” (19). In other words, their goal is just to make her feel better and not simply convey the truth. They tell her that she could have whatever she desires back from Gresham, to which she smartly replies by saying that if she could have indeed had her desire, she would have been still residing there at this very moment. She effectively uses their word against them. “I said nay,” she tells us, “If I might an had my desire I should neither a departed out of the place nor from the stuff that was therein” (19).

Margaret ends her letter on a strange note considering her comforting attempts prior to this discussion of property and capital. She tells Barow that they shouldn’t have sold the Paston’s stuff for even £100. They retort that their stuff wasn’t worth £20, which is something that have definitely angered John upon reading. Perhaps ending on this hostile note betrays Margaret’s agitation and fear, which the letter’s more composed initial attitude was just an attempt to suppress and hold back.

She concludes briefly by telling John that his mother is okay, and that unfortunately no one is saying a kind word about him in this country, something she prays God to amend.

What this letter essentially conveys is Margaret’s sense of religious sentiment (turning the other cheek) and her quick-wittedness when it comes to dialogue and negotiation. She shows skill in providing a keen reply. And she knows when to shush and withhold her knowledge of certain things. We can say that Margaret has an astute sense of differentiation and communicative prowess, despite not being able to write herself. 

Next time, thirteen days after this letter was composed, we will hear more developments from Margaret about her situation. See you in letter #10.

WORKS CITED

Davis, Norman, editor. The Paston Letters: A Selection in Modern Spelling. Oxford UP, 2008.

This is Paston. Paston Footprint, developed by David Viner and graphics by James Mindham, 2015-2025. https://www.thisispaston.co.uk/