Rating: 2/5

I had a hard time picking a rating for this book. On one hand, it had a lot of great info that mainstream Christianity has forgotten about. His information about the historical backdrop of Jesus's ministry was good, his analysis of his relationship to the poor, the oppressed, and sinners was strong, and I liked his chapters on healing and forgiveness. He had a ton to say about Jesus and "the kingdom", and I think there was more good than bad there. On occasion he would state things in a new way that I hadn't seen before and really made me think.

There did tend to be statements and arguments here and there that I disagreed with. Some were minor, like Nolan's claim that Jesus used children as an analogy for "the statusless oppressed", or that the least in the Kingdom was greater than John the Baptist because John the Baptist had status. In most of these cases what I saw as inaccurate Biblical exposition didn't really affect the main points. But later in the book my disagreements with his analysis started to pile up. By the time he interpreted Jesus's actions in the temple as solely economic with no relation to the sacrificial system, suggested that Jesus told the disciples they would be actual political leaders, and claimed Jesus advocated the use of swords for self-defense because he was scared of an attack by Herod's men, I felt he was getting way off base.

My other biggest issue is that the scholarship in the book dated quickly. It was written in 1977, and while much of the language has been heavily revised since then, the references and scholarship have not. As a result, Nolan relies heavily on the opinions and theories of the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s, a time when a certain strain of the "quest for the historical Jesus" dominated. This issue is amplified by the fact that Nolan often makes appeals to authority without making a real argument. He'll make claims like "All serious scholars agree" or "it is beyond all doubt" or "is has been shown once and for all" on topics where such claims are laughable now, 35 years later. Some of the best Biblical scholars today argue, for instance, that Jesus consciously acted in the role of Israel's messiah or that he wasn't the first person ever to call God "abba". Since Nolan does not appear to be a scholar himself, but instead relies on the unreproduced arguments of others, these frequent appeals to authority are both unprofessional and inaccurate.

Overall, I'd say that the book would have a lot of good information for someone who hadn't been exposed to historical research of the gospels, but it would be so hard for such a person to pick out the wheat from the chaff in this book that they'd be much better off reading something with more modern scholarship.