Rating: 5/5

This novel was deeply frustrating, annoying and aggravating. The main protagonist, Natasha, is a party organiser, an intellectual, a sharp thinker but is also a woman, a lover and a mistress.

The story follows her relationship with Semyon Semyonovich; a leading party figure whose self-centred understanding of love and relationships constantly means Natasha is sacrificing her feelings, work and ultimately independence in order to cater for his. 

Far from being a story of an individual couple's sexual and gender relations (despite the fact it's rumoured the story is modelled on Kollontai's understanding of Inessa Armand and Lenin's supposed love affair), the story has a much bigger and more universal significance.

Looking back at this period from the standpoint of working class women it's easy to simply point to the objective material circumstances of the family as the sole instrument of women's oppression. While this was certainly a key factor, Kollontai's piece does well to point to the more intimate ways in which women were denigrated, even amongst their own ranks.

The way in with Semyon constantly expects Natasha's feelings to be subordinate to his own (so Natasha becomes responsible for the mental reproduction of Semyon, but he does not expect to do the same of her), how he constantly denigrates her political work as superfluous, the way in which he saw her as a woman first (and therefore an instrument of sex and passion) and a party member and intellectual only after underscores the chauvinism that often underpinned women's relation with men.

Looking at the family as an institution is not enough, Kollontai is saying, but the content of the family is a big factor as well. After all, the family is an institution of thinking, breathing people who relate to one another. The personal relationship between Semyon and Natasha stunted her development intellectually and politically, it stunted her independence and confidence.

And this is why the novel was so annoying: I felt a constant anger at Semyon's consistent ability to subordinate Natasha to himself. It's probably the same anger women like Natasha were made to feel.

The novel is, as the end lines say, a reminder that social relations are not abstract entities but are acted out by human beings, sometimes in intimate relationships. And as such, we can't see change of the system in abstraction from changing ourselves.