Rating: 4/5

"Pussycat, Pussycat, where have you been?
I have been to London to take in the scene.
Pussycat, Pussycat, what saw you there?
Tarry a while, dear sir, with you I will share..."

London is an iconic city, both for readers of literature and history and travel enthusiasts. There is hardly a book written in the UK where there is no mention of London; the city is steeped in history, and one can literally hear, touch, smell and even taste it while wandering around this bustling metropolis. When I visited it first in 2009, it was like returning to a favourite childhood haunt, so familiar were many of its landmarks from years of reading P. G. Wodehouse and Agatha Christie. Though crowded and a bit noisy, the city charmed me.

Was it always like this? Say, what about three centuries back? That is what Maureen Waller sets out to explore in this book.

We are conditioned to see history as a kind of serialised movie, with one episode following the other. In this process, we tend to miss the backdrop where the action is taking place. Here, the author attempts to show us a still photograph from the movie that is British history; a picture of London, frozen in the year 1700, through the eyes of contemporary citizens and visitors.

In the period mentioned, London was a bustling metropolis, having been rebuilt after the Great Fire of 1666. "London in 1700 was the most magnificent in Europe." Maureen Waller opens her book with these words. The city had 530,000 people - compared to 30,000 in Norwich, the second largest city. It was the hub of trade (with the Thames as its main artery), the centre for industry, and the place where thousands flocked to, to eke out a living. It had many magnificent buildings and parks and aristocracy thronged its streets - the forerunner of the quintessential metro.

But was everything hunky-dory? Well, apparently, no. Beneath the glitter, the city's face was really ugly, rather like those disease ridden prostitutes who prowled its night streets, the ravages of venereal disease on their faces hidden under patches. There were bogus marriages of convenience; forced marriages, where young girls were kidnapped and forcibly married to get hold of their property; and the "sale" of wives no longer required. Childbirth was fraught with real danger to mother and child, and of those safely born, between one-quarter and one-third died before their first birthday. Children were brought up strictly and not spared the rod, though there were voices of moderation. Disease was endemic in the filthy city, and healthcare only in its nascent stages - many people had surprisingly short lives compared to today. The concept of hygiene was non-existent, and the city stank of human excrement from the open sewers to which many a time the chamber pots were emptied. Poverty was endemic. Crime was rampant, so was prostitution and gambling; and public executions (carried out quite frequently) were a source of public entertainment.

All was not gloom and doom, however. There was employment to be had for all (even for refugees); many people lived well (though not very hygienically); the city had plenty of art and culture; and people moved about in fashion. Even though the system was highly layered and exploitative, one can see the skeleton of the welfare state taking shape beneath the fleshy capitalistic metropolis (soon to be bankrolled by exploitation of the colonies!).

This is a fascinating look at the life of a metro, at a crucial juncture in history. This book will stay with me when I read any of the period classics (like Dickens) in the future. The only teensy complaint that I have is that it is a bit rambling - but that can be forgiven.