Rating: 3/5

The central character of this story is central in the way a cloud is central to a storm. Michael Moran, father of five and widower remarried, draws people into familial connection through a dark and dangerous and magnetic moodiness. His daughters, and even perhaps his far away sons, have become trained to believe that this feeling of separateness and isolation that comes from being a part of a deeply dysfunctional family is actually a form of superiority. Moran's youngest son Michael has escaped perhaps the least harmed, as his sisters shielded him from his father for much of his childhood and he ran away not so long after they left. But Moran's eldest son, who left and never returned, leads a life very different from Moran's, but has an air of intensity and withdrawal that sadly hints at his father's.

One of the more painful conflictual moments of the book (though there are many) comes when Moran refuses to support his daughter Sheila after she gets accepted to university. If she were to go to university she would be come different and "better" than the family, it would keep all of the family from being on equal, "humble" terms, though Moran is far from humble and what he really means to do is control his daughters' every move. He needs to be the center of attention, and he refuses to be out-shined by any of his children, or to have them be so far from him they are no longer vulnerable to his whims. What Moran says and what Moran does are two very different things, and when he insists on the equality of family members, what he means is, well, everything else. There is a coded life being lived here in which all that is said means nothing in comparison to the tone set by Moran, dictatorial and insistent. 

A goodreads reviewer posits an interesting theory, or, I will state it in the form of a question. Do we need another book with a shitty father? I don't know how to answer that. I don't tend to think in terms of repetition because I think books and themes are endlessly repetitive. I tend to read books on their own terms, not because every shitty father is different (and all good ones are the same?) in an oft misquoted or misdirected Tolstoyan way, but because each book with a shitty father is a different book. Unhappy or not, family relationships are part of larger equations. Some hint at fable-istic connections, and others resemble more mythical archetypes. This particular relationships is set up I think to show how the political is personal, the historical is personal, and it is also to a certain degree allegorical. Moran is a man who is disillusioned by the political reality. He fought a war with a certain idealism and what he learned was that all sides of the fighting were tied up in corruption. He cannot come to terms with his role as pawn, and so he becomes the master of his own kingdom, his little home, and refuses to let the outside world in except by way of his children who are allowed to bring little pieces of the outside world in, filtered as they are through the eyes of people he trained in how to see and what to say.

All of that said, there are ways in which every closed system fails to stay entirely closed, and this is true of Moran. It is not that he changes necessarily over time, but there is a certain mellowing of the rules after his children all leave, because there must be. It is either that, or he has to leave them all behind. 

The damage that he has done to his family will clearly influence generations, people will be allying themselves with or against Moran and that will influence decision-making and quality of experience for years and years to come. Just so, the political conflicts that are going on, that have brought Moran so much misery, will shift and change but continue to influence life in Ireland on many levels. 

And what of Moran's misery? Is he too idealistic? Too violent? Did an impractical idealism cause him to be so unhappy? What happens if this kind of idealism is lost? Then is every person for themselves? Is this novel asking us to call into question our deeply held beliefs about how the world should be run? Or are we to feel a certain solidarity with or compassion for Moran's desire to live in a less corrupt world?

This book had no plot to speak of and at first I was not drawn to it, but I found after thirty pages or so I couldn't put it down. It was not because I wondered what would happen. But I was drawn into the web of it. Curious to see how the three daughters and two sons, and how Rose, would continue to interact with Moran. It is like a locked-room mystery without the mystery (or the locked room). But it has that feeling of horror and air-less-ness. And yet there is lightness at certain moments too. To see how the siblings try to navigate their strange loyalties to their father and try to help each other escape him, all at the same muddled time. To see the rebellion and yet the inability to leave (they all take their father with them, whether they mean to or not.) And the specialness they feel because of their father's way of setting apart the family from others. That, in the end, may be the most damaging thing to their potential happiness. 

It is interesting to me that I learned about the author because he wrote the introduction to "Stoner" which I read recently. There are certain tonal similarities between the two writers, but I never had the feeling of awe reading this that I did while reading Stoner. They both hone in on complex and disturbing family dynamics and intertwine them with the larger political landscape in small but poignant ways.

Rose, Moran's second wife, is an outsider who becomes an insider, but she's a curious figure in this book. I know there must be a lot to say about her dual role here. She is not as brain-washed and cowed as the Sheila, Mona and Maggie are, and she cares for and protects the children, but she still defends Moran in ways which are troubling. McGahern explores how loyalty works in a family in ways which are quiet and dark and sometimes lit up as by a lightning storm, with occasional bright flashes. 

Here are some quotes from the book.

“These visits of his daughters from London and Dublin were to flow like relief through the house. They brought distraction, something to look forward to, something to mull over after they had gone. Above all they brought the bracing breath of the outside, an outside Moran refused to accept unless it came from the family. Without it there would have been an ingrown waiting. For the girls the regular comings and goings restored their superior sense of self, a superiority they had received intact from Moran and which was little acknowledged by the wide world in which they had to work and live. That unexamined notion of superiority was often badly shaken and in need of restoration each time they came home. Each time he met them at the station his very presence affirmed and reaffirmed again as he kissed them goodbye. Within the house the outside world was shut out. (93)

“It was like grasping water to think how quickly the years had passed here. They were nearly gone. It was in the nature of things and yet it brought a sense of betrayal and anger, of never having understood anything uch. Instead of using the fields, he sometimes felt as if the fields had used him. Soon they would be using someone else in his place. It was unlikely to be either of his sons. He tried to imagine someone running the place after he was gone and could not. He continued walking the fields like a man trying to see. (130)

“Tears slipped down their faces as they repeated the ‘Our Fathers’ and ‘Hail Marys’. Maggie had begun her Mystery when it grew clear that Moran was trying to speak. She stopped and the room was still. The low whisper was unmistakable: ‘shut up!’ They looked at one another in fear and confusion but Rose nodded vigorously to Maggie to ignore the whispered command and to continue. She managed to struggle back into the rhythm of the prayers when Mona cried out, ‘Daddy’s gone!’ They got up off their knees and stood over the bed. Weeping loudly Maggie and Sheila embraced one another and Mona ran angrily from the room, slamming doors on the way, shouting, ‘That doctor shouldn’t have been let give him that injection this morning.’ Rose turned to Maggie, ‘Would you mind going after Mona to see that she’s all right. I think that must be Michael’s car I hear turning in at the gate.
“Some of the anger at the death veered towards Michael as soon as he appeared in the hallway. Being left on the periphery of what was happening he had become bored and driven to town with his son. ‘You’re a nice gentleman. You couldn’t even manage to be in the house when Daddy was going.’ He did not realize at first what had taken place and put up his hands in jocose surrender to these fierce and impossible women but wen very pale and still as soon as he understood that his father had just died. Gently Rose opened the door to the room and he nodded silently to her and went in. The she took his son by the hand. The child and woman went from the room to room until they had stopped each clock in the house and covered every mirror.” (180)

“All through the night they kept vigil by his side. Time should have stopped with the clocks but instead it moved in a glazed dream of tiredness without their ticking insistence. Morning stole over the fields. The callers continued coming to the house throughout the day. At six the body would be taken to the church. As it drew closer to six the minutes seemed to race.