Rating: 4/5

The Grand Tour 02 Privateers by Ben Bova

challenging dark emotional hopeful mysterious reflective sad tense

Medium-paced

Plot or character-driven? A mix
Strong character development? Yes
Loveable characters? It's complicated
Diverse cast of characters? It's complicated
Flaws of characters are a main focus? Yes

3.75 Stars 

This is the book that I thought Powersat was going to be. This story was the start of The Grand Tour by Ben Bova, and it really doesn't hold up as well as I thought would. I still had fun in this Alternate History story within the Science Fiction Political Thriller genre.

This book was published in 1985, and it shows.

Dan and his viewpoints on women are also VERY dated. He uses them and abuses them (not respecting them, and throws them away, after he's been satisfied by them). 

One issue that was glaring, was taking two teen girls away from their own country via space plane, to another country...without the permission of the parents of the two teenagers. Oops. Not politically correct, nor morally right.

Also, his conquest of one of them (YES, this does happen), should make everyone cringe. This was "acceptable" by powerful men of the past, but in today's standards, this is unacceptable. 

Also, the alternate history that shows the Soviet Union in power and the United States of America the country that is spineless and a dog laying on its back...exposing their belly is laughable and not the "American Way" in any alternate history....sorry.

One portion of the story that is interesting...is how in our reality Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant hasn't had problems with tsunamis...is interesting.

Also, Dan says the statement, "Make America Great Again" to the current president of the United States...and it made me cringe. Yuck! Would NOT want to EVER see that as a slogan in ANY history that the US is involved in. No thank you.

After all the yuck is done, this is a fun story to follow and just accept. It is like a "popcorn" film in book form. I'm not worried about the bad "cgi" in the narrative, but going with the flow...that the author wants the readers to accept. 

I will be picking up Empire Builders soon...in my "trek" through The Grand Tour saga.