Rating: 5/5

Othello is considered not only the greatest of Shakespeare's tragedies but also the timeliest. This might be a play written hundreds of years ago, but all the themes discussed in it are even entirely relevant today. We can see multiple manipulation levels, betrayal, jealousy, and even racism in this book if we read between the lines.

Iago's maudlin concerns and jealousy force him to plot against general Othello and his wife, Desdemona. Othello, a battle-scarred yet lovable person, turns into a mercurial misogynistic and nihilistic personality due to the mundane concerns injected by Iago. Iago’s multiple interventions obfuscated the issues further. His character can be considered the paradigm for jealousy and hatred, a phony partisan who slanders to destroy any relationships. He knew to tell the right things to the right people at the right time to manipulate them to whatever extent he wanted. The way Shakespeare has counter projected jealously is simply brilliant. The way Iago engineers the jealousy of other characters is peerlessly done by the author.

We will get many interesting ideas from this play. If you are being robbed, and yet if you can smile about the losses, you are considered superior to the thief who robbed you. If you cry instead of smiling, then you are just wasting your time. This is an interesting way of depicting the concept of letting go and forgiving the people who hurt you.
 “What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
Patience her injury a mock'ry makes.
The robbed that smiles steals something from the thief,
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief."  

 If you closely observe each line from this play, you can see a vast amount of wisdom hidden within it. If you are a person who loves to think deeply, Othello will be one of the best books you can pick to read.
 “O, beware, my lord, of jealousy;
It is the green-ey'd monster, which doth mock
The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss,
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger:
But O, what damnèd minutes tells he o'er
Who dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves!”  

—————————————————————————

  You can also follow me on 
 
 Instagram ID - Dasfill  |  YouTube Channel ID - Dasfill  |  YouTube Health Channel ID - Dasfill - Health  |  YouTube Malayalam Channel ID - Dasfill - Malayalam   |  Twitter ID - Dasfill1  |  Snapchat ID - Dasfill  |  Facebook ID - Dasfill  |  TikTok ID - Dasfill1