Rating: 3/5

I have mixed feeling about this book, but overall it is fabulous and I'm very glad that I read it.

The Good: I understand why this book has been referred to as the "sleep bible." After finishing this book, I feel like I no longer have any questions about what normal sleep should look like for my child and how to best go about teaching her to sleep. This book contains information on a large span of ages and phases from the first days as a newborn all the way through adolescence. There are also chapters dedicated to extremely fussy/colicky babies, common sleep problems, less common and more serious sleep problems, and special events or concerns (moving, vacation, new siblings) regarding sleep. Perhaps one of my favorite things about the book has nothing at all to do with the topic it so thoroughly discusses. I absolutely love the way Marc Weissbluth speaks to his readers. He does not have a "my way or the highway" attitude and seems to understand that different approaches may work for different families depending upon parental attitudes, parenting styles, and the child's temperament. It was comforting that Weissbluth offered "let cry," "maybe cry," and "no cry" solutions to sleep problems, reminding us that each approach will eventually yield the same result as long as it is used consistently. I feel that I learned so much from this book that I will probably end up checking it out at the library again or buying a copy of my own to use as a reference as my child grows and her needs change.

The Bad: I read this book cover to cover and perhaps I shouldn't have. The author even recommends reading this book more as a reference - only reading the parts you need at that particular time. This book was a challenge for me to read cover to cover for a few reasons. The first four chapters were very dry for me. They contained a lot of common sense and information included in seemingly every single parenting book. Chapter four in particular, titled "Sleep Extreme Fussiness/Colic, and Temperament," really got on my nerves. I might just be bitter because as I read it made me realize that maybe my little girl really did/does have colic! Either way, she is not an easy baby and although it was comforting to know that I'm not alone in my struggles, I hate being reminded of all the extra work I have to go through to comfort my extra fussy baby. Another reason to hate Chapter four is that it is extremely scientific. Now, I like knowing that the advice I'm being given is founded in actual studies and has proven results, but I'm reading the book to learn how to give my child good sleep habits. If I had wanted to know every single detail from each sleep study ever done on children, I would have picked up a medical journal, not this book. My final, albeit minor, complaint is that I had a difficult time finishing this book. My daughter is three months old and it was hard for me to want to read about what I should be doing once she's in preschool or older to encourage healthy sleep habits. Call me ignorant if you must, but I'm much to focused on the now to project that far into the future.

Our Experiences: I have just finished the book, but already have applied some of what I learned to our family life. This book confirmed that my baby really needs more sleep than I initially thought. I have tried harder to make sure she is wake for no longer than two hours at a time during the day, per Dr. Weissbluth's recommendation. I have moved my daughter's bedtime to an earlier hour and have noticed good results. We used to begin her bedtime routine, which I highly recommend all parents establish, at eight o'clock with her being asleep by 8:45. Now, I begin her bedtime routine whenever she begins to get fussy in the evening, sometimes as early as 5:30 but never later than 7:00, and have found her to be asleep within a half hour of beginning our routine. I have also found that sleep truly begets sleep, even if it doesn't seem logical - it works!