Rating: 5/5

There were a lot of books I read well before I was able to understand them. I don’t think there’s any harm in reading ahead of our intellect, since it’s a way of pushing ourselves forward, but it undoubtedly affects impressions. While I don’t remember struggling with A Wrinkle In Time or A Wind In The Door in spite of their difficult concepts, for whatever reason, A Swiftly Tilting Planet went right over my head. Maybe it was all the time travel and the overlapping family lines, but I just didn’t get it the first time around. As I got older, I learned to love it as much as the other two, but it’s earned a new place in my heart and in my life.

I don’t often get political on this platform. I have other social media for that. My blog is a place for bright and lovely things, and politics are rarely bright or lovely. But on election night 2020, this was the book I turned to for comfort. It is, after all, about a boy and a unicorn who go back in time to stop a mad dictator from destroying the planet. The stakes weren’t quite that high in America, but on a night when I was filled with fear and dread over the future of my country (and remembering the dread and sadness of our last presidential election), L'Engle brought me hope that people could choose kindness and goodness, that the smallest choices could have an impact if they were made out of love. I don’t often make sweeping statements about books “everyone” needs a copy of, but The Time Quartet would be in that category. In one way or another, these books have always been there for me, as books always are in our darkest hours.

The world is on the brink of nuclear war, which could have a ripple effect on the entire universe. In order to prevent this, fifteen-year-old Charles Wallace is sent back in time with the unicorn, Gaudior, and his sister Meg kything from the present to try and alter the Might Have Beens that would lead to peace. He finds himself in a generations-old feud between two Welsh brothers, one who values peace and goodness and the other who seeks power at any price. Trigger warnings: character death, parent/sibling death, drowning, fires, severe injury, severe illness, abusive households, racism (some countered), ableism (countered), grief.

The plot of Planet is somewhat more sophisticated and the story more of a slow burn than the previous two books, and it’s harder to follow. It’s taken age and multiple readings for me to track all the name repetitions and crossovers in the multiple timelines. (If I were a more enterprising spirit–or a better English student–I might make myself a family tree of the Maddox/Llawcae families, but I tend not to want to pause and work out details when I’m in a story that I’m reading for fun.) While making all the connections makes the organize-y part of my brain happy, it isn’t strictly necessary to understand the bigger messages of the novel. If Time examined things on a macroscopic level, spanning galaxies, and Door took a look at the microscopic level, Planet’s dimension is time and how one small thing affects another over decades, centuries, or longer. They’re a near-perfect complement to one another.

The story is grounded in the much-beloved Murray family, and through Charles’s connection with Meg, the narrative returns to them time and time again like a touchstone. The other settings and characters shift frequently as he jumps among generations, which makes it difficult to get attached to some of them–-at least until I stopped seeing them as separate rather than a continuing pattern. This time around, I felt like I had a better sense of their individual stories: how Brandon’s connection with Maddok makes them stronger, how Matthew’s selflessness saves his family (and, further down the line, possibly the world), how Beezie’s life was a tragic victory for darkness. It’s more subtle, but it continues themes of love and connectedness that I enjoyed from the first two books. In L'Engle’s world, every small action matters and there’s always a chance for redemption.

I review regularly at brightbeautifulthings.tumblr.com.