Rating: 5/5

Gorgeous, complex, emotional - the pinnacle of Thornton's writing career. I think I detect a real Heyer-esque touch about it, too, minus of course the sheer eroticism.

Deirdre Fenton is a sharp-witted young lady dedicated to the care of her younger brother, Armand. Quite by chance she comes across the path of Gareth, Earl of Rathbourne - a man who once begged her to run away with him, before she slapped him across the face so hard he scarred and told him she didn't care if a bullet found him.

So yeah, he's not thrilled with her. But he's still obsessed with her. This one shrewish little chit has a hardened rake pretty much burning up inside for her, and it all started when - incensed he'd dismissed her as just another simpering debutante - she set out to fleece him of all his money at cards. I find the way she catches his attention rather adorable, and it's written in such a way as to make it seriously work.

When she puts herself back into his power, Gareth is quick to take advantage of her misstep to press her into marriage again. They just anticipate their vows a little... and the next morning she's gone. Thus begins the angstier bit of the novel, which occurs against a surprisingly detailed and rich backdrop of the Napoleonic Wars. Considering many HRs nowadays treat the Regency setting as so much wallpaper, it was lovely to see how Thornton had laboured to put in real people and language.

Yes, Deirdre can be a real bitch sometimes. But Gareth was more than a match for her, and I'm utterly in love with them both. He might be obsessed with her, but he knows exactly what he's getting into with her, and she softens over the course of the book. We have so many of my favourite tropes here, including a strident heroine eventually tempered by love; a hero who pulls out all the stops and whose domineering behaviour is countered by the heroine's sheer stubbornness; plenty of dubcon sprinkled on top...

For full disclosure, there is OW drama, but nothing unforgivable IMO. 

[Blog] - [Bookstagram]