Rating: 5/5

Schwabsky, Barry, ed. Vitamin P: New Perspectives in Painting. London: Phaidon, 2002. 352ps. ISBN: 0714844462. $39.95. 

Reviewed by Chris Pusateri 

Among the most venerated of visual media, painting occupies a position that is both enviable and dubious. The same ubiquity that makes it identifiable to any schoolchild also makes it an easy target for detractors. But one thing is certain: not since Marcel Duchamp famously abandoned painting has there been any question of its use as a proving ground—as the genre against which all other forms, old and new, are judged. 

In this hybrid age, when the very utility of genres is frequently questioned, we might ask, as editor Barry Schwabsky does, if such designations have lost their descriptive capacity. What is a painting? And if we can’t answer that question, then why have genres at all? In my experience, labels are about judgment, and judgment in art is about the formation of taste. When we look at a painting, we can see certain formal elements at work—color, brushstroke, gesture, and so forth—and we use those things to judge the quality of a piece. The reason that formally innovative work is so often dismissed absent any real critical scrutiny is because the old rules of judgment do not apply. That is, the typical museumgoer looks at the conceptual work of Robert Smithson, let’s say, and does not know by what characteristics he should judge it. His inability to fashion any evaluative criteria lead to a glib dismissal. He says that’s not art because he can’t explain what makes it good or bad. 

But maybe the true measure of a genre’s durability depends on its ability to encourage innovation and still remain discrete as an area of practice. In this book, Schwabsky convenes 114 painters, ranging in age from early twenties to early fifties, whose styles constitute an astonishingly broad survey of current techniques and procedures. From the shivering water pointillism of Johannes Kahrs to the architectural sparseness of Toba Khedoori, the artists of this book demand room and board within the genre of painting. 

By casting his net so broadly, Schwabsky argues for the elasticity of painting. Vitamin P places Fabian Marcaccio’s fabric-infused abstraction alongside Michael Lin’s floral interiors and argues for the work of both with equal vigor. This book serves as proof that the continued health of painting depends on its willingness to acknowledge those artists who inhabit its margins, and whose work makes us question where the boundaries of painting reside. 

-Originally published in the October 2008 issue of Chicago Artists' News.