Rating: 5/5

⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ five stars -

Just finished reread 1,234 😂 Who knows how many times I’ve read this since I first discovered it back in the late 1970s? I sure can’t remember 💁‍♀️

I just adore this book! I probably read it about once a year, since it now permanently resides on my much loved Kindle. Each time I read it, I am re-amazed at the skill and care with which Heyer has crafted this well-written Regency Romance. 

If you follow my reviews here on Goodreads, you know that I am a huge Heyer fan, and might recall that I keep a personal list that has rated all of my reads by this amazing twentieth century author. This particular book, “Regency Buck”, falls at number eight on my list. I would love to move it up to a spot with better pride of place, but I can’t! I would have to boot another beloved title down the list, and I just can’t do it! Either way, spot number eight still resides in the top ten and it’s not too shabby given the fact that I have nearly thirty titles on this list 💁‍♀️📚

This story…. What can I say? It’s high-quality Regency Romance. Heyer is a master at staying true to the time period. Given the fact that she wrote these stories in the early twentieth century (this book was originally published in 1938) it’s amazing to this reader the amount of research and knowledge that’s poured into her novels. Just truly outstanding and an absolute pleasure to read. 

This story centers around our heroine, the very rich heiress, Miss Judith Taverner. Judith and her brother, Peregrine, have recently inherited their father’s estate and decide to move themselves to London. The goal is to break into the upper echelons of high society, as their money is sure to pave the way. The only trouble lies in the fact that their inheritance is under the control of their guardian, the high-flyer Lord Worth. 

What happens next is a thoroughly well-plotted, well-researched, fun-to-read story about Judith and her introduction into London society. A snag is encountered when it’s discovered that their original guardian is now deceased, but the fortune has remained under the control of the new guardian, the present Lord Worth. The clash of wills between Judith and the Hero (who else but Lord Worth lol) provides a nice romantic buildup. 

The story also includes a little suspense as someone is trying to murder Perry. Heyer’s utilizes her skill in romantic suspense, and it’s a nice addition to the plot, and it all just speeds along. (Fun fact: in later years, Heyer grew tired of Regencies and her last published books became murder mysteries). 

Overall, a lovely romance with heartfelt emotion. My heart sings with the hea here each and every time. I am enjoyably entertained every time I read this, and look forward to my next re-read 📖.

Highly recommend. Five shining stars for the Great Dame Heyer.