Rating: 5/5

In a nice change of pace, Judge Dee investigates in Canton, which, even in the 7th century, was a cosmopolitan city full of Arabs, Persians, and other foreigners. Judge Dee, now elevated to Lord Chief Justice, has come to that southern city with two trusted assistants, the solemn Colonel Chiao Tai and the wily old trickster Tao Gan, to investigate the disappearance of a high-ranking official from the capital. While Murder in Canton was the 13th Judge Dee novel published, the novels bounce around chronologically and Murder in Canton is the very last tale of Judge Dee’s illustrious career. 

As is usual in author Robert van Gulik’s Judge Dee novel and in traditional Chinese detective stories, Murder in Canton deals with three cases, all set in A.D. 681, although one is inconsequential. The most important one, of course, involves the disappearance of the official, the Imperial Censor, who was investigating some skullduggery of national interest in secret. Early in that investigation, an Arab plotting to kill Chiao Tai kills the aged Northern Chinese gentleman who tips Chiao Tai off, but then is immediately strangled himself. Why was this Arab intent on killing Judge Dee’s loyal assistant? And who killed the Arab in turn? In the second case, a beautiful and exotic Arab dancing girl may hold the key to some unsavory goings-on in Canton. Those familiar with Judge Dee won't be surprised to find that the disparate threads become intertwined by the novel’s close.

Van Gulik was a Dutch diplomat, linguist (he writes English like a native!), and an expert in China, both modern and ancient. As with all Judge Dee novels, Van Gulik seamlessly introduces lots of ancient Chinese history, in this case the exchanges between what were the two world powers of the 7th century: the T’ang Empire, which extended west to Turkestan and south to what’s now Vietnam, and the Caliphate, which encompassed the Arabian Peninsula, North Africa, the Middle East, and southern Europe as far west as the Iberian Peninsula. 

Van Gulik first introduced Judge Dee to the West in Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee, first published in 1949 (although not translated into English until 1976). Using a real-life Chinese magistrate during the T'ang Dynasty named Ti Jen-chieh, van Gulik simplified the magistrate's name to Judge Dee Jen-djieh, and, in that first novel, he pretty much just used the cases from an 18th century Chinese detective novel, Dee Goong An. In his subsequent novels — including Murder in Canton — van Gulik wrote the books from his own imagination, although including nuggets culled from original ancient Chinese cases and 18th century Chinese detective stories.