Rating: 2/5

I'm not sure I've ever read a book where I felt such a divide between love of the story and inability to stomach the writing.
I'll say this: this may be blasphemy to some, but there are cases where the movie is better than the book. And this is one of those cases, because, at least in this person's opinion, the story may be great, but the writing is absolutely insufferable, and gets increasingly so over the course of the book.
The author appears to believe in the stance that brooding and negativity are interesting and clever- and so, there is a lot of it. A LOT of it.
At first, I wondered if it was supposed to be the narrator simply having a feline voice- after all, his arrogance most likely was at least partially supposed to be due to him being a cat- but increasingly it dawned on me that we were supposed to be impressed by the pages upon pages of repetitive moaning about how life is a bleak abyss, there is no goodness in mankind, we are all spiraling into the void into the cold clutches of death. (Indeed, the book opens on such a note- but, again, I had given it the benefit of the doubt and taken it as him being a pretentious feline.)
This brooding wasn't just annoying- it was REPETITIVE. The exact same points were moaned over for pages upon pages all throughout the book, with only slight changes in wording. It felt like he was trying to pad his word count. 
I can pinpoint the exact point I would have put the book down if I wasn't already so far into it; Francis, the protagonist, walks into another cat's house, and sees him lying on a cushion.
For some reason, this prompts a page-long moaning about how maybe that cat is comfortable in his home, but in truth human beings are horrible horrible horrible to animals, and cause animals to "become homosexual," mutilate themselves, rape or be raped- on and on and on. -Because he walked into a house and saw a cat lying on a cushion.-
Additionally, yeah, this was written in 1989, but I'm still going to say that this book was strangely intent on throwing offensive remarks about various minorities in out of the blue, just in the cat's many pretentious musings. But worst of all was its treatment of disabilities; constant paragraphs upon paragraphs moaning about poor, hideous invalids, pathetic, ruined cripples living half-lives- a blind cat is literally described as having "no life" because she was blind. All irrational and evil behavior is "schizophrenic." It's so obnoxious.
Good points:
- Story is a great idea
- The last couple of pages were okay
- Made a great movie 
- I like Bluebeard
So... that's my take. I gave it a star because the concept and story are very good if you separate them entirely from how it's written out.