Rating: 5/5

It's hard to name a more consequential book to come out of the 1960s than Betty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique. So how does it hold up 60+ years later? Quite well. It's a mesmerizing articulation of feminism that hits with ethos and pathos.

Largely an attack against societal pressures that want to limit women to mothers and homemakers, the book remains surprisingly relevant even as it lambasts dated ideas. And to be fair, a large reason why those ideas are dated is because this book so vastly changed the world.

I don't think women routinely go to college in search of an "Mrs. degree" anymore, and I doubt many grow up thinking their purpose in life is to be a homemaker. Society is still sexist as hell, though, and many of the same battles Friedan fought for—like abortion access—have slid back to the 1950s

The tone has the same energy as America Ferrera's "It's impossible to be a woman" speech from the Barbie movie. And its effect is just as de-hypnotizing. I can certainly imagine why millions of women read this book and suddenly woke up from gauzy beliefs that education made them unattractive and scrubbing floors was a worthy life ambition.

Sometimes Friedan's passion clouds her logic, clearly. Such as when she vaguely compares a life of housework to being in a Nazi concentration camp. There's also an odd moment where she seems to argue that the feminine mystique is responsible for a rise in gay men and explains why gay women are so "rare." These brief head-scratching moments certainly shouldn't negate the pages and pages of legitimate research and careful examination of facts, however.

Contrary to what some critics say, this is not a man-hating book. Friedan herself was very outspoken against feminists who wanted to hijack her movement into a man-hating crusade.

That said, I think more real estate could have been devoted to explaining why equality is good for men too. The 1960s also had a masculine mystique which suggested men must carry sole financial responsibility for the home. She does mention that an empowered woman frees men of this unreasonable burden, but it's brief.

All in all, The Feminine Mystique is a wonderful classic that's not just historically significant but enduringly liberating. For audiobook fans, check out the excellent unabridged performance by Parker Posey.