Rating: 5/5

The Jailing of Cecelia Capture by Janet Campbell Hale is a compelling and must-read story about a native woman trying to survive in a cold and unforgiving world. Cecelia Capture is stuck in jail and forced to reflect on her life and the experiences that brought her to where she is. The story delves into several important themes such as mental health, poverty, alcoholism, assimilation, and the continual effects of boarding schools for natives. Hale’s storytelling ability and voice are incredibly powerful and despite its heavy themes, the narrative was easy and enjoyable to read. Cecelia Capture is an exceptionally written character who feels like a living, breathing person. 

This book offers a crucial perspective that everyone should take the time to read. Readers get to glance into the world and experiences of a native woman, and specifically, the direct results of her father being a survivor of the American Indian boarding schools and assimilation. Cecelia grows up without learning her native language and is forced to think and behave in a white world. She struggles with identity and her place, often unsure of herself and dealing with anxiety. 

Be prepared to cry throughout this book. There were several heartbreaking moments that left me crying and reflecting for several hours afterward. I think this is a good thing, however. Hale does such a great job of creating this breathing character that you truly feel for her as she struggles and suffers. You desperately want her to succeed. There are so many little details, such as a particular law dictionary, that add so much life to Cecelia. Hale does a spectacular job at creating and adding these small, specific descriptions about all of the characters. You really get a great sense of everyone because of this. I also love how effortlessly Hale switches between past and present. I was never confused or unsure of where we were in the timeline. Everything made sense and had a purpose within the greater story. 

One of my favorite scenes is the ending. It took me off guard and made the entire story so much more powerful. It showcases this story was about a woman finding strength within herself to keep pushing forward. She recognizes her struggles, mistakes, and the unfair and cruel system she has been forced to live in, but she refuses to let these faults control her. It’s inspiring and such a hopeful read for everyone. It’s one of many scenes that I still think about from time to time. 

I strongly recommend everyone take the time to read this book, especially if you’re a white American. Although it’s fiction, it was written by a native woman, and understanding and consuming these narratives is so crucial to restoring rights back to Native Americans. I think it’s a great first step to understanding Indigenous struggles that are happening to this very day. On top of this, it’s an enjoyable and quick read. There are several things found throughout that everyone can relate to.