Rating: 4/5

Less striking than The Sheltering Sky

Published in 1955, The Spider's House centers on the incipient civil unrest that led to Morocco's independence the following year. In a foreword, Bowles indicated that he sought to avoid writing a political novel though it became one, in fact. Although the novel features the heavy-handed suppression of protests by the governing French authorities, the main protagonists are a young Arab boy (Amar), a long-term resident American (Stenham), and a visiting American woman (Polly Burroughs). 

Each has a different take on the unfolding political crisis. Amar is the rebellious son of a respected traditional healer. He is instinctively supportive of the nationalist cause, but his pious, unschooled views are contrasted with the secular approach of the Istiqlal party which is willing to intensify the suffering of the Moroccan population to help foment a rebellion. Polly has a naive view of the situation, and supports the independence movement, regardless of the costs. Stenham presumably represents Bowles' attitude, which is to regret the independence movement, because the push for secular modernization will result in the loss of the picturesque aspects of local culture in Fez where he has made his home.

The novel alternates between the perspectives of Stenham and Amar, highlighting their very different perspectives and lack of mutual comprehension. This, for example, is Amar's reaction when he spots the independent and adventurous traveler, Polly Burroughs, with Stenham in a Fez cafe:

"The woman was obviously a prostitute of the lowest order, because her arms and shoulders were completely uncovered, and the dress she wore had been cut shockingly low in the neck. As if to confirm Amar's verdict, she presently took from her handbag a small case containing cigarettes, and put one in her mouth, waiting for the man to light it for her. Amar was astounded at her brazenness. Even the French women in the Ville Nouvelle did not go to quite such extremes in their lewd dress and behavior. And even the most disreputable prostitute would have taken the care to keep herself from being so badly burned by the sun. This woman had obviously come from working in the fields: she was completely brown from having been out in the open for a very long time. Yet here she was, wearing gold bracelets. His intuition told him that he had made a mistake in his evaluation of her. She was probably not from the fields at all, but had had some misfortune which had obliged her to walk for many days in the sun's glare, and now she was ashamed, and wanted to hide herself from the crowd until she should be white again, which was why she had sought out the empty back room in which to sit."

Stenham and Burroughs, in turn, fail to see Amar's inner life, viewing him as just another needy, uneducated urchin.

This is a fascinating read, though I preferred The Sheltering Sky. Neither Stenham nor Burroughs are particularly attractive characters - he is smugly self-confident and she naively foolhardy, both being blind to the risks they are taking by staying in Fez as the independence unrest escalates. And given the antipathy between the two for much of the novel, the eventual affair seems implausible.

Paul Bowles reviews
1949, The Sheltering Sky, 4*
1954, The Spider's House, 4*

Background on Morocco's Independence

The push for independence intensified after Sultan Mohammed V was exiled to Madagascar in 1953 and replaced by the unpopular Mohammed Ben Aarafa. This sparked widespread opposition, uniting Moroccans in what became known as the Revolution of the King and the People. The nationalist Istiqlal Party, founded in 1943, played a central role in organizing resistance and negotiating with colonial authorities.

Negotiations for independence began after Mohammed V's return in 1955. In March 1956, the French protectorate officially ended, and Morocco regained sovereignty. Spain ceded most of its protectorate in northern Morocco shortly thereafter. In August 1957, Mohammed V assumed the title of king, officially founding the Kingdom of Morocco. He established a constitutional monarchy with a modern government structure and a balance of power to prevent the Istiqlal Party from dominating through a one-party state.