Rating: 4/5

When I began rereading Sherwood Anderson's Winesburg, Ohio for a library book discussion, I found myself grumbling about what I considered clumsy syntax and a seemingly monotonous prose style. However, in time I put away the red pencil and just allowed the characters from this century old (1919) book the freedom to take root in my consciousness. This is not a novel in the normal sense &amp; it is also not merely a collection of short stories. Rather, Winesburg, Ohio is a series of vignettes or tableaux vivant that eventually blend together to populate a small Ohio town, with the author acting as a kind of literary ringmaster. 

To my mind, Sherwood Anderson was not a particularly formidable writer but he was an exceedingly keen observer who often found just the right words to animate a group of people often bereft of hope and without the ability to express themselves to each other. 

The focal point of this menagerie of lonely people is George Willard, a young reporter for the town newspaper &amp; narrator of Anderson's book, someone many townspeople relate to as a sounding board, one woman as an object of lust and one jealous young man as a punching bag. George's mother, Elizabeth Willard, is said to be like a sleepwalker roaming within the Willard House, a semi-seedy hotel run by George's father Tom Willard, someone who has "succeeded at nothing, failing at both farming &amp; hotel-keeping but who fancies himself as a successful man". George's parents are like many others in Winesburg, residents with seemingly contradictory natures &amp; self-defeating personalities. 

In time, Curtis Hartman, a Presbyterian minister lusts after Kate Swift who he spies on from the church belfry as she, a resident of a nearby house, lounges in bed in a nightgown reading a book. Kate in turn lusts after George Willard, wanting initially to warn the much younger man about life's pitfalls even as she becomes increasingly attracted to him, causing George to wonder if the entire town of Winesburg has gone mad.

Some moments are reminiscent of Thornton Wilder's wonderful play, Our Town, set in Grover's Corners, New Hampshire but one is also reminded of another cast of characters with a Midwestern theme, Spoon River Anthology by Edgar Lee Masters, except that the folks in that book repose in a cemetery while those in Sherwood Anderson's work resemble living ghosts. 

There is "Wing Biddlebaum" (originally Adolf Myers), a former school teacher attacked &amp; driven into exile &amp; obscurity because he had "very expressive hands" &amp; some felt that his rather constant touching of students made him a potential menace. There are the Bentleys, living on 600 acres, 3 of whose sons perish in the Civil War, with Jesse Bentley taking over the farm after his wife dies in childbirth but with Jesse, acting with biblical overtones, becoming a fanatic &amp; wanting God to anoint him in some way, said to be "a man born out of his time &amp; place, mastering the souls of others but unable to master himself." 

Alice Hindman loves Ned Currie briefly, a man who flees Winesburg, never to return, while Alice waits &amp; waits, remaining faithful to a dream but one rainy evening momentarily runs about naked on the street in front of the house where she lives, before crawling back to seek refuge in her solitary bed,What is the matter with me? I will do something dreadful if I am not careful. Turning her face to the wall, she began trying to force herself to face bravely the fact that many people must live &amp; die alone, even in Winesburg.One of my favorite portraits is titled "Sophistication" &amp; features both George Willard and Helen White, who seem to have a longing for each other but are unable to express their feelings to others and while unsuccessfully attempting to express these fleeting sensations to each other, ultimately come to a realization that there is a commonality of spirit that links them, for "in the darkness, the two oddly sensitive human atoms held each other tightly &amp; waited.". Alas, when George finally decides to flee Winesburg, Helen fails to arrive in time to see his train off at the station. 

Loneliness is like a virus that plagues the town &amp; all of its residents but Sherwood Anderson manages to give each of them a voice &amp; very often a memorable image as well, as with Tom Foster's grandmother, who is swept away by the illness of her daughter &amp; by the cost of 2 funerals. Living above a junk shop...for 5 years she scrubbed the floors in a building &amp; then got a place as a dish washer in a restaurant. Her hands were all twisted out of shape. When she took hold of a mop or a broom handle her hands looked like the dried stems of an old creeping vine clinging to a treeAnd there is Enoch Robinson, once an artist in New York City "who was like a writer busy among the figures of his brain" a man who feels lust &amp; marries a girl who sat next to him in art school to solve his lust but still feels lonely, with "strange fevers keeping him awake at night." In time, the marriage fails and Enoch befriends...shadow puppets of his own making, including a woman with a sword in her hand, an old man with a long white beard who went about followed by a dog, a young girl whose stockings were always coming down &amp; hanging over her shoe tops. There must have been 2 dozen of the shadow people, invented by the child-mind of Enoch Robinson who lived with him.If only the Winesburg townsfolk had lived in the age of Twitter &amp; Facebook, their fates might have evolved quite differently but in so many cases, they seem never to be able to give vent to their inner feelings to those closest to them &amp; sometimes not even to themselves. Sherwood Anderson referred to the characters in Winesburg, Ohio as "grotesques" but went on to say that "some of the grotesques were beautiful" &amp; further, that "it was the truths that made people grotesque."

The critic Malcolm Cowley commented that Anderson had "the gift of summing up, for pouring a lifetime into a moment." But Cowley also suggested that a novel should have a structure &amp; a development whereas with Sherwood Anderson "there was chiefly a flash of lightning that revealed a life without changing it." Another critic, Irving Howe, in a commentary that seems dismissive of the "Chicago School" Sherwood Anderson is said to represent &amp; the Midwest in general, concludes that the figures in Winesburg, Ohio "personify to fantastic excess a condition of psychic deformity, the consequence of some crucial failure in their lives, some aborted effort to extend their personalities or to proffer their love." 

Sherwood Anderson chose to expose the interior spaces of his characters in a manner that most authors of his time did not seek to explore &amp; was an influence on Faulkner, Hemingway, Fitzgerald, Steinbeck &amp; other American writers, as well as others farther afield, Israel's Amos Oz among them. I found Anderson's "flashes of lightening" more than sufficient to hold my interest &amp; arouse my empathy, while the lonely, forlorn characters in this little Ohio town were well worth getting to know.