Rating: 3/5

The Prince of Annwn by Evangeline Walton was first published in 1974 by Ballantine, with lovely wraparound cover art by David McCall Johnston. Series editor Lin Carter had previously issued the other three books in the tetralogy in the Ballantine Adult Fantasy Series. The Prince of Annwn was intended to follow under Carter’s editorship, but Carter left Ballantine before it was published, and the book was released without his usual introduction. 

The series of four books are based on the four branches of the Mabinogian, the old myth cycle of Wales. Walton wrote them in the 1930’s, and just one was published then, The Virgin and the Swine (1936). This particular book was reissued in the Ballantine series as The Island of the Mighty (1970); two others followed, and then The Prince of Annwn after the series proper had ceased. 

Curiously, The Island of the Mighty concerns the fourth and last branch of the Mabinogian, whereas The Prince of Annwn concerns the first. The books, therefore, were published in reverse order. I’m not sure this matters, though just for myself I’ve started reading them in the “correct” order, with The Prince of Annwn.

I’m not familiar with the original works on which the tetralogy is based. However, I think I am correct in supposing that Walton’s books are more adaptations or retellings of the old myths than translations of the originals. Just looking at The Prince of Annwn, the spiritual thread that runs through it seems to contain Hindu and Christian elements in addition to any traditional Celtic content. I suspect Walton is expressing her own spiritual leanings as much as those of the ancient Celts.

The writing is generally good, and though somewhat uneven, contains many flights of brilliance. In her description of the monstrous bird that is the Guardian of the Gate, she writes,

“But that winged darkness is terrible because she always mixes truth with lies; twists and blackens all. Hard indeed it is to rise up out of her slough of darkness and realize that life is worth all its long, bitter battles.” (p. 57)

The Prince of Annwn is divided into two parts: “Descent into the Abyss” and “Rhiannon of the Birds.” I preferred the first, in which Pwyll, Prince of Dyved, changes place with Arawn, King of Annwn (the Underworld ), and battles monsters in Annwn before defeating Arawn’s enemy, Havgan. The second part takes place three years later, after a hard winter and poor growing season in Dyved, for which Pwyll is blamed. The druids are after his blood, and he must go on a second quest—to marry the goddess Rhiannon and restore his kingdom’s good fortune. 

Both sections are engaging and held my interest. The book strongly reinforces the idea that modern fantasy descends from ancient myth. Carter tried to make this point in Dragons, Elves, and Heroes, an earlier compilation in the Ballantine Adult Fantasy Series, but it comes through even more clearly in The Prince of Annwn. In a sense, Evangeline Walton’s work is a first step in transforming myth into modern fantasy: neither is it fully original and nor is it a faithful reproduction of the Mabinogian.