Rating: 5/5

First published in 1990, I recently re-read this book with several other men. While some of the examples humorously date the book in its decade, the message of the book and its importance remain just as relevant in the 21st century for men who want to fulfill their God-given leadership responsibilities in a faithful way. The dramatic cultural changes in the quarter-century since then only serve to hammer home how critical a sold-out-to-God husband and father are to the spiritual health of our families, our churches, and our mission in the world.

The book's title is taken from the role of the platoon leader in the Vietnam war, taking the "point" to alert those in his charge about the enemy's position and possible attacks while leading them safely to accomplish their mission. Similarly, in family life, the husband's role as spiritual leader is to do the same for his family through loving Christ, displaying Godly character, loving his wife, and loving his children. In each of these relationships, he notes that "time = influence" and thus involves sacrifice of selfish desires to pursue godly influence.

Personal spiritual growth is a key foundation of this leader's life, and so he emphasizes two critical steps that are very easy to understand but difficult to implement - the absolute necessity for men of God to engage in the spiritual disciplines of regular Bible reading and prayer. "A man who wants to be spiritually mature must put his roots deep into the word of God. Growth comes no other way...Prayer and Scripture go together, and we are most effective when we have a good balance of the two."

Important themes which he then elaborates include cultivating godly character and rejecting moral compromise, practical advice on avoiding and resisting the temptation of lust and the extreme action that resisting sin may require, the fact that pursuing godliness may look abnormal in our culture and will be a continual battle in which to persevere, the necessity of husband-wife teamwork, the blessing of children and how having them exposes and takes away our selfishiness, and practical guidance for raising children in a god-honoring way.

I recommend this book without reservation to any man who is serious about pursuing spiritual maturity and applying it for the benefit of his wife and children and the glory of God in his family, the church, and the world.