Rating: 3/5

Walt Whitman: Let there be commerce between us. At turns bombastic, ridiculous, beautiful, melodramatic, sublime and enlightening, you leave little unsaid and undone. What’s a reader to think? Could you be more modest? Do you blush?

But that’s the beauty, isn’t it? You are indeed multitudes and contradictions. Well, friend, we are agreed. You’ll give all, and I’ll take what I want. Then we’ll walk the ebbing tide and talk about the world. 

Leaves of Grass (1855) – See my separate review of this: http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/.... (5/12)

Song of Myself (1891) -- I didn’t do a detailed study of the differences between this and the 1855 version, but this has added text and some of the odd edges (such as the extensive use of ellipses) are removed from the 1855 version. Many of the additions were very good. (5/12)

Sea-Drift – There are some very well-known poems in this short set. Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking is an odd poem. Often cited as one of Whitman’s best, I didn’t care for it. Somehow death inspired his writing and there’s some maudlin story about the death of a bird. As I Ebb’d with the Ocean of Life is a much darker, more effective poem. The rest don’t rise to the stature of those, but are good nonetheless. (5/12)

Drum Taps &amp; Memories of President Lincoln – I read these sections some time ago, and perused them recently. These sections are uneven – as is much Whitman poetry – with great poems like By the Bivouac’s Fitful Flame and Cavalry Crosssing a Ford and When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloomed, and some less than great First O Songs for a Prelude and Song of the Banner at Daybreak. (Any Whitman poem with a child and father is usually pretty bad.) (5/12) 

The Library of America collection is, as typically the case, an outstanding collection. I wish, however, that they had just included the poetry and added more endnotes. (That is a consistent wish I have the Library of America sets. They seem very concerned about having too many endnotes. If they want to be the definitive hardcover edition in an age of ebooks, it would seem to me they would put a lot of endnotes – something that ebooks don’t do very well.) Whitman’s prose is okay, but a more compact book focused just on the poetry would have been nice to have.