Rating: 3/5

Summary: Interesting adventure story in the same vein as James Bond or Jack Ryan. Set in the Cold War with Star Wars military programs and a healthy dose of science fiction. Good story from first time author Dale Brown. Overall it's a good book, but probably a step below the many works of Clancy.

Background: One of the first computer games I bought as a kid was Megafortress. After playing through the tutorials and simple missions I attempted to play "Flight of the Old Dog". After my bomber was intercepted and the mission failed, I was prompted to read Flight of Old Dog to see how to beat the mission. Fast forward 30 years and I finally learned what I was supposed to do.

Dale Brown is a former Air Force navigator working on B-52s and that shows through in his writing. The amount of detail regarding flight operations and military interactions lends realism and depth to the story. As this is his first book, there are some stumbles and growing pains.
The story follows navigator Patrick McLanahan from trophy winning training missions to life and death decisions across the globe. Flight takes place at the end of the Cold War and draws heavily from attitudes and emotions around that time. Reading it today (2020) loses much of the political tension present at that time.

The good points about the book is the treatment of details and fast flowing plot. The story is immersive with enough details to make the technology believe, but not excessive to the point of textbook boredom. The performance and upgrades to an aging B-52 make the story believable. The amount of detail of how to fly and operate the aircraft help to picture the layout and interactions of the crew. The pace of the story is similar to a movie where actions and scenes move by quickly. There are 2 or 3 long chapters that seem to drag on, but for the most part the story is fast paced.

The main detraction for the story is the outlandish events that transpire. It's hard to provide examples without spoiling so I will refrain.