Rating: 3/5

Wilkie Collins is a master of sensational novels and detective fiction. In his time, he was more popular than Charles Dickens, although Dickens secured a stronger lasting legend posthumously. I love both authors for different reasons, and it's hard to choose who I like the most out of the two. But if I'm pressed to choose, I'd say Wilkie Collins. And there is a strong reason for my choice. I like and appreciate Collins' contribution towards raising awareness of the legal positions of the underprivileged, especially of women and children. If you have read enough Collins, you'll understand me. Even in this early novel, Collins has not wavered from his thematic inclination. 

And yes, your guess is correct. The Dead Secret is a sensational novel, which involves  a scandelous secret that threatens an inheritance. In his customary suspenseful manner, he brings to life an intriguing story. Collins' writing is atmospheric, and his characters have life. He knows exactly how to build up the tension and to create this foreboding aura. His stories are cinematic. These characteristics (which he later developed to perfection) were present in this novel to a satisfying degree.

Being an early novel, it suffers from some flaws. Here and there, one can find parts that are either verbose or overwritten. The novel was first published in serialized format, and that may account for the verbosity. However, in the book form, it was a little too much. And although not a flow in itself, some of the writing resembled his great pal, Charles Dickens. I had this same experience in Armadale, which I read a couple of months ago. Now I love Dickens, but I don't want his style "infiltrating" Collins. :) I much prefer to have the two styles separately. :) I also felt that Collins has borrowed some of the character types from Dickens: The eccentric Andrew Treverton, his manservant, Shrowl, the steward, Mr. Munder, and the jovial Uncle Joseph. Of course, Collins has the right to decide the type of characters he'd employ to make his story interesting, and I do respect that. Nevertheless, reading the story felt like switching between two different authors. :)

The strength in The Dead Secret is its characters. From my perspective, there are two protagonists - both are female. I saw one as a tragic heroine, and the other is a free-spirited heroine with an independent mind. The latter character, appearing in a Victorian novel, felt like a breath of fresh air. I always love the social misfits appearing in Victorian novels. :) These two characters around whom the story revolves were perfectly executed. The reader feels a deep sympathy for the tragic heroine and unreserved adoration for the free-spirited, unpretentious heroine. They ground the story. The supporting characters were all well-drawn. I didn't have a single complaint. 

Overall, it was a satisfactory read. After having a bit of a rough patch with Collins (over Armadale), I'm all too glad to have enjoyed this read. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/