Rating: 3/5

As I was looking up the book's info to write up this review, I realized that I have read the first book in the previous series (although I haven't reviewed it yet). It's been a whlie so it didn't meaningfully impact my review of this, but I'm tempted to go back and reread it now that I've read this one. Both series are set in England in the mid to late 1600s, a somewhat unusual setting in the historical romance space, and I really enjoyed the variety.

Violet is the eldest of three daughters and thanks to a generous grandfather, has a large enough inheritance that she believes any man who woos her will only be doing so because of that, not because of who she is. It doesn't help that her younger sister is gorgeous, which only makes her look even more plain in comparison. As a result, she prefers to stick to more intellectual pursuits and plans to someday use her inheritance to publish a book on philosophy.

Ford Chase, on the other hand, is the baby of the Chase family and spends much of his time ensconced in his laboratories. When his intended elopes with another man, possibly because he had made no progress on actually proposing after 6 years, he decides to take a break at his property in the countryside. When he stops at his brother's house along the way, he ends up in charge of his young niece for over a week. Unfortunately for him, he knows very little about how to handle children. Violet's appearance is something of a godsend, since he was hoping to have time to work on a design for a new type of watch, but soon she becomes even more distracting than his niece, although for entirely different reasons.

Complicating matters is the fact that his estate is in desperate need of funds, the sort of thing that would require that he marry for money. There's no way to hide this from Violet either, as the disrepair is obvious, but when she discovers that his creditors are threatening foreclosure, it only solidifies her belief that the only reason he could want to marry her is for her money.

I feel like the side characters made this book work. Violet's mother in particular was a favorite of mine, although much of that is due to her passion for creating perfumes for her friends. She distills her own essential oils and Ford won me over when he built a distillation column for her to use in her work. Ford's niece is both charming and impish and it is amusing to watch her wrap her uncle around her little finger. We see somewhat less of Violet's sisters and Ford's friend Rand (likely to avoid writing oneself into too many corners!), but I enjoyed the glimpse of the scientists that made up the Royal Society. The Chase family does show up in force toward the end of the book, allowing for visits with some characters from the previous series, but if you haven't read those books then it just becomes a lot of names to keep track of.

There were a few points where I was a little frustrated with Violet's insistence that there was no other reason that Ford would want to marry her beyond her money. She chose to ignore any evidence that might suggest otherwise and it made me want to slap her. Even when it seemed like she had made up her mind, she still went back and forth two or three more times before finally committing. The only other complaint I have is that the sex scenes, while well-done, are somewhat disconnected from the story as a whole. This makes more sense when you realize that a "clean and sweet" version of the book has also been published for those who don't want explicit content in their book and I can't fault the author for trying to broaden the potential audience, but it's also kind of obvious when you look at it in retrospect. The story does suffer some as a result.

Anyway, this was an enjoyable read and I liked it well enough that I will probably keep my eye out for either the sequel or the box set. It's well worth the sale price.