Rating: 5/5

A favorite fairytale reread from childhood and one of my favorite movie adaptations of all time! 

𝓜𝓪𝓰𝓲𝓬𝓪𝓵, 𝓬𝓸𝓶𝓯𝓸𝓻𝓽𝓲𝓷𝓰, 𝓪𝓷𝓭 𝓱𝓮𝓪𝓻𝓽𝔀𝓪𝓻𝓶𝓲𝓷𝓰

I’ll always remember the cover of this book and picking it up at my school library in elementary school. I was fascinated by it. A magical memory I’ll always hold dear to me. 

Warning though! The movie is very different from the book but still extremely fun and memorable. Anne Hathaway did amazing. I still belt out singing her version of Somebody to Love at random times. I loved the little additions and changes they made in the movie and have come to accept each version in their own way and love them both equally. 

Reread this one via audiobook and was so entertained! My favorite parts were the different languages. Loved, loved, loved it! So very creative!

“fwthchor evtoogh brzzay eerth ymmadboech evtoogh brzzay”

  Narration 
 10/10. 

"That fool of a fairy Lucinda did not intend to lay a curse on me. She meant to bestow a gift. When I cried inconsolably through my first hour of life, my tears were her inspiration. Shaking her head sympathetically at Mother, the fairy touched my nose. “My gift is obedience. Ella will always be obedient. Now stop crying, child.” I stopped."

With Cinderella elements and all the right ingredients for a perfect fairytale, Ella Enchanted will capture your heart and restore your inner magic. Bestowed the gift of obedience at birth by Lucinda the fairy, Ella is supposed to be grateful and blessed for such a gift. However, Lucinda is known for giving terrible gifts and doesn’t realize how dangerous such a gift is. Ella must obey every single command placed upon her. Yikes! How frightening! But Ella is a fighter. She’s intelligent, feisty, and blasts straight through the traditional female roles of her time. 

Thus, adventure strikes, and she is on a quest to find Lucinda and demand for her gift to be fixed. On the way, we meet snobby girls, elves, giants, ogres, and even a handsome prince. There are moments of humor and even heartbreak, but it’s an unforgettable coming-of-age, young adult, light fantasy novel. Highly recommend!