Rating: 1/5

In a nutshell:
 

I loved Elizabeth Thornton's Almost a Princess and I guess that's why it pains me to admit how disappointed I am with To Love an Earl. The novel was promising, but its extremely convoluted plot, slow pace, frustrating heroine, and flat characters ruined it for me. 

Believe me when I tell you that the book's blurb doesn't even begin to cover the seemingly ridiculous amount of conflicts in the story. Attempted murder? Check. Conniving mistress? Check. Claims of treason? Check. Gambling debts? Check. Blackmail? Check. And the list goes on. It was as if the writer Googled "possible conflicts" and just added whatever she found into the equation. In effect, the story became nothing more than a combination of disjointed elements. Nothing really made sense, and all those said elements only succeeded in overwhelming the hell out of me. I was only halfway through the book and I was already feeling bombarded by so many issues that I literally had to stop and take a stroll for a while, to soothe myself.

When I came back, I realised that I stopped giving a fuck.
 

It was such a shame because I really liked Gareth. Mind you, no one's more surprised by that fact than I am, because I didn't expect to like him when I started the story. I was actually prepared to hate him. I can only tolerate manipulation to a certain degree, and Gareth went over and beyond my limits. Hell, he even resorted to blackmail just to get Deirdre to marry him. 

But damn, he won me over in the end. My resistance started to thaw when I saw how desperately in love he was with Deirdre. The depth of his feelings was eventually revealed to us through a conversation he had with his good friend, Mr. Landron.

  "Yes, but that's not the connection that interests me." The Earl seemed reluctant to say more, but finally went on with slow emphasis. "He is half brother to Miss Deirdre Fenton."
At Deirdre's name, Landron's head went back and his expression became guarded but he said nothing. Rathbourne caught the sudden restraint in his friend's manner, and his smile became faintly self-mocking.
"What? Haven't you anything to say? No grim warnings about avoiding the vixen who left your friend a shell of his former self?"
Landron's voice was dry and chiding. "I've said it all before. I don't know why I bother. But I thought, in five years, you would be over her. Was I mistaken?"
...
"Why do you dislike her so much?"
"I was the one who picked up the pieces after she had put the boot to you, or had you forgotten?"

He was actually quite pitiful because the heroine totally misjudged him and his intentions at the start. Not without reason, of course. With his reputation and reckless actions regarding her virtue, I could hardly fault Deirdre for being wary of him. But still, my heart felt a twinge of pain every time Deirdre lashed out at him.

  She had rejected him without knowing the first thing about him, without giving him a proper hearing, and that had hurt. It had hurt because he had been captivated by everything about her. What a contemptible specimen he was to let her acquire such power over him. What did she have that she had this hold over him?

As the story progressed, Gareth's situation became more and more pathetic, much to my chagrin. Deirdre's attacks on him grew less justified and became downright cruel. My heart burned with hatred for her when she lied to Gareth and eventually culminated when she pointed a gun at him. And oh, did I mention that every time they had sex she would eventually do something cruel just to spite him? Like, when they first did it, she deliberately held off her release just to show her defiance? WHAT THE FUCK? SERIOUSLY? YOU'RE GOING TO DEBASE THE ACT OF LOVE LIKE THAT?
 

Reading them having sex didn't even feel warm or loving; it left me feeling unclean and hollow. 

Look, I have the utmost respect for strong willed heroines, but Deirdre was just cruel and stupid, man. She'd kiss Gareth one minuted and then lash out at him in another. I could almost hear myself telling her in my head: "Seriously, girl, what is it really going to be? Hatred or love? Pick one and stick to it, you stupid bitch!"

Needless to say I will not read this again. I don't recommend it to anyone. Believe me, just steer clear of this book.