Rating: 3/5

The Leper of Saint Giles is an interesting story of its own. Since, however, it is the 5th Chronicle of the Cadfael series, and I'm reading it in order, the novel doesn't escape from comparison. And for that reason, I felt the story here is weak in its creation. It started full of promise, but slowly waned into a predictable plot, drowning my enthusiasm somewhat. By "a predictable plot" I mean that you could fathom the general line of the story, and how it will end, etc. Nevertheless, some parts took me by surprise and helped fix my interest in the story. So, all in all, it was an up-and-down reading journey, though by no means unpleasant.

Still, I had some grievances. Cadfael's presence, which used to dominate and spread through her novels, felt limited for my liking. His role felt more supportive than dominant. Perhaps that must have been Ellis Peters' intention, but I wished it was otherwise. Another issue I had was being unable to invest myself as I ought to in various character stories. Ellis Peters was taking me from place to place a wee bit soon. 

For all that, Ellis Peters writes well. The historical details (this time a leprosy colony) she brings through the stories provide us with a mirror to the past. There were times during my read that I felt some of the scenes were childish. But the last couple of chapters ensured (to my greater relief) that it was I who had misconceived. Whatever the loopholes she may have in the story, Ellis Peters neatly winds it up. 

On another positive note, Abbot Radulfus and the sheriff, Gilbert Prescott, grew on me. I came to see their merits and appreciate them more. Brother Mark, the former assistant of Brother Cadfael, also plays an admirable role. For the newcomers, I liked the falsely persecuted Joseph Lucy, the leper of Saint Giles, and the three villains - two outright and one deceptive. They were presented larger than life. 

I'm determined to work through the series. So far, I haven't found Ellis Peters' stories boring. Even with flaws, they have an entertaining quality. That itself is encouraging to continue with the series. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/