Rating: 5/5

This book of short, humorous jokes and stories was designed to appeal to many audiences: those seeking a good laugh; those curious about what people many hundreds of years ago or living in very different cultures than theirs considered a good laugh; those seeking more than a good laugh (and this latter category can be divided into several subcategories); and possibly, although this isn't something I know much about, those reading this book because they were told to read it. So, even though I don't fit into all of these categories, I'm going to say a little bit to each potential audience, based on my recent reading of this book.

For those seeking a good laugh: There are quite a few gems in here but the material, I must admit, is uneven. I know I don't have the most evolved sense of humor but still, some of them had me scratching my head, going "Huh? This is a joke?" If that is your experience, too, don't worry about it: the ones that _are_ funny are well worth waiting for. :-) Plus, some of these jokes come from strange places and times, so maybe it's a cultural/context thing. Oh, speaking of which, every culture has its do's and don'ts, its obsessions with good/bad and right/wrong. Our modern age is no exception, especially these days (nuff said, I think). Don't be too shocked if some of these tales strike you as extremely "incorrect." Just remember, these were different people and different times, and they had their own "do's and don'ts," "rights and wrongs" that you'd probably think were absurdly and irresponsibly ridiculous...as people in future times will likely consider this particular "oh so very correct" age that we are living through. (At least, I hope they will. :-/) If you don't go into this book expecting every single joke to have you rolling on the floor (plus be politically correct and perfectly non-offensive to modern ears), you'll really appreciate the ones that do, and you may also find they lend themselves to a more updated, relevant retelling. A few of them have already had contemporary elements added to them by the collector, so you don't have to dress them up too much in modern clothing.

For those wanting to know what people long ago and far away considered hilarious: You are going to get your money's worth. I don't know which was more fascinating: those stories that struck me as hilariously relevant today or those stories that made me think in absolute bafflement, "Well, I guess I had to be there..." I sometimes tried to figure out what sort of mind would find a certain joke a howler... but I was largely unsuccessful in that endeavor. :-/ But my native suspicious was that I would not enjoy being in that person's company for longer than five minutes...

For those seeking more than a good laugh: You are the group I belong to and, thus,can relate to the most. I'll just spit out what little I've been able to grasp and hope that some of you can help fill in the gaps. For years, these stories made no sense, no matter how I battered my intellect against them (no comments about said intellect, please--I already know. :-/). Over and over, trying to puzzle it through, trying to worm out secret, special meanings. Nada, except for the occasional reference to something else I had read. Then I realized I wasn't battering much at all. I demanded from myself an instant explanation (I'd read the joke, after all, so why wasn't I getting any meaning out of it other than "its punchline is so great/its punchline is so lame"? So I continued to read the other books that the author of this collection has written, slowly, as time and life (and my flagging willpower) allowed. I actually think slow, gradual, infrequent reading is the best way, as it prevents intellectual obsession which tends to make one dash about very very fast, but always in circles. But this could simply be my justifying my own laziness, lol.

So, after many years of fruitlessly dashing myself against the Mulla Nasrudin rocks, I then decided that I would try, if I could bear it (meaning my mind really is rather lazy), to think a little about the short story or joke right after I read it. I just asked myself "What does this mean?" and then tried to think of an answer..for longer than five seconds. Occasionally this mental fishing expedition landed me something tiny: a piece of seaweed or driftwood, a crab carapace, a little slug, a bottlecap that said "Moxie," or things like that to tell me there was life (or something) in that ocean... but that's about it. Still that latter point was something of a revelation to me. If there's life in those waters, there's likely a few fat fish! While my skills at puzzling out these joke stories have not really improved much (perhaps because I'm just not letting a certain ego-driven imagination off its tight leash), I have noticed small changes in my life that have absolutely nothing to do with stories or reading them. I guess I perceive things a little differently these days. I think I see more detail. Not all the time and nothing particularly profound. I guess that's it. It's enough for me. Was it really caused by reading funny stories like this? I don't know enough at this point to have an informed opinion on it. It's just an intuition, a sense of a connection, and you may know deceptive those can be, sigh.

For those told to read it: Like I said above, I've never been in your position and expect I never will be but I have a lot of experience with being told what to do, so I can offer this, in the hopes it will help. Follow the instructions, however brief (or verbose), to the letter (and to the spirit, too, if you're certain that you actually understand the spirit and aren't just flattering yourself). Middle of the road stuff here: no more and no less. Don't embellish, don't try to show off, don't overdo it, don't pull that "cool" underdoing shtick, don't assume any attitude that appeals to you as placing yourself in an admirable light. Just follow the instructions and don't think or care too much about it, other than doing your job and then moving on to the next thing. Don't let an ego-driven imagination rampage through this particular garden, flattening everything in its wake. Enjoy the tales. Some are quite hilarious, some are marvelously opaque, some may appear, well... lame, I am afraid. (Although that can be funny in its own way.) But through the reading, follow your directions, if there are any besides "read this," as carefully as if you were negotiating an arms truce with two hostile nuclear powers. And if you weren't told anything other than "read this," for god's sake, don't go inventing mysterious, subtle, hidden instructions that only you can perceive! Just do what you're usually expected to do with any instruction, whatever that may be. The ego is legion and works in all ways. So watch your back...

For what it's worth, the author/compiler of these tales is the late Idries Shah, a man's whose writings I deeply respect and can relate to. He writes on a wide range of subjects and levels. If you are intrigued by this book, I recommend you read more of what he's written.