Rating: 4/5

Rereading Robert Rodi’s 1994 novel “What They Did to Princess Paragon” shows that it retains its satirical bite on the comics industry and its hard-core fans. The story revolves around an acclaimed writer-artist (Brian Parrish) who is lured from working for one company to a competitor with the offer to take on any title and update the character(s). He chooses a legacy character “Princess Paragon” (sort of a Wonder Woman clone) and decides that making her lesbian will bring both outrage and increased sales. Brian is gay, so he feels his retcon will help with acceptance of gay people everywhere. But his chief motivation is not so altruistic; he expects increased fame and fortune from his actions. Enter Jerome T. Kornacker, a thirtysomething comics fan living with his mother and working as a night guard at a local plant. Jerome is a bit of a stereotype of the older comics fan, one that aims for complete collections of his favorite comics and writes heartfelt letters to the editor. He is overweight, straight and lacking any social skills to help him meet women. His favorite comic is Princess Paragon, a character whom he worships for her purity. When Jerome learns that one of his favorite writers is taking over the book and making her a lesbian, he becomes unhinged, goes to a comic book convention and confronts Brian Parrish. He accidentally causes Brian to tumble down stairs. A recovering Brian decides to use the incident to his advantage by convincing Jerome he won’t call the police if he can stay at his house while working on the next issue of “Princess Paragon,” the issue where she comes out. Mom is out of town so further comedy ensues while this odd couple try to live with each other for a few weeks. Jerome attempts to replace Brian’s script with his own to prevent Princess Paragon’s “changeover” from happening. The comedy remains fresh after all these years, but the notion that Brian would agree to move in with his attacker requires a leap of faith. And mother Kornacker’s malapropisms wear thin when she is around. The book came out in 1994 right when the Internet was taking off. Today Jerome would probably be venting about changing his favorite character via social media and trolling Brian Parrish rather than physically confronting him. In these 26 years there have been more comics introductions of gay characters (e.g. Midnighter) and at least one gay retcon of a legacy character (Iceman). The comics industry continues to wrestle with meeting the needs of older continuity loving readers and younger ones who are being introduced to the characters via TV and film. Someone once said that the challenge in any serial type of entertainment is to provide the illusion of change without permanently changing what it was that readers/viewers liked about a show/comic book/book in the first place. That tension lies at the heart of the humor of “Princess Paragon.” Recommended.