Rating: 3/5

I really wanted to like this book more than I did. I'm a huge Anne McCaffrey fan, and I thought I'd long since read the vast majority of her bibliography. When I was hunting for a book published in a specific year for a reading challenge I came across Decision at Doona and realized I never had read this one. I was pretty excited to find a new (to me) Anne McCaffrey book - I love both her straight sci-fi books and her sci-fantasy books (even if she would have said they were all sci-fi)!

Anyhow, the short version is we follow Ken Reeve, a fairly likable protagonist as he along with a small group of other colonists sent from an overcrowded, mostly apathetic Earth population start a settlement on a "pastoral jewel" planet called Doona. Earth colonies have a strict, inviolate rule of not settling on any planets with another sentient species on them.

Unfortunately, or fortunately depending on your perspective, it turns out there is another settlement of sentient cat-people (Hrrubans) just across the river from where the human colonists settle.

The bureaucratic ridiculousness that happens when the two colonies find each other is all too foreseeable and painfully accurate. That might be my favorite part of the book.

However, here's where I have a lot of trouble with the book. 

Hrruban bureaucrats and Human bureaucrats? Basically interchangeable. I had to re-skim the first few chapters where there were Hrruban government meetings because I quite honestly thought they were the Human government meetings and didn't realize they weren't until a few chapters in. Intentional? Maybe.

World building? Pretty light. Seems like a random nice forest with a river running through it. There are a few interestingly named plants that can be harmful and the trees smell cinnamoney. There are a few animals mentioned - they're all pretty much standins for Earth animals (bears, deer). There's one more monsterish one that crops up later, so I'll give that one some credit.

Different race? Pretty much humans with fur, cat-like ears, and tails.

The Humans do a good job of picking up the Hrruban language and the Hrrubans mysteriously pick up on the Human language really quickly. Apparently if you're a 6 year old boy you can learn the Hrruban language instantly if you just "listen hard". I mean, children do learn language quickly, but that was a little silly unless we were going to go down a telepathy storyline (I hoped we were, we did not). I will say, the bit where Todd (the 6 year old boy in question) immediately finds some rope to tie around his waist to be a Hrruban "tail" was pretty endearing. Even more odd to me was the decision to have the 6 year old boy end up being the main negotiator/translator between Hrruban and Human.

The worst offender to me was the sheer sexism of the story. I understand it was written in a different era, I really do - but the humans only sent men to initially settle the colony. The wives and kids show up later and the women quite literally seem to arrive only so the men can have sex and so the women can cook for a feast. They show up on a spaceship and immediately start cooking and cleaning. Pat (our protagonist Ken's wife) is excited to cook and clean the "real" way instead of pushing a button. That's her adventure in the new world. Their daughter appears only as a worried babysitter for the son, Todd who is a bit of a star toward the latter part of the book. The only glimmer I saw was when Pat seemed appalled that one of the Hrruban wives basically had the equivalent of multiple advanced degrees but was spending her time "playing house" on Doona. Also, once again, our protagonist seems to find that repeatedly shaking the woman in his life is a good way to communicate with her. On my recent re-read of Dragonflight I was surprised at how often that popped up, so it was interesting to see it in this book as well.

Many of the the technology projections went well wide of the mark, but I don't find that as much of an issue in older sci-fi. It definitely does give you the feeling of it being dated though. Examples - messages being sent through space faster than light - but when they arrive they're pieces of microfiche in a capsule. Recorders and translators being big and bulky contraptions. The Computer being capitalized in several places gave me a chuckle. The far more hand-wavy approach to big advancements like matter transmitters actually worked a lot better for me.

So, despite my perception of the shortcomings I did find it an enjoyable read. Did I love it? No. Did I hate it? Also no. I do love a lot of Anne McCaffrey's later work more than this earlier piece and I'll always have a soft spot in my heart for her books.