Rating: 4/5

It's been almost a year since I finished this book and I still don't quite know how I feel about it. 

The author says that the title comes from an old term for mentally ill people, and that this book is meant to highlight the experiences of those people who still to this day fall through, or are pushed, the cracks in society. It's entirely accurate to say that this book centers those experiences and portrays them in a nuanced, complex, and perhaps most unusually accurate way. It's difficult to find books about people with serious mental illnesses that do all three of these things, especially ones that don't end with a bow wrapped around them and a card that says, and now doesn't that make you feel so much better about your own life? 

At the same time though, this book isn't perfect. It owes a lot to Junot Diaz's Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, not just in it's style and content (a dangerously overweight son struggling with his own neuroses and sexual hang ups while living in an immigrant household with three generations of women-his sister, mother, and grandmother-all of whom have their own struggles). 

LaValle also struggles with his depiction of women and their sexualities. The protagonists' sister is barely pubescent and there are numerous points in the book where she faces pretty egregious sexualization, some of which comes from her bother himself. His mother is perhaps the character treated most unkindly. Additionally the sister appears in a scene that does warrant a trigger warning for statutory rape or the sexual abuse of a minor. These are not inherently bad things, as representing something inexcusable isn't the same as accepting or supporting it. However I do feel that at times the writing blurs the line between saying that men view women as unattainable unpeople, and believing it. 

My final note has much less to do with LaValle and much more to do with the general populace. Mentally Ill people face enormous disenfranchisement, violence, and the outright disgust of many. I fear that someone less open minded or knowledgeable could easily read this book and ultimately take away that mentally ill people, ecstatic people, are human just as they are, but their fear and mistrust of these people is still the justified and safer option. This is due in part to the ending of the novel, but also because LaValle, like all good writers, doesn't tell you with a neon sign how exactly to feel about the events of his novel or its protagonist.

I do highly recommend this book, if not just for the questions it raises in the reader, but also it's painstaking dedication to narrating a story from the perspective of someone whose mind resists description at every turn.