Rating: 5/5

An astonishing work, late Shakespeare at his best, maybe just prior to the Tempest. Best children's role in the canon, Mamilius. Perhaps the most jealous of all the Bard's jealous lovers and spouses, Leontes. The most innocent accused, Hermione. The best stage direction, "Exit pursued by a Bear." The best friendship turned sour. The best speech on flowers, Perdita's "Now my fairest friend, / I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might/ Become your time of day, and yours and yours,/...daffodils, / That come before the swallow dares…lilies of all kinds,/ The fleur de luce being one…"(IV.4) This last, perhaps the worst line in all the canon, in a grand compendium speech.
 Then there is the Chorus, unique in the canon: "I am Time. I have passed" (as Amherst's T Baird said). Sixteen years between the first half and…Enough time for Perdita to grow from baby to Babe. (By the way, "Babe" is difficult to render into the Romance languages, like Italian: No, not "bimbo, or Bambina, or Tesoro.")

 Until the 18C, interest centered on Hermione, particularly the statue scene, but from the early 18C to the mid-19th, the play was performed "as a sheep-shearing festival"(176, Arden ed., 1986).
 Autolycus sings the famous "When daffodils begin to peer" which includes my fave line, "For a quart of ale is a dish for a king"(86). And though a thief, Autolycus has great insight into the Humperty-Dumpty White House. He says, "I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court [White House]"(IV.iii.85) Describes Sally Yates! And Comey?
 There is the riotous thievery of Autolycus…recently played to perfection by (Director) Fred Sullivan, Jr., at the Gamm Theater, Pawtucket RI *(perhaps the best Shakespeare I have seen in 40 years, including many in England). The most famous historical Autolycus was in the 18C, Richard Yates, who later began the New Theatre in Birmingham (1773). And finally, there is the animation of art, the statue invigorated--a variation on the Renaissance topos.

 AS in every play by the Bard, one finds acute analysis of character and satire of leaders, as in IV.iii above, but also here, Paulina says of the hypersuspicious Leontes, "These dangerous, unsafe lunes i' th' king, beshrew them!"(II.2.30). As a student of lunar mapping and influence in the seventeenth century, I love madness termed "lunes," and I apply the word to the US would-be King Humperty-Dumpstery.

*PS The Gamm Theater has moved from its excellent small venue to a huge theater, which I've never gone to. Serious reduction in level of excellence, though increase in level of tickets-- but not from me.