Rating: 1/5

I have written in the front inside cover of this book, "The Search." I also have sheets of paper with which I answered the questions. I wrote, "The gospel-the Good News of Jesus Christ. To me, personally, this means Jesus saved my from (and I listed the difficulties that I was experiencing in my life). Through Him, I am forgiven and have eternal life."

I initially read this sometime in the eighties. It was during this time that I understood the concept of Jesus emotionally for I was struggling deeply and found strength through my faith. I believed that I was saved by this faith, alone. 

One of the questions asked was to summarize some Bible verses about salvation. Ridenour, who teaches the popular notion that there is nothing we have to do to be saved, included the Bible verse Hebrew 5:9, "And having been made perfect (talking about Jesus Christ), He became to all those who obey Him the source of eternal life."
 In my notes, I wrote, "Jesus is the source of eternal salvation for all who obey Him (follow His teachings)." Although I did not realize the import of this verse at the time, it became integral to understanding "How To Be a Christian" and it had little to do with Ridenour's teaching. 

In 1993, I visited a little church building where I struggled with their teaching that one had to be baptized in order to be saved. I thought I was saved a long time ago. I felt saved. (I had even been baptized as a baby besides accepting Him into my heart as an adult. This was done by praying the "Sinner's Prayer") I believed I was saved but as I studied more thoroughly about salvation, I came to see that salvation does indeed include obedience, something that was stressed by this church of Christ. Obedience to the Word which teaches that in order to be saved, one has to first hear the gospel (Acts 8:5; Romans 10:17), believe what has been preached (John 3:16; Hebrews 11:6; Acts 8:5-6;), repent of one's sins (Romans 3:23; Acts 2:38) confess that Jesus is the Son of God (Acts 8:36-37; Romans 10:8-13), be baptized for the remission of one's sins (Acts 2:38, Romans 6:3-5, 17-18; 1 Peter 3:21) and then be faithful until death (Revelation 2:10; 2 Timothy 3:14-15). 

I was almost going to throw this long forgotten book away until I realized the importance of this book in my journey to the true understanding of the Scriptures. I hope that this review might spark your own search. If I can be of any service, please leave a comment. 

Thank you!