It took me one day to finish this book. True to form, I never know where Ernest K Gann is going with his books. He kind of gives you a detailed summary at the beginning or maybe that’s just the annotation part. I read it for a book club. I recommended in the company of Eagles and they didn’t like that book but they thought they would give this author another chance so they decided to read the aviator. I have had it on my list for a while so I’ve picked up the book. There were surprisingly sensitive themes for a book that has all of the trappings of a good rescue story. It seems to be a story about rescue but it’s more about the rescue of Jerry than anything else. And he does have a last name what you do find out toward the end of the novel.

As usual, the flights are described in great detail, which is part of the attraction for me for any of the Earnest K Gann books. The author was recommended to me 30 years ago by a then CFI, who has since become a pilot. he said that one of his favorite books was fate is the Hunter, so I read it that long ago and then have picked up some of his other writings over the last three decades. And as usual, he always ends the book how it should be ended. However, to me, I always am a bit surprised by the ending because he doesn’t tie up every loose end, but he gives a good Indication in all of his books at least the ones I’ve read so far of the direction he wants you to take the ending. He always leaves outcomes to the imagination, so he certainly puts all of the blocks in place to tell you how it should end. It’s almost as if there is a and they lived happily ever after, and end that you can change if you’d like.

I don’t think there has been a Ernest K Gann book that has disappointed me. Others are written at different points of writing journeys, I think. I was surprised I believe to see that this one came so late in life because I know he has been writing since the 60s. I have other books on my list that he has written. I’m sure I will enjoy them immensely and I’m sure as usual, that I will be surprised by the themes as well as the ending even though I expect the ending. I think one of his strengths is that he ends the book like he wanted to be ended, but he also put an element of surprise in that ending and let you imagine what happens. Maybe that’s just a sense of history Displaying itself in my case, but whatever the reason I like the element used in the story.