Rating: 3/5

When I first picked up Into the Wilderness and started reading I nearly died of happiness to see the characters from one of my favorite movies (The Last of the Mohicans) in it!!!!The first three books were wonderful and fabulously written. Watching Elizabeth and Nathaniel's relationship grow and their children was an absolute pleasure. I did have some hesitations at first with Lake in the Clouds, but Donati's style and writing cleared up some of the earlier hesitations I had. 

Now onto Fire Along the Sky. I think this could have been a fabulous book, a wonderful book....if not for a two nagging and annoying lingering doubts and blanks Donati left. First...the jump in time. I understand you can't have books falling year after year after year, but it really was a drastic jump. One minute I'm reading about the 8 year old twins and a newly married Hannah, and the next minute (well not really the next minute more like the next week)I'm reading about 18 year old twins who are leaving Paradise and a shell of the former Hannah who Donati just tells us has been presumably widowed and lost her only child. That leads me two my second and probably largest annoyance with the book...the way in which Donati directs Hannah's story.

Okay, so I was not by any means at all a fan of the fact that Donati kills off Strikes-the-Sky. It had taken me a bit to warm up to Strikes-the-Sky in Lake in the Clouds (honestly I had been holding out a secret hope that somehow Liam would change and his wife would be dead or something), but once I continued reading I perceived Strikes-the-Sky to be much better for Hannah/Walkes-Ahead because he sees both the Mahican and White parts of her. So there I am in my little blissful contentment after Lake in the Clouds that Strikes-the-Sky and Hannah are perfect and will live happily ever after, and then I read Fire Along the Sky. If I ever thought of not finishing the series in the middle of the series, it would have been when I found out-- after starting to read the book-- that Strikes-the-Sky has gone with Manny Freedman and Hannah presumes him dead. I was livid when I read this...for goodness sakes Donati had take Liam away from Hannah and now she takes Strikes-the-Sky away; I honestly think it was for more shock and awe affect than anything else--as in 'Let's see how far we can take Hannah's life and make it into the most wretched and difficult we can short of killing her'. Alright, maybe I'm a going over the top a little, but it really did anger me that Donati would put Strikes-the-Sky into Lake in the Clouds at the end to comfort us over the fact that Liam Kirby has turned out to not be Hannah's true love, and then not even bother to put him into Fire Along the Sky except when he visits Hannah in her dreams. I honestly think it would have been better if she had never created his character and just had Hannah have a desire to head west with her uncle Otter. 

Okay, now onto the parts that I did like.

I fell in LOVE with Lily and Simon! Yes, she seemed a little spoiled, but I couldn't help but watch as the two of them circled around each other. Him loving her and trying to show her that she loves and needs him too was one of the most beautiful tales of courtship to read about; they are perfect for each other!  Seriously loved when she threw the bottle of rose oil at him! It showed that she had guts and wasn't going to go down without a fight or giving her opinion. 

Also, I liked Luke and Jennet. It was really the first time we are given a glimpse into Nathaniel Bonner's first child by Gisele Somerville, but he proves to be quite a interesting and dynamic character. In Dawn on a Distant Shore, I had loved Jennet's little character as she takes Hannah all through the nooks and cranies of the Earl's house in Scotland. In this book she becomes a character of depth and courage (a little idiotic for leaving the letters) but a natural heroine to join the rest. 

So final conclusion...I would have given this book 4 stars or even 4.5, but I just could not get over the jump in time because it wasn't well established in what happened during the 10 years between the two books and the way in which Donati directed Hannah's life.