Rating: 4/5

Winston Graham started his Poldark series in the 1950s and he knocked out four entries in a row, culminating in WARLEGGAN.

Presumably he was at “four, no more,” and he backed away from it and started writing more contemporary thrillers, like MARNIE (which you should be reading right now). 

Then, 20 years later, he claimed he started wondering what all the folks over in Cornwall, circa 1790, were up to, and he returned to this series with this novel, THE BLACK MOON.

Is this true? I’m not sure. It’s likely more truthful that his other novels weren’t selling as well as the series, and he, like many of us, had mortgage payments to make. 

So, was his heart in this renewed project? I’m not sure.

I’m assuming that, for Poldark fans in 1973, a new entry in the series was probably greeted with much enthusiasm. I know I would have been excited by its arrival, at the time. I was excited to read it in 2026, too!

But, for me, I went from reading a perfect novel, WARLEGGAN (Poldark #4), to reading the comeback novel, twenty years later.

And this is how it felt to me: detached, and overwritten. 

Unfortunately, it’s a new entry on my “100 pages too long” shelf, rife with unnecessary and unwanted details about the French Revolution, frogs and painstakingly boring minutiae about ships.

I’m not a ding-dong; if I want to know more about the French Revolution, I’ll read about it. Please, please just rescue Dr. Enys from the nasty prison-of-war and don’t make my eyes glaze over with French names and innuendo about the sophisticated betrayals among the upper classes of France. 

I suffered long periods of frustration here, despairing that perhaps the rest of the series has gone to the dogs. I’m not sure, yet, but if Poldark #6 feels like this one, I will be done. 

This was almost 500 pages, and my eyes are tired, and I wanted to get back, shoulder to shoulder, with my favorite peeps from Cornwall, yet he kept them at arms length from me, and kept handing me frogs and French Revolutionists.

He lost his connection with his characters. Does he get it back? He’s got one more chance to prove to me that he wanted to be back in Cornwall as badly as I do.

I'm grateful he ended the story with Agatha, one of my favorite characters:

All the iron discipline of determined old age told you what to do--close your eyes, breathe deeply, shut out the angry thoughts, remember only survival. It had been practised before in so many every-day affairs. Apparent temper, apparent furious scoldings were surface storms, creating no real disturbance, no disturbance in depth. You grew to know how. . . But sometimes the discipline does not, cannot work. The fury, the agony builds up until it bursts all controls, and you are defenceless against all the rushing, blood-surging, damaging emotions which sweep through you and over you and will eventually destroy you.

3.5, rounded up to 4