Rating: 5/5

These two books - "When Worlds Collide" and its sequel "After Worlds Collide" - were so ridiculous in so many ways, and there's plenty to criticize, if you're inclined to. The dialogue was ridiculous. Some of the science was questionable at best, especially in the sequel - would a random planet drifting in from space really have the exact air mixture humans needed to survive, and foods they could eat, etc.? - and, like Clarke's "Rendezvous with Rama," you only get tantalizing glimpses of the aliens; you never actually get to meet one. John Varley's introduction is also perfect in so many ways, including in noting that the list of the few hundred people to survive the end of the world, chosen by the alleged greatest scientist on earth, was basically a selection from the American Social Register of 1932. Why was Tony Drake along, other than that he wanted to marry Hendron's daughter? He was a stock trader!! Bring another doctor, please!! 

And yet...five stars. I can barely even explain it. Can the end of the world be "fun"? Maybe a little! It definitely kept me engaged and interested. The plot was well-paced and the flowery language sometimes actually worked, for subject matter as serious as the end of the world. It made me think - how would humanity react if the situation described actually happened? How would we truly face a cosmic catastrophe? The context in which this was written was also fascinating. It was the early 1930s, and already the authors were talking about atomic energy and space travel. There were also glimmers of the tensions that would lead to World War II there, too, both in the last days of the earth and on the new planet. And of course, the Other People, the lost civilization and exquisite tragedy of the new planet's original inhabitants. 

I would just say, if you like post-apocalypse literature, give this a try. Extend grace to the authors on the occasional political incorrectness. This was the thirties, okay? Relax. Seriously. Also, if you do like the genre, this isn't the oldest example, but it is early, and it's interesting, if in no other way, for historical purposes. It's also readable and interesting with a plot that moves along and doesn't preach to me about politics or have some political agenda. Is that my only standard for novels now? Maybe, considering some of the crap that's come out the last decade. Five stars.