Rating: 4/5

There are very few stories in the short history of civilization that can match that of Alexander the Great. The name alone inspires a kind of awe, and after reading Steven Pressfield's impressive historical-fiction account, I feel as though I have a better appreciation for just how amazing Alexander's life was. In his twenties he was breaking apart the Sacred Band of Thebes, assaulting the Persian empire, and conquering further and faster than anyone to the time had dreamed of doing. It's one thing to abstractly think, "Wow, Alexander controlled most of the known world at 32." It's quite another to be dropped into the battles, understand just how outnumbered he was most of the time, and the staggering genius it took to break the Persian empire in two. 

Pressfield's style is one that I can understand how a few people might be turned off. Personally, I loved it. I enjoy military history, and so I have no problem with Alexander, in the first person, explaining exactly how the battle is going to go, and then having the actual battle scene follow. Pressfield's basic out is this: he's doing equal parts history and fiction, and not sacrificing either. Not to mention, being a tactician, this doubling up on battles makes a certain sense in the context of who Alexander is. 

Aside from fantastic battle sequences, Pressfield found a clear voice for one of history's most extraordinary figures. Pressfield's Alexander is very aware of himself. On the one hand he's Alexander, a man who just loves being a soldier. On the other hand he's 'Alexander,' conquerer of the world, thought by many to be a deity, needing to plant his flag for his age and all the ages to follow by reaching the ends of the earth. He struggles to match his lofty dreams with the realities of a discontented army far from home in the sweltering heat of India. Through his own eyes we come to understand why people were able to love him so easily, and how dedicated he was to a singular ambition. The complexities, rewards and challenges of being the most powerful man to ever live bring life to what is usually the monotone of a history book.

On the fact front, it seems that Pressfield really did his homework. Sometimes when I read historical fiction and research the stuff later, discrepancies begin to appear. With what little I know of Alexander's conquest, Pressfield is as true to history as he is to telling a gripping story. Education and entertainment. What a concept. 

Very, very solid novel. A real page-turner. Highly recommended, particularly to anyone interested in ancient history. 

"The sarissa's song is a sad song.
He pipes it soft and low.
I would ply a gentler trade, says he,
But war is all I know."