Rating: 4/5

As the old saying goes..."A friend in need is a friend indeed". The honorable Judge Dee will learn this out very quickly to his great regret, when passing through the resort of Paradise Island from unpleasant duties in the Imperial Capital, Chang'an ( now Xi'an) ...no Disneyland but notorious in seventh century China during the Tang Dynasty, A.D. 668. Calling this an island is stretching it, mostly surrounded by a river though, an adult area for gambling houses, imbibing and brothels quite prosperous, everyone is making money, well most are, the magistrate here is the obese, fun loving, lethargic Lo Kwan-choong. Finding himself in a bit of a pickle, making a promise he can't keep, to Autumn Moon the exquisite courtesan, and flees hastily, after begging the good Dee for help to take over while attending "vital business" faraway, he should have kept on the road not stopping to see Lo. The unenthusiastic able man has no choice, one little case his friend said pending , a routine suicide becomes a triple mystery going back thirty years, but are they murders or just more suicides this is the puzzle; how badly the uncomfortable Judge Dee desires to get home to Poo-yang, and the peaceful atmosphere there. Plots for power, ambushes from vicious gangs, boats colliding in the dark river, attempted seductions, an old lethal plague absolutely important in discovering the truth, all add to the unreal turmoil in the island. With the assistance of trusted lieutenant Ma Loong, a lusty man also, he too gets involved... what else a girl working in a house of ill repute Silver Fairy. She's from his own village and extremely beautiful , he falls in love. Even contemplates buying and marrying her, risking his friends teasing but not caring. The boisterous festival of the Dead weeks long, is crowding the streets in Paradise Island, the people are joyful and drinking rather... 
 heavily while the celebrations continue the unhappy Dee is working . The academic Lee Lien's death was it really by his own hand, suspects are plentiful and the beautiful Autumn Moon pays an unexpected visit to the Red Pavilion, the scene in the exact room of the hostel, where the blood occurred. Only a man with the fortitude of the judge could remain unemotional looking at the semi-nude woman. Still he is not afraid of ghosts or sleeping there, and what about Feng Dai the warden here , is he a respectable person or another criminal. A neglected crime novel which is more than this, for people who like a good mystery and gain knowledge about a different culture. You are immersed in the day to day living from an ancient era and still feel how civilization continues its progress or lack of, the climb up above the clouds to a better world, is not always in a straight line.