Rating: 5/5

I'm a big fan of Ursula LeGuin: her fantasy/sci fi; her essays, her writing guides; her translation of the Tao Te Ching, which I've read the last three Januaries and will probably reread this next year. And now, Orsinian Tales, which are historical fiction, sort of, set in a fictional Eastern European country. Stories are "randomly" presented rather than organized by time. Many are set in the first part of the 20th century, but the earliest is set in the 12th century. As she says, these stories are "linked by theme, image, and ongoing cultural and historical forces more than by simple chronology" (Kindle 3297).

These stories are spare, and most characters live in poverty, as LeGuin described, in a country "trashed" by Hitler, one that Stalin was now trashing. Furniture, food, transportation, and heat were rare. 

Some quotes:

You said there are unpardonable crimes. And I agree that murder ought to be one. And yet, among all men, it was the murderer whom I loved, who turned out in fact to be my brother. (Kindle 595-597).

“Nothing is evil, nothing is wasted, if only we look at the world without fear!”—then he broke away and stood up. “The only way to do that is go blind.” (Kindle 1168-1169)

An active man, the strongest and most intelligent worker in the quarries, a crew foreman since he was twenty-three, he had had no practice at all at idleness, or solitude. He had always used his time to the full in work. Now time must use him. He watched it at work upon him without dismay or impatience, carefully, like an apprentice watching a master. He employed all his strength to learn his new trade, that of weakness. (Kindle 1349-1352)

What good is music? None, Gaye thought, and that is the point. To the world and its states and armies and factories and Leaders, music says, “You are irrelevant”; and, arrogant and gentle as a god, to the suffering man it says only, “Listen.” For being saved is not the point. Music saves nothing. Merciful, uncaring, it denies and breaks down all the shelters, the houses men build for themselves, that they may see the sky. (Kindle 2416-2419)

She had thought of herself as one born for few, passionate friendships, out of place at the polite and cheerful dinner-tables and firesides of his life. Now she thought she had not been out of place, only envious. She had begrudged [her ex-husband] to his friends, she had envied the gifts he gave them: his courtesy, his kindness, his affection. She had envied him his competence and pleasure in the act of living. (Kindle 2544-2547)

 “Do you think I wish it said that I sold her courage to buy my safety? Do you think she’d go if she knew what I am giving for her freedom?" (Kindle 2749)

In stark contrast to the starkness of their environments and the political climate they are living in, these characters struggled, sometimes unsuccessfully, with existential decisions and moral choices. As a result, these stories feel like a series of movements in a symphony, setting the stage and building toward climax. 

But all this happened a long time ago, nearly forty years ago; I do not know if it happens now, even in imaginary countries. (Kindle 2933-2934)