Rating: 4/5

First off the list of the parenting books I intend to read.

Quite an easy read, two 45 minute sessions over two days. The book make a really strong argument for unconditional love. Which as Dr. Campbell points out is love for a person "no matter what". With regards to children, loving them regardless of who they are, of how they live up to expectations, regardless of their behaviour.

With this as the foundation the book, Dr. Campbell then proceeds to detail how unconditional love can be expressed to children. Briefly put Dr. Campbell argues that children feel love through: eye contact, physical contact, focused attention and discipline. Discipline receives a larger section because Dr. Campbell is wary to emphasise unconditional love and worries that people often jump to discipline (specifically understanding discipline as punishment) too quickly.

I think the foundation the book argues for is great. I felt Dr. Campbell's passion seeping through for parents to express unconditional love in a way that children will understand. Another positive of the book was that it was very easy to read. This is a very approachable book that you don't need a PhD to understand.

I felt like the practical advise was more of a framework which required that I needed to then actively discuss with my wife how these principles would play out in raising our children. I think that others would see this framework approach (even though it is illustrated with examples) as inferior to a book that provided a comprehensive to-do list, setting out in concrete steps what course of action to take under each circumstance. However, though it requires more effort to apply Dr. Campbell's framework to our lives, it is still possible to do so - and I believe that it has the advantage of being easier to remember and apply to each circumstance as it comes up.

Non-Christian readers might be put off by the Christian undertones that the book carries, though from a theological point of view the scriptural references aren't misinterpreted by Dr. Campbell - he doesn't twist the Bible to say something it doesn't. He even argues against people that do so (specifically in reference to misinterpreting the Bible for parenting purposes).

Dr. Campbell is apologetic in referencing himself and his family and I would have preferred if he had other people's stories to share. Some of his anecdotal stories are a bit over the top and slightly distracted from the message he was putting across.

Overall a good read, great principles as my wife and I look forward to welcoming our son into the world. A recommended read from me.