The council's decision was banishment. Stalking Wolf said goodbye to his sister and stepmother. Summer Wind was waiting as he walked away. She tried to apologize for playing Hump Back Bear and himself against each other and causing his death. His father rode up and gave him his horse, Black Wind, and a knife. He told him he loved him and watched as he rode away and never looked back. 
Stalking Wolf's mother had been Cherokee and died when he was young. He had been raised by a housekeeper until she quit. Other children hadn't been allowed to play with him because he was a half-breed. After the housekeeper quit, Killian Gallegher stopped drinking, sold their house and moved to New Orleans. He killed a man so they headed to California. They met up with a man who sold Indian women and he became smitten with Tall Grass Woman. They snuck off with her in the middle of the night and returned her to her people. They were happy to have her back and she soon married Killian. Yellow Flower came along the following summer. Stalking Wolf was accepted into the tribe as a warrior. He was 26 when he fell in love with Summer Wind.
He had been traveling for weeks when he heard a noise. He checked on his horse and found another one mounting her. Stalking Wolf caught the horse and went back to sleep. He woke up being beaten by men who worked for Brenden Carmichael, owner of the Circle C ranch. The men were threatening to hang Stalking Wolf when his daughter spoke up for him. She told them that she didn't think he had taken the horse and they shouldn't hurt him if they weren't sure. Her father was surprised that she was taking up for him because her brothers had both been killed by Indians. Brenden had noticed his thoroughbred and decided to take both Black Wind and the Indian back to his ranch. He also didn't want to look bad in his daughter's eyes. 
Raiford (Rafe) Gallegher had at least one broken rib. He swore that Abner Wylie would pay. Caitlyn was surprised to find out that Rafe was half Irish. She cleaned him up and put him in their spare room. Rafe felt the attraction but vowed he would never trust a woman again. Caitlyn had finally found a man she was drawn to, and he was an Indian. 
Rafe's wounds healed and Brenden wanted his horse. Brendon told Rafe that he could stay and get paid to work if he would allow him to purchase Black Wind's colt. Rafe agreed and started working. One of the first things he did was to help gather a herd of wild mustangs. Rafe knew that Caitlyn was following them and kept quiet. He had to rescue her the next day or she would have been trampled. He took her home. Brenden was angry but hoped that she would find someone to love so he could hand her care over to someone younger. 
The 4th of July dance came and Caitlyn refused Abner's invitation to be his date. She went wit her father. The dancing began in the evening and she was surprised to find that Rafe knew how to dance. Abner got angry with Caitlyn turned down an invitation to dance with him. He proceeded to get drunk and by the time the night was over began to insult her. He made a comment about her not being the lady he thought she was because she chose to dance with a half-breed. Rafe knocked Abner out and he quit the next morning. Rafe didn't kiss Caitlyn after the dance but he did after breakfast. 
Caitlyn went to the creek one morning and saw that Rafe was there. They talked and she was on her way back to the house when she saw the fire. Her barn was burning and she arrived to find her father and their foreman had been killed by renegade Indians. Caitlyn was heartbroken and alone. She sent Rafe and his horse away from the ranch. Abner came by the funeral home as she was making arrangements and offered to marry her. He didn't think she had a choice now but she had already turned him down three times. 
Caitlyn was worried within a few days. Things weren't going well and 2 men had already quit. Rafe was planning on leaving town but never managed to get away. He heard Abner bragging in the bar that he was going to marry Caitlyn and become the owner of the ranch. Rafe went to see Caitlyn and told her what Abner was saying then he offered to marry her himself. She didn't know what to say until Abner arrived. She told Abner that she was marrying Rafe. 
They married a few days later but on their wedding night, she couldn't get past the fact that he was an Indian and Indian's had murdered her family. Rafe was angry and left to go into town and found a poker game. Caitlyn thought he was sleeping with someone else. 
Paulie came and interrupted them one night when they were kissing to tell them that her horse had been attacked by a mountain lion. They stayed up for hours working with him and didn't get back to where they left off. Rafe was again disappointed.
They went to town the next Saturday and she talked with her best friend. She got advice to let go of her pride and apologize to him. Abner approached her and tried to kiss her. She kicked him in the groin and ran away. She told him that if he ever tried that again, Rafe would kill him. Abner vowed to make her pay for choose Rafe.
They arrived home and she Caitlyn couldn't bring herself to apologize. She did ask him if he was seeing another woman and he told her that the only woman he wanted was her. She told him that he didn't have to wait any longer to make her his wife and the spend the next three days making up for their lost honeymoon. 
The months after that fell into a pleasant routine. The seasons passed and the bard was rebuilt. It was obvious that Black Wind was pregnant and she had her foal. Caitlyn knew that she was in love with Rafe but was still waiting to hear the words from him. It still hurt when she made comments about savages and that she wished all Indians were dead. She tried to apologize and he let it pass after a bit. There were times that he felt that the ranch wasn't truly his home but Caitlyn's and he was the caretaker. She vowed to be more careful with her words but he knew how she felt inside and it was difficult to accept at times.
They prepared to take their cattle to Ft. Laramie to the Army. Rafe tried to get her to stay at home but she refused. They were attacked by Indians and he was stabbed while protecting her from being raped. He developed a fever and it took days to recover from his injury. As soon has he could ride, they headed toward Ft. Laramie. They found three of the ranch hands and covered them with rocks and sticks. They found out that another of the men had died but two were in the infirmary. Rafe went to see them the next day to talk to them. He suspected that it wasn't Indians who had stolen their cattle. The men told him that one of the ones who had died told them that he had seen Abner Wylie with the Indians. Rafe found out that Summer Wind was being used as a prostitute for the soldiers at the fort and took her. Rafe, Caitlyn and Summer Wind headed back home. They were met by Cheyenne's on the way and Summer Wind told her cousin that Stalking Wolf was her husband and Caitlyn was their slave. Rafe went hunting and Summer Wind gambled Caitlyn away. Rafe returned and tried to by her back but the warrior refused to sell her. He was attempting to rape her but his jealous, pregnant wife fought him off. Summer Wind tried to get Stalking Wolf to take her as his wife and when he refused her, she told her cousin that he had been banished for killing a Lakota man. Rafe was sent through a line of Indians beating him with sticks, rocks and whatever they could find. Rafe survived without breaking anything but he was in pain. He had to find a way to get Caitlyn back before she was used by the Indian who now owned her. He wished that he had never rescued Summer Wind but she did feel bad about what she had put Rafe through.
Summer Wind came to find him and brought him some salve and food. Rafe asked her to bring Caitlyn to him and she told him that she wasn't sure if she would or not. He told her she owed him. One morning soon after Rafe left, Caitlyn found herself leaving the tent early. She went for a walk along the river and headed in the direction that Rafe had taken. The pregnant wife hid Caitlyn's tracks heading out of the village. Summer Wind found her and took her to Rafe. It took them 3 weeks to get to their ranch. He explained what had happened to the two hands that had remained at the ranch and told them about Wylie's involvement. He got to thinking that he never really saw the men up close and that all of them might have been white because their ponies were shod. The men had been sloppily scalped too. 
Rafe found Wylie in town and pretty much called him out and told him that he knew it was him. Wylie had made $7,000 off the sale of the cattle and had more than enough to pay off the loan at the bank for ownership of the Circle C ranch. He was anxious to make that happen. Rafe went home to make love to his wife and felt sorry that Wylie was mad enough at him to cause so much hurt to her. Rafe blamed himself and thought that she might have been better off marrying Wylie but he was unwilling to give her up. He told Caitlyn what he suspected about Wylie's part in what had happened.
Things on the ranch were going smoothly. Rafe rounded up what was left of the cattle and sold it. He made enough money to pay the interest on the loan and bank postponed the due date for the balance until the next year. Rafe and Caitlyn were excited because she knew she was pregnant. Red's wounds had healed. Caitlyn met a traveling salesman and purchased a horse for $20. The salesman was actually glad to get rid of the thoroughbred because he couldn't tame it. Rafe told Caitlyn that the horse had ben abused but he broke the horse with patience. Both the new horse and Black Wind were pregnant. The future was looking good. 
Abner was watching Caitlyn trying to catch her alone. Rafe and the guys left one day to check things on the property. Abner took advantage and caught Caitlyn alone by the creek. Paulie had gone around a bend and was fishing. Caitlyn told Abner to leave and he told her he had the money to pay off the loan on the ranch. He told her that they could be married and run the ranch together. She told him that she was already married. Abner told her that nobody would blame her if she divorced Rafe to marry him. She told him that she didn't need his money either. He decided that if he couldn't have her then no one would. Paulie came back and Abner shot him. He tied up Caitlyn and took her away. He was going to sell her to a Comanchero to work in a Mexican brothel. 
Rafe came him to find her gone and started tracking her. Abner and another man had taken her to a hotel and when left alone with the other guy, he tried to attack her. Caitlyn grabbed his gun and shot the man. She was taken to jail and Abner took off. Rafe found her there and she told him what happened. 
Rafe took off to find Abner and tracked him to where he met with the Comanchero. Abner killed the guy and Rafe captured him. He knocked Wylie unconscious and took the money from his saddlebags. Caitlyn was freed after she explained what had happened and Wylie was put in jail for his part in the events. 
Years later, Caitlyn was pregnant again and her and Rafe already had 4 boys. One was a set of twins and the ranch had become profitable in a large part due to the horses they were raising.