Rating: 3/5

Howard Hughes was an absolutely miserable human being. You can interpret that statement in any way that you want and you will not change the truth. Charles Higham brings us the life story of this troubled, mentally disturbed, boorish, selfish, egotistical, and just plain bratty tycoon/film maker/aviation expert. Higham does not shy away from the seedy side of Hughes but rather seems to delight in it. And at the end of it all, I would be hard pressed to identify what the good side of Hughes was. He collected sexual conquests of Hollywood stars, both male and female, like a little kid collects baseball cards. He regularly cheated the government, his business partners, and investors out of millions he felt he deserved. He treated his assistants and underlings like chattel. Cary Grant was one of the few people whom Hughes could call a friend (as well as a lover) and yet he was pushed away. And yet he acquired a certain following that bordered on worship. These men fought tirelessly to preserve the image and eventually the legacy of Hughes as a great businessman and tycoon, even while they fought amongst each other. Why they did this when they were treated so badly by Hughes himself is not explored, although since Higham makes numerous references to Hughes's charm and charisma, it may be inferred from that. Higham spends much of the book refuting the image of Hughes's last years as a drugged-out recluse manipulated by his handlers; instead he shows Hughes, despite his (to put it politely) idiosyncrasies, as a man in control of his own fate right up until the last few weeks of his life. Higham's bibliography is exhaustive and includes interviews with those closest to Hughes as well as a who's who of Hollywood stars of the 30's and 40's, almost all of whom it seems he slept with at one point or another. The book slows down in the second half as Hughes retreated into his various cocoons located variously in Miami, Las Vegas, the Bahamas, Managua, and Acapulco. Much of this part of the book deals with eye-crossing details of law suits and shady business deals, although learning that Hughes was at least culpable in plots to kill Castro and the Watergate break-in make for interesting diversions. In the end, the reader is left with a portrait of a man who got so much, so young he didn't know what or how to do with it and a public who could not say no to him. Miserable was he, indeed.