Rating: 4/5

4 Stars ~ It's been three months since her best friend died leaving her the guardian of five year-old Robbie. Times have been tough, but thankfully Julie left Sam her cottage as well. Or so she thought. Just two days before Christmas and in with the winter snow comes Devlin, the true owner of the cottage. He'd been away in Canada for the past six years, and is rather surprised to see the cottage still occupied. Julie had only leased the cottage for five years. And then he's faced with Robbie, and what he believes are the consequences of the night before he left. Julia had refused to say who Robbie's father was, and Sam believed Julia was not seeing anyone when Robbie would have been conceived. Devlin has to be Robbie's father, even though there isn't much of a resemblance. Trapped by the snow storm, Devlin and Sam are forced to deal with the situation. His arrogance constantly rubs Sam the wrong way; their heated arguments and undoubted attraction to each other, keep the air in the cottage wrought with tension. Until they call a truce for Christmas. But when the roads open up, Devlin reaches a conclusion that he'd best leave again. He's barely gone a few days, when he returns to find Sam at the hospital, though on the mend now, Robbie had been very ill. When asked why he returned, Devlin says to marry her .. for Robbie's sake of course. Sam is shocked and calls the idea stupid. But Devlin builds his argument and even though Sam feels wrong about rushing into a marriage, without real proof that Devlin is actually Robbie's father; they marry. When Devlin becomes sullen, Sam thinks it's because he's now feeling trapped. And then they make a discovery that tears their tenuous relationship to shreds.

I have a silly habit of skimming through books as I'm organizing them and often find myself engulfed. This was certainly the case with this little gem. From the first pages I found myself pulled in to Sam's world. Somewhat vulnerable after the loss of her friend, and uncertain in her new role of mother to Robbie, she has to pull herself up when Devlin breezes in and shakes up her life all over again. Devlin often comes across as arrogant, but he also reveals his own vulnerability when faced with a son he knew nothing about. This is one of those fast, involving reads that was pleasantly surprising.