Rating: 4/5

Book Review

There are [Swedish] writers who set their novels in the more rural and sparsely populated settings, lending a decidedly chill atmosphere to the stories (the Swedish have an almost mystical attitude towards wooded areas and trees).

The above I wrote in my review of and in response to Camille Ceder's Frozen Moment, the first example of a Swedish book I've read that alluded to a Swede's almost mystical attitude toward the woods. Blackwater is another prime exemplar of this type of book, and granted, to a much greater degree steeped in such mysticism. Publishers often compare Ekman's book to Peter Høeg's beautiful language in Smilla's Sense of Snow as well as the chill found in Renko's Gorky Park: though, in having read both of these, in the former the language is more lyrical and evocative and in the latter it is a more significant crime story than what is found in Blackwater. 

Sweden's mid-north

I often have to remind myself that modern Scandinavia has its roots in the Norse sagas that are replete with stories of viking gods, fantasy, brutality, and a resplendent mythical nature. These sagas revolve around stories of mythic proportions where we see the earth reappearing from the water; where an eagle over a waterfall hunting fish on a mountain is of special significance; where wooden slips were used for divination; where the savage butchery of human beings was a matter of conquest; where the sons of two brothers could widely inhabit the windy world; and where it was said "that they will consume the morning dew, and will produce generations of offspring"; and where the human internal rhythm is deeply affected by a jarring unnatural sequence of daylight that invades Nordic nights, and conversely where night snuffs out daylight for weeks on end. The Scandinavian people before the Christianisation of Scandinavia were deeply entrenched in the Norse sagas and to this day, particularly in the North, this pagan aspect in their gene pool remains an integral part of Sweden's national character - in particular where it concerns nature. As Americans, we might equate this to the Native Americans' spiritual views toward the land and the earth. However, unlike Native Americans and through the eyes of Ekman, the Swedes appear to see nature as malevolent as can be seen by one of this book's narrators who observes a hawk in a tree above.

  

  In the old days, people thought the cuckoo became a hawk when the summer was over. Then he struck with his claws extended, his beak bloody. He was calling like a bell in the forest. She was so close, she could see the slate-gray throat feathers trembling at each call. He was perched with his wings folded and black tail-feathers outspread, spotted with white.
  

Moments later, she is overcome by an icy and frightening chill that sends her running back to the village, through the forest and pastures, where she cowers behind a shed so that the children cannot see her trembling. The book is replete with this underlying chill that seems to inhabit this part of Sweden's landscape. Every description seems to contain a feeling of foreboding. Even the task of rowing a boat takes on a darker significance:

  

  The lake looked peculiar, oily in the stillness, as if the water were sticky. The water enveloped the slim body of the canoe. As he dipped the paddle in and took a stroke, it seemed to him that muscles were trembling under the skin of the water.
  

Kerstin Ekman's Blackwater takes us to a remote place in the mid-north of Sweden where Midsummer's Eve, a time of the year when magic is at its strongest, is celebrated as the greatest festival of the year. Young people pick bouquets of seven or nine different flowers and put them under their pillow in the hope of dreaming about their future spouse (herbs picked at Midsummer were highly potent). Greenery placed over houses and barns are to bring good fortune and health to people and livestock. Flowers are picked for their fragrance, color,and traditional meaning. Near a small village and while the rest of the inhabitants enjoy their festivities, on that evening of the summer solstice, a Dutch woman and an unidentified man are brutally murdered in their tent while camping alongside the Lobber river.

This is the crime that drives the book forward even while the crime itself remains unsolved for several decades. What then fills this gap between the crime and its resolution? Mounting tension, would be the short answer. Something's terribly wrong in Blackwater. Portrayed in the seventies and late eighties, one generation passes to another and as the new generation takes over the stigma of what happened at the river Lobber all those years ago the stigma too is carried forward, like hives that never leave the human body. It is the younger generation that reluctantly takes on the task of discovering the terrible truth.

Perhaps I might add this to my collection of what I call "Ethno-mysteries" so detailed is the author's ethnography of this part of the world: its people, its landscapes, and its socio and psychological narratives woven in between the story line like strands on a vast and magic loom. Ekman explores an entire society: its eco system, its inhabitants, their psychological motivations, its sociological shortcomings, its place in nature, its attempts at building communes, its means of production, tourism, and the devastating if not jarring consequences as these inhabitants - legal and illegal - collide at a single point in time: Midsummer's Eve. 

As an aside, this might also serve as a warning to mystery readers in general: expect to be deviated from the story line in this book. This is not a who-dun-it...Scandinavian crime fiction rarely is. But, having said that and if we are to be deviated, then let it be as an invitation into Kerstin Ekman's mesmerizing and frightening world 

Beautiful and ominous written passages, particularly where it concerns the landscapes which often take on the appearance of a character in the book; natural paths, rivers, lakes, mountains, the snow, a biting cold, the flourishing of spring, summer, nights made of daylight, scented and flower infested interiors of Nordic huts; eco-activists who eschew civilization while practicing some dubious ethics - all surround a small group of inhabitants whose lives are to be forever changed by two horrendous events (yes, there are two crimes).

Chilling overtones and superb characterization betray much of what could otherwise be inspirational: a measure of brutality in the inhabitants, psychological deviations, scorn, revenge, racism, love, betrayal, a profound dysfunctional attitude towards children and offspring, a novel approach to education quickly snuffed out, and a society seemingly living under a natural law all its own. Written from the point of view of several narrators and a complex weaving of first and third person we are invited inside the minds of the Lapps, Swedish, and Norwegians that populate Ekman's novel.

And yet, Ekman kept my interest by never straying too long from the story line even while giving us a slow, mounting and throbbing tension that builds in volume to a point of true insight into brutality. It's difficult to place a finger on what exactly makes Ekman pull this off. From other books I've read, this is certainly not an easy task and speaks to Ekman's expertise as an author. I found the book scary and delightful, especially as it represents a category of Scandinavian crime fiction largely gone unnoticed in the world of translations: that being books written about the deviance in the North of Sweden.

My only small beef with this novel is that often Ekman relies on pronouns at the beginning of chapters to render suspense, when in fact it is slightly disorienting while - given that we have several narrators - we wait to find out to whom "He" or "She" is actually referring to several paragraphs later.

Enjoy!

-------------------------------------------------------
About the author

Kerstin Ekman

Kerstin Lillemor Ekman is a Swedish novelist born August 27, 1933. She began her career with a string of successful detective novels (among others De tre små mästarna ("The Three Little Masters") and Dödsklockan ("The Death Clock")) but later went on to persue psychological and social themes. Among her later works are Mörker och blåbärsris ("Darkness and Blueberries"), set in northern Sweden, and Händelser vid vatten (translated as Blackwater), in which she returned to the form of the detective novel.

Ekman was elected a member of the Swedish Academy in 1978, but left the Academy in 1989, together with Lars Gyllensten and Werner Aspenström, due to the debate following death threats posed to Salman Rushdie. As someone once said: "No one leaves the academy of their own free will, except in a coffin." According to the rules of the Academy, however, she will remain a passive member for the entirety of her life. Chair number 15 in the Swedish Academy has remained empty since Kerstin Ekman walked out of the meeting room in protest.

Most writers have their own literary midwives. Ekman’s was the Nobel laureate Eyvind Johnson. For her masterpiece Blackwater she received the Nordic Council Literature Prize in 1994.

Few writers possess the ability to truly change the lives of their readers, even if we’d love to have it be so. But Ekman is perhaps one of the few to do so for her many fans.