Rating: 3/5

“But Stewart! If the previous book in the Elric series, Stormbringer, ended the way it did, how can there be a seventh?”

It's a fair question. It boils down to the simple fact that Michael Moorcock keeps writing Elric stories. Furthermore, he writes them out of sequence. We know how it all ends, sure. But there's plenty of room within the span of Elric's life to add details. The first six books collected stories written over the course of a decade or so, assembling them in chronological–as opposed to publication–order. But then came the day when Moorcock had two more Elric stories, one of them a crossover with his Dancers At the End of Time series …

So the book consists of about one-third Elric, one-third Sojan the Swordsman, and one-third essays and an exercise in self-parody. I speculate that the lure of further Elric money was too great to resist. Nor do I really begrudge him, especially given his remarks in one of the essays regarding how much money he lost publishing New Worlds magazine–he published it himself rather than forming a corporation, and wound up personally liable for its debts. I would probably be featuring my best-known character's name in the book's title and slapping an attractive Michael Whelan cover on it too.

So the book is a bit of a hodge-podge. “Elric At the End of Time” is fun. I particularly enjoyed seeing Werther de Goethe reacting to Elric. Obviously, being familiar with the characters and concepts of Moorcock's Dancers At the End of Time books helps. Though all you really need to know is that it's incredibly far into the future, and what remains of Humanity have essentially become gods. What do nigh-omnipotent, immortal beings do to fill their days and pass the time? The second Elric tale, “The Last Enchantment,” is more forgettable. 

The essays are nice. In one, Moorcock discusses the origins of Elric and the series publishing history. In the second, he talks about his tenure with New Worlds and the origins of the Jerry Cornelius books. The final self-parody, “The Stone Thing,” is hilarious fun, sending up Elric, Corum, and just about every incarnation of Moorcock's Eternal Champion in just five pages.

Really, the weakest part of the entire book is the seemingly interminable Sojan the Swordsman. While it has its occasional moments, it's a pretty poor cross between Conan and John Carter. I lost track of how many situations were resolved by luck and coincidence. At one point, there's an airship crash. Sojan is left for dead, but his two companions are taken prisoner. He eventually regains consciousness, heads to the nearest city, convinces the local police force that he wants to join, goes through their training process, and is assigned duty at the tower where his two companions have been imprisoned, and his first shift begins just days before they are to be executed! I have no words … I certainly admire Moorcock's bravery in publishing such juvenalia.

As much as I enjoy Elric, I'd have to say that this one is probably for the die-hard fans. Read at your own risk, and don't be shy about skipping Sojan …