Rating: 5/5

“But soon we shall die and all memory of those five [who perished in the bridge collapse] will have left the earth, and we ourselves shall be loved for a while and forgotten. But the love will have been enough; all those impulses of love return to the love that made them. Even memory is not necessary for love. There is a land of the living and a land of the dead and the bridge is love, the only survival, the only meaning…”
-	Thornton Wilder, The Bridge of San Luis Rey 

We humans are a lot like automobiles, which start to lose value the moment you drive them off the lot. From the moment we are born, a clock starts ticking, and nothing we do will keep it from counting down to zero. Just to make it a bit worse, we don’t know when the timer was set.

Day to day, we can accept this, even ignore it. Grandparents can enjoy their grandchildren without dwelling on the unlikelihood of seeing them fully grown. We can plant a tree with the acceptance we will never sit beneath its shade. If the end comes naturally, at the end of a respectable sum of years, we can even temper our sadness. All roads, after all, lead to the grave, and there are no exceptions. It is the only fairness that the universe grants. 

Sometimes, though, death comes from nowhere and takes the people around us unexpectedly. A car accident or a drug overdose. A drowning or a suicide. A crashing car; a terrorist’s bomb; a boy in a classroom with a gun, pulling the trigger over and over. In those moments, our concepts of the world can shatter. We start to wonder how thick the ice beneath our feet. What keeps us from them? 

Every time a plane plummets to earth, there are stories about the passenger who overslept and missed the flight, or who changed his plans at the last moment. This person feels there is a design, that he or she was saved for a reason. But what about the three hundred other people who made it to their seats, and were strapped in till the end? 

Is there a divine being governing our lives, or is it caprice alone that governs our fragile existence?

That question forms the core of Thornton Wilder’s slim classic, The Bridge of San Luis Rey. 

*** 

The Bridge of San Luis Rey is less a novel or novella than a fable. It tells the story of Brother Juniper, who on June 20, 1714 – as we are told in the opening lines – watches the “finest bridge in all Peru” break and toss “five travelers into the gulf below.” The bridge had spanned the river for a century, and looked like it would last forever; now it had disappeared in an instant. 

Brother Juniper, deciding “that it was high time for theology to take its place among the exact sciences,” sets out to discover why the bridge chose this particular time to fall, and how it came to be that these five specific people were on it at that fateful moment. Wilder describes the inquiry thusly: 

Some say that we shall never know and that to the gods we are like the flies that the boys kill on a summer day, and some say, on the contrary, that the very sparrows do not lose a feather that has not been brushed away by the finger of God.

To solve this cosmic riddle, Brother Juniper delves into the backstories of the victim’s, spending six years interviewing people about the rich Dona Maria; her companion, Pepita; the orphan Esteban who was raised at a convent; the bastard-turned-valet Uncle Pio; and the young Don Jaime, whose suffering mother puts him into another’s hands. 

The connections between these five are vividly sketched in brief vignettes that form the middle section of this briefest of books. 

***

The word that comes first to mind in describing The Bridge of San Luis Rey is simplicity. I mean that in its most virtuous sense. The structure is elegantly functional, describing Brother Juniper’s idea, flashing back to the victims, returning to Brother Juniper, and then making one final timeline shift to bring us to the famous finale. Despite Brother Juniper’s vocation as a monk, this is not a tangled deconstruction of theological tenets. 

The prose is clear, readable, and obscures nothing. Its metaphors are plainly recognizable, the sentences mostly without ornament. For all that, it sticks in your mind and your heart. The lines quoted at the top – “a land of the living and a land of the dead and the bridge is love” – have given comfort to millions. After the September 11, 2001 attacks, for instance, then-Prime Minister Tony Blair quoted them at a memorial service. When the I-35W bridge collapsed into the Mississippi River in 2007, those words – appropriately enough – were repeated again. 

On the long road to the altar, my now-wife and I broke up, a separation that lasted over a year. Never knowing if I’d hear from her again, she contacted me one day to let me know her father had suddenly died. It was difficult news, for I had adored him. Beyond that, this was one of the first deaths I’d experienced as an adult, my grandparents having all died when I was much younger. For the first time, the full weight of death’s finality landed squarely on my chest. Heading to Hyvee, I looked through the sympathy cards, discovering there were two types, both inadequate. Meanwhile, four million other cards existed making fun of people turning forty. Grief, after all, is hard to distill; middle age much easier. 

So I went to the bookshelf instead, pulled down The Bridge of San Luis Rey, and mailed it to her. 

*** 

While I consider Wilder’s straightforwardness a strength, it also subjects The Bridge of San Luis Rey to accusations of triteness. In that way, it’s a lot like Paulo Coelho’s The Alchemist, which has alternately been hailed as inspiring, and decried as parceling out the wisdom of a fortune cookie. To that end, I would not expect this to hit everyone the same way it hit me. 

Still, the inescapability of death belies cynicism. We can doubt that our existence is part of some infinite power’s grand project. We can believe that once the moment of death strikes, we are done. We can harbor the certainty that religion is nothing more than a psychic balm to keep us trudging forward to our unrequited doom. Brother Juniper might disagree, but The Bridge of San Luis Rey doesn’t require you to believe or disbelieve. 

It asks only that you love and be loved. 

***

Wilder talks about two worlds. But I sometimes like to imagine that the timeline we inhabit is just one of many. That as I write this review in one chronology, I am doing the same thing in another, except that I am slightly richer, and slightly thinner, and have kept more of my youthful hair. 

In this fantasy, everyone who has died is alive somewhere else. For example, there is a timeline where my grandparents are still young, and just starting their journeys; and there is a timeline where my brother-in-law, who died at the age of twenty-four, is old and has his own children; and there is a timeline where the kid from my Boy Scout Troop who jumped off the top of a parking garage never went to the garage at all. When I have a crazy dream, I think: well, maybe that was a visit to one of those different worlds, reachable only through the workings of the deep subconscious. 

To answer your question: no, I’m not high. 

Anyway, in lieu of the possibility of endless parallel worlds unfolding simultaneously, we are left with this one, and the knowledge that it is terribly finite and devoid of any meaning we do not impose upon it. Faced with this, I’m convinced of Wilder’s ultimate contention that love, and the memories that love creates, is the only thing that matters, the only thing that endures.