Rating: 5/5

Ever since I read The Road to Mecca by Mohamed Asad, my interest over the life of Arab grew. Asad's description of the Arabs, especially the tradional/bedouin one is against typical one that I know. Asad praise high standard of their value, their hospitality to strangers, the simplicity of life. This (probably, still research) was the same type of people that lived during Prophet Muhammad time. 

I came to saw this book recommended by Goodreads. I read the short review on Wikipedia, and it is a travel diary of an Englishmen, Wilfried Thesiger during his time as map maker in Arabia. Ever since Road to Mecca, i wanted to learn mode about the pre modern Arab and hope this book can gave me other insights.

This book completely met my expectations. It gave us a rich look into the life of the Bedouin Arab, Thesiger travel companions. Thesiger did not write as an outsider who only observes from afar or rely on interviews but rather lives and travels with them for years. He experiences firsthand the life of the Bedouin; their attitude, life value, even the dynamics of the tribe amongst Bedouin across Arabia from nowadays Saudi to Bahrain to Yemen to Emirates and Oman.

Thesiger was far from having a comfortable life during his time in Arabia. As a map writer, he needs to wander into the desert, and no, not using a car, but using a camel. This was what makes his journey adventurous. There were occasions of life and death. Where they didn't have much water left, and water in the well was not drinkable (I just happened to know about this. I was thinking that the well, or the oasis, is drinkable). Where they can't find grazing for their camel, the extreme Sandstrom, the steep dune, the rivalry between tribes that can cost them life.

His observation of Bedu, his travel companion is also something that reader will be interested in. At least for me, Bedu, like many local tribes, was often depicted as pre-modern, uncivilized, and somewhat rude. We might do no justice by not mentioning the good qualities of Bedu. Their hospitality to strangers, their loyalty to their travel companion, and their practicality in life that allows them to survive the hard life in the desert.

Strongly suggested for someone who wanted to feel the experience of what is life in the Arabia desert (and yes, before modernity kicks in. I heard that not many Bedu that are fully nomad remains.)