Rating: 3/5

This hefty tome was given to me by my uncle, who teaches creative writing. The upside of the book is there are probably 25-50 (I honestly forgot to count) different short to medium length stories, plus maybe a half dozen to a dozen poems (and one that falls between the two types so much that it can't be easily classified as either,) and so whether you prefer mythic fantasy, Gothic vampire tales, fables, or tales with a preternatural twist, there will be something in here for you. Some of my favorites included "Scarecrow" "The Puppet and the Train" "Timmy Goebel's Bug Jar," "Annabelle's Alphabet," and "Gestella." Most of the authors (with the exception of Gregory Maguire, author of "Scarecrow,") were authors I was unfamiliar with, and so I took the time to write down the names of my favorites so that next time I'm looking for a new book, I have a new author to try, since many of the authors included in the collection are also novelists, many of whom only have a book or two to their name, so they're not necessarily going to be easy to find unless you know they're out there and can special order them. Another bonus is that the beginning of the book gives an overview of the top novels in different categories within the sci-fi/fantasy realm, with a short entry on each, which is another great guide to finding not just new authors, but specific books you otherwise may have missed. The thumbnail provided is also enough to gauge whether the book is within a subgenre you enjoy or one you avoid like the plague. (For me, if it isn't Pratchett or Tolkien, I avoid wizards like the plague. Wizzards are always fine.) 

The downside of the book is that, as is the case with any collection of works, is that others are going to miss the mark or simply not be written in a style that you particularly enjoy. This was actually a setback for me because the very first story in the collection was both one of the longest entries and possibly the one I enjoyed least. I started reading it, couldn't get through it, lost interest, and set the whole book aside for a year or more. I picked it back up recently between other novels and skipped to a shorter entry (the shorter entries, by and large, tend to pack a better punch, in my opinion) and then hopped around until I finished the entire lump. So, I encourage any reader who enjoys sci fi, fantasy, horror, or just a good story, well told, to grab a copy, and if the first story doesn't catch your fancy, skip ahead, bounce around, and cherry pick your morsels accordingly.