Rating: 4/5

(I was provided a free copy of this book through a Goodreads giveaway.)

Very clear, informative, and helpful book for those who aren't sure how to get their point across in a business environment or who have picked up some bad habits along the way. It addresses how to be clear, concise, and grammatically correct. There are chapters on how to figure out what you need to say, on how to organize the information visually to make it easier to read, and how to frame and tone your message depending on what you'd like the recipient to do. There were suggestions on how to be concise without being short, how to be polite but not too polite, etc. The book covers a lot of the basics but also includes a lot of the 'tricks' that I often use at work (bulleted lists are your friend, start off with your main point, etc.) The book provides a lot of examples, with revisions, which I think is helpful to allow the reader to see what the author's advice looks like in practice.

The book is a tiny bit dated, as it was obviously written back when "memos" were done mostly on paper rather than electronically, but updates have been made to keep the advice relevant and applicable to an email culture. The pictures are a bit dated and hokey, as well as extending the page count, but they also help to break up the content and keep the book visually interesting. In some places the author's voice comes through a bit too strongly (using an incorrect construction when talking about that construction, for instance, as a joke...this is fine if someone already knows the rule and just needs a reminder, but I don't think you can assume that for all readers, and if they miss the joke, then they might be confused by seeing the wrong construction used.) The section about using humor in writing also struck me as a bit too contrived, but maybe that's just because humor in my workplace writing should only be used very gently and sparingly. In general, a few more suggestions of how to assess your office's existing and accepted "writing tone" and then adapt the book's advice for that tone would have been welcome.

Overall, this is a great book for someone who needs a little help with business writing, and I think that anyone can take away some points from it. I'm going to recommend it to a friend for whom English is a second language, because I think she'll find it helpful. I have found myself giving her a lot of the advice that this book gives!