Rating: 4/5

Helen Keller died at the age of 87 in 1968. 
At 19 months old, she came down with an illness ( Scarlet fever), that left her blind, deaf, and mute. 

Most people are familiar 
“The Miracle Worker”... the award winning play. 
Less are familiar of her many contributions. She became a writer, and publisher. She made many contributions into Human Rights. She helped many who were blind and death, but also fought for world peace and women’s rights. 

She attended Radcliffe, the prestigious college for women graduating cum laude. She received the first first honorary degree from Harvard - the first ever to go to a woman. 

“The World I live in”, ( a collection of essays), was Helen’s first book. ( written in 1908). 
Helen described her experience of the world through sensations: touch, smell, and vibrations. 

“The hand is easy to recognize as the face, that it reveals its secrets more openly and unconsciously. People control their countenances, but the hand is under no restraint. It relaxes and becomes listless when the spirit is low and dejected; the muscles tighten when The mind is excited or the heart glad; and permanent qualities stand written on it all the time”. 

This first book that Helen Keller wrote is out of print - but it’s a free kindle download. It takes about an hour to read. But took me longer - I paused a lot...
thinking about things I haven’t in a long time. 

She included an essay with quotations from Shakespeare. ( there are a few grammatical spelling errors errors in this essay)...
but I found it fascinating with Helen’s awareness of the speech of Shakespeare - in relationship to how she sees the world. 
When Cleopatra is threatened with the humiliation of gracing Caesar’s triumphant, “she snatched a dagger, exclaiming, I will trust my resolution and my good hands. With the same Swift instinct, Cassius trusts to his hands when he stabs Caesar: 
“Speak, hands, for me”. 

So many thought provoking references to our ‘hands’ as language. 
“We find the hand in time and history, working, building, inventing, bringing civilization out of barbarism. The hand symbolizes power and the excellent work”. 

“Allusions to moonbeams and clouds do not emphasize the sense of my addiction: they carry my soul beyond affliction’s narrow actuality”. 

“There is nothing, Misty or uncertain about what we can touch. Through this sense of touch I know the faces of friends, the illimitable variety of straight and curved lines, all surfaces, the exuberance of the soul, The delicate shape of flowers, the noble forms of trees, and the range of mighty winds. 
Beside objects, surfaces, and atmospherical changes, I perceive countless vibrations. I derive much knowledge of every day matter from the jars and jolts which are to be felt everywhere in the house”. 

Footsteps reveal and measure the character and the mood of the Walker. She picks up indecision, hurry and deliberation, activity and laziness, fatigue, carelessness, timidity, anger, and sorrow.
ALL THROUGH A PERSON’S FOOTSTEPS!!

Vibrations, ... animals, music, tones, taste, emotions, etc. I tried to look at everything in the way Helen did. 

Helen shares of being extremely sensitive to harshness of noises ...
grinding, scraping, loosing of the earth rumbling, etc. 
I can relate - and I can see. 

I got into the experience of this ebook. 
Our daughter played the role of Helen Keller - “The Miracle Worker”, with a professional theatre company when she was 14..
A proud mom- she was phenomenal. I couldn’t believe how incredible she was with the combat choreography during the famous dinner scene. 
Sold out performances every night - with the show held over. 
I have bittersweet memories ..
Great during the shows run for 6 weeks ( rather the the 5 planned)... but ‘less’ great because soon after she left for High School in Michigan.... ( Interlochen)..
It was there when anorexia developed....
Playing Helen Keller was the last role I saw our daughter play for many years. 
Thankfully today - our daughter is vibrantly healthy- still acting in Los Angeles - ( singing - playing piano, dancing, writing, painting).... thriving. 

I’ve held a personal relationship with Helen Keller - since that play our daughter performed in....
But it’s been years - to never - to thinking - THIS PROFOUNDLY about being blind, deaf, mute, educated, and an incredible contributor to society. 
THAT WAS HELEN KELLER!!