Rating: 2/5

Most kids are afraid of the monsters in their closet – even if they aren’t real. But Devon March’s monsters are actually demons, and his closet is actually a hell hole, and his father never tells Devon to stop imagining things. So, Devon spends most of his childhood fighting off the demons and learning to be stronger than anything that comes out of the hell hole. Then, when he is fourteen, his father dies, leaving him with more questions than answers and Devon is sent to live at Ravenscliff where he will learn the truth of his heritage.

At Ravenscliff, Devon encounters a number of ghosts, a friendly teenage girl, and a spiteful possessed child. He also learns that he is a Sorcerer of the Nightwing – one of the guardians of the world, who can harness the power of demons. He has no idea who his true parents were, and his new guardian isn’t eager to help him discover the truth. As Devon begins to unravel the truth, he must risk his life to protect the other inhabitants of Ravenscliff from evil forces his coming has attracted. When the story ends, we learn what Devon is, even though we are not much closer to knowing who he really is.

Even though this is a really fast read, it’s somewhat disappointing. Sorcerers is obviously set up to be a series of books, and while there’s plenty of action to move the story along in this first book, there’s just not enough content. So many of Devon’s attempts to learn about himself fail, and he doesn’t get any opportunities to study his powers, or the books of sorcery of the Nightwing. It was extremely frustrating as a bystander to watch Devon decide to do the things that wouldn’t bring him any closer to self-discovery when it was clear that answers could be found easily by other means. There was a lot of repetition – of key phrases and points that characters were trying to make. Some of these were things that might have worked better as more subtle foreshadowing than as the constant reminders they became. We already know Devon is more powerful than any of them, can we move on already? I have very little tolerance for lengthy books that make no progress. There’s only so much stringing together of scenes of violence or sex or action you can do before readers (hopefully) start wondering if you’re ever going to make any headway into the real things that are at stake. If I’m going to invest my time in a book or a series, I want it not to be a waste of that time. 

Sorcerers has the potential of being good – if the author/editor/publisher would focus less on parsing it up into several volumes and more on making sure that each volume stands well on its own and doesn’t merely serve as an appetizer for the next. There’s only so much tantalization readers are willing to take before they look for a main course. I’d really like to see this story get somewhere and I don’t have any confidence that it will.