Rating: 4/5

I had heard so many good things about Michener’s historical based novels and had this one on my to- read list for a while. I felt like wintertime would be as good of a time as any to embark on the quest of reading his massive novel Alaska. 

Make no mistake readers: this book is definitely a marathon and not a sprint. And that’s perfectly fine with me. I was reading at about a twenty-five or thirty page a night clip, and it took me over a month, but I enjoyed the book quite a bit. But it was worth noting that I had to make sure to have my other books that I was reading with this one to be a little bit more light in page count. 

One of the more impressive features is simply the rather astounding amount of research that the author must have put into writing such a long book. He takes us though so many phases and aspects of Alaska’s history. It is such an ambitious book with so many facts, figures, and thoughts. 

Another effective element of this behemoth is simply how effortlessly Michener can give the reader a historical perspective or outlook on Alaska from a wide range, broad viewpoint, and then transition to zoom and narrow in on those pivotal, key individuals who were instrumental in Alaska’s history and the lives they led. This gives the novel that wide, grandiose, sweeping epic kind of feel. This is a book that covers a massive amount of area and ground, both literally and figuratively. 

There is an interconnectedness to the tales of individuals who were part of Alaska's history, as we follow them around and sometimes their stories resurface later in another generation in another chapter. The way the author portrays their lives is broad, but then he gives a personal quality to the moments and events and the lives they led. 

All this said, while the novel was enjoyable in the bigger picture, I definitely thought the last few chapters dragged a little and maybe had too much in the way of meticulous, superfluous detail or retreading over already covered topics, so my interested waned a little here. I would say that I definitely enjoyed the other chapters much more and felt more invested in those. 

At the end of the day, though, this is such an ambitious and impressive work of historical fiction, so methodically and effectively researched and constructed. I felt compelled to look up documentaries about Alaska while I was reading because the author has an uncanny way of engaging the reader in its history. 

Anyone who loves reading historically based novels should give this one a try. I look forward to more of Michener’s works, and have Hawaii on my to-read radar.