Rating: 1/5

I think I know less about gardening after finishing this book than before I started. 

There are about three useful chapters in this book: one about compost, one about preparing raised beds, and one about companion planting (and that one is a little weak). The rest of this book is a repetitive advertisement for the GROW BIOINTENSIVE method, which we all need to adopt because the world will be unable to feed itself using traditional methods by 2020. (Naturally, I'm frantic. It's 2019 and I don't even have 4000 square feet per family member, let alone know how to garden it. However, this book was no help, and I'll have to mail away for more GROW BIODIVERSE materials to fully prepare for the coming vegapocolypse.) 

I was really hoping to learn more about how to grow stuff together in my tiny 120 square ft garden, but I'll have to find another book to help me with that. According to this book I need to grow wheat and alfalfa for no reason other than to create compost to grow wheat and alfalfa in. 

it was also riddled with strange errors. For example, he provides a sample template of a family garden that grows over the course of 5 years, and for four of those years, he grows tomatoes in the exact same spot. Is that not poor crop rotation? Now I'm confused. Was that an error, or can one grow tomatoes in the same spot for 4 years without disease buildup? 

Some other fantastic stuff in this book: planting by the phases of the moon. Because the gravity makes roots pop out. How to mash up and crystallize plants to see if they will grow well together. Seriously: I question the entire companion planting science now that I've read this.

a good chunk of this book is dedicated to "master charts" which describe how many calories you can get per square foot if you plant these recommended vegetables. Amazing if you're preparing for the apocalypse, pretty useless for those of us who measure our produce by item count and plant by food ingredient, not caloric density. 

If you want to learn how to grow stuff in a small amount of space using an intensive method, I recommend literally any other offering on the market.