Rating: 5/5

"What you will find here are the Mirabal's of my creation, made up but, I hope, true to the spirit of the real Mirabals. A novel is not, after all, a historical document, but a way to travel through the human heart"- Julia Alvarez (584). 

I have traveled in and out of the world of the ill fated and legendary Mirabal sisters throughout several times in my reading and teaching life: 2010. 2011, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2025. 

I first discovered their stories from having watched a well crafted (however, unsuccessful) film adaptation starring Salma Hayek as Minerva Mirabal almost 30 years ago. 

While in college, I had a professor give us other texts by Professor Alvarez to read: "In the Name of Salome"; excerpts from "How the Garcia Girls Lost their Accents" in a wonderful Caribbean literature class. 

Then I finally brought myself to read "in the time of the Butterflies" when I became a high school educator. I have read this novel several times since 2010- and with each read, I am often an emotional wreck after finishing this book. 

It's one of those modern classics where everyone knows that Patria, Minerva and Maria Teresa Mirabal will all be assassinated driving up that lonely country road. Everyone knows from its first chapter that Dede Mirabal survived. 

Then there's the imagined, gorgeous chapters that are all reminiscent of surreal, eerie poetry that depict the flight of a flimsy butterfly contrasted with the heaviness characterized by Rafe Trujillo's cruelty.

To keep these girls alive, you have to keep reading. Their power is regained and knowing their fates is filled with a heartbreaking sorrow and indeed grim. How could a phone call that never was to come be the end of these incredible women?

Professor Alvarez’s writing is deceptively simple: to the point, with descriptive sentences that are subtle with hidden meanings. 

When you experience the heartache and joys of the Mirabal sisters: Patria, Dede, Minerva and Mate- Alvarez has constructed a masterpiece of voice and shifting points of view. 

It has some of the most gorgeous sentences of heartache and glory all at once, "tears came to my eyes, something big and powerful spread its wings inside me" (Alvarez 238). 

The voices that Professor Alvarez constructed for the sisters are nothing but remarkable and absolutely gorgeous. First is the fiery idealist Minerva Mirabal, the third sister and allegedly the mastermind of the violent plot to bring Trujillo down. 

She is described as her father, Enrique that "a daughter is a needle in the heart" (12). She wants to study law and bargains with Trujillo into allowing her to go to law school. 

Yet her dream is cruelly destroyed when she was unable to receive her certificate to practice law. She is the most reflective of the sisters through an imagined point of view, she shifts from firebrand to somewhat defeated, becoming human in the process: "My months in prison had elevated me to superhuman status. It would hardly have been seemly for someone who had challenged our dictator to suddenly succumb to a nervous attack at the communion rail" (259). 

Patria Mirabal- the eldest and most docile of the sisters first is all about serving God; then gives into her romantic and sexual love to her husband Pedrito. It is when her sons become involved with Minerva's cause that she becomes political herself, "things had gotten so bad even people like me who didn't want anything to do with politics were thinking about it all the time" (149). 

Maria Teresa Mirabal is the writer of the family- with her voice told through journal entries, her voice is the most political and the most personal. She is the sister who is equal in Minerva's brains, and is the one who is physically assaulted by the prison guards, suggesting sexual assault. 

Dede Mirabal has the most interesting shift: beginning in third person, and finally in first person in the epilogue- she has survivor's guilt that she did not become as political as her sisters. However, Alvarez indeed gives her the last word. 

Alvarez does not want these girls to be merely historical martyrs, "to them we are characters in a sad story about a past that is over" (318). Through Dede's voice, this effect is achieved. 

There are also the men: supporting players that are also necessary to serve the plot, and to show that the sisters also had personal and complicated love lives and children. 

Minvera has Lio and Manolo; Dede has Jaimto; Maria Teresa has Leandro and Patria has Pedrito, who is a skilled and erotic lover. There is Enrique and Mercedes Mirabal, their parents who also drive the story, unpacking the gender roles and complicated dynamics of the lives of the Mirabal sisters.

The Mirabals become legends, women that transcend victimhood into what are moments that demonstrate the strength of women and all the positive change to come, even though there are setbacks, "like an invisible needle stitching us together into the glorious, free nation we are becoming" (Alvarez 239). 

Professor Alvarez in her postscript states, "I would hope that through this fictionalized story I will bring acquaintance of these famous sisters to English-speaking readers. November 25th, the day of their murder, is observed in many Latin American countries as the International Day Against Violence Towards Women. Obviously, these sisters, who fought one tyrant, have served as models for women fighting against injustices of all kinds" (584). 

A personal reflection: (2025)

In the several times I’ve taught and read this book, the experiences of doing this have affected me in different ways. With each read, I feel both sadder and more at ease that this novel remains relevant to the high school kids and former college students I have taught. 

I have had former students, several who've grown up to be mature young women and readers who told me this was the first book where they really felt connected to women characters, and a book where they saw aspects of themselves. 

It's a powerful testament as a teacher to know Julia Alvarez has changed the lives of many who have never read this story before; but is able to write in such a straightforward and melancholy narrative that has a power that builds to a horrifying climax that will enrage and and ultimately educate. 

I love this novel, it's one of my can't-live without's. 

I was very lucky to have once spoken to Professor Alvarez during my time in graduate school and I thanked her for having written this unique, heartfelt novel that is often misunderstood if not actually read.

Article Link about Alvarez meeting Dede Mirabal:

https://remezcla.com/features/remezcl....