Rating: 1/5

First of all, let it be known that I'm a sucker for bizarro fiction. The weirder and more absurd, the better. I loved last year's Welcome to Night Vale, and found it a perfect balance between humor and offbeat horror. Here, though, Donald Antrim concocts nothing short of a failure!

From first reading the synopsis, I was in. Elect Mr. Robinson for a Better World seemed right up my alley in terms of genre: social satire, darker than black humor, and a tones of underlying dread. It had all of that, but in each instance it was never enough. The satire I get. The humor is completely dry and wack-a-do; it's presented in this very serious and straight-faced way that usually gets a smile out of me, but instead never struck me as particularly exciting. You have in this story a man, Pete Robinson, living in suburbia with his wife. But their suburban ideals involve draw and quartering the former mayor (who caused the deaths of many by launching missiles at a picnic), traversing spiritual realms to become their inner animals, digging home-defense pits/moats filled with sharpened bamboo spears and water moccasins around their front lawns, and recreating scaled model torture chambers in their basements... All of it reminiscent of other (better) absurdists. And the plot should've worked for me, but it didn't. The main reason is because of the end.

For such a book to be categorized as "Humor/Comedy" only is false advertising, because this is for sure, too, a horror novel. To avoid spoilers, I won't say much about the ending, just my general reaction, which was first disgust, and then disappointment. Mr. Antrim was certainly going for shock value, but he lost me long before those final pages. Pete Robinson is a delusional, detached narrator, and his unhinged mind is referenced by the lack of structure to this story: there are no chapters here. It is straight through Mr. Robinson's observations from moment to moment without any transitions, even between hours and days. There was a particular section that unnerved me regarding Pete Robinson, and that is his focus on the young Sarah, a child of seven years of age. The way he talks about her (although brief) is pedophilic, and he expressly states he shouldn't be thinking those thoughts. My issue here, too, is with the author, for explicitly sexualizing a child.

I tend to have no boundaries or limits when it comes to literature and film; slowly desensitized over the years by the likes of Cannibal Holocaust, Salò, or the 120 Days of Sodom, and A Serbian Film, but there was just something totally off-putting by Antrim's and Robinson's observations of Sarah that rubbed me the wrong way.

There was potential here for something truly quirky and bizarre, but it just didn't work. Maybe at the hands of a different author? Who knows. Regardless of all that, I've already moved on, and am starting the process of quickly forgetting about this book starting now...