Rating: 4/5

Culture and Personality Paradigm:
Ruth Benedict’s Patterns of Culture

 In her book Patterns of Culture Ruth Benedict presents ethnographic accounts of three unique cultures, the Pueblo (Zuni) Indians of the Southwest, the Dobu of eastern New Guinea and the Kwakiutl of the Pacific Northwest coast between Washington and British Columbia. Benedict employs use of these cultures to demonstrate her theory of culture as “personality-writ-large.” The book starts out with two sections, largely theoretical; Benedict then presents her idea of cultural configurations (patterns) before moving on to compare the Apollonian Zuni and Dionysian Plains Indians, the paranoid Dobu, and the megalomaniacal Kwakiutls’ perspectives on marriage, family, resources, animism, and warfare/violence. The final chapters discuss cultural relativism and also provide an analysis of the relative nature in which abnormal individuals and their actions can be viewed and the constructed nature of deviance through the imposing of strict standards as it relates to conformity. 
 
 The purpose of this summary is to review the main themes of the text and to understand this work in the context to the configurationalist approach, which is an extension of the culture and personality school within the field of American anthropology that Benedict developed and made use of in this work. Patterns of Culture contains three central themes: 1) human culture can be viewed as “personality-writ-large,” 2) comparative studies of different cultures can shed light on our own social and cultural behaviors, and 3) that morality is a dependent cultural variable and cultural dissimilarities should not be judged by absolute standards. 

 A central theme of Patterns of Culture is cultural configurations; Benedict’s hypothesis is that personality patterns can be found in culture. In introducing Benedict’s book, Boas explains configuration to be “a knowledge of the attitudes controlling individual and group behavior.” (Benedict 1934: xvii) Benedict views human culture as “personality-writ-large,” meaning that a culture can be seen as an individual personality and each person in a culture can be perceived in relation to the pattern, types, or traits which characterize their specific culture. According to Benedict, a people’s culture should be viewed as an articulating whole, made up of traits, actions and beliefs that are shared by individuals within the culture. In explaining her theoretical premises, Benedict puts forth that “a culture, like an individual, is a more or less consistent pattern of thought an action,” that choose from “the great arc of potential human purposes and motivations” and that “the only way in which we can know the significance of the selected detail of behavior is against the background of the motives and emotions and values that are institutionalized in that culture.” (Benedict 1934: 46, 237, 49) In saying this, Benedict is making clear her theory of cultural configurations (patterns), explaining that each culture has a system of ideas, standards and values that facilitate social cohesion, and that through the process of socialization selected traits are reinforced and the shared behaviors and beliefs of a culture are perpetuated. 
 
 Benedict believes that personality patterns can be found in culture and that these patterns can be characterized in a meaningful way. To illustrate this point, she presents chapters on the Pueblo Indians of the Southwest, the Dobu of eastern New Guinea and the Kwakiutl of the Pacific Northwest coast. In the first ethnographic chapter, she describes the Pueblo (Zuni) to be Apollonian, valuing sobriety and inoffensiveness and being controlled and reserved in nature, seeking to follow and reinforce the bounds of their cultural norms; she contrasts the Pueblo Indians with the Plains, and other North American Indians, stating they are Dionysian and characterizing them as prone to irrational excess and continually testing the boundaries of their existence. In the next chapter she presents the Dobu, describing them as paranoid, fearful and suspicious. Finally, she discusses the Kwakiutl, stating they are megalomaniacal in nature, discussing their competitive potlatch to demonstrate their need to dominate others. It is important to take note that Benedict’s accounts of the Zuni came from her own research, while ethnographic material about the Dobu came from Margaret Mead and Reo Fortunes work in New Guinea, and the chapter on the Kwakiutl was largely formed from Boas’ work in British Columbia. In discussing each of these cultures, she presents their perspectives on marriage, family, resources, animism, and warfare/violence. Benedict’s hypothesis is that all cultures can be described as Apollonian, Dionysian, paranoid and or megalomaniacal and that some cultures are combinations of these traits; however, in assigning these terms she is not attempting to create typologies, as “each one is an empirical characterization, and probably not duplicated in its entirety anywhere else in the world.” (Benedict 1934:238)

 The second theme in Patterns of Culture is that comparative studies of different cultures are beneficial and can shed light on our own social and cultural behaviors. Benedict puts forth that use of the comparative method in looking at cultures in relation or contrast to each other will act to emphasize differences between cultures and will simultaneously provide “the understanding we need of our own cultural processes.” (Benedict 1934: 56) To this end, in the concluding chapters of the book Benedict touches upon cultural deviance among the Zuni, Dobu and Kwakiutl and provides an analysis of the relative nature in which “abnormal” individuals and their actions can be viewed and the constructed nature of deviance through the imposing of strict standards as it relates to conformity. Margaret Mead states that the questions Benedict raises related to the connection between abnormality and cultures brings to light the need to question the limited definitions of normal behavior, allowing us to reconsider what is normal and abnormal, and that “the widening of cultural definitions might enrich our culture and lighten the load of rejection under which the cultural deviant now labors.” (Benedict 1934: ix) Benedict does make a point to state that use of the comparative method has no room for moralizing judgments and that attempts to do so go against the principles of cultural relativism. To do this would be a futile endeavor as each culture has “certain goals toward which their behavior is directed and which their institutions further,” and that these goals “are incommensurable.” (Benedict 1934: 223)

 The third theme in Patterns of Culture addresses the concept of cultural relativism. Benedict clearly communicates throughout the book that morality is a dependent cultural variable and that cultural dissimilarities should not be judged by absolute standards. During her time as a student at Columbia, Boas mentored Benedict and trained her in the, at the time, disputed notion of cultural relativism that greatly shaped his anthropological work. Patterns of Culture highlights the issues in understanding cultures on their own terms, often bringing up Western ethnocentric views; this is key as when the book was first published the target group was a Western audience. Benedict states that a culture’s beliefs must been looked at within the context of their own culture, not judged in comparison to the cultural ideals of the individuals studying them. Benedict takes a highly humanistic approach and clearly leans towards culture in the culture vs. nature debate. Her book has gone a long ways in communicating the importance of being aware of our own ethnocentric tendencies and continues to teach the value of human diversity. 

Patterns of Culture in context to the Culture and Personality Paradigm 

 Benedict received her anthropological training at Columbia University under the instruction of Franz Boas. The anthropology program at Columbia was somewhat new, and its’ foundation was based in the four-field approach, melding physical and cultural anthropology with archaeology and linguistics as a way to study human biological evolution, cultural differences, the uniqueness of each cultural history and the interconnectedness of language and culture. Having studied anthropology during a time when the field was so greatly changing certainly impacted her use of theory and methodology, but also explains why she fell sort of operationalizing the ethnographic data she collected in a more quantitative way. 

 Believing that culture and personality are so interconnected that they could not be examined independently, Benedict developed and employed use of the configuration approach, which is a specific perspective within the culture and personality school of American anthropology (later known as psychological anthropology) that melds cultural relativism with psychological theory. The roots of the culture and personality school of American anthropology can be traced back to Franz Boas; however, Benedict, Margaret Mead and Edward Sapir largely developed this theoretical approach, focusing on socialization, and developing a course of action for comparing cultures in terms of the benefits for individuals. Proponents of this paradigm consider how cultures understand their own human identify and focus on understanding the relationship between the cultural environment and individual personality. The main premise of the culture and personality paradigm is that socialization constructs personality patterns by shaping an individuals behaviors, thoughts, and norms, and that the behaviors adults display are culturally patterned, allowing them to fit in and function productively within their surroundings. 

 In Patterns of Culture Benedict clearly uses a theoretical approach to cultural comparisons and culture theories. As Boas points out in his introduction, Benedict’s approach is different and distinct from the functional approach, in that it is more focused on determining the “fundamental attitudes than with the functional relations of every cultural item.” (Benedict 1934: xvii) Although it seems rather questionable that the groups she highlighted in this work so succinctly fell into the categories of Apollonian, Dionysian and paranoid, the examples she provides for each of the cultures clearly demonstrated her theory of culture as “personality-writ-large.” Eighty years later, this view seems a bit simplistic and dated; however, her discussions of ethnocentric tendencies, cultural relativism, and historical particularism are timeless. Her analysis at times seems to have been highly generalized and far too humanistic, specifically in that she did not make use of enough quantitative data. The Zuni, particularly, seemed to be portrayed as devoid of emotion bringing up the question as to if she truly found specific patterns or merely subsets within the culture as a whole. It seemed a bit incongruous to be describing cultures as specific categories while at the same time using a cultural relativistic framework, but I think Benedict’s theory of cultures espousing certain patterns is certainly valid, although simplistic. 
 
 The specific methodology employed in this work does not translate to my thesis topic; however, the general concepts of cultural relativism and historical particularism will certainly play a role in shaping all of our theses.