Rating: 3/5

I’d heard a lot of good things about this book, and there are plenty of positives, but what jumps out at me now that I’m done is just how long it took me to get through it. A friend referred to it as “If I Never Get Finished” in a comment and it seemed to fit. For 424 pages, it felt a lot more like 600+. 
 
I’ve always liked stories about time travel, from “Back to the Future” to “A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court.” Daryl Brock really nails this history here, particularly regarding the 1869 Cincinnati Reds. Clearly he did a lot of home work to capture the characters on the team, and he placed them in a very historically detailed setting. It was fun to see Mark Twain pop up here as a character, and at times the book felt almost like an adventure Twain might have written himself. 
 
It felt like there was too much going on here, though. Some of the story lines, particularly with Johnny in the latter part of the book, just seemed to prolong things. I’m not sure why we needed the bicycle racing, other than as a vehicle for Sam Fowler to make a premature (given the standards of 1869) moralistic stand about race. For all the bad guys chasing him, he sure managed to punch his way out of a lot of scrapes. If the Fenian Army was really much of a threat to anyone (maybe they weren’t) it seems like they should have been able to finish him off a bit more easily. And for someone so shrewd in all other matters, how did he not see the gold crash coming? 
 
As to the Fenians and Cait, that story line grew weary for me pretty quick. I never picked up why she looked so familiar to him (perhaps I dozed off for that part), but the context seemed to hint at maybe an ancestor of some kind. If that’s really how he knew her picture and had a square of her dress on a quilt in modern times, then going back 120 years to court her gets a bit creepy. It calls to mind the old song, “I’m My Own Grandpa.” 
 
In the later chapters, when Sam returned to San Francisco, the intricate detail on the layout and landscape of the city felt like a means to showoff secret historical knowledge instead of nice color for an exciting tale. By that point I was ready for the book to end and I was tempted to start skimming. Likewise, some of the game recaps got to be too much, and I’m someone who loves reading about baseball. 
 
Spoiler alert: But my biggest issue would have to be the end. What exactly was going on there? So he gets shot, sort of, and somehow that kills him back into the modern world, but not really. And he’s insane and a bum, who turns back into pretty much of a total loser whose daughters don’t even really want to spend time with him. I’ve just read 400 pages of a guy who can single-handedly whip the Irish militia and he can barely feed himself by the epilogue. I’d have rather not read that part and at least parted ways with Sam when he still had 
some dignity.