Rating: 2/5

I genuinely wanted to like this book. I think I get what the author was trying to do but it just didn't work for me. Obviously the central argument of the book is against the court verdict that said Agnes was suffering from 'the madness of a seduced woman', that she was some kind of passive doll on which a man worked his puppetry but then he is somehow also magically absolved of blame for the seduction which drove her mad. It's a confusing theme that tries to have things a number of different ways, and while I appreciate that the author was trying to get across the complexity of Agnes' real motivations and the confusion of her mental breakdown, I still had problems with the book.

My main problem was Agnes herself. She was just dreadful - a whining, entitled little snowflake. I suppose I was expecting a kind of Ruth Ellis character, a woman who commits murder but is sympathetic largely because the man she puts six feet under is far, far worse than herself. Of course, this doesn't happen, because Agnes doesn't shoot Frank and instead murders the blameless new girlfriend, which pretty much destroyed any sympathy I had left after a thick chunk of book listening to Agnes drone on about how special, different and sensitive she was. I know that this was based on a real case in Vermont but I must admit I questioned the author's decision in writing about this case. In many ways it was a brave decision to write about a woman who kills another woman over a man, but again it largely hinged on creating sympathy for Agnes, in which I'm sorry to say she didn't - for me, anyway. 

I think another problem was that Frank fails as a plausible subject for obsession. He's a schlub, a bland lump - he's just there. Obviously a large part of Agnes' fixation is pure projection; she's feverishly scrawling her own absurd fantasies (he must be a hero, he must be an artist) on this bore of a man, but again, it's a symptom of Agnes' self-obsession. 

The second half of the book could have been much better, since the POV shifted to third omniscient, thus sparing us any more of the angst-ridden droning that passed for Agnes' mental processes, but then it fell flat because it was just retreading what happened in the first half. Again, I think I can see what the author was trying to - to show us what life was like outside of Agnes' head and so underscore how wrong her thought processes were. Unfortunately, if you just thought Agnes was wrong all along and in need of a nice hot cup of tea and a slap, it doesn't work.

It's a shame. I bumped up my initial rating for this book because I think it could have been great. It would have worked very well if the second and first halves were switched over, because then we would have had the excitement of the court case and the details of Agnes' crime unfolding bit by bit. As it was you had the court case going through the details of what she did when you knew everything from the first half anyway. The tension was already blown. I respect that it was a brave attempt to try and create sympathy for a character like Agnes, but I'm afraid I just found her shallow, selfish and manipulative.