Rating: 4/5

Emily walked forward and fastened the collar of diamonds around the dog’s neck and then stood with her hand on his head. She gave a harsh, ugly laugh. 

“Look well on us,” she said. “The mongrels have the diamonds!” 

Duke lifted his black lips in a long slow grin while the diamonds blazed and flashed among the shaggy gold-and-black fur at his neck.

Beaton, M. C.. Duke's Diamonds (Endearing Young Charms Book 1) (Kindle Locations 861-864). RosettaBooks. Kindle Edition. 

There's a romantic storyline in this novel between the illegitimate heroine Emily and Lord Storm ( heir to an Earl ), but my attention was always primarily focused on Duke. This is Duke:

Duke is a funny looking, adorable, obnoxious, spoilt rotten, lazy, opinionated ( yes, dogs are capable of letting us know how they feel about certain stuff ) and vain mongrel dog. His owner is Sir Peregrine Manley who also happens to be the biological father of the heroine Emily. At the start of the story, Emily has been brought over from the orphanage, where she'd spent her entire life, to act as a servant and primary care provider for Duke ! That was hilarious ! The dog has his own servant ! Sir Peregrine is a sour old man who is dying and his dying wish is to have a lot of fun at the expense of his hateful and equally nasty relatives. Emily didn't know that she was his biological daughter until the reading of the will; he ended up leaving all his properties, his money and custody of Duke to Emily. He also included a rather mean legacy that's guaranteed to make poor Duke the victim of a lot of criminal murder attempts on his poor doggy life:

  “‘My fortune in diamonds, with the exception of the Manley diamond collar, which goes to Emily Winters, I leave to—’” 

“Yes. Yes!” said Harriet, her face thrust forward like a gargoyle. 

“‘I leave to my dog Duke.’” 

“What?” cried everyone in the room. 

“‘On Duke’s death,’” continued Mr. Summers, “‘the diamonds will be divided equally among the following: my sister, Harriet; my brother, James; my cousin, Mrs. Clarissa Singleton; and my nieces, Fanny and Betty Kipling.’

Beaton, M. C.. Duke's Diamonds (Endearing Young Charms Book 1) (Kindle Locations 851-856). RosettaBooks. Kindle Edition. 

The pesky but lovable dog finds himself entangled in a lot of mischief because all of these other beneficiaries make numerous attempts to kill him, because they're so greedy for the diamonds. I honestly hated Sir P for putting such a clause in his will. If he had really loved his dog then he wouldn't have put the animal's life in such jeopardy. Emily finds herself in a quandary because she has to protect the dog and deal with her emotional feelings for the H, Lord Storm. The heroine eventually leaves with Duke to go stay with the lawyer's widowed sister in Bath and then the H decides to pursue her. They end up getting engaged but Emily calls off the engagement after she hears Lord Storm telling his friend John that the only reason he's marrying her is because they were found in a compromising situation. 

There's much drama, chaos, conflict, comedy and bittersweet romance in this story. Lord Storm and Emily were both so proud that they ended up sabotaging their relationship because they're reluctant to communicate with each other. The heroine did stand up for herself against the evil relatives but the plot on Duke's life is further complicated after the H's friend John gets romantically involved with one of the villains, Mrs. Singleton. John had appeared to be a nice guy but he was also swayed by the greed for the diamonds; Mrs. Singleton got him involved in a murder scheme when she asked him to shoot the dog for her. Emily was able to befriend an orphan young boy called Jimmy and the latter soon became Duke's new best friend and protector. 

Eventually, the heroine is forced to ask the executor of the will ( the H, Lord Storm ) to break the terms of the will and just divide the diamonds among the parasitic relatives. This actually became a necessity after the attempts to murder the dog became too numerous. But Sir P was smarter than I thought because  the relatives ended up getting fake diamonds ! The old man knew they were nasty wretches so he sold the real diamonds before he died and bought some fake ones just to have a final practical joke on these villains. It was vastly entertaining to see their reaction to this:

“Paste?” screamed Clarissa, a stream of gems dropping from her fingers to rattle on the table. “Paste!”

Beaton, M. C.. Duke's Diamonds (Endearing Young Charms Book 1) (Kindle Location 2025). RosettaBooks. Kindle Edition.

The MC's get their HEA after Emily confronts Lord Storm about the conversation she'd heard between him and the vile John. The H apologizes and confirms his love for her in the sweetest, most emphatic manner:

  “You could not…? Dammit, woman, I love you with my mind, my hands, my body, my very soul. And you put me through months of hell because you were too proud to ask for an explanation?” Emily looked at him wonderingly. 

“I did not think I had it in my power to put you through any kind of misery. Oh, my love, if you only knew how ashamed I am of my birth, how you seemed too good for me. I felt you were ashamed of my birth.” 

The hard lines of his face softened. He drew her gently into his arms and caressed the back of her neck, feeling the long shiver that ran down her body. 

“I do not care anymore about your birth. I want you, Emily.”

Beaton, M. C.. Duke's Diamonds (Endearing Young Charms Book 1) (Kindle Locations 2169-2174). RosettaBooks. Kindle Edition. 

This is the hero, Lord Storm:

This is the heroine, Emily: