Rating: 3/5

I'm not sure there's a single other comic book character out there whose origin story has been told as often as Superman's. Every time the continuity is so much as nudged we need to hear, once again, about how he fell to Earth and got picked up by farmers and met Lois Lane and Lex Luthor. You know, just in case we forget. Or something big and important goes different this time around (it never does) You could probably clump together everyone else in Justice League and their origins wouldn't come to half his number. Maybe Batman's.

This one sets him straight after Crisis on Infinite Earths. And out of all the origins I've read for him, this one comes across as particularly weird. Krypton looks and feels wildly different to anything from before or since, there's a Batman rogue I've never heard of before (though she's at least crazy enough to fit the general theme), and Lex Luthor has hair. I guess they tried to give a new spin on it, carefully, here and there, new continuity and all... but it doesn't seem like any of it stuck for very long, at least to a relative layman such as myself. In retrospect it just struck the eye as something of a novelty at best.

Other than that, it felt pretty basic. Kal-El comes to earth, his childhood is summed up in a few panels, he picks up his suit and comes to Metropolis, one issue is dedicated to Lois Lane, Batman, Lex Luthor, and Bizarro each, then he comes back home to get his full origin and figure out what he's about and what he stands for. It paints all the important numbers but not in the sort of colour that'd stick to memory in any way. It's just something they had to do - again - and it serves its purpose well enough, but it never rises above. And now that the continuity's been rebooted at least twice since (I honestly lose count of these things), its reason for being is gone and it has little to nothing else to cling on to. A historical footnote - not terrible in itself, but you can whack a tree and at least four other Superman origins will fall down, each of them telling the tale more memorably.

ᴺᵒᵗ ᵃˡˡ ᵒᶠ ᵗʰᵉᵐ, ᵗʰᵒᵘᵍʰ...

Thanks for the rec, Tim. Sorry I couldn't like it quite as much.