Rating: 4/5

Directly after I've finished the book:

THAT, my friends, is an excellent example of a literary fiction. 

And it is not easy to rate the books of the genre. 
They could be everything - from 2 to 5 stars. 

Well, I have to decide between 4 or 5 in this specific case, but it won't be easier to write a review for it. The reason WHY I love literary fiction-it makes you not only feel, but think, think a lot. 
Oh, yes, it can even detect our hidden individual talent for philosophy.
 
Now I'll go into my tub to think about...the fragility of life, the variety of love, the power of human bonding, the senseless of death, the significance of the moment and the solemnity of words...

  I decided not to hide my review within the spoiler tags=&gt;spoiler-free
:

Michael Cunningham is an extraordinary story teller. I was drawn into this multifaceted journey across years and cities from the very first page. I re-read some lines again and again letting the words slowly grow on me before turning to the next page. The writing is rich and compelling. I highlighted the half of the book. 

The author takes us through the lives of the three main characters- Bobby, Jonathan and Clare- their childhood, families, their loves, lives, dreams, disappointments, losses, small triumphs, big changes, ups and downs. The trio would find themselves becoming major parts of each others lives. The relationships between these three characters between the late 70s and the early 80s are the core of the story.

This book is about friendship and family bond. And it is about love, that is so different in all its facets and appearances. 
There is no rules for love, it is genderless and ageless, and timeless.

And because all my dear friends wanted to know if there is a HEA:
It is a very realistic ending, full of hope and mererly present and at the same it is an open ending - Michael Cunningham trusts his readers to draw the right conclusions about his characters - and this ending is melancholic, poignant and simply BEAUTIFUL.

My only complaint, a very tiny one - the multiple first person's POV. I would have given it 5 stars if not every character had his own first person's POV. In spite of the fact that this kind of telling is my favourite, I think the book was a bit overloaded with it. As the result -all these different POVs sounded very similar at the end. 
It was always ONLY the voice of Michael Cunningham behind. 

 
Highly recommended!

P.S. I'd like to thank Nick for a nice exchange of opinions about the book. It is this kind of books you NEED to talk about while/after reading it. It is a kind of book you shouldn't read alone. 
It is why I love my GR friends so much.