Rating: 4/5

This tale is part-journalism and part-fictional speculation about Lee Harvey Oswald, who was at the center of the most famous conspiracy theory of the 20th century. The novel aims to reveal Oswald's character and answer the perennial question, did he really do it and why? Well, Mailer thinks he did shoot at the president, but maybe he was not the only one who did so on that day, as the Warren Commission insisted resolutely from the start (at the behest of President Johnson). 

The first part of the book is taken up with recounting LHO’s life in the Soviet Union (in Minsk, Belarus), where he went at age 20 after leaving the Marine Corps, declaring that he wanted to live in the Soviet Union, which he admired. This section contains much info gleaned from the Belarus KGB files, and shows that the KGB was not sure whether LHO was a US spy or not. They decided that he could not be so, given how bad his Russian was and how lazy he was. He got a job in a factory in Minsk, and a good flat, and then, after some romantic failures, meets his future wife, Marina, whom he later gets pregnant. For some reason, which is not quite clear, a couple of years later, he then decides he wants to return to the USA and embarks on a program of pompous letter-writing to the US embassy in Moscow, who are not very keen (he has 'defected' after all). This section, written in a flat, faux-Soviet style, is very effective and offers insight into life in the Soviet Union of the time, if nothing else. Oswald appears both determined and arrogant, almost delusional about his role in the world. 

Back in the US, Oswald, living in Texas, where his brother’s family is based, is then an object of interest to the CIA and FBI, having lived in Soviet Union and then returned with a Russian wife. The book spends some time establishing his strange family background – lived in poverty in a shack in New Orleans with his mother, then put into an orphanage, then developed, at the same time, a strong desire to join the Marine Corps and an interest in Communism (trying to join the local Party). This being Mailer, the book speculates that he was driven to prove himself as a ‘man’, and about his possible homosexuality, using extracts from the Warren Commission to show that this was a strong line of inquiry – they were determined to show he was a ‘lone killer’ and his gay tendencies might be seen as part of that line, with the implication of his already living a ‘double life’. By 1958, he had decided to defect and started to learn Russian, although it is not clear who paid the somewhat high travel costs of his journey to Russia (Mailer says perhaps he sold secrets to foreign agents while in Japan with the Corps).

In Texas, they get involved with local Russian emigres, some of whom may or may not be involved with the CIA (such as the bizarre Baron de Mohrenschildt, a geologist with ties to the Company), and he mysteriously comes into enough money to pay off his debt to the State Dept for the costs of repatriation from Russia (Mailer speculates that this could be from local Communist groups or from the Agency - the author quotes from his CIA novel Harlot’s Ghost about this way of developing an asset). Mailer says Oswald believed he was destined for greatness, and even writes a manifesto of his vision of society (the 'Aethian System') , in Russian. In early 1963, he loses his job in a print shop and then buys a mail-order gun (the famous carbine that he posed for a photo with in his garden), apparently with the plan to kill the far-right General Edwin Walker, a virulent anti-communist (fascist, in Oswald’s view). Oddly, despite the rifle having a telescopic sight and the victim being seated in a window, he misses his shot. The police fail to match the bullet casing with Oswald’s gun and, Mailer suggests, he is perhaps is emboldened to think that, as a Man of Destiny, he could therefore undertake a much bigger act of Historic Change (thought you might also say it indicates he was not that great a shot, and perhaps not good enough to fire three accurate shots at a moving car under extreme pressure). 

He goes back to New Orleans, his birth town, and starts to mix with the local Cuban expats and joins the Hands off Cuba Campaign, which he hopes to use as a way of spreading communism. Mailer again suggests that he may be working for the FBI as a agent provocateur, without solid evidence (this is a recurring theme in any conspiracy theory). He hatches a plan to go to Cuba, and 
goes to Mexico City to try to get a visa for Cuba and is told to get one to Russia first, and then visits the Soviet Embassy where he may or may not have met with a KBG officer, Mailer notes, who may or may not have been in charge of ‘wet jobs’ (there is an endless litany of possible contacts in this period, as everything he does is read back in light of his role in the assassination). He goes back to Texas, eventually, where his wife has a second child, and is then under constant FBI surveillance and yet, via a family friend, lands a job in the Texas Book Depository in Dallas in October 1963, just one month before the assassination. On the fateful day, after shots are fired from the Book Depository building (witnesses heard them), Oswald leaves calmly as chaos ensues and later encounters a policeman who tries to stop him, for some reason, and is shot dead by Lee. Oswald is then apprehended and taken for questioning. After a long period of questioning, during which Lee admits no guilt, the police decide to transfer him for his own safety, and then, in front of the TV cameras, he is shot dead by Jack Ruby, a local nightclub owner (the 'amateur hitman' in Mailer's words).

The real mystery, Mailer suggests, is perhaps why Ruby, who was not a professional gunman, took it upon himself to kill LHO when he did? Mailer posits that Ruby was likely to have been acting for the Mob (who had long hated the Kennedys) and Ruby himself implied this to the Warren Commission when he said his life would be in danger if he was to speak frankly in Dallas (but then concocted a bizarre story that he acted as he was so upset at the thought of Jackie having to return to testify in court). Mailer says it is likely the mob ordered a hit on JFK, but also that LHO was not working for them – though they may not have known this and wanted him dead just in case. Ruby’s actions are perhaps an even bigger mystery than those of Oswald (Mailer calls them ‘spiritual brothers’) and without his hit, the whole story may not have spawned the huge conspiracy that it did. It remains a mystery but the picture drawn of Oswald's character here would suggest that he would have been pleased to go down in history as the person who killed the president of the United States (the leader of the capitalist world), though there seem to be a huge number of loose ends.