Rating: 3/5

this book was evidently published in 2009 and the audible book that I listen to the second Time around in 2017. I would guess it may have been stories that were written by Paretsky before the Warshawski series became popular. This is a half dozen more or less short stories, featuring the famous detective. They are fire, less skillfully presented than the full length books, as they feature fairly quick and immediate crime resolutions without much mystery or skulduggery. VI shows up and solves the mystery as in a one hour TV drama where the solution comes quickly.

————————
The V.I. Warshawski series has reached its sixteenth book in 2013 and I have read all but this most recent book in the running series. It has not been out long enough to be on the ninety-nine cent list yet so I am waiting! And, while I wait, catching up on this 1995 book of short stories seems like one way to while away the time.
 
The Paretsky books have gotten progressively longer as the series has developed. This, in my opinion, has not lead to an improvement in the stories or the writing. It just seems like the publisher or author has decided to increase the thickness of the books. So I wondered what a Paretsky short story of a V.I Warshawski adventure would be like. This book came out the year after #8 in the series. In an Author’s Note, Paretsky says, “These stories were written over a period of thirteen years. … I sometimes write short stories when I am trying to understand a question that doesn’t seem to merit a whole novel. “ The first in the series was published in 1982 so this collection is thirteen years later. Now, after another nineteen years, another short story collection has not been forthcoming.
 
A GR friend writes in her review
 This book does not add anything to her storyline. These mysteries are a nice way to pass the time if you simply want a small quick read between doing things. However, they do not showcase Warshawski's customary wit, although she quickly solves nine crimes pissing off everyone as usual… 
When I was growing up outside Detroit, the morning Free Press carried One Minute Mysteries on the back page. I remember enjoying those as quick fun. But a ten or fifteen page murder mystery might be a bit much unless you are desperate for a little V.I. Warshawski.
 
OK. Maybe I am being too harsh on this book. I don’t think so but “The Maltese Cat” story is funny. I do not usually think of Paretsky as funny but I may have to rethink that now and keep my funny bone tickled. 

In the normal course of events, a new book in the V.I. series comes out on a pretty regular schedule, every year or two: 1982; 1984; 1985; 1987; 1988; 1990; 1992; 1994. Then a gap to 1999; 2001; 2003; 2005. Then a gap to 2009; 2010; 2012; 2013. Windy City Blues (1995) and Ghost Country (1998) come in the first gap. Bleeding Kansas (2007) in the second gap. I have read two out of the three gap books and each falls short of the normal Paretsky writing skill. So maybe they filled a need during the time of the gap in the series but now the reader has control over the reading frequency and the gap vanishes. 

A full V.I. story in a short format? It just doesn’t work. I suggest the modern day accelerated readers skip the gap books and just coast through the uninterrupted series at a leisurely pace.