Rating: 3/5

This had potential and there were things about it I liked but sadly the heroine was annoying, which is what I read 19th century books to get away from. So there was 20th century feminism inserted into 1895 which is inauthentic and most of it was ridiculous, such as her being considered a spinster at 19 in 1895, this is just not accurate lol and there was already women working on printing by this time, and also unlike what the heroine believes, that women didn't work in printer because people thought they're weren't able for it......that isn't how it was at all, it's because printer was created by men for men......it wouldn't have even crossed majority of women's minds to even want to do these things because it was a given that women had more important things to attend to......like bringing human beings into the world, it's hilarious how they keep turning past century women into feminists when doing period movies/shows/books today because if women actually were feminists at that time then majority of us would not be here right now lol as women would not have had children like what's happening today due to feminism, so we literally are all only alive right now because our female ancestors were not feminists. In fact the heroines mother would have been closer to the average 19th century woman, who took great pride in her family, children and homemaking and wouldn't even dreamed of doing anything else. So to hear the heroine complain about being a woman printer every 5 minutes was annoying. I would have even been fine with her working on the paper if she wasn't so obnoxious about it. 
"Until that moment, I had decided to do exactly that, but his patronizing tone changed my mind" this is the type of insufferably annoying crap she was pulling through the entire book, every time someone would caution her because they were worried for her, it made her act like a 10 year old child told not to play with a certain toy. Which brings me to the hero Taylor, now he was wonderful, I would have liked to give the book higher stars for him, but the heroine brings it down, every time I might of liked her she just ruined it. 
Taylor was unusual for a gothic hero, he was light haired and he wasn't very brooding or dark, he was witty and fun which I liked for a change, though I do like my brooding heroes lol. Also the setting being Atlantic city was unusual too and it was interesting so I liked these things about it, though the ending was disappointing, again to add to my dislike for the heroine, she never proved her love for Taylor, never told him, never really did anything for him and all she did was snap at him every 5 minutes and assume the worst of him, I don't know why he loved her. Only in a novel does a gorgeous nice witty millionaire fall in love with and marry an annoying feminist lol he was too good for her honestly, she behaved like a child most of the time yet the novel kept harping on about how intelligent she is, while of course crapping on all the other ladies, as the heroine is "not like other girls" "she's special" and why? because she wants to dirty her hands instead of wear nice dresses and get married, um nobody cares, nothing I hate more when these authors crap on all the other women of the time and try to portray them as stupid......basically I loved Taylor and I liked the setting and story but the writing and heroine I did not like.