Rating: 5/5

Calliope Minton, a/k/a Margaret Stafford, a/k/a Thomas Landes, doesn’t like the nobility much at all. Which is why she does caricatures of them, poking holes in their bloated self-importance. She uses the "Stafford" pseudonym to gain entre among the ton, posing as a companion to an old gossipy society bitch. She publishes her work under the "Landes" pen name, so nobody makes the connection.

And her favorite target is the Earl of Angelford. He's a handsome devil

who has earned her disdain by making "witty" remarks at her expense.

It all comes to a head one night when Lady Simpson, fires her very publicly at a soiree. Unable to curb her tongue, Calliope lets the cat out of the bag

	
… by exposing Lady Simpson's nastiest, back-stabbiest private comments before she takes her leave.

Of course, Callie's days as a companion are over. She’s great with disguises but after this spectacle, she'd be recognized. So she decides on a new guise, that of courtesan. All she needs is a trustworthy man to be her “keeper” in name only. Robert, a caricaturist who mentored her talent, calls on a distant relation, Stephen Chalmers. 

Stephen is oddly willing to take the part and, surprisingly, shows no objection to the “in name only" part. It doesn’t occur to Callie to wonder why. 

Stephen, it turns out, is a spy. As is his best friend (surprise!) Angelford. Who has very sharp eyes and keen instincts. Who recognizes that “Esmeralda” (that unfortunate alias was Stephen’s idea) is really “Margaret Stafford,” and wonders what she’s up to. Who decides to investigate.

Then Stephen disappears, and someone is threatening Callie. Callie and Angelford are thrown together, trying to find Stephen and figure out what “it” is. It all ties in, somehow, with the fire that killed her mother, and with her father (also dead).

This is a good mystery, with plenty of danger and adventure, and Mallory has a deft hand with the romance, which is pure icing on the cake. If you like your “romance” verging on erotica, this isn’t for you—there’s really only one sex scene. But I personally prefer it that way. I hate it when the sex scenes substitute for solid pacing and a great plot. Here, the story has precedence, and the one sex scene was both integral to that story and pretty damned hot. Mallory’s hit a five-star home run with this one.