Rating: 1/5

I just finished reading the novel,  Nectar in a Sieve  written by Kamala Markandaya. The author, born in the highest caste in India but lived mainly in England, writes about the tale of a family's struggles with poverty and globalization. Being Markandaya's first published novel,  Nectar in a Sieve  is a worldwide best-seller and has been translated into seventy languages. Markandaya takes us to rural India set in mid-1900's, with the reflection of main character, Rukumani, taking the reader from her early marriage to old age; with the constant companionship of poverty all along the way.

 I found it quite shocking the desparate measures people are driven to just to stay alive. It makes me feel lucky and thankful that my life is constantly filled with panic and worry about feeding my family. The culture change was also very interesting and I liked being able to see the world from a completely different way of life, and I thought the way of life displayed in the book were a nice opposition from something I'm used to. The characters' way of life, view and povertt really opened my eyes and the change in perspective was refreshing.

 The weaknesses I found in the novel would include the absolutely depressing theme to the entire novel. Certainly not a "feel good" story, I constantly found myself cringing and thinking how the characters' lives could possibly get worse, and they did. I started to get the feeling that this could be somewhat exaggerated to back the author's point that globalization was negative to the poor. But perhaps that was the only way to make her point. Something that the author could do to make it better was to lift the mood-just a couple of times. After done reading that night's assignment, I found that the reading would leave me in a very sad, depressed mood.

 Although  Nectar in a Sieve brought a cool perspective on culture to the table, I felt that the chain of extremely negative events made me not even want to continue as I helplessly watched as the characters' lives lead to absolutely nothing. Every sacrifice and the days on end of empty stomachs and the seemingly never ending veil of death threading throughout the novel could not come remotely close to countering the negatives of the novel that made the novel somewhat unenjoyable.