Rating: 3/5

Yaffa Eliach’s “Hasidic Tales of the Holocaust” is a collection of stories that were shared within the Hasidic community during and after the second world war. They are stories of faith, hope, tragedy and cruelty. 

Some will read these stories and conclude that they are true, others will with equal certainty declare that they could not possible be true. I fall into neither of these extremes. The stories have value because the stories which we tell each other say something important about who we are and what we believe. In some cases – here especially – the stories provide a way to try to understand events and their meaning. 

For all of the research and scholarship that has been devoted to the subject, the Holocaust – the genocide of six million Jewish men, women and children – remains an un-knowable mystery. Knowledge of the roots of antisemitism and its evolution from contempt to expulsion to slaughter falls apart in the face of a simple question: How could people do this to other people. 

Not the first time this question has been asked, and certainly not the last.

The Hasidim of these stories struggle to survive in the kingdom of death while retaining their faith in God, even in those moments when God seems to have abandoned them. The meaning of these stories seems clear to me: God’s seeming absence does not absolve us of the responsibility to show up. We pray for deliverance and we are burned in our synagogues; in the face of death, we circumcise our newborn children, and receive a bullet between the eyes as our reward. In one of Elie Wiesel’s stories, Moshe the Beadle, escaped from a death transport, stands in an abandoned synagogue and says, “Master of the Universe, the Jews of Sighet are still here …. But where are you?”

But what I found most moving were the stories which demonstrated a faith in humanity in the midst of man-made death; how a Rabbi survived a selection in Auschwitz because in the crucial moment, the rabbi and the SS officer recognized each other from daily encounters in their village. 
“The rabbi, now in his eighties, told me, ‘This is the power of a good-morning greeting. A man should always greet his fellow man.’”

Yaffa Eliach’s “Hasidic Tales of the Holocaust” is a collection of stories that were shared within the Hasidic community during and after the second world war. They are stories of faith, hope, tragedy and cruelty. For this alone, it is a book worth reading. 
Some will read these stories and conclude that they are true, others will with equal certainty declare that they could not possible be true. I fall into neither of these extremes. The stories have value because the stories which we tell each other say something important about who we are and what we believe. In some cases – here especially – the stories provide a way to try to understand events and their meaning. 
For all of the research and scholarship that has been devoted to the subject, the Holocaust – the genocide of six million Jewish men, women and children – remains an un-knowable mystery. Knowledge of the roots of antisemitism and its evolution from contempt to expulsion to slaughter falls apart in the face of a simple question: How could people do this to other people? 

Not the first time this question has been asked, and certainly not the last.

The Hasidim of these stories struggle to survive in the kingdom of death while retaining their faith in God, even in those moments when God seems to have abandoned them. The meaning of these stories seems clear: God’s seeming absence does not absolve us of the responsibility to show up. We pray for deliverance and we are burned in our synagogues; in the face of death, we circumcise our newborn children, and receive a bullet between the eyes as our reward. In one of Elie Wiesel’s stories, Moshe the Beadle, escaped from a death transport, stands in an abandoned synagogue and says, “Master of the Universe, the Jews of Sighet are still here …. But where are you?”

This enduring faith in God is not that surprising, what is, though, are the stories which demonstrated a faith in humanity in the midst of man-made hell; how a Rabbi survived a selection in Auschwitz because in the crucial moment, the rabbi and the SS officer recognized each other from daily encounters in their village. 

“The rabbi, now in his eighties, told me, ‘This is the power of a good-morning greeting. A man should always greet his fellow man.’”

A worthwhile read.