Rating: 4/5

In Artemis Cooper's recently published (2016) biography of Elizabeth Jane Howard, she says The Beautiful Visit "grew out of the unhappiness of Jane's first marriage, and it asks the questions that were preoccupying her then. How do women find a place in the world if they are brought up unprepared and uneducated for anything but marriage? Does coupledom really bring fulfilment? Is it possible to find an identity outside it?"

The book is very much a coming-of-age story about a young girl - never named - who is the youngest of four children in a 'shabby genteel' family. Her mother comes from a rich family; her father from a lesser social class, and these are the things that have always mattered so much in England. There is a strain, and a shame, in the family which suffuses the atmosphere completely. Her father is a composer (not quite first-rate) and the family lives in a house in Kensington that they cannot afford to maintain properly. EJH is very attuned to the nuances and gradations of social class, and one of the themes of the book is that women from 'good' families are not allowed to do very much at all other than make good marriages. The book is set just before, during and after World War I - a time that instigated great social change in England, and also (not unrelatedly) wiped out a large part of a generation of men. For those girls bred for well-connected marriage, the opportunities became more limited than ever. 

The details and atmosphere of this novel are so spot-on, so precise - and it really does allow the reader to imaginatively enter that world. The oppressive rules applied to women are so hard to imagine now, but it's worth remembering that women still did not have the vote in England. (Partial voting rights for women were granted in 1918, and more comprehensive rights were not passed by law until 1928). 

Bored to the point of despondency, the young protagonist of the book is invited to visit some distant relatives of her mother's for the Christmas holidays: two weeks in the holiday at a 'jolly' country house with a large family and interesting, attractive guests. The repercussions of this visit then play out through the rest of the novel. There are several important encounters with young men, her mother and her sister, but this is a largely internalised novel. She is a quiet observer, more than a primary mover in life - because of sex, age and temperament. It is quite hypnotic to read; at least I found it so. 

Like EJH, her protagonist longs for something more than just marriage. The example of her parents' marriage has not been a positive one, and the sensitive, observant young girl sees how men and women all around her are constantly misunderstanding and disappointing each other. This is the opposite of a 'marriage plot' novel, really, because it is really about exploring about what else is available other than the marriage plot. My only disappointment was with the ending - which felt both strained and improbable. Otherwise, I thought this novel was full of emotional power.