Rating: 1/5

I'm not going to lie, I skimmed through a lot of this book halfway through. It was very repetitive, very one note, and I thought the characters were all extremely unlikeable. The main character went through a tough time, it's never expanded upon. The second eldest daughter is traumatized and exhibiting schizophrenic behavior, it's never expanded upon. Typical Christian story where the whole point is for the mc to convert for absolutely NO reason, except that she's finally able to unload five kids on an Amish women who, a mere couple of chapters before, firmly refused EVERYONE'S request because she was 'close' to Sarah's sister and made her promise her kids would stay together...
NOTHING and I mean NOTHING makes sense in this stupid book. I don't know how it got made into a movie, but the reboot that film gave this book must've been it's ONLY saving grace (no pun intended) because I seriously don't understand how nobody could pick up on the number threads left unwound and frayed to just be discarded. A more abominable use of plot devices and last minute "because-it's-so" only reminds me of movies that do things just because it's "in the script" when it contributes nothing to the story. 
As far as the unlikeable characters, this isn't the first Beverly Lewis novel I've found that problem. I've struggled to like her writing, even though her stories are SO close to being original. Movies do the books a favor. I might finish reading the Shunning series, but only because I'm invested in the movie. If I'd read the book first, I would've neither seen it nor cared.
This woman might do a success to the christian amish writers too afraid to leave their comfort zone for fear of angering God with sinful behavior and any message other than evangelism, but the thing is- WE GOT THE MESSAGE! CENTURIES AGO! Your only audience are those same christians with little to no imagination and fear for digging too deep into a story because they'd rather keep God at arm's length rather than asking the most IMPORTANT QUESTION a writer or a true child of God could ever ask- why?