Rating: 4/5

Man of Steel reads a little thin these days, not that much happens for a Superman origin story, as John Byrne liked to pad his pages with full-page spreads and quick plots. That being said, it was a very important part of comics and mostly very successful at updating Superman for modern audiences. 

After Crisis on Infinite Earths, Superman needed a lot of updating and DC knew it. The Silver Age corny character, nearly omnipotent and fighting mad scientists, didn't have any relevance in the 1980s as superhero comics became more of a sophisticated medium. He didn't fit in the same world as, say, the New Teen Titans. Let alone the critically acclaimed stories Marvel was publishing. 

So they got one of Marvel's biggest stars to remake Superman from the ground up: John Byrne. The art may not have been as solid as his legendary Uncanny X-Men. The writing may not have been as good as his Fantastic Four (let's be honest, Byrne was already past his prime). But it was fresh and readable and he's just plain a good storyteller. 

I liked that this version was canon for so long. Krypton a far more interesting sci-fi planet, his parents as part of the supporting cast, and most of all Lex Luthor as evil businessman of the Reagan era. The latter was Marv Wolfman's idea and one of the best changes that still works well today. 

The villains were the least interesting part of the Man of Steel miniseries, with machinations by Lex involving Bizarro being the worst physical threat to Superman. There's no Brainiac or Zod for him to fight, which was still made for the weakest part of overly powerful Superman stories despite the update. 

There's also the Batman chapter about their first meeting, which is its own isolated episode and it's a lot of fun to see them as rivals teaming up and Batman actually being a detective. However, the original villain Magpie is such a boring antagonist but I suppose having a famous Batman rogue would take away from Superman's focus. 

Man of Steel overall remains an excellent introduction to Superman that new readers can still enjoy today, especially for younger ones who don't need everything to be so gritty and cynical. Recommended as ever.