Rating: 4/5

This is a fine collection of what Howe here, in the 80s, dubs "Short Short Fiction" and which was called "Microfiction" in the 90s and which we now call "Flash Fiction". I feel it's a useful collection for editors, like me, who are trying to get a handle on what constitutes valid standards for successful flash fiction (through offering the attempts of literary greats) - modified for genre in my case - and also for modern writers of flash who may also wonder just what they can and can't consider to be in their box of tricks. Howe's introduction serves as a fine examination of these very questions (barring genre considerations) and I've excerpted the salient sections into the quotes.

And the stories - oh, the stories. I have to read a lot of short genre fiction both in my professional role and as well by choice and sometimes I get burned out on horror fiction and it is always a joy to return to short lit fiction and remind myself of just how wide open the field can be, how expressive, how far ranging, how inventive.

Given the great names here and the brief nature of the stories (some of which would be ruined in the synopsis) it wouldn't really make sense to do a full, story-by-story review. So I'm just going to note some of my personal favorites.

I.L. Peretz's "If Not Higher" has a rabbi who absents himself during penitential prayers and the eventual discovery of his engaging in mysterious, and then not so mysterious, actions. A very nice tale of the true meaning of the religious impulse.

"Eveline" by James Joyce is about a woman, trapped in her life of caring for her abusive, drunken father, making plans for escape... but she can only escape so far. Excellent story with a powerful ending.

Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa tells a simple story of a downtrodden working man and the prize he wins at work, which he hopes to present to his family, in "Joy And The Law". As it turns out, fate and social custom have other plans...

"The Use Of Force" by William Carlos Williams is a story I read way back in college and have been looking for ever since as I couldn't remember the name or the author. A doctor makes a house call and finds himself in a pitched battle with a little girl who will just NOT open up and say ahhh!

A sensitive, well-off woman is haunted by the image of her maid's unexpected newborn wrapped in bloody newspapers in "Swaddling Clothes" by Yukio Mishima. This image eventually drives her to an atypical action, a walk in the park at night, which leads to a confrontation and an ambiguous but powerful ending.

Doris Lessing's "Homage For Isaac Babel" is a charming story about attempting to inform young people's worldviews through great literature.

"The Dead Man" by Jorge Luis Borges has the author playing with form, as always, retelling us a fable-like story of the rise and fall of a criminal figure, all to explain a strange incident at a bar.

A familiar old cliche - the white man captured by savages who plans to use his superior astronomical knowledge to save his life - is overturned in Augusto Monterroso's sharp little tale of "The Eclipse".

"The Laugher" by Heinrich Böll is a compact character study of a man who laughs as his source of income, and how this affects his demeanor.

There's beautiful writing by Paula Fox in "News From The World", a tight little story that revolves around a married woman's infatuation with an older man, contrasted against life in a remote village.

"Going To Jerusalem" features a town beset by a mysterious illness and a stranger who tells a story in a crowded waiting room - interesting stuff from Maria Luise Kaschnitz.

Luisa Valenzuela gives us a blackly comic fable about how trying to beat them by joining them doesn't always work in "The Censors".

Finally, the really amazing find for me was Octavio Paz's wonderfully sinister "The Blue Bouquet", a very creepy story about the dangers of going for a walk late at night.

This was, all told, a great collection and might make a nice way to introduce a young person or non-lit-reader to the art of the short story.