Rating: 4/5

4 stars - Published in 1930, a realist American novel about a thinly-disguised town in eastern Oregon, written in a style closely aligned with Sherwood Anderson’s journalistic Winesburg, Ohio (1919) minus Anderson's more eccentric characters. The author lived in the town the novel portrays from 1919 to 1927; the book caused local controversy at the time which is hard to understand now. Eastern Oregon at the time was strictly wheat-growing country, with not much else to drive a young person's imagination unless they wanted to go into shop-keeping, tractor repair, banking or housewifery. Brief escapes in the car could take them into Pendleton or into Walla Walla, Washington, to dance and drink, but the bright lights of Portland or Seattle were the much-preferred goal of those with more fanciful ambitions. 

This is a strongly place-based book, carrying universal themes; it strikes me as being in the mode of Grace Metalious's Peyton Place (1956), which is set in New Hampshire, but without the latter's sensationalism; Oregon Detour is more documentary in style, while portraying the similar confinements and limitations of insular small-town life. 

It's interesting to me that Jones chose to write Oregon Detour using a young woman's point of view as she faces the future, her marriage prospects, her caring for parents, relations with neighbors and, later, her husband's infidelity. By coincidence, I read The Fields by Conrad Richter (1946) around the same time, which is a miniature epic about the earliest white pioneer settlement of Ohio, also told from a woman's point of view. The dominant white male narrative of solitary conquest is up-ended in these novels, making them interestingly close in tone to Ellen Glasgow's Vein of Iron (1915) and Barren Ground (1925), about Virginia, and also to, perhaps, As the Earth Turns by Gladys Hasty Carroll (1933), which takes place in Maine; all of these novels feature very strong women who create homes and community, and struggle to preserve their dignity and the social fabric into which they are woven. 

Another continuity between these very different novels appears in the sequence of events that leads, for example, in The Fields, from cutting the Ohio forests in order to plant grain and establish small towns, to Oregon Detour's portrayal of the immense grain fields and stifling small towns of eastern Oregon a century or so later. The long struggle to create an agricultural economy and small independent communities across the U.S. runs into an apparent dead-end in Oregon Detour. 

Nard Jones offers a clue to a different thesis underlying his book when he refers to its characters "as no longer held to the soil." They could get away from farm-life now, but only to something worse, i.e., modernity with its decadence, rootlessness, and so on. The journalist in Jones makes his argument somewhat more explicit when he refers directly to the exposes of small town hicks and of modernism in the works of Sherwood Anderson and Upton Sinclair (245). But Jones then quickly turns the tables by affirming his characters' total complacency: they love their lives, and their town, and would laugh at Anderson and Lewis, as they probably would laugh at (and did feel insulted by) Jones as well.

I really enjoyed this book for its focus on an area of the U.S. that is perhaps bereft of a literature, and its links to other regionalist works of that time. And because it's also a compelling story, well-written. For me, a great discovery.