Rating: 4/5

Having just polished off a work of verrry literary fiction, I was ready for something light and unchallenging. CHIEFS did the trick. A tattered, heavily foxed copy of Stuart Woods’ first novel from way back in 1981 made for an entertaining, easy read, but one with lessons to teach, which still remain relevant 38 years later. (Given how far we still have to go in 2019, one can imagine the levels of readerly discomfort it may have provoked in the early ‘80s.) It is billed as a murder mystery about a serial killer of young boys. But within half-a-dozen pages, readers already have an uneasy feeling about who might’ve dunnit, and it isn’t long at all before those suspicions are confirmed. If you’re looking for a game of CLUE, this book isn’t for you.
 
Mystery and murder constitute very minor plot features in a book whose real mystery concerns how a small Georgia town will adapt to social upheavals between the end of World War I and the Kennedy assassination in 1963. It tells its story chiefly through the eyes and lives of 3 generations of police chiefs in the fictional town of Delano, GA, for whom the serial murders serve as only an occasional distraction from more immediate concerns—at least until the book’s final chapters. In the meantime, the challenges of racism loom largest, aided and abetted by good ole boys, politicians, and police. (It’s worth remembering that ¼ of the Atlanta police force were believed to be Klan members at the end of World War II. And readers should brace themselves for frequent and realistic uses of the N-Word, even by a few good guys.) 

It may seem a little far-fetched that the third of Delano, GA’s police chiefs should turn out to be black in 1963, whereas Charlottesville, VA would wait another 50+ years for a black police chief, and given that other southern towns and cities were just beginning to think about hiring any black police officers at all by the early ‘60s (and often forbidding them to arrest white folk). The book optimistically suggests that it only takes a handful of capable and honorable people to make things happen, but also realistically suggests how political pragmatism may play a large part in the process. A few other plot twists may strain credibility, but as the plot starts rattling towards its conclusion, it’s easy enough to suspend disbelief and go along for the ride.