Rating: 4/5

I first read this book in 1980. Being now retired (and a mite poorer) I have started to re-read a lot of the 2,500 books in my library rather than just buy new ones. This is about 50 books in. I know I enjoyed it when I first read it and have found that it is just as enjoyable the second time around.
The book consists of a series of diary entries by a monk known as Geraldus, an historical figure, but not one actually involved in the incidents cover by the novel. As it Robin &amp; Marion, and even more so in The Lion in Winter, the author, James Goldman takes an historical shell and, with skillful use of fiction and imagination mixed into the history, tells a story that shews the personalities of the historical characters. Goldman makes Geraldus a very real character with a real and believable voice.
There are small historical errors as well as fiction, but, even so, this is a book that you will always appreciate for the light it throws on a dark period of English history. The King John we meet is not the one of Robin Hood stories, nor is he a whitewashed hero: he is a very complicated and misunderstood person. In the same way one finds that John is in fact a good, but very unlucky, general.
One point the book raises is why the English lower classes flocked to his banner in 1213 when the French were threatening to invade England. Geraldus, in the book, cannot understand why they did so, especially as the French had been given a Papal Banner and England lay under a Papal Interdict. I know why, and answer it in my own novel: https://www.amazon.co.uk/If-You-Go-Do... . The English lost all when William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, seized the Crown of England and distributed all the land to his followers - the last thing the English wanted was for another invasion of England by French speakers causing the land to again be given over to strangers.
Anyway: let's get away from one of my hobby horses and back to Myself as Witness: it is a good book, reads well, moves quickly and informs.