Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars rounded down to 3

This is definitely a book of two halves: the Niccolo-on-tour half which is a travelogue through Poland, Crimea, Russia etc. gets a thumbs down from me - Nicholas has never been able to hold my attention alone no matter how many times Dunnett tells me he's a charismatic genius. But once we get back to telling the ongoing story of the company and family I perked up. 

There are some developments (at last, after the stasis of the previous two books), some confrontations and the story finally clicks into place. That it's a repeat of Lymond now goes without saying: the quest for Nicholas's family history and identity becomes key. 

Anna's the new Guzel, Bel is like Archie, and Gelis takes on a Philippa role investigating Nicholas's antecedents, uncovering a twisted family history. David De Salmeton is a half-hearted villain though and can't compete with Gabriel. And Nicholai de Acciajuoli finally comes out in the open about his Dame de Doubtance function. 

With the momentum finally going up a gear, I'm looking forward to seeing all the ends tied up in Gemini. I wish this had been less self-indulgent though. 

--------Original review --------
Firstly, do not read this if you haven't read the previous 6 volumes in this series: they really do matter.

Following the shocking revelations of Nicholas' plans at the end of To Lie with Lions, Nicholas has been exiled both emotionally and physically from his family and company. Gelis takes his place, trying to make reparation for what he has done, and hold the company together.

Adrift, emotionally scarred and unsure what to do with his life, Nicholas drifts to Poland in vague pursuit of his missing gold, only to get caught up in the increasing drama of Julius' marriage to the enigmatic Anna. And while he is away, Tobie and Gelis start to unravel some of the hidden secrets of his birth and childhood.

I have to say that I've never been as great a fan of the Niccolo series as I am of Dunnett's Lymond books, but re-reading them now I do think that they're much subtler and more intricate works. Dense, resonant, complicated and somehow maturer, they're never an easy read but always a riveting one. Here Nicholas reaches his late 30s and finally - by the end - becomes an adult. I don't want to spoil the plot for any new readers but the last part of this book is one of the highpoints, in my view, of Dunnett's writing. And the deliberate intertextual links with the Lymond series just add emotional depth to an already moving story. Very highly recommended, but do make sure you have the time to give this the space it needs.