Rating: 4/5

The second book in the series was wonderful, somehow it was even better than the first which I found to be a bit long and overly wordy ( yet enjoyable never the less) this left me hungry for more, what better in a continuing story line than a hook line and sinker type of feeling, reading "Death du Jour" made me crave the next book right away. I almost never read a series one after another, I give myself a break because it's always better to crave the next than get stuck in a similar story and feel like I'm reading an eight hundred page book. That said I can't recommend Kathy Reichs enough, she knows what she's talking about and she engages the reader rather than making me feel like I'm standing on the site and observing, I couldn't wait for a free moment to sit and read, on the train, during lunch, before bed, you get the gist...

Its winter time and Temperance finds herself working on a misplaced nun coffin, along the way she gets called to examine the victims of a fire, this of course is no ordinary accident, what fire victims after all have execution style bullet wounds in their head? Clues from her work place and a nearby university reveal that something foul is going on, as usual Tempe gets mixed up into a situation that puts her life in danger, her character is so well written that the reader feels her victories and her falls with great flair. I loved solving the mystery alongside of her, tracking strange disappearances and wondering what happened to the mutilated bodies, traveling and picking up clues and forming opinions of a bunch of zany characters, for those who love gristly deaths, mystery, clues, realistic characters and engaging dialogue this is a real treasure, I hope this series has thirty books in it by the time she's done because deep down I want to read them all. I liked the realistic element of danger, in the previous book her close friend meets with a deadly end so you never know when someone is going to exit the story, it keeps you on your toes! I also enjoyed the bit of romance developing, it made things a bit more interesting, and trust me, it's not nauseating, it adds to the depth of the book. This was another nice read from Reichs and I can't wait to dig right back in.

- Kasia S.