Rating: 5/5

"Why do people fall in love? It’s almost impossible to say. If you’re not a teenager or in your early twenties, you’ve gone on a lot of dates and met a lot of people. When the real thing comes along, you just know it. At least I did."

I can think of no better way to get a real insight into someone's life than by reading their letters. These were deeply personal. I felt like I was prying many times while reading this memoir. 

Nancy's memories, interspersed with Ronald's actual letters to her from the time made their lives so vivid for me. I felt every emotion with Nancy and it was amazing and, at times, heartwrenching. I laughed and I cried but above all, I really felt what an overwhelming love they had for each other.

I also saw what a great sense of humor Nancy had.

"“Show him who’s boss,” he said to me the first time I got up on a horse. That’s ridiculous, I thought. This animal knows perfectly well who’s boss and it isn’t me."

I can speak from my own personal experience that sometimes it takes a couple of tries to get it right, but Ronald definitely got it right with Nancy. There could be no better helpmate for such an amazing life. I saw how much she was working in the background to raise their children and to make his home life easy and comfortable. She was inspiring. 

I know how much people can discount the contributions of a housewife and mother, but it is not a cushy life. I saw in his letters how much "Ronnie" saw what she added and appreciated it. I wish I had highlighted the exact quote, but I missed it. There was a letter toward the end where Ronald said that if they stayed in a hotel for three days, she would have rearranged the furniture to make it a home and he would wonder why it had not always been that way. Through his letters, I really see what a treasure she was.

If you want a really great insight into the family life of Ronald and Nancy Reagan, this is a great read. It won't give you a lot of history or politics but that is not what it tries to do and there are plenty of other books that address that part of Reagan's life. This is just a heartwarming and deeply personal book.