Rating: 4/5

Okay, where do I start? "There be Whales in there sir!"

Actually, there are whales, but that's not important right now. Shane Schofeild has worse luck than that guy who played James Bond in between Sean Conery and Roger More (Her Majesty's Secret Service). His best line of the movie was "How come this doesn't happen to those other guys?" 

Shane Schofield, alias "Scarecrow," has a tough job. Go rescue some hot babe scientists in one of the remotest parts of the world. He and his team of Marine special warfare fighters have to go in, secure the station then wait for the rest of the corps to show up so they can claim the glory. Sounds easy right? 

Nothing is ever easy.

Scarecrow and his team learn from the word go that nothing is easy on the butt-end of the world. The entire world seems to want a piece of the ice and for some reason they are treating the Scarecrow and his team as "persona non gratta?" If that ain't bad enough, only two of the scientists are hot babes. A new battlecry is born "NUKE THE WHALES!" 

This is a solid action adventure read. It's more Ian Flemming and Alistair MacLean than Clive Cussler or James Rollins. It is pure action adventure in the same vein as "Where Eagles Dare" and "James Bond." If you want action, this book's got it. I bet you'll smell like gunpowder smoke and whale poop when you get done reading this book. 

The story starts in the action phase and after barely a "how do you do" the runaway train is leaving the station. Then, after a third of the book, he takes the time to slow things down and add in some character development. Schofield's back story is chilling. Gant (Fox) is curiously interesting and the others are strangely absent. The background of one of the most interesting characters, "Mother" stays a question mark. Yet we get plenty of back-story on Allison and Crawford, two pencil-necked geekoid wanna-be Berstien and Woodwards. 

Rielly relies on action and white hat/black hat descriptions to keep the warriors straight. Having said that, he does do the work it takes to write behavior and quirks and other things that make each character distinctive if somewhere between 2 and three deminsional. He gets an "A" for the difficult prospect of writing strong female characters that come across as realistic without being bitchy or needy. Even the love swooned beauty in hiding is able to keep her emotions straight while she takes care of business. 

I'd have liked to see him develop relationships more, though true action adventure enthusiasts might balk at the "yuky-girl-stuff" if he'd gone farther than he did. Unless of course there was gratuitus sex. 

Plot wise the pace starts fast and gets faster then settles down to regroup for another round of BOHICA (Navay Rehtoric for "Bend over, here it comes again). The action is very fun and the lulls are necessary to gather the frayed ends the last hair raising segment left laying all over the place. 

I did find that, despite Scarecrow's comments that "we can't get a break," he did benifit from the miraculous more than a few times though Rielly did try to write in a logical reason for them it didn't quite wash. Schofield himself bordered on uber-human while his comrades had to struggle like upper teir humans. There were also times Schoofield reminded me of the Weasly Crusher (Wessley Crusher) from Star Trek, The Next Generation. The same kind of Know-it-all-ed-ness that lead to the "kill Wessly campaign" by Star Trek fans that found the charracter a bit too Godly. 

But that's the bad stuff. For the record, most of this is standard fare for this genre and sub-genre. Rielly manages this better most. The pace is fast, furious and none of it comes easily. Add to this a really good plot that is not so complex it can't be followed, yet not so simple you can figure everything out before Scarecrow learns it. He also did a good job of hiding adversaries so you might never know where the next one is coming from. Super job there. 

So, why the 4 stars? So much potential. WOnderfully worked plot. Superb pace and, though I found some of it creative, the obstacles that Rielly dropped in front of Scarecrow and his team made for some exciting edge of your seat ride. Rielly also does everything the genre asks. Short of some gratuitus sex, it's all there.

Great fun. Good read. I recommend it for anyone who likes military style action, complicated plots that aren't too complicated. The characters are stronger than most that this genre produces. 

Lacks/likes: I'd have liked to see more development of the only romantic relationship in the book, or something that more clearly established it as a sad, unrequieted love. 

Warnings:

No nudity, no sex, lots and lots of people getting killed in creative military ways. There is even some brutality. This violence is likely managable by most mature adults and young adults, though it's likely not right for the Amish and children. It could be worse, but if rising body counts bug you this isn't for you. 

bottom line. Good read, lots of fun, exciting action and aventure.