Rating: 4/5

I'd purchased this in 1990, but although I'm sure I'd read it, darned if I could remember any of the stories.

Nearly 34 years old, but Dozois' 'Summation' referenced the then-fear that the horror inflicted on Salman Rushdie through the publication of The Satanic Verses would see literature, including SF, increasingly subject to self-censorship.

That didn't happen, or at least not in 1990. Fast-forward though another two decades, and science fiction changed, markedly. Self-censorship became the key thread running through the genre. Who you are, rather than what you wrote became the key driver for awards and, not surprisingly, quality plummeted, and kept on plummeting to the depths we know today, a world of insipid virtue-signalling or juvenile space opera 'book 1 or a 10-book cycle' sh3t2. 

And so, perhaps inevitably, I gave-up buying science fiction books, with the odd, very rare exception. Fortunately I've an extensive library of novels and short story collections I'd purchased since the 1970s. And most need a re-read.

And so onto Best New SF 4, the British edition of The Year's Best Science Fiction, Seventh Annual Collection. 

And it was a mixed bag. Yet this huge volume displays in vivid colour just how varied and muti-faceted the genre of science fiction was in 1990 (well 1989, when the stories were first published). It was a Golden Age, with the likes of Silverberg still producing quality work (he had two stories in this collection) whilst a new generation of writers were just starting to make an impression on a publishing industry then in the doldrums.

There are a few duffers. Alphas by Gregory Benford would be best-described as 'hard science fiction' though I'd prefer the term 'rubbish'. Unfortunately its basic premise would be used in one of Benford's Galactic Centre novels, which I'd read after 1990. At The Rialto b Connie Willis was a poor follow-up to the brilliant The Last of the Winnebagos from the previous year. A Deeper Sea by Alexander Jablokov; pretty standard cyberpunk fare. Judith Moffett Tiny Tango? Well, entertaining enough, but it packed too much into too short a space; First Contact, cross-dressing, AIDS, geno-research...a nuclear disaster. Just one theme would have been enough.
The Loch Moose Monster by Janet Kagan was just too 'chummy' and frankly, a little improbable (even for science fiction!)
and
The Odd Old Bird from Avram Davidson was just...dire. So I gave-up with it as I simply didn't enjoy any of what I'd read up to then.

Of the rest, I found a few fabulous stories.

Steven Popkes The Egg is a brilliant, evocative tale that I hope was expanded into a novel.
Lucius Shepard's The End's of The Earth is typical Shepard, and reminded me that we were left only Green Eyes, Life During Wartime and The Jaguar Hunter as his major works.
The Price of Oranges from Nancy Kress is just...sublime.
The Edge of the World from Michael Swanwick reminded me of the cover of an album from the US band, Kansas
Silverbergs first story in the volume, Tales from the Venia Woods is one of those reminders that he really is a perfect storyteller.
Just Another Perfect Day from John Varley is pretty simple, but was surely an inspiration for Christopher Nolan's movie Memento made decades later?

The rest were of a high quality, but three stories really stood out for me.

British writer Brian Stablefords The Magic Bullet is just so different. I can't easily describe it, but it reminded me of P.D. James. There was a potential TV detective drama series lurking in its premise, and I wonder if Stableford thought to pursue that.

S.P. Somtow's Lottery Night is just great fun, and a plot that will stick with the reader.

And finally, the best of the collection, left to the last. John Crowley's stunning novella Great Work of Time. It's simply incandescent &amp; beautifully-written. It bears a resemblance (in basic idea) with Asimov's The End of Eternity but it couldn't otherwise be more different. It's a story that would have foxed me when I was younger; with its Cecil Rhodes and references to history such as the Dreyfus Affair. It helps to have read a bit since school.

Overall though a great collection and a great year.