Rating: 1/5

Lordy. I'm aware that Heinlein's later works are self-indulgent examinations of everything he held dear (e.g., free love, libertarianism, and breakfast), but I'm shocked how much he crosses lines with this book. It starts off early, too, with the titular character being gang-raped in the first chapter, and how she decides to cope with it by liking it. The worst thing about it all is one of them has bad breath, and furthermore, she notes that rape is worse for men, so what does she have to complain about?

After surviving this encounter, her boss insists on having her grow a new nipple after one of the rapists cuts it off with a steak knife because she has "an unusually comely body; damage to it is deplorable", so clearly physical appearance is all that matters in the future. It's just ... I mean, I get that later Heinlein is an exercise in counting all the WTF? moments, but I don't even know how to process this kind of thing.

Did you know this book was nominated for a Hugo and a Nebula? I wouldn't have guessed it in a hundred years. There's an admirable theme buried beneath the ranting, about what individuals do when they don't fit in anywhere, but that's the 3 ounces of sensible packed in 12 pounds of crazy. It's touched on so briefly, and is so overshadowed by the free love that it's hard to imagine it's the point of the novel.

I mean, people use Heinlein's fiction as some sort of benchmark in the field of SF, and I don't get it. His style is so chatty and arrogant that his characters come across as insufferable. They know everything, are never wrong, and deal with any minor hiccup in their day with the most unreasonable responses. Reading a Heinlein novel is like watching that video of the woman in the Apple store over and over for a week.

Oh, were credit cards a new thing for Heinlein when he wrote this book? Because he spends an inordinate amount of words talking about them, about how good they are, how the banks support them, how they're the pinnacle of convenience, etc. Was 1985 the year credit cards broke, or was he just a little slow on the uptake in that regard?

I read this as an ebook, and the number of typos and OCR errors were ridiculous. The word "turn" was "tum" in every. Single. Place in this book. A few of them here or there are to be expected, but someone should have spent some time proofreading this edition before expecting people to pay money for it.

The crazy thing is this is actually a book that reads fast, and is insanely compelling. I've noted before that Jo Walton commented on how Heinlein knew how to write sentences to make you want to read the next one, but it bears repeating, because as offensive and insensitive as this book is, it's hard to stop reading it. It makes me waffle between one and two stars, but then I remember that Friday winds up marrying one of the rapists from the first chapter, and I'm done.

I know Heinlein's early, juvie novels are worth reading, but I can't see myself wanting to read anything else from his later years, save for when I want to pursue another hate-read, because based on everything I've read about Heinlein, Friday is his best work from his later years.

And that's fucked up.