Rating: 4/5

Haunted by Maris Soule is a 2012 publication. I was provided a copy of this book in exchange for an honest review.

If are in the mood for a Halloween read , but want a dash of romance instead of werewolves and zombies, this book is one you might want to try.

Valerie runs a fundraiser for domestic violence victims and the annual Haunted House event brings in much needs funds each year. However, the props are old and outdated. Valerie needs some fresh ideas to make the event more successful.
Enter Jason McLain, former Hollywood special effects wizard. Jason has moved into the small community in Nevada to hide from the public eye. Jason's wife was murdered and he became the number one suspect. Tried and convicted in the court of public opinion, Jason barely escaped prison when the jury acquitted him on grounds of insufficient evidence. 
Jason is just the guy Valerie needs for a few suggestions one how to create a spectacular Haunted House on a bare minimum budget. 
She is aware of his past, but decides to risk approaching him to help with the fundraiser. Jason lives up to his reputation right away, but some kind of chemistry between the two is sparked as well. Valerie begins to believe Jason is innocent, but even Jason isn't so sure. It seems like bad luck follows him everywhere and his jealousy streak seems to trigger these episodes. But, Valerie is not going to give up on Jason. She is determined to get to the bottom of what happened to Jason's wife. However, her snooping just might be her undoing. 

I enjoyed this short and easy to read romantic suspense novel for the most part. The mystery is just a little predictable and some of Jason's feelings were a little ridiculous, especially for a grown man. However, I do think the reminder that innocent until proven guilty is something we all need to hear from time to time. I also like the way Valerie stood her ground, both with her ex-husband and with the community when they were still unsure of Jason's innocence. It is also important to have a person in one's life who will stick with you through good and bad times. Jason didn't have a lot of folks stand by him when the chips were down. There is also the message that domestic violence victims to have a place to go to for help and they can successfully take charge of their lives. Valerie's staunch support brought out the truth and in doing so shamed many people who believed the worst. So, while the book was transparent is many ways it was still a good story with a sweet love story and worth your time and money. I think those who like the lighter type of mystery with a slightly sensual romance without a lot of graphic violence and won't give you nightmares on Halloween, you should check this one out. 3.5 rounded 4