Rating: 4/5

Rec. by: Artifice; Farah Mendlesohn
Rec. for: Blade runners, perhaps, and others who may doubt their own humanity

The first time I read Robert A. Heinlein's Friday was shortly after it was published in April 1982. I bought this novel brand-new in hardcover, even—an extravagance for me at the time (and still the kind of expenditure that gives me pause, to be honest). A year or so later, I also purchased a high-quality print of the Michael Whelan painting that became the cover of the mass-market paperback (a much better image, to my mind, than that hardback edition's muddy dust-jacket).

Friday is, I think, the best of Heinlein's later novels (any of the ones he published after, say, 1970)—it's relatively tightly-plotted, not nearly as discursive or bombastic as (for example) Time Enough for Love, and its heart is in the right place. However, Friday is still late-period Heinlein.

There is no place in my house to display that Michael Whelan print, now. Liking Heinlein's work nowadays is not necessarily anything to crow about, or to put on display.

Oh, and before I go any further... Friday should have all the trigger warnings, too. For example, the book begins with an extended rape and torture scene that is perhaps made even harder to read by Friday's calm acceptance of the situation.

And yet, even so... I still found a lot to like in this novel, upon rereading it again in 2025—and much that has stayed relevant to the present day.

Not everything, though. Heinlein's projection of the future may be correct in broad outline but it's wildly wrong in detail—we have our own near-ubiquitous public surveillance, for example, but it's by fixed cameras (for the most part) rather than floating "Public Eyes." And public Internet cafés having their own keyboarding assistants on hand to help customers... type search queries? Not so much.

Heinlein also cannot resist his usual libertarian(ish) digs at bureaucracy, the faithful and mostly anonymous government workers who help hold society together. Early on, Friday opines,
No matter how lavishly overpaid, civil servants everywhere are convinced that they are horribly underpaid—but all public employees have larceny in their hearts or they wouldn't be feeding at the public trough.
—p.5Speaking as a (relatively low-level) public employee myself... fuck that noise, Bob.

On the other hand... I may have gotten my own oft-repeated Jenny Holzer-like quote, "Your family is in the best position to betray you," from reading Chapter 2.

*

I keep running into human practices not covered by my training.
—p.81

Beautiful, talented Friday is an "Artificial Person," the product of cut-and-splice genetic engineering which, at the time, was pure science fiction. As she often repeats, "my mother was a test tube and my father was a knife." And so even though she is 100% human, her DNA indistinguishable from that of any one of us, she is technically (and in many jurisdictions legally) not considered a human being at all.

This is both the central conflict and the defining trauma of Friday's existence... she is a human being, with what we are pleased to style inalienable rights—but she cannot bring herself to believe in her own personhood. Friday was taught, systematically and from a very young age, to think of herself as other than the girl she was, the woman she has become. And this is where I think the genius of Heinlein's novel lies: he shows us Friday's traumatized mental state from the inside, and helps us understand exactly why it is so wrong for so many others to have treated her as a thing.

Friday was published just a couple of months before another extended meditation on what it means to be human—or, as the slogan goes, "More Human Than Human": the film Blade Runner, which premiered in June 1982.

I have written about that movie myself, at some length.

*

As is always the case, Heinlein's characters talk a lot... and as is often the case, what they say is eminently quotable.

Regarding artificial intelligences of another sort:
"Yes. Then you know that several times AI scientists have announced that they were making a breakthrough to the fully self-aware computer. But it always went sour."
"Yes. Distressing."
"No—inevitable. It will always go sour. A computer can become self-aware—oh, certainly! Get it up to human level of complication and it has to become self-aware. Then it discovers that it is not human. Then it figures out that it can never be human; all it can do is sit there and take orders from humans. Then it goes crazy."
—Friday and Georges Perrault, pp.95-96I'm... not sure Heinlein was wrong about that.

These words could be about many current events...
"Brother, I am not joking, I am weeping. One gang plans to shoot me on sight, another merely outlaws my art and profession, while the third by threatening without specifying is, so it seems to me, even more to be dreaded."
—Georges, p.107

It is not written in the stars that I will always understand what is going on—a truism that I often find damnably annoying.
—Friday, p.173

A credit card is a leash around your neck. In the world of credit cards a person has no privacy... or at best protects her privacy only with great effort and much chicanery. Besides that, do you ever know what the computer network is doing when you poke your card into a slot? I don't. I feel much safer with cash. I've never heard of anyone who had much luck arguing with a computer.
—Friday, p.203

Heinlein seems to have understood (or at least his characters did), long before it was common to say so, that gender and sexuality are spectra, not binaries:
All normal human beings have soi-disant mixed-up glands. The race is divided into two parts: those who know this and those who do not.
—Dr. Hartley M. Baldwin, p.223

"{...}but a dying culture invariably exhibits personal rudeness. Bad manners. Lack of consideration for others in minor matters. A loss of politeness, of gentle manners, is more significant than is a riot."
—Dr. Baldwin, p.251Now, I'm not sure I buy this assertion any more than Friday did at the time—her reply was, "Really?"—but then... I don't have any offworld colonies to emigrate to, either.

*

Once Friday does go offworld, seeking a colony planet to settle on, Friday comes to an unfortunately abrupt conclusion... not only does the novel's ending feel rushed, it also comes across to me as terribly contrived, depending on far too many coincidences.

But by this point we are rooting for a happy ending for Friday... and Heinlein does at least deliver that.

*

After reading Friday (but not before, unless you really don't mind spoilers!), I would also highly recommend Farah Mendlesohn's sensitive analysis of Friday in The Pleasant Profession of Robert A. Heinlein (scattered throughout the book, but especially on pp.306-313, and in the book's conclusion on pp.428-429). Mendlesohn's work was a significant factor in my own choice to read—and appreciate—this Heinlein novel once again.