Rating: 5/5

Yhis is a large, dense tome. There's crazy amount of stuff going on. Instead of trying to make one coherent impression of it, I thought it'd be best to keep a running commentary, diary style.

I started this on Jan 27th, reading only during my commute. It took 3 weeks and 2 days.... 

...Finished "The Final Programme". At first I was seeing these weird Elric overtones in the Cornelius family drama. Then it just got weird, and carried on. And then it was over. I'm still not sure what the message was. There's entropy, and the "end of history"; but beyond that, it's one big WTF. Must be what taking drugs is like. The language is designed to overwhelm, the pages turn... but there's no enlightenment in the end. But of course, this isn't the end, so who knows?

...I'm not quite done "A Cure for Cancer"- tomorrow, I think. Just a few general thoughts. First of all, I'm reminded of a novella by H.G.Wells (I forget the name), about an American (I think) businessman who decided to destroy Europe. It goes into detail about just how he did it (Scandinavians all fell asleep. Netherlands drowned, I think)... and it's this kind of tone that's the backdrop of the story. 
Second- sex. lots and lots of it. It's the 70s and (almost) everyone is doing it with (almost) everyone else. It's the most mundane thing in the world. 
Third- Moorcock keeps name-dropping lots and lots of musicians. I have no idea if these are real or made up, and i'm too caught up in the ride to wiki and check. I'm sure if I was a music aficionado, I'd get more out of this, and may even understand the "flow" better. 
Overall, to use my own musical allegory, the main impression is that of a CACOPHONY.There's this whirlwind of action, sex, globe-trotting spy action, and in and out jumps the rehash of the Cornelius family drama (again)... You're trying to reconcile what happened in "The Final Programme" and does this have any bearing on here and now (there's hints pointing yes), all the while Jerry questions the nature of time and space, almost as if winking to you across the 4th wall. You try to slow down to assemble the facts, but the flow is getting stronger, and the nihilistic noise rises to a pitch, and you can't stop. The chapter titles are obscure, and sometimes they're describing exactly what'll happen and at other times they leave you stumped as to how on earth can the title and the content have anything in common? Some chapters are a few pages, others a few paragraphs. Nothing is certain. 

...And done with "Cure for Cancer". it really IS like a piece of music- it just fades after hitting a crescendo.I'm no closer to understanding anything about Jerry, or anything else, but I'm dragged along and it's impossible to stop. 

... "The English Assassin" is insane. The book makes no sense, it's being told out of order (I think, after being about halfway through). At first I thought it was a direct sequel-ish to "Cure for Cancer", because that's what the global political situation seemed like. But now that I read more of it, and some more names got dropped, I'm almost getting "Nomad of Time" cross-over vibes. And still, very little makes sense. But the imagery is awesome, and I keep trying to grasp the plot, not to mention reconcile it with the previous parts of the quartet... Even if it turns out to be all in vain, it's a hell of a ride.

... Ok, 3/4 into "English Assassin". Peace Talks section was mindblowing (cool cameos: I may have been right about my hunch last time...and Beesley is WHO?) Also, my head hurts trying to figure out how these sequels work... or don't.. or is this the multiverses screwing everything up? Forget Erikson's timeline issues, Moorcock questions the very existence of a timeline.... but for once my OCD re: timeline is undisturbed. I'm not sure it's possible to make sense. I'm not sure I want to. 

...finished "The English Assassin". Um, ok. So, really, it' "builds" on what happened at the end of "Cure for Cancer", just with bigger cast and... lots more...entropy. And it gets  really metaphysical with all the multiverse-s... Seriously, trying to follow it would drive me crazy: Just need to take it as an array of themes. And images. And life-stories. And... just what the hell  happened  between the Cornelius kids? Figuring out the Tiste races of Erikson is easy by comparison. 
This is like abstract art, only literature. With the flow defined by an internal music piece. And dressed in trappings of Absurdist post-apoc in lots of places. I don't know.

...Roughly one third into "The condition of Muzak" and things are  slowly clicking into place. clever is the only word to describe the whole thing. I'm trying to think of what I can compare this with. it's a little bit like Amberghris trilo, but taken to a whole other level. 

... Getting to the end of "Condition for Muzak". still lost, just gone back to being a sequence of episodes. I keep feeling that I'm about to grasp it, but I'm not. Now they've introduced the allegory, waiting to see if it's actually deconstructed properly so that my feeble mind can "get it"

... 100 pages left. There's entire (short) chapters explaining stuff, and then lots more episodic fragments of shattered histories. Increasingly more philosophizing, as the other players' motivations throughout this kaleidoscopic merry-go-round ride are being revealed. 

... less then 30 pages to go (of "the Coda"). Is this the real life? Is this just fantasy?" © I don't know, Freddy. Can't say I really care, either. 
I'm not sure if there's anything really clever left to find in here. The Ride itself- was exhilarating. Trying to piece stuff together is tantalizing. Whether there's any satisfaction to be found in solving the puzzle (or not- I STILL don't know!) is, imho, irrelevant at this point. 
At any rate, the Quartet takes that quintessential experience in every "nerdy" person's life where they populate their dream-scapes with people from their life--and goes abso-fucking-edibly wild with it. This maybe a spoiler, maybe not. I'm 30 pages from the end, and STILL guessing-that's how "obtuse" the Quartet is. But I loved it. 

...Ok, done. "clever" is still probably the best word for it. Not a whole lot to add that hasn't been said yet. I think it's safe to say I recommend this to just about anyone. with interest in sci-fi, who's not turned off by the myriad references to sex. And some incest.