Rating: 4/5

In 1993 a reincarnation of Plato in the form of Haddaway posed the question that had been asked two and a half thousand years ago by the original, namely, “What is love?”. I suspect that having wrestled for an answer over millennia without getting even close to a definitive answer Haddaway wisely avoided the mental gymnastics of his predecessor and chose to deflect the question by responding with a request, “Baby don’t hurt me…no more”. 
If only love was as simple as the state of not being hurt we would all be happier but impoverished culturally. As it transpires, Haddaway was not as expert in these matters as the Ancient Greeks who had multiple names for the variations of love. Here we have a roll call of the great and the good (Socrates, Aristophanes, Alcibiades among them) who all take turns to shove in their two penn’orth on the subject. Is love the physical erotic love embodied by Aphrodite, is love the appreciation of that which is good or that which is beautiful? Does beauty derive from the possessor’s inherent goodness? Is love the spur to achieving greatness or spiritual fulfilment? Who is the more worthy in a love affair – the lover or the beloved (and interesting question because, whether we care to acknowledge it or not, in every romantic couple there is one who loves more)? There is even a display of the most painful of loves – the obsessive unrequited. Can those two adjectives be separated when it comes to love? 
Everyone has felt, enjoyed or suffered love and this is a very human and humane series of declamations on the highs, lows and vagaries of a driving force in most people’s lives. If you are tired of modern love manuals telling you not to phone before waiting 3 days, how to enforce boundaries and quizzes to find out if you are co-dependent read this because you will realise that love is all things to all men, unchanging over millennia and yet still indefinable and incomprehensible and that is somehow more reassuring than imagining that love can be reduced to a series of rules.