Rating: 2/5

When I finally found a copy of Robin Hood at my local used bookstore, I was over the moon. Robin Hood was my absolute favorite superhero growing up. (He counts as a superhero, right?) Not only is it fun to see the clever ways that Robin will outsmart the Sheriff of Nottingham but also hilarious to the Sheriff's anger as he does so. When my family watched Robin Hood, my brothers and I would quickly claim our favorites from Robin's crew of misfits. Robin Hood is just a story with so many memories with its parts that encourage you, teach you, and tickle your funny bone. Overall, one of the best stories ever written.

However, this edition fell flat for me and it had none of things I loved. It had poor pacing as the entire book was how he became Robin Hood and got his crew, the characterization was lackluster as the crew was nothing like the jolly band I remember but instead just a name that pops in every once and a while, and had very few moments of Robin's wit (which would then be recycled as the author used the exact same method every time Robin needed to use his brains to get out of situations.) Not convinced, here are some quotes that show more reasons why this book just does not work for me:

❌"You are the Bishop of Hereford," said Robin, "and so can well afford to give in charity this very sum. Who does not know of your hard dealing with the poor and ignorant? Have you not amassed your wealth by less open but more cruel robbery than this? Who speaks a good word for you or loves you, for all you are a Bishop? You have put your heels on men's neck; and have been always an oppressor, greedy and without mercy. For all these things we take your money now, to hold it in trust and will administer it properly and in God's name."

I was expecting more of this type of smack talk and rivalry. More of the traditional, I am taking from the rich to help the poor type of tale. However, the entire book was just Robin growing from a kid into an adult and recruiting his group. Every chapter was another crew member. It got very repetitive because each recruitment was just the new character defeating Robin and being like "oh my didn't know you were Robin Hood can I join?" I wish the book spent less time on just recruited his crew and more on what Robin Hood is actually known for- his trickery and beliefs. The members of his group also only had this one chapter intro before getting lost in the narrative the rest of the book. A chapter into just to be mentioned in a few sentences later on in the book.

❌"He was a Jew, dear friend, and did grievously provoke me...Further, he has upon his head a goodly sum of money, as I well know. Wherefore, if chance should yield him to our hands, it would seem right and proper that we should bind him."

I was so shocked that this racist moment was followed with absolutely nothing. Like this behavior was completely normal! I am all having racist characters in books that shed light on the current climate in our world. However, to have an extremely inappropriate comment with no follow up or to create any type of dialogue, it presents racism as appropriate, normal behavior. Encouraging racism is completely at odds with what Robin Hood is supposed to be about which is encouraging equality.

❌"The dark-haired boy only laughed and tossed his head in a queerly fascinating way."
"The victory of this queer unknown was popular.

It is in these moments where the age of this book really come to the forefront as the book has several moments where it uses the word "queer" flippantly to indicate things that it does not today. While I understand that this is a subject of its time, "queer" was used a simile of "weird" and was used frequently to reference the LGBT+ community. For this reason, I got very uncomfortable at these parts, and once again, these moments feel at odds with what Robin Hood is known for.