Rating: 4/5

Favorite Quotes: 

"Long after we discard a particular set of religious beliefs, these disempowering customs, patterns, and attitudes still linger in our self-concept and contribute to the ineffective behaviors that bring us into a woman's support group, a self-help meeting, or a counselor's office. Whether we consider our family to be religious or not, the pervasive influence of religion in our formative years cannot be ignored."

"Spirit-Filled one,
Your Grandma is God and so are your favorite star and rock.
 God has many names and many faces.
God is Mother, Daughter, and Wise Old Crone.
 She is found in your mothers, in your daughters, and in 
 you.
God is the God of Sarah and Hagar, of Leah and Rachel.
 She is mother of all living, and blessed are her 
 daughters.
You are girl-woman made in her Image.
You can run fast, play hard, and climb trees.
 You are batwoman, firewoman, and Goddess.
The spirit of the Universe pulsates through you.
 Be full of yourself. You are good. You are very good."

"In my experience as a woman...I To believe that God is only father is to become aware of myself as a stranger, an outsider, as an alienated person, as a daughter who does not belong, who is not appointed to the marvelous destiny offered to the sons of the father. To believe that God is only father says that "I am other" in regard to all men and in regard to the divine."

"I am Eve, the Mother of All Living, culmination of creation.
I hold and nurture life within me.
In the fullness of time I thrust and push life from me.
And all that I have given birth to is good, it is very good.
 Honor all that has been demeaned.
 Receive all that has been cast aside."

"In the very beginning, there was the Mother.
On the first day, I gave birth to light and darkness.
 They danced together.
On the second day, I gave birth to land and water.
 They touched.
On the third day, I gave birth to plants.
 They rooted and took a deep breath.
On the fourth day, I gave birth to land, sea, and air creatures.
 They walked, swam, and flew.
On the fifth day my creation learned balance and cooperation.
On the sixth day, I celebrated the creativity of all living things.
On the seventh day, I left space for the unknown."