Rating: 5/5

I read this book virtually every summer, not only as a very interesting historical account of the life of a famous Wall Street trader in the early 1900s, but also as a learning tool. Or should I say continuing education. While the rules and regulations of Wall Street have changed dramatically since this book was first published in 1923, human nature remains virtually unchanged. Fear, greed, hope and pride are the same today as they were in the early 1900s and these core fundamental human emotions can account for the rise and fall of every Wall Street trader, from the tiny retail players to large hedge fund and private equity fund managers.

The book is a non-fictional Wall Street primer about "Lawrence Livingstone", a pseudonym for Jesse Livermore, the legendary lone Wall Street trader whose personal fortune purportedly peaked between 1.1 and 14.0 billion dollars normalized to the value of today's US dollar. Through trial and error and constant self-evaluation, Livermore developed strict trading rules and guidelines that are still practiced today by some of Wall Street’s most successful operators. However, ignoring his own rules and falling to the emotions of hope, fear, greed and pride, Livermore was often flat broke during his career and entered bankruptcy in 1934.
 
While $800,000 worth of annuities purchased in 1917 to hedge against the risk of getting wiped out in the market prevented his family from destitution and poverty, Livermore used a revolver shot to the head to commit suicide in late 1940. He had been suffering from depression and in his suicide note he describes his life as a "failure". 

I have been enamored with Wall Street since I was a high school kid, not necessarily exclusively for the profit potential although that is surely a major motivator, but more with the observation of the psychology of the marketplace. Equity prices rise and fall according to vagaries of human emotions - think fear, hope, greed and pride. Remember Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan's famous "irrational exuberance" comment? The cauldron of fear, hope, greed and pride at full boil!

While this book is probably not a great fit for those with little or no Wall Street experience or interest, anyone who trades individual equities or commodities or is involved in overseeing a 401K account should give this investment classic a read ... often!