Rating: 3/5

This book continued the adventures of Aline, Countess of Romanones as an undercover spy. It is now 1966. Aline is happily married with three sons, still going to extravagant parties and dinners. Her old boss, John Derby, aka Jupiter, visits Aline to talk to her about help he needs to uncover a mole in Paris who happens to be working at NATO and passing information to the Soviets. Aline’s husband Luis has forbidden her to do anymore spy work, but coincidentally the Dutchess of Windsor asks Aline if she could pick up a painting she bought with “a little yellow dog” since they would be leaving to go back home. Aline assumes this painting is by Cezanne, one of the paintings stolen by Hitler during the war. But when Aline gets to the shop, the owner says it’s been sold! Aline is hooked. She even gets the Dutchess to help her in the espionage case since she enjoys doing these kind of things and it keeps her busy. 
It was interesting to read about the happenings to Aline right after the war, her being successful in espionage, but difficult to maintain a relationship. Luis stuck with her though, and they have a happy marriage. 
So the current mission to find the mole who is feeding information to the Soviets has Aline on the lookout. With her extravagant social life, and being invited to the best parties, she may come across the mole and see information/documents being transferred. Also, the Dutchess is constantly going to dinner parties or hosting dinner parties where she can invite persons of interest. 
At the Rothchild’s costume ball, Aline is surprised to meet up with Top Hat after all these years. He seems to be onto something. 
Aline stays in Paris making an excuse to Luis who is not happy with her secrets and comings and goings.
Top Hat unfortunately is murdered, made to look like a suicide. 
Aline goes to the Sevilla Fair where she is introduced to Jackie Kennedy. They attend bullfights and ride horses. 
Top Hat’s replacement keeps in touch with Aline during the fair. A Colonel Michael Chandler follows Aline when she is alone and almost attacks her when luckily a coachman comes to her rescue. This puts Chandler on top of the list of suspects. 
Then Claudine de Jorans, wife of Edouard, dies suddenly...right after she put on lipstick. (poisoned) A pianist who played at the Jorans’ dinners told the Dutchess that Claudine and Chandler were lovers of music and gave each other music compositions...most likely documents in code! 
Things come together when Aline finds out Edouard and Klaus Fribourg, were previously roommates. They have been partners involving the paintings. Klaus commits suicide. 
Chandler implicates himself by skipping a dinner party with the Dutchess and went into Hungary. He was the mole. 
Edouard Jorans was arrested. He was having an affair with Klaus’ wife Ada. Ada Fribourg, who is actually a free woman, seems the real mastermind. 
A lot of characters to keep straight but overall truth is stranger than fiction!