Rating: 5/5

I have always been a fan of Greek mythology. Although I'd never heard of Sappho until discovering this novel more than a year ago, I've come to appreciate the attention Jong gives to Sappho's life and poetry.

The novel moves quickly and is just what I've come to expect from this author's writing. The prose is witty, sensual and retrospective as the protagonist laments the taking of her daughter while longing for the embrace of her lover. Imagery describing the Greek isle of Lesbos and other locales is exquisite and alluring. 

Jong's Sappho undergoes differing degrees of change from the time she departs her native island to the conclusion of the novel. The beginning of the story finds Sappho precocious, albeit extremely naive. The circumstances she encounters - nearly losing her life from shipwreck, landing in the domain of the amazons, braving Hades' domain - teach her about herself and the ever changing world in which she lives. These lessons give Sappho a wisdom she would not have otherwise attained. This wisdom becomes a vital asset in the final chapters as she must once again navigate the precarious terrain of new love while struggling to mend relations with her daughter and instruct young, eager students.

The conclusion leaves the reader with a question, one it seems Jong attempts to answer throughout the whole of the book. Do human beings decide their own fate? Or, are they subjected solely to the whims of some fickle higher power? Jong leaves this question unanswered.

I selected this book to read as part of my "research" for a current novella project. I was looking for novels with a strong female lead. This book certainly fits the bill. What makes it more spectacular is the fact that, despite its intrinsically feminine angle, Sappho is almost completely inundated by the presence of men. Whether the memory of her dead father or the company of Aesop the fable-maker, Sappho must define her own existence separate from the constant influence of men. For this reason, I found this book an excellent tool for my "research".

I would encourage the male reader not to shy away from this book, despite its feminine qualities. If Erica Jong excels at anything, it is writing a universal character whose application crosses the boundaries of sex, social opinion, and religious predisposition. It is a profound piece of work.