Rating: 2/5

This book was originally released in 1983, then was tweaked for a re-release in 2004 amongst all the DaVinci Code hubbub. However, this book lacks the cultural and historical awe of Brown’s famous novel and a number of others who jumped on the religious conspiracy-theory type novel bandwagon. Purdue tries to fit in too much action and not enough character development or history, leaving DaVinci himself to take a backseat to international politics and economics. Plus, while Purdue tries to update his book for the 21st century (euros, Iraq war, 9/11) he fails to make other necessary adjustments, which leave the timeline inconsistent and half of the narrative stuck in the early 80’s.

The hero, Vance has a background in the military, while being a rogue oil locater and the most experienced amateur DaVinci scholar in the world. Um, how convenient for a guy like him to have so many obscure skills. His accomplice in the adventure is enemy reporter turned lover, Suzanne, who happens to be an ex-spy, another set of useful abilities to go along with Vance’s as they dodge bullets, make narrow escapes, and add to the body count. And though Suzanne still holds a grudge for being spurned by Lance in college, the immediacy of their professions of love seem a bit implausible.

The only moderately fascinating plot point was the mystery behind the secret organization, which wields uncanny power and has a bizarre if fanciful history. But the captivating things that should have been more elaborately portrayed fell short. There is not enough about DaVinci and the religious aspects of the plot. It tries too hard to be about international conspiracy that is so far reaching it seems ridiculous. While Purdue tried to capitalize on a hot topic that was revitalized in fiction, he would have been better off completely re-writing the book and thoroughly revising the sub-par dialogue, rethinking the poor decisions made by the characters, completely modernizing it, and developing the plot to be more engaging.