Rating: 5/5

Forgetting is part of our lives, my lord. Sometimes it is a blessing, or we could never move beyond loss.

Guy Gavriel Kay, how do I love thee? Let me count....alright that might a bit over the top but I have to say Kay is one of my favorite authors so you can take that into consideration if you read on.

Kay dips his toe into 8th century Anglo-Saxon, Welsh and Viking cultures using characters from each to weave together another fantastic historical fiction tale with a touch of the mystical, faeries. Characters to identify with and a great prose style are the two main reasons for my Kay love. Tigana and The Lions of Al-Rassan were my first two reads and I loved them both, Under Heaven was great but I didn't click with the characters as much. This story was back to form for me.

Bern Thorkellson an Erling(viking) escapes Rabady Island and ends up joing the Erling mercenary force at Jormsvik.

Alun and Dai ab Owyn, Cyngael(Welsh) princes of Cadyr plan a raid on an outlying farmhouse of Brynn ap Hywll, famed fighter and leader of the neighboring province. Fortunately for the brothers, they are thwarted by Ceinion the Jaddite(Christian)high cleric to the three Cyngael provinces, who comes uopn and warns them that Brynn and a large party are currently staying at the farmhouse.

Aeldred king of the Anglcyn(Anglo-Saxon) is setting up a series of forts to protect his people from the raiding of the Erlings. At the same time he is attempting to raise his subjects through knowledge and scholarship and has ask the high cleric Ceinion to join him in this endeavor.

My favorite part of the whole book is the exploration of the relationship that is formed between Alun and a curious faerie.

Her hair went pale, nearly white, came back towards gold but not all the way. She said, "You were in the pool. I...saved you there." Her voice, simply speaking words, made him realize he had never, really, made music with his harp, or sung a song the way it should be sung. He felt he would weep if he were not careful.

There are several encounters throughout the book and I thought Kay did a wonderful job of conveying the magic of these moments, how the two interacted trying to understand each others view of the world. How Alun struggled with this legend/myth, how it might change not only his views on the world but might actually change his world.

"Will my own world be there when I leave you?"
"I don't know what you mean. This is the world we have."
 She was beside him, very near. The glade would have been dark were it not for the light she cast. Her hair was all around him, copper-coloured now, thick and warm; he could touch it, had been doing so, in a wood on a summer night. They lay in deep grass, edge of a clearing. Sounds of the forest around them, murmurous. These woods had been shunned for generations by his people and the Anglcyn, both. His fear was beside him, however, not among the trees.

Kay also spends some time on the question of fate or consequences of actions/inactions.

Some paths, some doorways, some people were not to be yours, though the slightest difference in the rippling of time might have made them so. A tossed pebble landing a little sooner, a little later.

But sometimes the most gallant actions, those requiring a summoning of all our will, access to bravery beyond easy understanding or decription....have no consequence that matters. They leave no ripples upon the surface of succeeding events, cause nothing, achieve nothing. Are trivial, marginal. This can be hard to accept.

Just another fantastic story from Kay.
4.5 stars