Rating: 5/5

This book has long been on my to-be-read shelf, and I began it (election night 2020 in the US, while a President still hadn't been declared) without realizing it's actually the second in the Camulod series. So, while I'm reading them slightly out of order, I give this book, and the entire series, an IMMENSE recommendation for fans of Arthurian legend and historical fiction. 

The second book in the Camulod series is told from the perspective of Gaius Publius Varras, a lamed soldier of a noble Roman family and talented ironsmith in the southwest of Roman Britain, confronted with his role in the assumed death of a member of the Seneca clan, another Roman noble family and enemies to Varras and his patron, friend, and former General, Caius Brittanicus. Varras lives in a settlement known then only as the Colony, established by Brittanicus and a few other noble families for communal protection and prosperity in the face of what they predict will be a forthcoming withdrawal of all Roman military control and administration of Britain. Varras is joined with Brittanicus not only through their exploits in various lands as soldiers, but through marriage to Brittanicus's sister, Luceiia, and through the vision of what could become of the Colony in a post-Roman Britain. They work hard on their plans for the Colony, establishing a Council and a local training regimen for troops (including rediscovering and adapting the skill of heavy cavalry), while protecting themselves from invading Saxons, stand-offish Celts, and the perfidy and treachery of the Seneca clan bent on revenge. All the while Varras experiments with new and old forms of swordsmithing, especially using a special form of iron he calls the Skystone, which just might result in the creation of something spectacular. Through natural progression of the plot in battles, treaties, and friendships formed, the book eventually leads to the births of cousins Merlyn and Uther, and the renaming of the Colony as Camulod.

This whole series (I'm now 4 books into it by the time I'm writing this review) reads more like a history of Britain just before and after the withdrawal of Roman occupying forces, rather than as a fantasy series, but it is one of the best retellings of the Arthurian stories I've ever read, giving far more backstory to the generations before Arthur arose (in fact, Arthur doesn't even appear until the end of the 3rd book, and doesn't really make a splash until the 4th). There is a wealth of detail into Roman and Celtic life in Britain near the end of the 4th century, including architecture, weaponry, metallurgy, clothing, farming, geography, religion (including the local "Old Gods" of the native Britons, as well as the still nascent Christian religion gradually spreading through the Roman empire and its schism between the arguments of Augustine and Pelagius), and all other aspects of life that are described in minute detail and written with extraordinary skill by Whyte. It's full of action and intrigue, teasing at a future story we all know and love while telling full tales we've never heard before.

Other than Whyte's tendency to employ the now-common British antipathy towards commas -- like the foot and the pound, the wily Brits seemed to have invented the Oxford comma just so they could spread it to the rest of us before abandoning it themselves -- I had no issues with the mechanics of his writing. It's exceptionally well-written and -edited.

I loved this book, and as I noted above, am currently a few pages into the 5th book from this series. I give it the largest possible recommendation to any fans of the King Arthur "Matter of Britain" legend -- if you liked the books of T.H. White or Marion Zimmer Bradley or Mary Stewart, or even the older sources like Malory's Le Morte D'Arthur or the Mabinogion, then you will love this book and this series.