Rating: 5/5

Entirely excellent, and one of the best books I have ever read.

To disambiguate from others with the same name, here's a link to the WikiPedia article on the author:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_A...

'Goatwalking' is so named because it goes into some detail on the author's unusual experience of living and traveling with herds of goats for days at a time, drinking only their milk.

A Quaker, Corbett is popularly credited with having founded the Sanctuary Movement in the USA. Legend has it that he traveled up and down the length of Mexico helping to shepherd and guide refugees from repressive regimes in El Salvador, Guatemala, and other countries, interceding to save their lives and gain them tenuous asylum in safe havens, including churches, throughout the USA.

As of 2017, the Sanctuary Movement has grown to the point where entire cities have declared themselves sanctuaries, and ordered their police not to cooperate with the Federal immigration authorities. It is a major thorn-in-the-side of the repressive Trump regime, whose officials are attempting to coerce various jurisdictions' collusion by denying federal aid to them.

Here is an extremely powerful excerpt (not in 'Goatwalking') from a Quaker pamphlet (Pendle Hill Pamphlet #270, 'The Sanctuary Church') written by Corbett :

"We cannot serve justice if we become hypnotized by the state's use of violence, as though its force were the ultimate power. When we focus on organized coercion as if it were the dominant reality, our world shatters into means and uses, all that is truly worthwhile being projected as goals out beyond the present time in which we actually live.

"One consequence to this strictly-political approach is that, in common with its extension as warfare, it can make no sense of universal human rights.

(There is an irrational assumption that) the present must be sacrificed, and violence must be done for the future's sake.

"The alternative is social involvement generated by presence-centered communion. Fulfilling this present time in which we live -- as the co-creative task for which our unrepeatable place here and now empowers us -- is quite different from assaulting our present as though it were a barrier separating us from our creative potential and requiring that we engineer the means to break through to a just and meaningful future.

"... we hear ourselves called to become a people that hallows the Earth, a people that covenants to do justice and to love kindness, that the Kingdom may come -- on Earth, in our lives, and during our days.

"... the term 'sanctuary' refers to protective community with (the vulnerable); with people whose basic human rights are being violated by government officials. As a declared practice, it incorporates prophetic witness into protective community; that is, in addition to protecting the violated from the state, the public practice of sanctuary holds the state accountable for its violations of human rights."

-- James Corbett (1933-2001) -- Quaker Author, New Mexico Rancher, and founder of the Sanctuary Movement, who was honored within his lifetime by the National Conference on Peacemaking and Conflict Resolution (NCPCR '99) as an 'Elder Quaker Peacemaker'.