Rating: 5/5

Anne McCaffrey is generally thought of as a novelist, particularly when it comes to her Dragonriders of Pern 'verse. However, she has written a small number of shorter works.

"The Littlest Dragonboy" was originally published in the collection Get Off the Dragon, and is a variation on the "ugly duckling" or "little engine that could" tropes. Keevan is the youngest Candidate, and is ridiculed for his strong stature. When the bullying turns violent, it looks like he won't make it to this Hatching -- but he is determined.

"The Girl Who Heard Dragons" is the original story of Aramina, a poor girl whose family was left holdless when the wicked Lord Fax conquered Ruatha Hold. The bandit chieftan Thrella, who styles herself Lady Holdless, is trying to capture Aramina and use her as a living dragon detector. The family's desperate flight leads them into the territory of Benden Hold, and K'van and his dragon reappear as rescuers. The story ends happily with Aramina off to her new life in Benden Weyr, and it appears she has a great future ahead of her. (Sadly, readers of the later novels know that she found so many dragon voices unbearable and fled, and ended up in Southern Continent, where she turned into a fretful ninny after the role of protagonist shifted to her son).

"Runner of Pern" is a story of the messenger system by which ordinary people can send letters and small parcels. Tenna is just starting her career in the family craft when she's run off the trace by a reckless rider who has no business there. She makes it to Fort Station, where she must track down the culprit and hold him accountable for his actions, for the honor of her guild. There's a certain Captains Courageous element here, of the spoiled youth who must confront his flaws and ends up coming to respect the person who makes him accountable for his actions.

"Ever the Twain," which is new to this collection, is the story of two young twins who are taken to Ista Weyr in Search, and who each want the other to Impress a dragon. It feels like a story set in one of the earlier Passes, since it's a time when it's still unremarkable for women to Impress green dragons.

In all, it's a good, solid collection, although IIRC there was one more Pern story that's not included in it, which for the first time suggests that between could also be a sort of afterlife when a character gets lost in it and meets Moreta.