Rating: 5/5

Reading Log #5
English 6 (1)
Lina Ryadi

1000 Facts About Space is an interesting Informational book written by Pam Beasant. This book mostly talks about space and how it was discovered and what is in space. Space is all existing matter and space are considered as a whole, it’s called the cosmos. Did you know that according to the calculations of scientists, space is approximately 13.8 billion years old? Also in Space, there are 9 planets; Mercury, Venus, Earth, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto, Mars, and Jupiter. Well, Pluto is no more a planet because it’s too small for staying a planet. So now, it’s a dwarf planet. Also, space was discovered by Edwin Hubble hundreds of years ago. And did you know that our galaxy is called The Milky Way? Well, it contains about 100 billion stars and it would take about 100,000 years to travel from one side to the other. Very Cool!

The best part of the book 1000 Facts About Space was The Constellations. Well, constellations are patterns of stars in the night sky. The shapes they seem to make, were given names in ancient times, and they are still used today. The stars that make up the constellations aren’t really close to each other, sometimes the stars that look closest are really far apart. They just happened to form a pattern and so look like a group when viewed from earth. From the information of the book, the reader learns a lot about space and this book could help you a lot is Science for getting better grades, getting more information on space, and understanding how space works and what’s in space.

The most exciting episode in the book was when I read about the constellations because I really love stars and it's my favorite thing in space. However, the most disappointing moment in this book was when I finished it because honestly, this book was really interesting and fun to read. I would recommend this book to all the Science lovers because this book showed a lot of fantastic facts about space and it was really interesting to read.