Rating: 5/5

I was having a ton of anxiety for a week or so, so I bought this book. I was feeling really stressed and depressed and had a pit in my stomach all day long for days. I didn't feel like eating and felt dread all day. I lost confidence in my abilities. 

I also experienced a few panic attacks. I'd feel really lightheaded like I was going to pass out, it was hard to swallow, my body would feel all tingly, and I felt like I couldn't do anything but lie there. The book says those symptoms are all the result of adrenalin and it's nothing to worry about. She reassures that you can indeed still function. Just float through it.

The book helped me understand what was happening to me and easy ways to help these unpleasant feelings go away. My nerves had become too sensitive so that every scary or stressful thought released too much adrenalin so I'd feel intensely scared or stressed, more than that thought warranted. And then I didn't know what was going on and was scared about what was happening to me and maybe I was going crazy, so my body would release more adrenalin and I'd feel those panicky feelings again and it was a bad cycle. The book reassured me that those symptoms I was feeling were just a result of the adrenalin, nothing was wrong with me, and it happens to a lot of people. It gives four quite simple, but effective techniques for breaking the panic-adrenalin-panic cycle and helping my nerves to desensitize: 

First, face your feelings. Instead of shrinking from the upsetting sensations, zero in on them and analyze them. 

Second, accept. When I feel those panic feelings, I need to change my scared mood into an accepting mood. I need to tell myself it's okay that I'm having those feelings and they aren't going to hurt me and then once my mood shifts to an accepting mood my body will stop releasing the adrenalin. 

Third, I should let upsetting thoughts "float" out of my mind because they are just thoughts and not give them credence. 

The last technique is to let time pass. Be patient and don't get scared if those feelings come back. Just keep doing the first three techniques. 
 
Anyway, the book was very reassuring and easy to read and understand. It has helped a ton and I'm feeling back to my old self again. I've always been a worrier so these techniques are helping me to relax which is good especially since worrying doesn't help anything.