Oh Henry James! It is the first book which i cannot possibly assign with any stars as it would not reflect my reading experience. It was probably the most hard book to read this year. And it took me ages. It was at the same time frustrating, but addictive experience. It was not the first Henry James I've read. In fact, I've started reading him this year and I loved my experience without reservation until this one. I think the master works for me better in a smaller doses. I absolutely loved his shorter fiction. "Aspern papers", "The Finger in the Carpet", "Private life" or "The Wheel of Time" were fantastic, enigmatic and suspenseful. The Ambassadors was great as well. I thought I got his humour, enjoyed his characters and his attitude towards them. And I did not mind the sentences too much. In fact i enjoyed treating each sentence as a puzzle when i had to.

Here, it got a bit too much. Maybe it is just the time of the year, but I needed to re-read almost every single sentence at least twice. So it took me at least twice to read the book. It would take me around half an hour to settle down in to the reading session. Then, after another half an hour i would find my mind inevitably drifting far away. I would catch myself thinking about anything starting from my school years (very long gone) to what to make for dinner this evening. So i guess i need to be grateful to James that dinner varied more than usual in our household. Anything apart from the book. The beginning was better, and then, when the action or the lack thereof has moved to Venice, in has become more bearable. But the middle was a muddle for me.

However, I've finished a few days ago and I keep thinking about how the novel is constructed, why James was interested in the triangle of the main characters; the role of the supportive cast. Also how he described Venice and London tube for example somehow stuck in my mind. So i cannot say I did not appreciate the novel after all. And I certainly would read more James. It is just i think for me he works better when it is less pages to turn. Especially I know he would leave a lot of stuff out for us to think about anyway and I appreciate it.

I've just found this except from a letter in an old New Yorker's article:

“but one thing of him I know: our language has no artist more serious or austere at this moment. I explain to myself his bewildering style thus: he is attempting the impossible with it—a certain very particular form of the impossible; namely, to produce upon the reader, as a painting produces upon the gazer, a number of superimposed, simultaneous impressions. He would like to put several sentences on top of each other so that you could read them all at once, and get all at once the various shadings and complexities, instead of getting them consecutively as the mechanical nature of his medium compels. This I am sure is the secret of his involved parentheses, his strangely injected adverbs, the whole structure, in short, of his twisted syntax. One grows used to it by persisting. I read ‘The Ambassadors’ twice, and like it amazingly as a prodigy of skill. One other thing of signal importance is a key to his later books. He does not undertake to tell a story but to deal with a situation, a single situation. Beginning (in his scheme) at the center of this situation, he works outward, intricately and exhaustively, spinning his web around every part of the situation, every little necessary part no matter how slight, until he gradually presents to you the organic whole, worked out. You don’t get the organic whole until he wishes you to and that is at the very end. But he never lets the situation go, never digresses for a single instant; and no matter how slow or long his pages may seem as you first read them, when you have at the end grasped the total thing, if you then look back you find that the voluminous texture is woven closely and that every touch bears upon the main issue. I don’t say that if I could I would work like this, or that the situations he chooses to weave into such verbal labyrinth are such as I should care to deal with so minutely and laboriously, even if I had the art to do so; but I do say that judged as only any works of art can ever be judged; viz., by themselves, by what they undertake to do and how thoroughly they do it, Henry James’ later books are the work of a master. . . .”

And, I think it has fully reflected my experience, but in a wonderfully articulate way.