Rating: 5/5

Third read 6/24/2026:

I really wish this book would be rereleased in a convenient ebook format. All of CL's other books have been, and this is arguably her best novel. It's tragic that it has gone out of print. I agree completely with my previous 5-star review below.

I'm not sure why this fabulous author has stopped writing fiction, but it is a real loss to her fans. She has not published a novel in almost a decade.

Review from 4/22/2022:

Outstanding example of witty, comedic chick lit

Olivia "Livvy" Martin is a 21-year-old college student who is the privileged offspring of a wealthy father. She has never had to hold down a job, and she is drifting toward a BA degree. She has never been kissed because she has never been willing to date, due to a deep cynicism about not just men, but the whole human race. It is made obvious early on in the book that this distrust is rooted in her upbringing by her emotionally and ethically dysfunctional parents. The hallmarks of Livvy's self-identity are a huge chip on her shoulder and an overriding alienation that is clearly connected to that shoulder chip as well as to her perpetual unwillingness to ever make herself vulnerable to anyone. This "rebel without a cause" attitude is outwardly manifested as a constant opposition to any form of authority, not in huge, destructive ways, such as drug or alcohol abuse or committing petty crime, but instead by an inability to talk to other people in any other way than via witty, sarcastic remarks. She is obviously as brilliant as her father, because even though she rarely shows up for class, she gets A's whenever she makes the least effort. And over time in the novel, it becomes clear that she is almost as attractive as her mother, who is a classic "dumb, beautiful blonde."

Livvy's mother, Barbara, is a former top model who has been unemployed for many years. She appears to be an alcoholic, and she feels entitled to leech off her daughter emotionally and her ex-husband financially. Both Livvy and her father have propped up Barbara's addiction by maintaining a codependent relationship with her. Though Livvy never outwardly shows it, she is driven mad by Barbara's oblivious ignorance and blithe, unshakeable conviction that she is a sacrificial mother, while endlessly treating Livvy with selfish disregard.

Livvy's father is a narcissist, too, but of a different order. He is an arrogant, patronizing jerk who is a highly successful shark attorney. His second wife is a trust-fund baby from an elite family, and she is yet another of the significant narcissists populating Livvy's world. The stepmother is as beautiful as Barbara, though much younger and not remotely as dim-witted.

To round out Livvy's family party, which we are exposed to as a group for the first time at the start of this book at the Thanksgiving celebration from hell at her father's mansion, there is Livvy's half-sister Celia, a four-year-old, spoiled brat whom Livvy barely knows.

Since leaving home to go to college, as much as possible Livvy has attempted to ignore her family, and mostly succeeds, until the fateful day when her father and stepmother die in a fiery car crash, and she discovers to her horror that her father named her in his will as Celia's guardian.

This novel was published in 2003 and is Claire LaZebnik's first novel. If you are looking for romantic comedy, please be aware that though she has written several young adult (YA) romantic comedies, this book is not a romantic comedy. It is, instead, "chick lit," a subgenre within women's fiction that focuses primarily on a main female character's relationships with other women (whether friends or relatives), with children, and/or on her "dating disasters." In the early days of chick lit in the 90's, most were comedy-of-error stories in the vein of Bridget Jones's Diary, but this particular book is a "dramedy." There are plenty of serious issues which are leavened by the repartee between Livvy and three different male characters who are all as intelligent as she is. There is typically an HEA romance subplot in chick lit, which is the case for this novel. However, it is very much a minor part of the book as a whole, unlike an actual romance novel where a courtship takes center stage.

In Ms. LaZebnik's chick lit books, like most chick lit, the heroine is often self-centered at the beginning of the book to the point of being obnoxious, which is definitely the case in this book with Livvy. But she is saved from being outright unlikable by virtue of the fact that her frequent, witty zingers are often laugh-out-loud funny. In addition, the author subtly makes us aware, without hitting us over the head with it in a preachy way, that Livvy has reasonably become cynical and jaded due to her disillusioning experiences with her awful parents. She also makes Livvy sympathetic using one of my favorite tropes in women's fiction and romance, when the heroine takes responsibility for raising the orphaned, vulnerable child of a close relative. 

In that regard, the core of this novel, above all, is Livvy's evolving relationship with her little sister, Celia. For the most part it is extremely well done. I do have one big quibble, though, with the characterization of Celia: We are told she is barely four. Unfortunately, Celia speaks like a very gifted child of seven or eight. This anomaly is never justified anywhere in the novel.

There is onstage sex but with basically no description, so I would classify it as closed bedroom door.

I am personally not a big fan of chick lit, and over the past 20 years or so since the genre began I have read less than a dozen chick lit novels. I find them irritating because the heroines are so often portrayed as clueless and utterly superficial, and the so-called comedy is what I call humiliation humor. The audience is encouraged to laugh at the heroine rather than with her. 

The only reason I originally read this book and Ms. LaZebnik's other four chick lit novels is because I loved her YA romantic comedies, and I find her to be an exceptionally talented author. In particular, it is a challenge for a chick lit author to write a typical doormat, wounded protagonist and not rely on revealing her angst via redundant self-pitying thoughts. In contrast, none of LaZebnik's heroines are doormats, and their psychological wounds are shown in a very sophisticated manner through their behavior and interactions with significant subcharacters.

I've recently enjoyed a Claire LaZebnik reading festival, revisiting all of her books at once. These are the rest of her chick lit novels:

Knitting Under the Influence (2006)
The Smart One and the Pretty One (2008)
If You Lived Here, You'd Be Home Now (2010)
Families and Other Nonreturnable Gifts (2011)

These are her YA romantic comedies:

Epic Fail (2011)
The Trouble with Flirting (2013)
The Last Best Kiss (2014)
Wrong About the Guy (2015)