Rating: 4/5

Absolutely lovely reread for me, for Reading the Detectives group December buddy read.

I read all of the Cadfael books decades ago, so don’t remember “whodunnit” for any of them, but I love the beauty of Ellis Peters’ writing; she evocatively captures the natural beauty of Shrewsbury, the English countryside, and Brother Cadfael’s herb garden at the Abbey of St. Peter and St. Paul. Brother Cadfael is a wonderful creation, a twelfth-century monk who came to the cloister late in life, after time as a soldier in the crusades, and as a sea captain. We learned in a previous mystery that he even unknowingly fathered a child in his previous life, who is now a dashing young man.

This story opens in late spring - the feast of St. Winifred approaches, and with it, the day a single rose must be paid by the abbey to the wealthy young Widow Perle. She gifted her former home to the abbey; it was the home where she lived, happily married, for a few years before her young husband died, and soon after, she miscarried their first and only child. All she asks in return, as rent, is a single white rose from the bush in her old garden. Such heartbreaking circumstances, but Cadfael reflects when he sees her at Mass:

 “She was barely twenty-five years old, and had enjoyed only three years of a happy marriage, but she went about her deprived and solitary life without fuss or complaint, cared scrupulously for a business which gave her no personal pleasure, and faced the prospect of perpetual loneliness with a calm countenance and a surprising supply of practical energy. In happiness or unhappiness, living is a duty, and must be done thoroughly.”

I really liked Judith Perle as a character, and typically for a Cadfael mystery, there is a romantic subplot, but this was refreshingly subtle and quiet, with two mature characters - Peters has given readers several charming pairs of young lovers in this series, so this was a nice change.

So, time for the annual presentation of the rose is approaching, when the young monk assigned to deliver it is found dead beside the bush, which has been hacked up and badly damaged. Judith Perle is a wealthy, much-pursued widow; would a potential suitor, anxious to secure her worldly goods and attractive person, stoop to murder to break the generous bequest?

Before Cadfael and Sheriff Hugh Beringar can investigate the shocking murder, Judith herself disappears, and another murder is discovered.

I am so enjoying rereading this historical mystery series - Cadfael started my love affair with historical mysteries 30 years ago, and any trip to Shrewsbury is a comfort read!