Rating: 3/5

We're told by Muriel Spark, who provides an "Afterword" to this edition of Pitch Dark, that it's a love story. And it's a portrait of a woman, Kate Ennis, who's in love but on the run. The first two parts of the novel find her traveling to try and forget the relationship she's recently ended with a married lover of eight years. She's fled to Orcas Island in Puget Sound. Then she's in Ireland as guest at the castle of an acquaintance. And then she's back home as she works toward a decision. Pitch Dark reads like a meditation. It reads like the interior of Kate Ennis thinking about the complications of her life and relationship, complications piled on complications when she has an accident in Ireland and has to deal with the offhandedness of authority and the castle's servants. She's unsure of herself, she's lonely and stressed. She seems slightly paranoid, and she feels guilt.

What's interesting about all this is that it's not told in a straightforward manner. There's narrative but it's revealed only a bit at a time and in a jumbled sequence. The novel's brief sections set off by line breaks are strokes or snapshots taken of a woman's flight from a relationship. They're like flashes of lightning at night slowly revealing a landscape as a storm passes over. At last we can see detail and make sense of it.

Maybe it's at that time that we realize the writing is more interesting than Kate Ennis. Kate is a journalist, intelligent and insightful about her own past. Yet she lacks self-possession and the ability to approach her problems rationally. She can't be resolute about the present because she can't be sure she did the right thing in her love life. The trip through Ireland is a nightmare of indecision and letting herself be taken advantage of. Her story becomes painful. Adler has given us a challenging, well-written novel which, stretching the boundaries of narrative as it does, gives us an interesting way to look at a character. It's just that who we come to know at last might be someone who doesn't interest us very much.