Rating: 4/5

“He didn’t look like a murderer, he supposed, in his clean white shirtsleeves and his silk tie and his dark blue trousers, and maybe even his strained face didn’t look like a murderer’s to anyone else. ‘That’s the mistake,’ Guy said aloud, ‘that nobody knows what a murderer looks like. A murderer looks like anybody!’”
-	Patricia Highsmith, Strangers on a Train 

Patricia Highsmith’s Strangers on a Train is a novel that almost needs no introduction. It is the very definition of high concept, an irresistible idea that can be summed up in a handful of sentences. Two strangers – architect Guy Haines and louche playboy Charles Bruno – engage in a conversation while traveling aboard a train. Both men have troublesome people in their lives, a soon-to-be ex-wife for Guy, and an unloving father for Bruno. The notion arises that they could swap murders, ridding themselves of these nagging issues, while elegantly dealing with the problems of motive and alibi. The train eventually reaches its destination, the two men part, and that should be the end of it. 

Until one of the men goes through with the plan. 

The first book written by the famed author of The Talented Mr. Ripley, Strangers on a Train gained immortality when Alfred Hitchcock turned it into a semi-classic film. Its setup has found its way into the pop cultural consciousness, the basis of many other additional movies, television episodes, and parodies. 

In short, Strangers on a Train has transcended itself, becoming far more than it ever was to begin. Perhaps unsurprisingly, this resulted in a reading experience that often left me wondering what all the fuss was about. It’s a fine diversion and a quick read, but it would have been quite forgettable, if other factors had not already made forgetting it impossible. 

*** 

Plotwise, Strangers on a Train is relatively straightforward. There is a minimum of surprises or twists, and once you swallow the central conceit – that two guys who’d never met each other would have this conversation, and that one of them would put the plan into motion – things progress in ways that are not hard to guess.

Rather than focus on storytelling mechanics, Highsmith is more interested in her two main characters, Guy and Bruno. And that’s a bit of a problem. 

Neither man is really worth rooting for. Guy is put in the unenviable position of being the moral center, except that he’s not really good, just indecisive. There are a half-dozen points in the novel when he could have solved every problem by simply doing the halfway decent thing, but his lack of a backbone prevents this. Meanwhile, Bruno is a proto-Tom Ripley, a psychopath with an ingratiating smile. Unlike Ripley, however, Bruno has zero charisma. Instead, he’s a fall-down alcoholic with an inexplicable obsession for Guy, and Guy’s girlfriend Anne. 

For much of Strangers on a Train’s length, I felt trapped in this story, pinging back and forth between Guy and Bruno – Highsmith writes in the third-person, mainly from the perspective of these two – neither of whom seemed worth a moment of my time.

Ultimately, I came to accept that this wasn’t really a character study, so much as a thesis statement. Highsmith is clearly a believer that there is a demon in all of us, and realizing that, I saw the two leads – and Guy, especially – in a different light. Rather than viewing Guy as a decent fellow trapped in extreme circumstance, I accepted him as a man slowly coming to realize his latent homicidal tendencies. Though Highsmith undercuts her own savage, cutthroat world with a tediously expository ending, I appreciated her willingness to execute such a bleak outlook.

*** 

Because this is a Highsmith novel, the sexuality of her characters has become a matter of some controversy. Specifically, it has been assumed that Bruno’s intense fixation with Guy is homosexual in nature. Highsmith – herself a lesbian – goes out of her way to tell us that Bruno is interested in women (there is a scene with Bruno trying to find a prostitute), but she leaves enough bread crumbs to form a trail to other conclusions. 

This is important because it affects our ability to judge Strangers on a Train in the 21st century. At the time this was written – in 1950 – homosexuality was criminalized, stigmatized, and often diagnosed as a mental illness. There were many unfortunate examples of a fictional character’s sexual identity being used as a proxy for their villainy and evil. The matter was to arise again with The Talented Mr. Ripley, with Tom Ripley’s ambiguous desires called into question. 

Frankly, I’m not sure that Bruno deserves the excavation. He is meant by Highsmith to be mesmerizing – at least, Guy and Anne are both oddly taken with him – but I found him to be an exasperating presence, a sloppy, erratic, vaguely-intentioned leech. Trying to pin his actions on any one thing, much less his sexual inclinations, seems a fool’s errand. The force that is driving him is not important, least of all to Highsmith, who is clearly more interested in Guy’s descent to the dark side. Bruno exists mainly to provide the wind that propels Guy’s voyage of lethal self-discovery. 

*** 

Reading a book that has achieved cultural saturation is always at least a bit unusual. Even though you haven’t seen the exact arrangement of words, you have the sensation of having been there before. This can make it hard to accurately evaluate a piece of art, since what comes across as cliched or obvious now, might have been entirely original and sui generis seventy years ago. 

With that caveat aside, this was a minor disappointment, given its lofty reputation. The ideas are still half-formed, the characters are a bit uncertain, and Highsmith definitely pulls her punches at the end, writing as though she was operating under the old Hays Code, in which the “bad guy” has to meet justice.

To be very clear: this is not a bad book. It is a solid psychological thriller boosted by the reality that Highsmith was a pioneer in this genre. Nevertheless, my greatest enjoyment came from seeing – for the first time – all the ingredients that Highsmith would later put to much better use in The Talented Mr. Ripley. It is a novel full of authorial promise that would only later be fulfilled.