Rating: 4/5

Thorne's second novel, first published by Zebra in 1996 (with a great lurid cover!) takes place in the small town of Moonfall, somewhere in Southern California. Moonfall is known for its apple orchards and not much else. There is a 'Catholic' orphanage school for girls, but the nuns and girls keep a very low profile. Just because it is a small town does not mean, however, that death is a stranger. 

The story starts of during Halloween in 1972, with a bunch of boys planning to sneak over to the girls school (St. Gertrude's Home for Girls), but known by all as St. Gruesomes, hopefully to see some naked girls. The boys awake in the nearby forest the next morning, all with headaches and one little boy floating dead in the local swimming hole. The boy that died was the young brother of John, and they have no idea how it came about. 

Flash forward 24 years and the real story begins. John is now the sheriff (just like his dad before him) and he is called about a 'floater' in the same swimming hole; this time, a young teacher from St. Gruesomes. It looks like a suicide, but why she jumped in the lake after starting to cut herself in her room remains a question. Meanwhile, the replacement teacher (Sara) arrives on the scene. She was a former student of St. Gruesomes, but ran away when she was 16 after her roommate apparently killed herself (she is convinced it was murder, however). Upon arrival, Sara visits John and asks about her dead roommate, but much to his chagrin, can find nothing whatsoever about it in the files...

I think to enjoy Thorne, you have to be on the same page as her quirky humor, and I surely am. Her later work has more bawdy, erotic scenes to be sure, but she can really tell a story. I would place this in 'Thorneverse', e.g., her 'haunted' SoCal universe, populated with Celtic mythos and in this case, 'witches' (please call me a healer) both good and evil. So what is really going on at St. Gruesomes? Who is the 'witch' that lives in the woods and has scared generations of kids in town? What is the deal with all the hideous gargoyles that populate the school's grounds? You will have lots of fun finding out. Another winner from Thorne! 4 witchy stars.