Rating: 3/5

I read excerpts from The Feminine Mystique at university, and have wanted to read entire book for a few years now. While this book is still important and highlights the ways in which sociology, higher ed, economy - hell, even architecture - betrayed women, for every positive post-it note I found something problematic I would love to see addressed in a footnote or the foreword, which will probably never happen in my lifetime. Sorry for focusing on the bad and the ugly, but this book already has many good reviews and my qualms go beyond the “I am a happy SAHM and strongly disagree” tone of many negative ones.

1) I love my job and returned to it with tires (metaphorically) screeching at the end of my maternity leave. But even I don’t believe women who can find satisfaction solely as housewives/ mothers don’t exist. Ms. Friedan did not manage to find a single one.

What is more, she keeps hearing about someone who reportedly is a fulfilled mother and housewife, and – time and time again –after an honest conversation, these mythical beings are reduced to tears, sobbing how much they envy working women. More importantly, I could not resist the impression that the author can interpret the same pursuit (say, community work) as either a pathetic time-filler (if a woman is unsatisfied with her life) or a fantastic way of self-actualization (if a woman happens to be happy).

2) While I understand “the housewife syndrome” was a serious problem, the parallel Friedan chooses to illustrate the importance of self-actualization shows an utter lack of sense of proportions. Less than 20 years after the war, she uses death camps as a metaphor for American housewives' entrapment. To use an example of a female prisoner, formerly a dancer, about to be gassed, who is ordered to dance and kills the officer, because she finally remembers what it is to be a human being, as a reminder that dabbling in painting or writing can ward off depression? To essentially blame the inmates of death camps for having allowed the Nazis to suppress their personalities instead of turning against them? To smoothly move on to discuss female ability to orgasm? 

Tellingly, Friedan's bio on Jewish Women's Archive webpage (jwa.org) contains the following excerpt: Despite its popularity, [Feminine Mystique] caused her personal troubles. Her children were ostracized from car pools, and she and her husband were no longer invited to their friends’ dinner party circle.(And this, I swear, are all the "personal troubles" listed). In other words - step aside, prisoners of Auschwitz, Dachau, Stutthof and Treblinka; this woman has a thing or two to teach us all about resilience in face of suffering.

3) This is not the only moment when the author fails to do her homework. She repeatedly (for nothing in the book is said only once) gives examples of Russia and Israel – highly centralized, highly politicized states – as countries where women, particularly working women, report much higher levels of happiness than in the U.S. The joys of working motherhood in Russia, where your kid would spend as long as entire work week in daycare, depending on your job? Where institutionalized brainwashing started at the pre-kindergarten level? Start by reading The Time of Women.

4) While I understand that this book, due to its subject matter, is extremely heteronormative, it must be said that Ms. Friedan has surprisingly macho views on homosexuality. She seems to associate male homosexuality – a result, for her, of pathological upbringing – with weakness and passivity, and compares it to smog spreading over America. In a nutshell: male homosexuality is yucky; female homosexuality doesn’t exist. 

(Also, is the narrator of Breakfast at Tiffany’s really gay? I don’t remember anything to this effect, and yet Friedan chooses to share this piece of trivia with us – unsurprisingly - twice.)

5) The core message of this book: immaturity leads to depression; depression leads to weakness; and weakness is, again, yucky. One lost trait of American women Ms. Friedan repeatedly mourns is the frontier/ pioneer spirit. I have a crawling suspicion the picture this book paints of American suburban housewives might be a reverse of the author’s vision of herself. Such an unsympathetic representation of weakness, immaturity, social irresponsibility of young Americans may only come from a woman who sees herself as mature, responsible, and productive.