Rating: 5/5

What a captivating read! Having already enjoyed Katherine Routledge’s diary written during her time on Rapa Nui I was looking forward to reading about the island from a more modern perspective. Thor Heyerdahl was a Norwegian ethnographer who was particularly well known for his expeditions to various Polynesian islands. Spending well over half a year on Easter Island, Heyerdahl was able to meet with possibly the last significant generation of islanders who were initiated into the mythology and craftsmanship of the islands patriarchs and matriarchs. He truly immersed himself into the community of Rapa Nui, having  taken his wife and daughter with him on the expedition.

Heyerdahl describes how his expedition carried out the first archeological investigations on the islands, discovering incredible things such as the subterranean portion of the moais (more than half of the stone statue’s body is hidden beneath the earth), finding tangential evidence for the myth regarding the ultimate battle between the long and short ear factions, verifying the method of raising the moais onto their ahus (the rectangular stone platforms) and much more. The documentation of many inhabitants’ beliefs and memories has greatly contributed to capturing the soul of the islands community for posterity.

The only gripes I have with Heyerdahl’s method of discovering the mythology, and specifically  the artifacts stored in the inhabitants ancestral caves, involve him manipulating the locals into believing he had a powerful aku aku (a spirit guardian). Despite his denial, the islanders believed he was somehow ancestrally related to themselves and that he was some sort of a sage with knowledge about the island that they themselves did not even possess. Not being able to convince the natives that he was not some sort of sage, he started to use this myth as a pretext to coax the islanders to do things against their initial inclination.

For example, he would convince islanders to show him their ancestral caves and artifacts by claiming that his aku aku was powerful enough to defy their own aku akus, who did not allow strangers into their family caves. I am also discontent with him having taken a lot of statues and carvings in exchange for money or other worldly items. Although I don’t claim he did so maliciously, he did rob the islands community of their cultural patrimony with the excuse that he was conducting scientific studies on them. I do have to consider however that during the time of the expedition colonial holdings were still a thing, and that the author is not (and definitely wasn’t at the time) the only archeologist/ethnographer to have appropriated artifacts belonging to native communities.

Having enjoyed this book so much, I am planning to visit Rapa Nui during my South America backpacking trip in 2021. Overall, I really enjoyed this book and would recommend it to anyone interested in indigenous societies and sociology  in general. I’m looking forward to reading his other books in the future.