Rating: 5/5

“Five Smooth Stones” was written in 1966. Its a LONG….900 page turner-engrossing story….with wonderful characters, (such intimacy in the storytelling), set in the era of the American civil rights movement. 
The length will scare readers away….(too bad). It didn’t me.
When my close friend, Lisi, *lit up* when she mentioned how good this book was….I instantly knew I wanted to read it - pushed it to the top of my reading. (Thanks, Lisi). 

The title comes from the biblical story of David and Goliath, of The First book of Samuel: “Then he [David] Took his staff in his hand, chose five smooth stones from the stream, put them in a pouch of his shepherd’s bag and, with his sling in his hand, approached the Phillistine [Goliath]”. 

We meet protagonist David Champlin, a black man, with a limp from a bad leg, from an accident he had as a child, called a chile as a baby, the grandson of Lil’l Joe Champlin, who was born into poverty during the depression era in New Orleans. We follow his story as he ages from birth to adulthood….from poverty to success….from his education- a scholar- at Pengard, Harvard, and Oxford….. 
and becomes a lawyer, with the help of a great professor, Bjarne Knudsen, from Denmark……and the complexities of love and marriage to Sara Kent, a white girl, who loved David from the moment she first saw him. 

There is a lot of ugliness that is revealed about racism, and injustice…..
At the same time this book is so so so damn good……powerful as can be! It has everything important in it: love, loss, family, hard work, death, morality, horrors, integrity, injustice, adversity &gt; all in the context of phenomenal storytelling. 

I don’t think I’ll forget it. Ann Fairbairn was a masterful storyteller. It left a deep personal impact. 
The ending is heartbreaking. 

 “Lying to whites was a fact of life; it was like keeping your head up and your eyes up when you worked on the docks around the cranes, because the cranes could mean a horrid death. But if he gave his word to any man, colored or white, he kept it. If they did not keep theirs, his’s was not given again”. 

 “Some of the colored guys hole up and won’t have anything to do with anyone, and some of them throw their weight around, and either way it’s not good. Most of the students are all right. Some of them stink. Where would you find it different? Faculty’s O.K. 
Most of it. You have to feel your own way”. 

 “A guy didn’t have to bother about Crow in New Orleans because it was always there, 
but here you had to sniff it out, go around like a damned ol’ houn’ dawg with your nose twitching”. 

Incredible novel!!!