Rating: 5/5

The second book in the “Camulod Chronicles” picks up shortly after the events of the first book, The Skystone. It continues the tale of Caius Britannicus and Publius Varrus (both great grandfathers of the future King Arthur of Briton) as they continue to build the colony of Camulod during the turn of the 5th century AD, when Rome was pulling out of Briton and leaving the Brits, the Celts, and other assorted peoples to deal with various invading groups such as the Saxons and the Northmen.

I love the way this series is a truly accurate historical novel series, at this point at least, that also just happens to be related to the Arthurian legends. As the colony of Camulod gets established, we get to see major historical events and influences unfold. For example, due to the need for mobility in responding to threats, the art of warfare using horses is advanced. Rome was never known for its cavalry but now there is a need for well-trained warriors on horses. A breeding program is introduced to increase the size of the horses, the stirrup is introduced, and the swords are lengthened to allow use from horseback. All of these developments are actual historical occurrences. We also get to witness the first rough efforts to convert a Senate-like council meeting where elitism prevails to a newer style of local government in the form of a round circle of chairs where all have an equal voice. I think we all know where this will lead to in an Arthurian sense.

But more importantly, this is a well-told tale. Just as in the first novel, this is a first person account by Publius Varrus, a former legionnaire, partly crippled through a battle injury, and now a master blacksmith. One might correctly guess from the title that he is the eventual crafter of Excalibur. His first person point of view lends a great perspective on bringing these great events down to the individual level and allowing the everyday life of families, lovers, builders, etc. to be as personal and emotional for the reader as it is for him. Great and satisfying personal achievements are matched by great loss and even tragedy. It is rare when a fictional novel brings a tear to my eye but this one managed to do it.

All of these great historical shifts in thinking and technique take many years. The first two novels cover most of Caius and Publius’s long lives but it is inevitable that we move on. I’m excited for the third book in the series The Eagles' Brood where I understand that Publius’s grandson takes over the first person account. His name is Caius Merlyn Britannicus, first cousin of Uther Pendragon.