Ok! This book was part two in a 20+ part "better know a genre"/Romance History Project with some lovely friends, where we take a (lightly adapted) version of this list and read through it together. 

Regency Buck was my first Heyer and my feelings about it were all over the place. My knowledge of Heyer going into this was that she's apparently the model on which a lot of current regency romance is based - sometimes moreso than on the actual regency - and that as a genre, romance is still struggling with her legacy of antisemitism and racism, which is laid out very well in these articles. I was also told, when I posted on Twitter about reading Regency Buck, that not only is Heyer a model for a certain amount of regency romance, Regency Buck is itself a kind of proto-Heyer, where she's still figuring out her own approach to what she would eventually write.

In terms of the problematic stuff Heyer is known for, it seemed somewhat less on display in this book (though not entirely absent). Also somewhat less on display was the...actual romance? There was a surprising lack of there, there when it came to Judith and Lord Worth as a pairing. The basic plot here is that Judith, a prototypical strong-willed heroine, and her brother Peregrine (whom I ADORED and stole the entire novel) end up as the wards of Lord Worth. They go to London to live with him until Judith's majority, until which time he controls their money, their marriage prospects, and their entire lives. 

Almost every scene we see of Lord Worth and Judith together, of which there are not many, he is being actively terrible towards her. Highlights include him abducting Judith into a carriage and kissing her against her will, arguing with her about whether she should be "allowed" to engage in some (very fun) carriage racing with her brother, and blaming her for her own assault by the Prince Regent. The one or two scenes where they get along and where he is kind to her are weirdly glossed over: the way this book would devote pages and pages to them bickering, and then give us "One afternoon, they went out for a ride and Lord Worth was actually nice and pleasant to be around. NEXT TOPIC" was... sincerely baffling! In some ways, this felt both like the seeds of romance's obsession with enemies-to-lovers (to be fair, Judith and Worth bantered very well, but clearly the book thought animosity was more interesting than getting along) and the seeds of... romance's decades-long struggle to show emotional competency as a sufficiently masculine and desirable trait for its heroes. Truly, an entire paper could be written about how one of our genre's proto-heroes could only be kind off-page.

I also saw glimpses here of romance's early struggles with letting heroines be headstrong and willful, despite the nomativizing mandate for their stories to end in marriage. Lord Worth controls *every* aspect of Judith's life, and that's not just her money and her ability to marry. He spends most of the novel off-page trying to avert a plot against her brother's life, which involves him constantly manipulating her and everyone else like puppets on a string "for their own good" without explaining why. And in the end, almost in place of a declaration of love, we get a truly gut-wrenching (to me as a modern reader) scene where Judith has to thank Lord Worth for always knowing what is best, for managing her affairs so much better than she ever could, and for keeping her wild tendencies to ... have a personality... firmly in check. She's just so happy to have been tamed. 

Before I throw my hands up completely in frustration at this, I do think the novel is somewhat productively engaged in the complexities of trying to carve out agency as a woman in a society that is very much *set up* to make you feel better when someone is running your life. At one point Judith muses: 

She might quarrel with [Worth], and resent his interference in her schemes, but while he stood behind her she had a feeling of security which she had scarcely been aware of until now when she was so near to having his protection withdrawn.

And... that did make me think a lot about how a genre that prioritizes the individual has to grapple with the immobility of social norms. Which is something I'm always interested in, even when (like here) it's resolved in a way that disappoints me immensely. 

There was one true bright spot in this novel for me, and that was Judith's brother, Peregrine. I not only loved him more than any other character in the book, I might have loved him more than any character I've read in a while. Perhaps it's the contrast to his staid surroundings, but he is just SO CHAOTIC and so well-meaning and bumbling and charming. Every thought he had, he said out loud. Every emotion he experienced, he applied directly to his sleeve. He is constantly getting himself into scrapes, and then finding the silver lining of being pulled out of them (at one point he is drugged and put on a yacht by someone trying to keep him out of his own way, and upon waking up to what should be a rather distressing situation, he decides he just REALLY LOVES SAILING and exhausts everyone with his newfound love of the ocean). I laughed out loud multiple times at him and his admiration for other men's cravats. 

Anyway, I think in some ways this book is telling about romance's antecedents because, when presented with your Peregrines and your Lord Worths (Lords Worth? is this an Attorneys General situation?), the genre has often turned reflexively towards Lord Worth. Whereas I would love just a little more Peregrine.