Rating: 5/5

This book is fantastic. It's the most helpful "self-help" book I've ever read. I've actually applied its lessons to my life and have been doing much better because of it.

If you're a woman that struggles with setting boundaries, standing up for yourself, being brave in social situations, changing who you are to suit other people... read this book. 

------------------------------------------------------------

The version of the book I read was first published in 1981. This book is nearly 40 years old. Normally, I'm wary of the accuracy of older books in regards to practical research and life advice. But it's amazing how relevant the info in this book still is. Its lessons are still applicable in 2018. 

Gender roles are no longer as rigid as outlined in the book, but it's shocking how women are still culturally conditioned to behave a certain way-- a damaging way that leaves them feeling they can't be true to themselves, a way that makes them place themselves secondary to others. 

The book is practical and to-the-point. There's no fluff or feel-good stuff, which I feel really adds to its legitimacy. It's a technical guide for women on how to be assertive. Dr. Butler clearly diagnoses the problem, and gives clear, simple instruction on how to overcome it.

She explains why unassertive women act/feel the way they do, the fears and labels associated with being assertive, and different levels and ways we can be assertive.

The book's lessons are simple, practical, and easy to apply to life. It describes self-assertion as a ladder. Taking small, manageable steps up until you reach the top. This book helps you all the way through.

It gives examples of conflicts and of ways to respond. It teaches you how to assert yourself without feeling guilty or wrong. It differentiates between "assertion" and "aggression," and it validates anger and hurt. 

Besides occasionally thinking "gender roles aren't this strict for American women anymore," I wasn't tipped off about the age of the book until halfway through, when the author mentions a typewriter. I zoomed to the front to see when the book was published, and was shocked to see 1981. I had no idea the book was so old (another giveaway was that most people outlined in the examples could afford to own a home, even as a STUDENT).

This book (along with congruent therapy) made me realize how hard self-assertion is for me, and how it has caused so many issues for me, issues that have developed since my youth and lasted for years. Not asserting myself has caused problems from forgoing my true personality, nature and interests to not being able to say no to anyone. From comparing myself constantly to others for the "right" way to live to internalizing sexual harassment. 
This book left me feeling hopeful, empowered, and ready to be assertive. I've started standing up for myself at work, with my friends- every area of my life where I was too afraid to before. The impact is immediate. Each encounter leaves me feeling better and stronger about who I am.

Until I can find a reliable, up-to-date book with similar content, this remains my go-to on how to be assertive. I like it so much that I purchased my own copy.