Rating: 5/5

This is a sort-of sequel to Lodge's book CHANGING PLACES. However, the two main characters of CHANGING PLACES are now secondary characters in this novel, which takes place 10 years later, roughly around 1979. 

Lodge turns up the academic aspect to HIGH in this novel, which may drive away some readers. This is a novel filled with conferences such as MLA, a lot of literary theory, and a lot of professors who are out of ideas for books and articles.

Into all this enters our protagonist, the Irishman Persse McGarrigle. He is a professor of English who is still a virgin. At a conference one spring, he meets a beautiful, sexy, intelligent woman who he becomes obsessed with after only a few conversations and flirting sessions. When the conference is over she disappears and can't find her anywhere. He is full of despair. He asks everyone about her, but she seems to be sort of mysterious - showing up at every English Professor conference she can but not really a professor herself, and no one has any idea of what her address is or where to find her. Persse wants to write her a letter, but he can't because of this. So he starts a long and complicated journey from conference to conference around the world in order to try and find her again.

I have to note that I love how Persse's virginity is handled - it's no big deal. It's just another fact about him, like the fact that he's never been to Mexico. There's no 40-Year-Old-Virgin panic, no 'OMG this is so embarrassing I'm such a freak' shame, no long passages discussing exactly WHY he's a virgin. Lodge doesn't treat Persse's virginity as if it's some huge burden or problem or defect with the character. And when Persse DOES finally find himself in a sexual situation, the matter isn't even brought up and everything just proceeds normally - which I think is refreshing and realistic and an amazing move on Lodge's part.

This book, like all of Lodge's novels, is a comedy and a journey of self-discovery - not only for Persse, but for the other five or so side characters in this novels. They are all middle-aged or older men, which seems to be Lodge's forte. 

I adore the way Lodge writes men and thoroughly enjoy being in these guys' heads for the duration of these novels. The reason I love it is because Lodge makes men seems so human. If you're wondering what I mean - let me explain.

In most books that are popular nowadays (young adult, new adult, romance, mysteries, thrillers) men seem so...one-note. They are either hardened bad boys, who are rakish and dangerous and just waiting for the right woman to love OR sweet kind men who are so nice and caring and provide that kind of neutered hero that is so popular in 'sweet' YA novels right now.

The men that Lodge writes are like actual humans - they have doubts, they don't make good decisions, they fumble, the fall in love with the wrong person, they get the 'girl of their dreams' but end up not being able to have an erection with her, they argue, they fight with colleagues who threaten their jobs, they despair, they hope, they dream, they are petty and they gossip a lot. We see them deal with their marriages, their children, their bastard children, their failing careers, their unexpected successes, their rivals for jobs, and their mistresses.

None of them are purely good, and none are purely evil. They are just struggling to make sense out of life. 

This is a comedy and Lodge obviously believes that people are basically good and well-intentioned. You will find no murderers or rapists here. People do choose to do bad things in this novel: abandon their pregnant mistress, cheat on their wife or husband, seduce an innocent and then shrug and walk away, ignore someone in a troublesome situations pleas for assistance, or play a cruel practical joke on a person who's obviously mentally unstable.

I felt like all these 'bad deeds' the characters did were human and understandable, not done out of some evil deep-seated malice but instead done out of human fallibility. None of these men are heartless cads - but none are paragons of virtue either.

Same thing for the women in this novel, although we are not as privy to their thoughts as we are the men's. Women in this book are not either 'bad girls' or virgins, but instead human beings who are sometimes wonderful and sometimes petty or bitter. 

The humor in these books is subtle - it sneaks up on you and makes you laugh out loud. It's not bludgeoning you with funny like in HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE or THE 100-YEAR OLD MAN. It's more situational comedy. You know certain things that the characters don't and you know they're in for a big surprise and can't wait to see their reaction.

The ending of this book is a mixed bag since Lodge gave me ALMOST everything I asked for, but leaves some measure of doubt about a key issue and therefore has me gnashing my teeth. Just a warning for readers who like all their loose ends tied up.

In my opinion, THERAPY is still Lodge's best book.