Rating: 3/5

What is prayer but wishful thinking?

For many, it seems that it likely stops there. So many grow up in the discourse of God as a sky deity and so prayer becomes a place of primarily petition. How many pray for the success of a sports team, the adoration of a crush, or success in a job interview? 

As part of my current deep dive into Christian and Catholic spirituality and mysticism, I cracked into this book by Guardini, a prominent intellectual within Catholic thought in the early 20th century. 

Prayer, it seems, is beyond wishful thinking, but it is also a mental act that Catholics struggle to clearly define and describe. Like meditation, it requires a recollection and presence of mind, mental discipline and vulnerability, and a right view regarding certain/all conceptual and symbolic matters. But within the mental space Guardini describes as precondition to prayer, there exists a dynamic condition in which the person speaks and ’listens’, is changed as they speak, and is shaped as they listen. 

"Everything depends on this state of recollectedness. No effort to obtain it is ever wasted. And even if the whole duration of our prayer should be applied to this end only, the time thus used would have been well employed. For recollectedness itself is prayer. In times of distress, illness, or great exhaustion, it can be most beneficial to content oneself with such a prayer of recollectedness. It will calm, fortify, and help. Finally, if at first we achieve no more than the understanding of how much we lack in inner unity, something will have been gained, for in some way we would have made contact with that center which knows no distraction."

Yet, Catholic tradition seems to have a poverty of techniques and paths towards being able to recognize and establish recollectedness. In comparison, Buddhism starts a seeker on the path towards nirvana with the techniques for establishing mindfulness. With Christians, many times it ends with the conclusion that in the end, recollectedness is a gift from God. Such a conclusion, coherent in theological terms, becomes a pathetic and sentimental cliche in the hands of the laity. It makes about as much sense as saying physical strength is a gift from God, not establish from routine and habit. 

In fact, here, Guardini gives little guidance other than to set a clear intention with mental fortitude. One wonders of those praying with a clenched jaw, or perhaps those who feel to be left out from the gifts of God because they can't establish recollectedness. 

"A profound mystery surrounds the origin of divine love, so that to the question as to why God loves man, man himself cannot give an answer. God's love must be regarded as pure gift, as the creative cause of itself."

My criticism of the poverty of technique and clarity on some points aside, there is a deep spiritual tradition being tapped into here, and given the brevity of the book, we only scratch the surface here. I am still seriously critical of the cohesion of the Christian tradition, but it seems that it can tap into the same ‘spiritual’ space as Buddhism. Through these techniques, I can see how a spiritual seeker can develop in mental spaces of calm and recollectedness with prayer, but without more direction available to the Christian seeker, it seems they are likely to walk many detours on the way.

The world would be a much better place if Christian prayer, in practice, would align itself more how it is articulated by the masters - instead it is left to be shaped and passed down through the lenses of sentimentality and superstition.