Rating: 1/5

I read this when I was 13. When I was done, I thought it was nothing but a lot of angry, hysterical ranting and raving, and I see no reason to change my opinion now. The entire book bashed everyone I cared about, everyone I admired, and everything I wanted to be, but everyone talked about how great it was. The book bashed my mother and my grandmothers for staying home and taking care of me, and then it bashed my father and my grandfathers for working hard to pay for my food, clothes and everything else I had. Then it tore me to pieces because I wanted to be a wife and mother, and I didn't want a career. 

The point of this book seems to be that all women must want to go out into the workplace, and if you don't, there is something wrong with you. If you want to stay home with your kids, you are less than other women, with a smaller brain and you are holding other women back by doing so. Well, if you want to go out and break glass ceilings, you go right ahead, but don't expect me to come along and carry the hammer for you. I realize that the book was written in a different time, but it never factors in that this is America. 

We have choices, and we have freedom. Women had freedom and choices even in the time that this was written, especially the white upper middle class at whom this book was aimed. They had the money and the mobility to do more than any other women in this country, yet they chose to self-flagellate over this whiny literary stepchild of Mein Kampf, instead of taking actual steps toward what they wanted. 

I sure did. I threw this book in the trash, and I told my mother if that was the way she saw things, to get her own career, and get out of the house herself. She never did. Feminism didn't give me choices, my mother didn't give me choices, and this book didn't, either. The constitution and my own agency did that, not anything or anyone else. All this book gave me was a headache and extra weight when I took out the garbage. You can do anything you want. Don't let this book, or any book, tell you anything different.