Rating: 4/5

The charming conclusion in the Songs of Acadia series. Nicole finally takes her uncle up on his offer to stay with him at the Harrow estate in England, yet her heart is still torn between her new-found family home and this burning desire within her. As she adjusts to her new lifestyle as Viscountess Nicole Harrow, with all the airs and graces, society and politics, she puts her whole effort into seeking God's further direction and purpose for her life.

 “She felt more whole, more at peace with who she was. Perhaps soon God would show her how the past was to be played out in her future. Surely there was some purpose for the events of her life, some way that they would benefit her, and others, in the days to come. If she could just discover what that might be, she knew she could make peace with her past.”

Anne, newly widowed and with her new baby boy, struggles to cope with a crippled heart and clings to her faith. But with Nicole's urging soon follows her dear “sister” to England for a visit. Both girls with their own seperate struggles and sorrows learn to lean on one another and on the Lord as the rumors of war change to the sounds of battle around them.

 “All my life,” Nicole said, “I've measured how well I was suited to a place by how happy it made me. Only now, as I learn my way through English society, have I come to see that, although happiness is a fine thing, it comes and it goees. So long as I base my happiness upon what I have or how life suits me, it will always remain fleeting...I need to find my happiness in God, and in Him alone. By placing my life in His hands and seeking to live as He wants me to, I now have a peace that's greater than whatever struggle I might face. My frusterations and my difficulties, at all these will pass. But He remains always. And it's in His eternal promises that I must abide.”

I loved this story of growth in faith and trusting God during changing seasons of life – the joy mingled so often with the hard times. The messages of hope and strength resonated deeply with me, and I found myself growing too, along with Anne and Nicole. This is such a treasureful series!

 “The desert is within you. The question is, are you ready to leave that behind?”

*My only dissapointment was the plot was slow and a little dull at times. And it was not very original – I had the entire book figured out before the halfway point. The ending felt a tad bit rushed to bring everything together. But on the whole it's the message that really shines.