Rating: 4/5

Rereading this after a few decades or so reaffirmed how novel and fun Manhattan Transfer is. This is something of a blend of Golden Age pulp and hardish scifi to produce an adventure story regarding first contact. The story starts off with Manhattan island being first enclosed with a massive dome via spacecraft and then lifted off the planet something like a huge ice cream cone, the cone being the bedrock and such under the city. Next thing you know is Manhattan is located on a sea of grey goo surrounded by other domes containing alien cities. Apparently, it is inside a massive space ship over 100 kilometers wide. 

The story coalesces around a handful of characters, the main protagonist being Matt, a military bigwig who just arrived in Manhattan before 'lift off' if you will. We also have an intrepid female reporter, a 'Mary Sue' type mayor of NYC, a civil engineer and buddy of Matts, and a linguist; together, they operate as something of a task force, first to get the city stabilized, and then something else. The alien captors set up 'bird feeders' which supply water, power, and food quickly deemed rabbit food as it comes in small green pellets...

While first published in 1993, the story is set about 2 decades later (e.g., near future) and the science/tech feels about right, so kudos of Stith! Manhattan Transfer is something of a mystery novel (why the hell did aliens 'kidnap' Manhattan, and what do they want?) alongside a more typical hardish scifi plot, where the characters are alas really secondary to the overall story. This stated, the mystery is fun and the alien encounters along the way are better than normal pulp. I can see people being a bit put off by the rah rah humanity expressed along the way, and also the rah rah New Yorkers, but so be it. Manhattan Transfer also suffers a bit from some pacing issues-- a bit stop and go-- and the inclusion of some really unnecessary story arcs, but still, I am a bit surprised how well this story has held up after 30 years. 3.5 stars, rounding up!!