Rating: 3/5

Original review 2/14/2018: When I was in college, learning about the history of sci fi, I developed a pretty strong prejudice against A.E. van Vogt. He represented the “bad old days” of sci fi, before the New Wave of the 1960s, when everything was hypermasculine, uncritical, optimistic. His work was dismissed with the pejorative “Space Opera” and ignored. In fact, I don’t know that I even read any of it, maybe part of one novel, I can’t recall now. In the years since, I’ve come to be more appreciative of the earlier history of sci fi, but for some reason I never gave van Vogt a chance. I think the impression left in my brain was too strong: he had to be bad, because I had decided he was bad years ago and never examined it. 

I’m saying all that to explain that I didn’t exactly come to this book with very high expectations, but I did finally come to it. It’s flawed, but it’s not the worst example of sci fi I’ve read, or even the most blatantly sexist or imperialist. It is those things, mind you, but not to the extreme I might have imagined. The book was not written as a novel, but as a series of four short stories published over more than a decade, which partly explains why the overall plot never really comes together. In each story, the all-male scientific crew of the “Space Beagle” encounters an alien far more powerful than they are prepared for, which threatens humanity and the Universe if allowed to take over the ship. In each case, the one person who can figure out how to stop the alien is the protagonist, a practitioner of a new holistic science called Nexialism, and in each case he is ignored almost until it is too late. There is something of an “arc” for him, however, because his confidence in his ability to put his plan forward grows each time, and by the end he is the de facto captain of the ship. 

As I said, it’s pretty familiar stuff, but it’s handled in an interesting way. I kept hoping that Nexialism would get more exposition: from what we see in this book, it mostly seems to be rather aggressively applied psychology, reminding one of the concept of “brain washing” that was popular at the time, but applied with a certain internal ethic. The aliens tend to be so super-powered as to be hard to take seriously, although I liked the race of telepathic bird-men, the only one whose culture is really considered in detail. For D&amp;D nerds like me, one trivia fact of interest is that the alien in the first story in this novel was the inspiration for the “displacer beast” of the 1st Ed. Monster Manual. Two other aliens were depicted in Barlowe's Guide to Extraterrestrials. Van Vogt seems to have been a competent wordsmith, though in this case parts of the story are definitely under-developed. I’d be willing to give him another try, despite all I thought of him as a younger person.

Updated 5/21/2023: Not much to add, but I still found this a moderately entertaining example of old-school sci fi. Nexialism seemed a bit paradoxical to me, this time around, since it seemed to be a "holistic" science that took as one of its premises that science is necessarily too large a field to be grappled with holistically. Often, the result just seemed to be that the protagonist was a bit smarter than everyone else. Van Vogt puts forward an interesting theory of cyclical history; notably most of the villains are at either very decadent, or very primitive, stages of the cycle.