Rating: 5/5

Who knows, he may grow up to be President someday, unless they hang him first!
 The Adventures of Tom Sawyer ~~~  Mark Twain

Selected by Kenny for August 2021 Big Book Read (In August I am reading the entire Tom &amp; Huck Series as well as Life on the Mississippi &amp; Huck Out West

Buddy read with Aesaan

Random thought: I love returning to  Mark Twain’s Mississippi Universe. I grow to love it more with each repeated reading.

Another thought: Tom Sawyer is so different than Huck Finn. This requires a very different review.

A third thought: This must be my fourth reading of  The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. It's fun revisiting childhood books. 

Tom Sawyer ~~ like every boy of his time ~~ just wants to be free, adventurous, moral, and intelligent. Born in the heart of the South, in Missouri, Tom, an orphan, lives with his Aunt Polly and cousins. He loves to play hooky so he can go fishing.

His aunt ~~ bless her heart ~~ tries her best to tame him, dragging him to church and punishing his rebelliousness. But she never breaks the boy's spirit.

Mondays are the worst for Tom because a week of dull education looms before him. If Tom is late, like he is so often, he will undoubtedly be the recipient of the switch, laid gustily upon his back by the bore of a schoolmaster.

That is how we have been taught to think of Tom, but there is so much more to him.

 Mark Twain is a master at weaving words with wit. Here, Twain tells the story of the young Tom Sawyer. Throughout  The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, you will sense the moral, psychological and intellectual growth of Tom, Huck and Joe. A beautifully written story,  The Adventures of Tom Sawyer presents the past in such a way that readers will personally identify with Tom.  The Adventures of Tom Sawyer speaks of life on the Mississippi River where Twain himself spent his youth.

The genius of  The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is to have the reader on Tom's side all the way through. Despite the third-person narration, the reader is drawn into the small real world and larger imagined worlds of a boy in a town on the Mississippi River in the mid-1800s. It's as though we are recalling our own wayward childhoods when the world seemed huge and full of potential adventures, full of possible lives we could live, regardless of whether we grew up in a world remotely like that of Tom's life.

We laugh when Tom lures his friends into running away to an island to become pirates, steal food and plan bloody raids ~~ we could imagine ourselves at least wishing we could do something like that when we were kids. We squirm a bit when the boys realize their loved ones thinks they have drowned ~~ remember thinking they'll regret it when I'm gone. We cheer at their staged reappearance at their own funerals ~~ I'll show them! And then we melt when Tom's Aunt Polly, who raises him, convinces herself the boy means well and loves her.

There is also plenty of death in the novel ~~ when you count the bodies that pop up among the boy's adventures. One serious overarching plot tangled up with the episodes in this very episodic novel involve a violent gang whose leader has it in for Tom. The boys' games have a way of spoiling Injun Joe's criminal endeavors ~~ their cemetery plays leads them to witness a murder. Or when their comical efforts to find buried treasure brings them to uncovering the gang's actual stash.

This merger of playacting and real-life drama throughout Tom Sawyer lets Twain make fun of the fantastic adventure stories of his time while still deriving the entertainment value of those stories. Tom and Huck actually win great riches at the end of the novel, just as in any potboiler of Twain's day.

In the early pages, Joe Harper is set up as the Tom's best friend, though he has little personality beyond a proclivity for going along with whatever Tom suggests. Huck though adds something interesting as he develops in the course of the book from a loose member of Tom's group to his bosom buddy. The barefooted boy is basically growing up alone, impoverished, an outsider to the town's decent folk. But he's got a heart as big as Tom's, if less calculating. And his honest responses can give vent to Twain's disdain ~~ without cleverness or meanness ~~ for the norms of upright ~~ or is it uptight ~~ society.

In the last chapter Huckleberry has become the most intriguing character of the novel, the moral center of this world. It's Huck who, with his discomfort at being pressed into civilized living, undercuts the too neatly wrapped up happy ending. It's no wonder Twain wants his voice for their next three adventures.

 The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is an unforgettable read. Tom and Huck squirm right into a person’s imagination and heart.  The Adventures of Tom Sawyer shows the joy of childhood as well as the acceptance of change. But most of all it reveals that we all have a little Tom Sawyer in us.