Rating: 5/5

What a fantastic story! How terrible it was to be poor in the Victorian Era. Dickens was a humanitarian and saw first hand the poverty in the streets of London. The starving urchins trying to steal an apple or a handkerchief. The void between the rich and the poor. This story, like Oliver Twist in my opinion is a masterpiece.

The musicals are just, brilliant. 👍🐯 

Christmas is coming, we know its near

Evenings are darker, the cold weather is here

Will there be snow? The sky is white

Or have they been Chem- Trailing? All through the night?

Corporations love it! Consume, buy, consume, buy

Temptation, pretty colours, prices way too high

We know we can't afford it, so credit cards we use

When ones child is surrounded by all these things, how could one refuse?

More and more credit, people just don't see

It's all a lure, to take your hard earned money!

The bank is in the red, cards no credit left

Spending money we have not got, it is all akin to theft

When the party is over, it is a New Year

Reality hits home, and many are filled with fear

All the booze has gone, the cakes and turkey too

Everything purchased, has been used or consumed

Not a pot to piss in, just a huge vacuum

Hung over, depressed, lots of work to do, back to the mundane

Was it ever worth it? We all must be insane

Not the CEO's though, happy they are

Their bank accounts are bursting, and probably have a new expensive car

The rest of us sadly, continue as before

A working persons life, is really a chore

Up early, commute, and work all bloody day

Obey a boss, yes sir no sir, everything is OK

Repeat it day in day out, for a pittance of pay

Repetition, repetition, its like Ground Hog Day

We pay our taxes, National Insurance too, Why?

Yet when we need benefits, or an operation, no matter how we try

We never tick their boxes, computer says no!

One is talking to a human but, they never show

Any compassion, empathy or emotion, no semblance of care

They are only doing their job, and the box has no tick in there

One does not tick the box, one has no chance

No matter whatsoever, one's circumstance

Computer says no, the Beast see's no profit, even though one's contributions were paid in

That's the Corporations, corpses, bleeding us dry, we are drowning

NHS has no money, it is failing fast, what a damn cheek!

No money in the NHS yet, footballers earn £250,000 a week!

A crazy world we live in, it's all inverted and upside down

Could have had a crazy woman as US president but, ended up with a Clown

All these Elites are crazy, and not there for us

When the shit hits the fan, we will be under the bus

These people are all part of a secret clique

And we are not invited, as we are weak

We work through the Week Days

Like in a field, a sheep, that never strays

And come the Weekend, we are weakened, and need a rest

Sunday is the sabbath, relax, cos' Mon one is needed to be at their best

For one has to pay their taxes, their debts too

It's a never ending cycle, insane, loopy loo

Perpetual debt, slavery, stocks and bonds, assets frozen and Banksters

Liquidation, cash flow, currency, CEO's are Wankers

Most of one's earnings taken, and sucked in by the Beast

We will eat budget foods while CEO's feast

Money is our bondage, this paper we crave, we are simply debt Slaves

Maritime Law, Piracy Of The High Seas, and Britannia Rules The Waves🐯👍

By Leo.

Remember this one growing up? Nostalgia...

Christmas is coming, the goose is getting fat

Please put a penny in the old mans hat

If you have not a penny, a halfpenny will do

If have you not a halfpenny, then God bless you

A pleasant nursery rhyme🐯👍

Or

Christmas is coming, the rich are getting fat

Devoured everything, and that is that

Taken all the money, everything else too

And absolutely nothing left, for me and you🐯👍

:-0

Let's enjoy our festivities and forget about the rich and their ilk

Let them wear their designer clothes and enjoy their sheets of silk

Let indulge on the meat, puddings, port, whiskey and wine

Choke on the gristle, whilst they dine

Let them smoke their cigars, eat all the candy and nuts

Fill their veins with cholesterol and burst their guts

Fatten their bellies, and pickle their liver

Just that thought, gets me all of a quiver

So here is a greeting, with joy and cheer

As we welcome in, another New Year🐯👍

Merry Christmas to everybody on Goodreads, happy holidays. 👍🐯

Happy New Year!🐯👍🐯👍

So Christmas is over, for another year

It has been a good 2017 on Goodreads, all cheer!

Many new authors, and books galore

For all tastes and ages, all what readers adore

Let's start 2018 with a new story, leave 2017 behind

Let's not forget the books we read though, we have expanded the mind. 🐯👍

Are the authorities any better now? Back then people knew their place. Now not so much. I have had experiences with these, authorities. Here is a little rant:

How does one deal with a neighbour from hell?

Email the council, wait for them to give one a bell

And wait, and wait, and wait some more

But the call does not come, so try once more

Has to be email, for recorded message, and number to press

The option one requires is not available, what a complete mess

This system, automated, no reason or rhyme

Just go around in circles, all the bloody time

Nothing ever gets done, this system, this beast

No empathy, no concern, not in the least

All one gets is nonsense eventually, when they call

We are all just a number, this system is so cruel

A case spanning ten years, and still no hope

The authorities do nothing, and I just cannot cope

The neighbour's behavior escalates, yet nobody will intervene

Since the day he moved in, it is all it has ever been

Hoarding rubbish, rats, mice, and flies

Calling the Police on us, and telling them lies

His deviant behavior, his antics, disgusting to see

Leaning up against my front door, and having a pee

All over the cat flap, sodden and wet

Contaminating, Archimedes, my beautiful pet!

My neighbour is vindictive, cunning, never sleeps

Stands naked in his window, and gives my girl the creeps

This man, this creep, who has ruined our lives, such pain

I have had numerous breakdowns, he is making me insane

Yet still, nothing, nothing is done, we are stunned

He goes about his life, yet we are shunned

What is this system? We mean nothing, only he

And we have ploughed everything we have, into our property

Bought it from the council fifteen years ago

Since that time, neighbours, to and fro

We have had drunkards, criminals, drug addicts, and now this

We feel the council took our money, now they are taking the piss!

Another neighbour complained, saw him warts and all

As she was walking with her child, towards the school

One hundred yards from our front door

And he plays up downstairs, Porn, Hardcore!

We hear it frequently, and the authorities were told

Dating back years, yet we are left out in the cold

Finally this man has been arrested, the neighbour called the law, such luck

Yet we have been telling them this for years, OMG! WTF!

So they took him away, and it put us at ease, he has gone the creep

Maybe tonight, we will finally get some good earned sleep

However, to our dismay, the Police brought him back, he is downstairs now

I have this horrible feeling, something is not right somehow

This man clearly needs supervision, yet here he is

My brain is all scatty, I am all in a tiz

I don't quite get, what the hell is going on

How we have to put up with this phenomenon

He called the Police on us for apparently bullying him, for our concerns for his welfare

And at midnight that same day, we had quite a scare

Two police officers banging on our door, in the late night

No concern for our welfare, gave us quite a fright

Enter our property, cos' he feels victimized, OMG!

We have had this for a decade, yet get woken by PC Plod

So this is one of many issues causing my soul to break

My girl has enough to deal with, for goodness sake

Having to deal with this, being flashed as she leaves for work in the morning, it is wrong

Stepping over rubbish bags, and him leering, his stench, his pong

He does not wash, or clean, or tidy, or care

About his appearance, or when people stare

He seems to like it, an audience, the Police know

Yet they still have not spoken to us, no show

I really am at the end of my tether, this is too much to take

I am sitting here in my lounge, on edge, wide awake

This is when my brain cells are on fire, I suppose

When I am empty, and forlorn, I pen my prose

The words they flow, like a river racing

Like a cheetah, on the hunt, pacing

My head feels like it is going to blow

So I suppress it, this feeling of sorrow

It is a crazy world, in which we live

Nobody ever, ever, seems to give

An ounce of compassion, no feeling, no heart

A system that is totally falling apart

It is time we woke up and realised thus

That the authorities are simply, not there for us

Nobody cares, about you, or about me

Only what the celebrities, are doing on TV

Which team won the weekend? Who scored? Which player? OMG!

I am still smarting about PC Plod!

All is quiet at present, hope it stays that way, still

My girl gets up at six, and walking by his front door makes her feel ill

My girl will sleep alone tonight, my insomnia is back, I am wired, it will seem

So I will sit here, silent, hoping for a snooze, and welcome a dream👍🐯

By Leo

I wonder what Dickens would make of the Rich Quarter in London today. The mind boggles.