Rating: 5/5

It's interesting how, in my reading experience at least, that two of the best UFO books are also two the of the earliest (the other being USAF Captain Ruppelt's The Report on Unidentified Flying Objects. What makes both so attractive is that both approach the subject of UFOs in a cautious and measured manner. Both seek to anchor the issue, as much as possible, in facts. Fuller's account of the Bettie and Barney Hill sighting of a UFO, and later reported abduction in the mountains of New Hampshire in 1961, runs up against various filters of, and resistance to, recovered memories via hypnosis administered by Dr. Benjamin Simon, a highly regarded psychiatrist. Barney Hill was the more resistant of the two. He was obviously frightened by whatever happened during the two missing hours. 

Well, SOMETHING happened. Betty, the more imaginative and more fearless of the two, seems more accepting to whatever happened. But her account, possibly influenced by her sister's sighting of UFO years before, is also, at least initially, with its chatty conversations with English speaking aliens, the sketchier account. But that will change as the sessions continue. The initial sessions present fragmented accounts of alien abduction, and later examinations on the alien ship. The entire experience, from the Hills' car being flagged down by the aliens, to their release and return to the car, is bracketed by a series of beeps (something Dr. Simon cannot explain). Many of the details firm up as the sessions continue. Simon's skepticism regarding the abduction (not the initial UFO sighting) is rooted in his belief that the Hills' shared a dream or fantasy that was possibly influenced by anxieties stemming from their interracial marriage. That's pretty thin. If you watch the old 1975 movie based upon the book ("The UFO Incident" (currently available on Youtube)) you can see how the doctor was grasping for some sort of traction to explain what the Hills had experienced. (I believe Betty Hill and Dr. Simon had some involvement with the movie account. Barney had passed away by 1975.) The Hills were not lying, they were sincere, but even Barney wonders, at about the midway point in the book, if the memories he had of the abduction were themselves implanted by the aliens. Betty is told by the leader that she and Barney will not remember what happened, but if they do, their accounts will differ in such a way to as cast doubt on their experience. Well, all these years later their voices ring true to me, but what does that mean? The reader is left with the haunting memory of the Hills and their little dog Delsey driving into the New Hampshire night, heading for an unwanted encounter with Something.