Rating: 2/5

“The Baudelaire orphans looked out the grimy window of the train and gazed at the gloomy blackness of the Finite Forest, wondering if their lives would ever get any better”

NON-SPOILER ALERT: They don’t!

Count Olaf’s nefarious plans for a marriage with Violet Baudelaire and the theft of the children’s inherited wealth were foiled in A BAD BEGINNING, THE REPTILE ROOM, and THE WIDE WINDOWN. In THE MISERABLE MILL, their erstwhile guardian, Mr Poe, remains blind and hopelessly, indeed almost criminally insensitive if not indifferent to the children’s danger and Count Olaf proves that, while he was down, he most certainly isn’t out. He continues to lust for the children’s bankroll and this time round his plans include hypnosis and some fiendishly clever disguises for himself and his henchman assistant. The children’s placement with the greedy owner of a lumber mill who treats his staff, including his new young charges, as no better than slaves is destined for failure.

Yes, yes, I understand that A SERIES OF UNFORTUNATE EVENTS is intended to be a fantasy aimed at young children. BUT … the fact is that the anticipated climax of this one in which the children extricate themselves from the clutches of their nemesis, Count Olaf, reached well beyond the credible range of young adult’s or child’s fantasy and spilled over into silliness! Sissy Baudelaire, a young child who has not yet mastered the skill of speaking with complete words, engages in a sword fight with her teeth! C’mon, are you kidding me? Well, why not? The author would also have us watch the same babe forced to use those extraordinary teeth as a debarker for newly felled trees in preparation for their milling into lumber because she was too small to lift the actual tool intended for that purpose!!

THE MISERABLE MILL was so poor in comparison to its predecessors and so unremittingly ridiculous that, as I closed the last page, it had been my intent to put paid to the series and retire them to our local Little Free Library boxes. But, as I was reading other 2-star reviews to see how some of my fellow critics expressed their disappointment, I came across the following:

“Unfortunately a lot of people give up on the series after reading this awful book and it's a real shame because the next books (5-10) are THE best in the series. If you're thinking of quitting after reading this, at least try book 5!”

OK, I’ll bite. On to book 5, but it’s one chance for redemption and one chance only!

Paul Weiss