Rating: 5/5

I have a greater appreciation and love for poetry because I read this book. The authors say towards the beginning of the book that reading poetry is a skill whose development manifests itself in an increasing ability to appreciate different types of poetry. I agree with that statement and would recommend this book to anyone wanting to develop that skill. There is some forma teaching of concepts like imagery, meter, and rhyme, but I found that useful rather than distracting. It was actually a nice way to break up and organize the hundreds of pages of poems.

Favorite poems
* The Rhodora (Ralph Waldo Emerson)
* I wandered lonely as a cloud (William Wordsworth)
* I felt a Funeral, in my Brain (Emily Dickinson)
* Love (George Herbert)
* The Subalterns (Thomas Hardy)
* On Reading Poems to a Senior Class at South High (D. C. Berry)
* A Noiseless Patient Spider (Walt Whitman)
* Ulysses (Alfred, Lord Tennyson)

Favorite lines 
(Speaking to death)
“…Why swell’st thou then?
One short sleep passed, we wake eternally,
And death shall be no more; death, thou shalt die.”
(Death, be not proud - John Donne)

“I’d like to get away from earth awhile
And then come back to it and begin over.
May no fate willfully misunderstand me
And half grant what I wish and snatch me away
Not to return. Earth’s the right place for love:
I don’t know where it’s likely to go better.”
Birches (Robert Frost)

“For it is not for what I have put into it that I have written this book,
Nor is it by reading it you will acquire it.”
Whoever You Are Holding Me Now in Hand (Walt Whitman)

“If in some smothering dreams, you too could pace
Behind the wagon that we flung him in,
And watch the white eyes writhing in his face,
His hanging face, like a devil’s sick of sin…
My friend, you would not tell with such high zest
To children ardent for some desperate glory
The old lie: Dulce et decorum est 
Pro patria mori.”
Dulce et Decorum Est (Wilfred Owen)

“Something sinister in the tone
Told me my secret must be known:
Word I was in the house alone
Somehow must have gotten abroad,
Word I was in my life alone,
Word I had no one left but God.”
Bereft (Robert Frost)

“It is always a matter, my darling,
Of life or death, as I had forgotten. I wish
What I wished you before, but harder.”
The Writer (Richard Wilbur)

Learnings
* Poetry is about being, not meaning. The best poems capture some primal, essential characteristic of life. They encapsulate lived experience, rather than trying to teach something.
* “We should avoid symbol-hunting and to see virtually anything in a poem as symbolic. It is preferable to miss a symbol than to try to find one in every line of a poem.” This piece of advice makes reading poetry less stressful 😂 plus, I think allowing yourself to be submerged in a poem (with no ulterior motive) allows you to see meanings that lie below the surface.
* Good poetry need not have a perfect meter or rhyme scheme. I am still partial to a flawless meter and fixed rhyme scheme, but am learning to see past the meter and rhyme to reach the beating heart of a poem. “In first-rate poetry, sound exists neither for its own sake nor for mere decoration, but to enhance the meaning.”

megrim, spud (v.), barton, lea, tercet, quatrain, gustatory, kinesthetic, cloy, fantail, jamb, offices (assistance), sepal, taffeta, winnow, drowsed, sallow (n.), bourn, croft, barred (striped), ablution, courser, compass (scope), intellection, dram, tippler, losel, loblolly, lout, hunkers, whippet, blarney, ductile, fritillary, linden, tippet, cornice, diurnal, snowdrop, pram, officious, refractory, accretion, prurient, dun, damask, coomb, ermine, vestal, taper (n.), plaint, darkling, hectoring, pyx, accoutered, frowsty, perfidy, scarp, caesura, breve, ictus, iamb, trochee, anapest, dactyl, spondee, scansion, limn, lay (n.), aural, bluebottle, synesthesia, passing-bells, orison, killdeer, nightjar, limpkin, vesper, debar, impinge, ken, demesne, wanton, clapboard, lawn (fabric), bombast, strumpet, fellies, brinded, charactery, malinger, peignoir, peony, isinglass, bailer, thwart (n.), gunnel, athwart, cedarn, dulcimer, troth, aubade, enjambment, penumbra, shingle (pebbled beach), chancel, wight (unfortunate person), lintel, veldt, sedge, grot, thrall, pard, fay, hawthorn, eglantine, vatic, catkin, hummock, merganser, canvasback, gyre