Rating: 3/5

This one is a hard one for me to rate, so I opted for 3 stars. There were somethings I really enjoyed. The book is very well written and moves at a great pace. I found myself absorbed to the point that I couldn't put it down. The story is about a woman suffering amnesia for 2 years and is accidentally identified by her brother-in-law when he almost runs her over. For some reason amnesia is not one of my favorite tropes, but I thought it well done in this story. 

However in spite of the well executed plot, I had trouble warming up to the heroine and hero. I typically don't like infidelity in my romances, but when it happens to be with your husband's brother, right in the family dwelling, it leaves a lot to be desired. Love does not excuse morality and these two were in my opinion both amoral characters. Especially the heroine, who claimed not to be a gold digger, yet married a man after only ten days and chose not to leave him when things didn't work out because she didn't want to give up the lifestyle. In stead she opts for an affair with his brother right under her mother-in-law's nose. I'm not quite sure what her definition of gold digger was, but it came very close to mine. 

The Mother-in-law was quite vicious in her approach with the heroine. But when I step back, and think about it, she is the only one that had common sense. She suspected the heroine of marrying her son for money. Check. She suspects her of sleeping with her other son. Check. She suspects that the heroine has no real character. Check. So even though MIL is painted as an evil manipulator, I found her to be the sayer of truth. 

As for the hero, the only reason he could identify her as his ex-sister-in law was a distinguishable birthmark in a very private place. Seems he was about to do the horizontal tango with her again when he saw the birthmark. That alone could be forgiven, except it turns out he was seriously involved with another woman and about to get engaged. 

I see a life of misery for these two. I think their only connection was on a physical level. Once all the pheromones die down, I see a life of misery. He drifting off and not being able to keep his pants zipped and the heroine only focused on keeping her comfortable lifestyle, whatever the price.