Rating: 5/5

The second book in the author's treatment of fictional stories as 'real life.' It should come as no surprise that Jasper Fforde has been known to use these books. 

So, yeah, here we find Jane Eyre, Fanny Hill, Fagin, Maggie Tulliver, Clarissa Dalloway, etc. Peeking through the undergrowth, we can also catch sight of some American classics: Black Beauty, The Madwoman in the Attic, Hester Prynne, Hawk-eye... I've come to expect interesting commentary, so here's the down and dirty on the books I've read (or the chapters that were amusing):Robinson Crusoe: "Why the Single Print of a Foot'?" Having never read the book, I'd not come across this phrase until I read the Crusoe-esque book previously this year. I can see why it would be disconcerting to picture a single footprint. On the other hand, I came up, independently, with the same solution as Sutherland: walking near the shore, walking on stones.... 

Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure: "Where does Fanny Hill keep her contraceptives?" Indeed, what contraceptives? Fascinating that this was in print in 1749. Good answer, as well. 

The Last of the Mohicans: "Whose side is Hawk-eye on?" My answer: his own. Sutherland's answer: (basically) his own. 

Oliver Twist and Great Expectations: "Why is Fagin hanged and why isn't Pip prosecuted?" ...for aiding and abetting a criminal act. Because Fagin is creepy, dirty, Jew and Pip is the hero of his book. 

Wuthering Heights: "Who gets what in Heathcliff's will?" He dies before he can change it to disinherit. Cathy's doing? According to Sutherland, yes. 

Jane Eyre: "Can Jane Eyre be happy?" Boiled down, Rochester's track record with women sucks. Is Jane going to 'live happily ever after?' Doubtful, according to Sutherland. Depressing thought. 

The Mill on the Floss: "How good an oarswoman is Maggie Tulliver?" Too good for reality. She's taught how to row about 50 pages from the end, and still manages to control her boat in a flood, until some "wooden machinery" is driven into it. What the hell is "wooden machinery?" 

Daniel Dorinda: "Is Daniel Dorinda circumcised?" Wow. Birth control and circumcision and Jews. In one book. Who says literature is boring! 

Tess of the D'Urbervilles: "Who will Angel marry next?" The presumption at the end of the book is that he'll marry Tess's sister. But in Victorian law that was illegal at that time. So perhaps she was meant to remain virginal and pure, unlike Tess....? 

The Yellow Wall-Paper: "What cure for the Madwoman in the Attic?" One of my absolute favorite stories...was it the cure that made her mad? [Of course. Hey, Sutherland, take a Women's Studies class once, ok??] And what aspect of it was the maddening one? 

Mrs Dalloway: "Clarissa's invisible taxi." A lovely walk around London to purchase flowers. At the end of her walk, Mrs D suddenly is back at home; how did she do it?Can't wait to get the next book in the series.