Rating: 5/5

Even better than A Girl Of The Limberlost!

Freckles is and Irish orphan who has spent nearly all twenty of his years in a foundling home, stories abound of how, when he was only a few months old he was brutally beaten and left more dead than alive on the orphanage steps. Freckles wishes he knew for sure that it wasn't his mother who left him, that she loved him just as much as normal mothers do, after all, isn't that what every orphan dreams of? 

Even once he has moved on to work as the Limberlost guard, he can't banish the worry that he was always unwanted. (he's emotionally scarred, no doubt from the taunts of other orphans) But, that is not to say he isn't loved now, he quickly won the trust, respect and love of his Boss, who wishes that Freckles was his son and the admiration of "The Swamp Angel", a young girl who works with The Butterfly Woman collecting her specimens. But for some reason that isn't enough for Freckles, he needs to know the truth about himself, and it's left to Angel to find it, if not for him, for herself…

I can't believe I liked this so much more that A Girl Of The Limberlost, but I did. Freckles is a lovable, imperfect hero, in more ways than one; He's scarred both inside and out and he does the unthinkable by falling in love with a girl far above his station in life, someone he'll never be worthy of. (That's what he thinks anyway) 

The descriptions are beautiful, I could see the Limberlost in colour because of them, I saw the fear, loneliness, and wonder of the swamp, what could be better? 

My only complaint is this: I feel that Freckles should have let go of the past sooner, and moved on. His parentage didn't matter to his friends, why should he continue to be tormented by it? Some ideas in this book are rather old-fashioned, or out of date. I have always detested the thought that you can tell just by seeing how someone behaves whether they have upperclass parentage, since those things are all "in the blood". That's rubbish when you are off the streets! Someone lower class can be just as good as someone upperclass, Imo. 

Other than that I really loved this book, and don't know why I didn't pick it up before. 

  G rating for this sweet, heartfelt read. Definitely a reread!
 

(Found at http://landandlit.iweb.bsu.edu/Enviro...)