Rating: 4/5

Reputation – 3/5
Edmund Wilson’s 1931 study of Symbolism in Modernist literature is no longer widely read as a book. The essays are more often approached individually, but the analyses Wilson presents have become canonical. It’s hard to find a Joyce or Eliot scholar who does not make a living repeating Wilson’s conclusions to undergraduate students. Thankfully for the livelihoods of those professors, it’s harder to find where these opinions were first expressed. Most of them are in this book. 

Point – 4/5
Because these essays are so often read out of the context of the book itself, it is best just to present a short summary of Wilson’s remarks about each writer in sections. 

Symbolism
Symbolism is “a second flood of the same tide” of Romanticism. Symbolism first grew up among the French poets who read English poets and introduced new metrics into previously strict forms of French poetry. The prime example of this is Baudelaire’s reading of Edgar Allen Poe. Baudelaire’s early experiments inspired a young generation of French poets who followed his lead: Mallarmé, Maeterlinck, and Villiers de l’Isle-Adam. French writers reading English. 
Later English writers like W.B. Yeats and T.S. Eliot read this “new” French and brought its fruit back to English. 
This book can be read as criticism about literary cross-pollination: English writers who read more French than English, and French writers who read more English than French. And Wilson proves here that cross-pollination, in literature as in botany, produces richer fruit. 

W.B. Yeats
Yeats has achieved a true “style” in both his poetry and prose that calls to mind the stately, individualistic writing of men of letters of the seventeenth century, whose style, in Wilson’s words:
“was a much more personal thing: it fitted the author like a suit of clothes and molded itself to the natural contours of his temperament and mind; one is always aware that there is a man inside.”
This “suit” of Yeats makes him stand out in a generation of writers who wear the ready-made clothes of modern industry, but it also makes him susceptible to obsolete approaches to modern life. In the end, for all Yeats’ allure as a poet and mystic, his rejection of modern life and his seeking refuge in the realm of fairytales and prophecy make us too skeptical of him to take him at his word. 

Paul Valéry
Valéry obsesses himself too slothfully with the workings of the mind, rather than with its fruits. He is one of the French first writers to face the math and science of the modern world head on, but he becomes paralyzed by it. He mostly stops writing poetry, convinced he can’t do anything perfect, and focuses on a prose that is superficially philosophical and profound, but is really just stringent and highbrow. Wilson:
”Paul Valéry disregards altogether the taste and intelligence of the ordinary reader: instead of allowing his reader the easy victory, he takes pride in outstripping him completely. And he is read chiefly by other writers or people with a special interest in literature: his poems are always out of print and his other writings are always being published in editions so expensive and limited as practically never to circulate at all.”

T.S. Eliot
Wilson’s essay on Eliot is well-known, especially his pronouncement that
“Eliot, in ten years’ time, has left upon English poetry a mark more unmistakable than that of any other poet writing in English.”
Eliot’s successes are that he has “brought a new personal rhythm into the language,” and that, as a critic, he enjoys “a position of distinction and influence equal in importance to his position as a poet.”
Eliot’s shortcomings: 1) his convictions seem insincere and 2) he has established a sort of “thin lipped” school of literary criticism. Wilson:
1)”We feel in contemporary writers like Eliot a desire to be to believe in religious revelation, a belief that it would be a good thing to believe, rather than a genuine belief.”
2)”One is supposed to have read everything and enjoyed everything and to understand exactly the reasons for one’s enjoyment, but not to enjoy anything excessively nor to raise an issue of one kind of thing against another.”

Marcel Proust
Proust uses the Wagnerian, symphonic structure of “themes,” rather than classical literary devices to achieve a remarkable unity in what is considered the longest novel ever written. Proust was addicted to English literature – especially Dickens and Ruskin – and has introduced into French a type of characterization and moralism that was unknown before him. 
In a gigantic book of complicated relations, Proust has managed to sum up the bourgeoisie decadence of fin de siècle France and European civilization as a whole. Wilson: 
”Proust is perhaps the last great historian of the loves, the society, the intelligence, the diplomacy, the literature and the art of the Heartbreak House of capitalist culture.”
But he was also an indolent hypochondriac, “a perfect case for psychoanalysis,” who, in the end, drags us into a dream world and makes us rather fall into a coma than face the onrush of modern life. 

James Joyce
Certainly the most popular essay from Axel’s Castle, Wilson’s review of Joyce has become canonical. 
Joyce has fully assimilated Flaubert’s naturalist innovations and paired them with the tide of Symbolism to create something utterly unique in English. There is no shortage of superlatives for Joyce from those who have understood him, so I will only include one sentence of praise from Wilson:
”Joyce is indeed really the great poet of a new phase of human consciousness.”
Wilson’s judgements of Joyce’s shortcomings are more insightful and interesting:
”I doubt,” Wilson says, whether any human memory is capable, on a first reading, of meeting the demands of Ulysses… that Ulysses suffers from an excess of design rather than from a lack of it,”
and that 
“Joyce has here half-buried his story under the virtuosity of his technical devices. It is almost as if he had elaborated it so much and worked over it so long that he had forgotten, in the amusement of writing parodies, the drama which he had originally intended to stage;”

Finnegans Wake, which had been only partially published serially by the time Axel’s Castle was written in 1931, is pinned down with such exactitude by Wilson that is is almost unbelievable he wrote this criticism long before Finnegans Wake was even published. Wilson: 
"The best way to understand Joyce’s method [in Finnegans Wake] is to note what goes on in one’s own mind when one is just dropping off to sleep." 
Many Joyceans will tell you that this is The Way to read The Wake. 
But in the end: 
“We can grasp a certain number of such suggestions simultaneously, but Joyce, with his characteristic disregard for the reader, apparently works over and over his pages, packing in allusions and puns… And as soon as we are aware of Joyce himself systematically embroidering on his text, deliberately inventing puzzles, the illusion of the dream is lost.”
Embroidery – perfect single word description of the later decadent Joyce. 

Gertrude Stein 
No one really reads Gertrude Stein anymore, but she was a force in Wilson’s day, so he makes a few remarks about her writing. She is the female American representation of the surrealist vanguard and is the most forward-looking of all the writers addressed in this book.
”But most of what Miss Stein publishes nowadays must apparently remain absolutely unintelligible even to a sympathetic reader.”
Yet
"Whenever we pick up her writings, however unintelligible we may find them, we are aware of a literary personality of unmistakable originality and distinction."

Axel and Rimbaud
To read the final chapter of this book is to realize how much those pickers who go through this book only reading one or two essays are missing out. Wilson compares the arch Symbolist work, Villiers de l’Isle-Adam’s Axel, to the life of the man who, with Baudelaire, is most responsible for Symbolism’s genesis – Arthur Rimbaud. One represents the resignation of life in favor of art, the other resigned his art in search for more life. 
Those familiar with Rimbaud’s life, with its Parisian perversions, its scholarly solitudes, its anonymous adventures in Abyssinia, will find it retold here with an eminent rapidity and force of style. Wilson is really at his best in this last chapter. In it, you even see the seeds of his next book, To the Finland Station, and that book’s concern for the battle between the life of letters and the life of action. 

Recommendation – 3/5
I recommend Edmund Wilson to anyone who likes reading literary criticism. I consider him the North Star of 20th Century American literary criticism. So many of his judgements have turned out to be the standard, and it is always worth seeing them in their first form. In this book, five of the six authors treated were still active when Wilson was writing. Remarkable.
Even if you have no particular interest in Symbolism or these writers, this book is still worth reading because the authors here are THE canonical Modernists. They are worth understanding, if only to not be left out at dinner parties. If you do have any special interest in one of these authors, don’t just read the one essay. Read the whole book. You won’t regret it. 

Personal – 5/5
I really love Edmund Wilson. He’s one of the few critics I always return to for pleasure reading. I won’t add any more praise, as this review is already too long. But this reading of Wilson’s treatment of Symbolism brought to mind an idea for a personal criticism: 

I’ve been a fan of Bob Dylan since I was very young. As much as I've boundlessly loved his music, I’ve always been a little repelled by his “Rimbaud” phase in which his lyrics are less concrete and more suggestive. Despite liking songs like “Desolation Row” and “Stuck Inside of Mobile…” the ethereal lyrics left me with nothing to hold on to. They were hard to memorize by comparison and sometimes seemed more like slipshod nonsense than anything a great songwriter ought to come up with. 
Reading Axel’s Castle gave me insight into another side of Bob Dylan. Along with all his roots in American folk and blues, it became clear that Dylan also drank deeply at the fount of French Symbolist poetry. It made an indelible mark on his style, and was no mere passing phase. Bob Dylan, in a uniquely popular American way, carried on the Symbolist tradition Wilson outlines in Axel’s Castle. 

It's great when a book can bring you a resolution long considered question. Even better when it’s so unexpected.