Rating: 3/5

"a man ... ain't got no ... hasn't got any ... can't really ... isn't any way out. No matter how ... a man alone ... ain't got no bloody chance."
	Harry Morgan 

A novel of the Depression Era,  To Have and Have Not  follows the struggle of Harry Morgan to make ends meet, to live a decent life. He is a boat owner sailing the waters between Cuba and Key West, renting out to rich tourists looking for the thrill of big fish capture. The novel opens with a spectacular gunfight in front of a bar in Havana and continues with an episode of marlin fishing in the Gulf Stream. Harry is one of the 'have nots' and, after one of the 'haves' pulls a fast one on him and disappears without paying for renting the boat, he is forced to accept shady jobs on the wrong side of the law. He has a wife and three girls to provide for. Smuggling persons and hard liquor in and out of Cuba is not for the faint hearted, and Harry Morgan is forced to get tough in order to survive.  All I have is my cojones to peddle.  . But his luck has turned against him and everything he tries seems to end badly.

The story is told through internal monologues and hard edged dialogue with Hemingway signature spare prose and with his typical protagonist of few words and brooding visage. The timeline is broken into separate episodes in Harry's career outside the law, each one illustrating another step down on the ladder of respectability and success. For the good parts, I really liked the time spent on the sea and the way the relationship of Harry with his wife is described. Most of the problems I had with the story come in the second half of the novel, where the author loses the focus and starts to write about a lot of secondary characters loafing around Key West and having little to no connections with Harry's story. I suspect Hemingway was on a deadline, had only enough material for a novella and filled in the required pages with several unconnected episodes from his work in progress pile. These additions have a strong autobiographical vibe, especially the episode of the alcoholic writer who has a row with his wife. An interesting literary device has the author jumping from ship to ship in the Key West harbour and look inside each cabin at the thoughts of the owners as each contemplate failure, despair, suicide, anguish, ill health, loneliness. I could see Hemingway lounging in his own boat on an evening, looking around at his neighbours in the marina and imagining their life stories, putting everything down in his notebook for future use. Another bother is that my edition always uses the N word for the black characters in the book, and to make matters worse these black characters are rather poorly constructed and illustrate an uncomfortable level of prejudice in an author I greatly admired in my youth.

My disappointment may have another source : I have seen the movie version three or four times, and I was expecting something along the lines of Casablanca with a cool cucumber Bogey, Lauren Bacall swinging her hips with a wicked smile while she sings a jazz tune and some idealistic anti-Nazi message. 

The novel is instead closer to the theme of futile struggle against fate from  The Old Man and the Sea  and to the social militancy of  The Pearl  by Steinbeck.