Rating: 4/5

In the Middle presents a fabulous approach to teaching language. It is one of those books that can refresh a stressed teacher, can fill her with ideals and ideas, and those books are very important in my world! What I found, though, was that Atwell's approach in this book really cannot be applied to my students. It can apply to me in that it presents a pedagogy I believe in and illustrates techniques that I would love to practice, but I cannot successfully practice these approaches with the students I currently work with. To me, it feels like Atwell's teaching style is culturally and/or socioeconomically bound. It occurs to me that perhaps my troubles with applying her method is more about my boundaries as a teacher than about my students' boundaries--turning criticism inward is instinctive for me--but this time, I think it might not be my fault. And as much as I wish I could teach like Atwell does, the truth is that doing so would do my particular students a disservice. 

This situation reminds me of the problem we face with the bureaucracy of education today. As Obama and Duncan look for a model school system that can be replicated all over the Country--KIPP already being in the running--every day teachers discover that lessons, units, and educational approaches, as effective and promising as they might be in one setting, cannot necessarily be recast in a different environment. Schools struggle to revise and systematize, racing against test scores, while Obama and Duncan work harder to refine high stakes testing and increase the stakes than they do to help schools be who and what they need to be. Schools cannot all be the same thing. Being in Nancie Atwell's classroom or, even better, at a school modeled after her work, would be amazing for me, but it would be completely too unstructured for other kids. Differences, great, gaping differences need to be allowed if we want to successfully and lovingly serve kids all over the Country. But it's hard to reform each school for its students in its neighborhood. It's thousands of times harder than finding one model. So bureaucracy says there must be a system all schools can adopt and then personalize as needed. This idea of progress is not helping kids learn. It is not even helping them pass an ugly standardized test that now determines whether they can graduate from high school or not. There's just so much wrong with this picture. And I shouldn't have gone out drinking before writing this review.