Rating: 3/5

Geez, do I give McBain more credit than he deserves because of the 87th Precinct series, or what?

I have nearly all of the Matthew Hope series on my TBR shelf. Needed a palette cleanser after Beloved, enter Rumplestiltskin, which did its job as designed.

McBain is trying to create someone else to write about outside of NYC, in this case located in Calusa, Florida, by way of Chicago, Illinois, in the form of lawyer Matthew Hope (where Hope is still legal-adjacent to McBain's arguable forte - criminal activities.) Hope is the everyman attorney that gets caught up in several nefarious ongoings. In this case, the death of his friend and sexual partner.

The plot is paper thin, not well developed, and feels like one of the usual trio of crimes in an 87th novel. The remainder of the book's pages are filled with extraneous details on cityscapes like New Orleans, or why women choose their hair color, or... well you get the point. By the time Hope susses out suspects, everyone's alibi checks out except the killer's which gets a late-stage revisit to close out the story. McBain just tacks on a lame excuse for the deaths incurred with little resolve or sympathy for those involved. At no time did the story reach any tension or depth.

Instead, we get Hope interviewing suspects against police advice, hunting down a will, then a trust, all while bedding a fellow attorney met along the way. Did I mention him being a single parent trying to dole out parental sex advice to his young teenage daughter, sprinkled among the pages? Well, there is that aspect, which had more gravitas than the plot.

This one is better than the first, but not stellar. The story felt dated, there is little technology or relevance to the larger world. Just a sad capture of human nature. More time was wasted on emphasizing the correct usage of Miranda-Escobedo, Rights Warning Statements than anything else involved. Unsure how I should feel about that other than wistful for the early 87th stories.

Surely McBain fans will find this title. I'll leave it at that.
Thanks for reading and Merry Christmas to all.