Rating: 5/5

Lillian Hellman added a new phrase to the English language with this memoir of McCarthyism and Hollywood, "I will not and can not cut my conscience to fit this year's fashion". This sentence alone ranks above her plays, THE LITTLE FOXES, THE CHILDREN'S HOUR and TOYS IN THE ATTIC. Hellman was summoned to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), America's Cold War Inquisition chamber, in 1952 to identify herself and others as suspected Communists. She knew the consequences. The previous year her lover and room mate Dashell Hammett had been summoned to testify on the identities of those who had contributed to a Civil Rights Committee he had formed in the Forties. Hammett lived up to the tough-guy detective role he'd written about in THE MALTESE FALCON and RED HARVEST. His refusal to turn friendly witness for the HUAC landed him over a year in jail and IRS seizure of his assets. This infamy for a man who had fought for America in two world wars. Hellman surmised she was in for similar flagellation. In a letter to HUAC Chairman Wood she agreed to talk of her own politics from the Thirties onward and nobody else's. The scathing reaction of Wood and his political mentors, McCarthy and Nixon, did not astonish her. "These men were incapable of any other behavior. They set out to wreck people's lives". Hellman reserves her wrath for the Hollywood liberals and intellectuals she naively thought would stand up for American principles of free speech and thou shalt not fink on friends and associates. Wrong. No one came to her aid; no "Free Hammett" ads in the NEW YORK TIMES, no Lillian Hellman Legal Defense Fund paid for by her old movie pals. Hellman had once been the most sought-after screenwriter in Hollywood, wooed by L.B. Meyer, Jack Warner and Sam Goldwyn. Now, these moguls were on the other team, forcing their clients to sign loyalty oaths or be fired. Hellman still wouldn't budge. She told her first lawyer, future Supreme Court Justice Abe Fortas, and his choice for her defense attorney, Joseph Rauh, that she would neither cooperate nor take the Fifth Amendment in front of the HUAC. Both men warned her this was legal suicide. So did Hammett, who counseled her to avoid jail. Finally, Hellman and Rauh hit upon a brilliant scheme; put the burden of bad publicity on the Committee. By releasing to the press Hellman's letter to Wood offering testimony only about herself the other HUAC members would be forced to explain why they had refused her reasonable request. After the perfunctory "Are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party?' question and a few negative answers from Hellman she was let go. But, not unmolested. She wound up on the Hollywood blacklist of writers, actors and directors not to be further employed, and reemerged in Tinsel Town only after twenty years of forced unemployment. Hellman is right that the HUAC hearings paved the way for the government deceptions of the Vietnam war and Watergate. Those who lie about small things, though the HUAC was not small to its victims, will lie about war and break-ins. Of the Hollywood crowd Hellman sighs, "they showed the courage of mashed potato". It is always scoundrel time when civil liberties are in danger. Those who collaborate by silence in the face of evil are destined to be its next victim.