Rating: 5/5

I am not reviewing a particular edition. I had a Jane Austen omnibus edition once, and it was not easy to read from. I just wanted to make some notes regarding ALL the novels, which I re-read in 2017 with an online discussion group.

And this review is based on re-reading the books, so I am not worrying about SPOILERS.

Incidentally, there are 720 different ways of ranking Austen's novels, but only 120 ways if Northanger Abbey is always last. My own personal ranking did not change, although as someone else remarked, my favorite Jane Austen is always the one I'm currently reading. Even Northanger Abbey, simple as it is, has touches of genius. Notably the superb liar Isabella Thorpe, who gets engaged to Catherine's brother, dumps him, and then tries to patch things up when her other thing doesn't work out.

And that reminds me, that the twists at the end of NA are as fast-paced and breathtaking as in any of the later books. Also, the sketch of Catherine's mother, at the end, as a sort of overworked, over anxious, barely affectionate country parson's wife is very well done.

Sense and Sensibility- Elinor and Marianne- what a plot! What amazing comic characters! I knew everything that was going to happen to Marianne when she came to London, and still I was reading as fast as I could to see what would happen next. What a coup de theatre when M. is expecting Willoughby to come walking in the door, and Colonel Brandon appears. Matched a little later by Willoughby's sudden appearance on a dark and stormy night. The twist involving Lucy Steele becoming Mrs. Ferrars- Mrs. Robert Ferrars- is a good one, handled well.

Pride and Prejudice- the favorite of many, and with good reason. I can honestly say I appreciated it more than ever. I must say I still have a thing for Lydia and her "natural self-consequence." Is the whole thing too "light and bright and sparkling"? Of course not!

Mansfield Park- the best novel by the best novelist. This is the one which will amaze the reader more and more with its skill, in every line, the more one re-reads it. Yes, the rival and the scoundrel- Mary and Henry Crawford- are the most charming 'villains.' One might say they have all the charm, and the heroine none.- but Fanny Price is actually quite amazing. And Aunt Norris- words fail me. Some people spread joy wherever they go, some whenever they go.

Emma- the thing to consider about Emma is, is Emma the heroine, or the hated rival? What struck me this time is that Emma is really about Jane Fairfax, telling her story from the wrong end of the telescope. At any rate, this is one of the best parts in Emma:

"Emma," said she, "this paper is worse than I expected. Look! in places you see it is dreadfully dirty; and the wainscot is more yellow and forlorn than any thing I could have imagined."

"My dear, you are too particular," said her husband. "What does all that signify? You will see nothing of it by candlelight. It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight. We never see any thing of it on our club-nights." 

The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant, "Men never know when things are dirty or not;" and the gentlemen perhaps thought each to himself, "Women will have their little nonsenses and needless cares."

Finally Persuasion- This I had not re-read for a long time, and it was wonderful. Whatever level of appreciation you are at, Jane Austen will meet you there. Anne's sister Mary sort of plays the same role as Aunt Norris, but they are completely different. Still Mary's egotism is breathtaking. I love when Anne is talking to her distressed friend Mrs. Smith, and Mrs. Smith says she loves having a nurse as a friend, because she has access to all the homes in Bath, and Anne says, oh, yes, she must tell wonderful stories of fortitude in sickness, and Mrs. Smith says, basically, noooo, that's not the kind of inside information I meant. 

Anyway- Jane Austen 2017. Thanks to Anna K. for organizing the group, and to Bryan for sticking with it, and to Ian for his scholarship, and to Cphe for always being at the finish line cheering on the stragglers.