Rating: 4/5

"With anger such as ours, murder—most terrifying to say—could prove the cure for all the rest." - Norman Mailer

We live in times when men are encouraged to get therapy so that they would not aspire to the toxic side of their masculinity. I've seen guys on social media who said Salinger would never have written Catcher in the Rye if he had only taken an appointment with a therapist. 

Norman Mailer had a fascination for men who could not contain themselves. Men who surrendered to what was inside them. That thing that was eating away at them. If you're a man, you know what I am talking about. Devilish thoughts torment us from the time we wake up every morning. Some asshole slighted you in the lift the previous day. Some prick (a better man) at work cut in on the woman you like. Men from another tribe ganged up and insulted you. You cannot get any of this out of your head. It is eating away at you. You suspect if you don't do something about it, there is no point in going on. 

Mailer wrote a 1,100 page tome about Gary Gilmore, a murderous criminal who lived on pure instinct. He wrote another big novel about Hitler. Oswald's Tale - well, Mailer called it a mystery and it is. But it is actually Mailer the pompous boring genius sadist ogling at the life of an ordinary man who could not contain himself. An ordinary man who killed a better man, an American president no less, with a gun. 

Oswald's Tale is not an entertaining book. It is not Raging Bull. I silently laugh when people say that Scorsese film is about the perils of toxic masculinity. It is the most stylish temple for it. But Mailer shows us the dreariness of it all. It's really fucking boring. Oswald must have died a thousand deaths as a poor kid, his time in the marine corps, defection to Russia and return to USA to do what he finally did. There are no slow motions. No great dialog. Just a small nasty man who was an asshole to his Russian wife (there is something exceptionally tragic about a couple in trouble - like Oswald and Marina in this book and Gary and Nicole in The Executioner's Song). A mediocrity who could not impress other men. That man is there inside us all. 

Oswald's Tale is a warning. Mailer, the great artist is blowing the fog horn for men who are approaching a rocky coastline. Yes, Mailer is fascinated by Oswald. He is not unlike the sadistic public who wants to know every detail about Oswald. But he is also an uncompromising artist. It is not an entertaining thriller. It is a grave, eagerly researched and ultimately depressing book. There is nothing else like it because there is only one Norman Mailer.