Rating: 2/5

Now, Last of the Mohicans was a book I was SO excited to read. I love love love the Michael Mann film with Daniel Day-Lewis and thought if the book is half as good as the film then it will still be a great read. 

Let me say this now, it was not half as good. Not even a tenth as good. It was a slog and not an enjoyable one. 

“History, like love, is so apt to surround her heroes with an atmosphere of imaginary brightness.” 

The Last of the Mohicans was written by James Fenimore Cooper in 1826, and is set in 1757 during the French-Indian wars. It is a fascinating time period in history and I felt like Cooper would have had a unique insight into this world as he was a part of it. 

Hawkeye is a white man travelling with Mohican companions, Chingachgook and his son Uncas - who is ‘the last of the Mohicans’. Hawkeye as a character is tedious and irritating in many ways, not to mention that he mentions almost in every part of speech that he has ‘the blood of white men’ in his veins. He also gives Uncas a pretty hard time, even when the young Mohican actually saves the companies lives. 

“Is it justice to make evil, and then punish for it?”

I have read a fair few books with Native American cultures and tribes in now, and nowhere I felt the depiction and portrayal of them was anywhere near as demeaning as it is in The Last of the Mohicans. I really disliked the portrayal of Chingachgook and Uncas. They had minimal dialogue, most of which was taken over by Hawkeye, and they were just following his orders for the whole of the book. I enjoyed some parts with Magua - our antagonist and all round bad guy - his dialogue and motivations were interesting, however he did manage to wriggle out of every life threatening situation which was frustrating. 

Nearly all of these characters have about 32 different names (okay maybe more like 2/3), and Cooper will use their multiple names in the same passage just to confuse the reader even more. 

“Tis a strange calling!’ muttered Hawkeye, with an inward laugh, ‘to go through life, like a catbird, mocking all the ups and downs that may happen to come out of other men’s throats.”

If you’ve seen the film then the plot is vaguely similar, with some differences here and there. The book plot felt weaker to me, some parts unbelievable and demeaning to the native cultures and very very long-winded. Cooper evidently has an affinity with describing the endless rocks and twigs that the characters tread past. It is very jarring and distracts the reader from some of the actually good parts.

The language is at times very eloquent and intriguing, other times bulky and wordy but I didn’t mind that so much. Some dialogue was interesting and fun, some parts pretty epic, others mind numbingly-boring. The Last of the Mohicans covers a lot.

“I too can play the madman, the fool, the hero; in short, any or everything to rescue her I love.”

There was a few action sequences in the book that were written well - when they weren’t strewn with jarring dialogue. The fights were intense and brutal and the standout of the book for me.

1.5/5 - I'm disappointed and sad I didn’t enjoy this, as many reviews say it is a masterpiece. However, I feel it was strewn with too much nonsensical description, a demeaning depiction of native Americans and not one character who was able to carry the book. There was some lovely artwork in the version I read though, so there’s that.