Rating: 4/5

“And then what proper person can be partial 
To all those nauseous epigrams of Martial?”
-	Lord Byron, Don Juan

Despite the haterade from Byron and others, many people have enjoyed Martial’s Epigrams since their publication from 86-103 AD. Martial effectively invented the modern epigram (per Wikipedia, “a brief, interesting, memorable, and sometimes surprising or satirical statement”). He wrote over 1,500 of them throughout his career, and his work continues to be read over 1,900 years after his death. Martial’s popularity can be attributed to two factors: his sense of humor and the window he provides into daily life under the Flavian emperors. 

The Comedy

First off, I should say that I think Martial is more witty than funny. His epigrams are more likely to draw out a wry smile than a belly laugh, at least for me. But Martial can often be very clever. Some of his observations are timeless:

“There is nothing more contemptible than a bald man who pretends to have hair.” X.LXXXIII

Others are more personal and biting:

“Bassa, you tell us that you’re young
And Beautiful. Is it the truth?
That old refrain is often sung
By those who’ve lost both looks and youth.” V.XLV

Many are more specific to Martial’s day: the constant problem of legacy-hunters, the haplessness of 1st century surgeons, etc. But I am burying the lede here. Martial is most famous (or infamous) for being very, very dirty. Only about 10% of his epigrams fit this description – some are not even satirical at all, and are meant to be moving memorials to dead contemporaries or praises for Emperor Domitian’s rule. But the more salacious stuff is what Martial is most famous for. There is pederasty, which is not unique to Martial among Greco-Roman authors (although he is more graphic about it than most). But really nothing is out of bounds. For example:

“If from the baths you hear a round of applause,
Maron’s great prick is bound to be the cause.” IX.XXXIII

Many are much, much more NC-17 than this. Among Martial’s courser offerings include  a tale of cunnilingus performed on a girl during her period, and a truly filthy epigram explaining why the male penis was made for females, while their butts are reserved for men. Again, these are the exception rather than the rule…but be warned. 

A Window Into History

The second great appeal of Martial is the view he provides of daily life in the Roman empire. There are a number of Roman writers who do a good job of this – Pliny the Younger, Statius, etc. But Martial may be the most entertaining of them to read. His poems provide a window into a huge spectrum of Roman life. For history buffs, this is really good stuff. A number of the epigrams feature famous figures from Martial’s age: Domitian, Pliny the Younger and other authors, etc. I really appreciated this aspect of Martial’s writings, and this has been a big part of Martial’s enduring popularity.

Conclusion

Not everything about the Epigrams is perfect. As I mentioned, I didn’t find Martial as laugh-out-loud hilarious as Petronius or Aristophanes when they’re on their game. Some of the sucking up to the sitting emperor is a little tedious (if unavoidable). And there is a fair amount of repitition among the epigrams in their entirety. But on the whole this was a very enjoyable read – probably the most entertaining extant piece of literature from the Flavian era. Martial conciously rejected the epic, grandiose style that dominated his age:

“Let such (i.e., epic) poems be written by those who are most grave and singularly severe, whose wretched toilings the lamp witnesses at midnight. But do you season books for the Romans with racy salt; in you let human nature read and recognise its own manners. Although you may seem to be playing on but a slender reed, that reed will be better heard than the trumpets of many.” VIII.III

The result was a racy, enjoyable set of poems that have endured while his peers have faded into the shadows. 4 stars, recommended.

Note on the Translation: There is no complete translation of the Epigrams available in English. The comprehensive ones all date from the 19th century, when Victorian sensibilities bowlderized Martial almost beyond recognition (when they deigned to translate him at all). But the James Michie translation is excellent: it only covers about 10% of Martial’s work, but it is literal while still being entertaining, and doesn’t shy away from the rough stuff. As there is a lot of repetition in the Epigrams, and there are a fair amount of forgettable poems among the diamonds, I would highly recommend Michie for readers interested in Martial’s work.