Rating: 4/5

Ray's book on his life in The Doors is a fun and quick read. He's as lighthearted and enthusiastic as John Densmore is serious and cerebral. The two memoirs stand as entertaining, revealing, and, as these things go, somewhat contradictory books.

But we're here to talk about Ray's book, which I found to be an entertaining grab bag of stories about The Doors and, most interestingly, Ray's tremendous admiration and, you could even say, worship of his friend, Doors' singer Jim Morrison.

The cool thing about Ray is that he writes enthusiastically about everything. His enthusiasm gives his book a narrative drive that's missing from, I'd like to say, every other book I've read on The Doors. It's great when Ray gets lost in this enthusiasm and riffs on specific memories. He can go on for pages, writing about specific scenes from The Doors' history. He really gives you a sense of immediacy - of what it would have been like to have been with The Doors when they were jamming, coming up with songs, playing live, arguing, dealing with Jim's descent into alcoholism etc.

The only problem - and its a big one - is that Ray can riff for pages on stuff that just isn't that interesting. His description of his meeting of his future wife falls into this trap, as does his description of being on acid. The book seriously drags in these sections - and even some of the scenes on The Doors themselves go on for way to long.

As a musician, I'm of course very interested in the more technical aspects of Ray's writing on music. I love his description of how the chord progression of "The Crystal Ship" makes that song so radical.

Moreover, I enjoyed Ray's description of Jim's books. The man read all the great authors (and most of my favorites): Blake, Rimbaud, Kerouac, Burroughs, Céline, Genet, Ginsberg, Joyce, Mailer, Nietzsche, Artaud. In fact, one of Jim's sole possessions was his box of books. Perhaps his lyrics and sensibility resonate so much with me because we're influenced by the same guys.

It's also cool to find out that Jim and Ray were interested in the same filmmakers that I am (man, this is getting self-indulgent!). 

I can't give Ray's book more than three stars, however, because of the sometimes too lengthy riffs and its problematic ways of quoting dialogue that happened almost thirty years before he wrote the book.