Rating: 4/5

Coming from an academia work environment, I’m already attuned to the politics and tensions inherent within the lay of hallowed University grounds – and am quite willingly prepared to sit through another of Raphael’s solidly written tales set at the State University of Michigan’s Department of English, American Studies and Rhetoric. The writing style is as usual infused with witty barbs and sardonic descriptions of almost larger than life characters who inhabit the lecture halls, conference rooms and campus buildings of Nick Hoffmann’s world – academics, writers, publishers, students, senior University administrative beaurocrats, extreme right wing homophobic fundy-religious types. As further incentive – the reader gets invited into Nicky’s tasteful home (which he shares with sexy hirsuit boyfriend of 12 years, Stefan) to partake of their remarkably taste-bud tempting meals … the early-on description of preparing Pasta Puttanesca (translated whore’s pasta) made me stop reading to dash to my pantry to see if I had the ingredients on hand to make up a batch of my own – yumm! 

This second volume in the series sees Nick and Stefan’s relationship stabilised at a new equilibium (with some reservations) more than a year post the saga of Stefan’s ex-lover appearing on the scene and then being knocked off. Tensions and high drama arise when Nick’s department votes to stage/host a major literary conference celebrating a female author to counter socio-political cries of sexism and anti-discrimination within University ranks. Nick is blackmailed into planning and running the conference – especially since he’s the resident bibliographic expert and know-it all about this chosen writer – Edith Wharton. One would be forgiven to think such a conference would be easily run and quite tedious to sit through but no … there are two rival Wharton literary camps – members of each whom detest each other – such is the high feelings aroused regarding literary interpretations of the lady’s writings as well as of the lady herself. Throw in a couple of controversial best selling pop-writers with attitude galore, declamations of plagiarism, viciously nasty book reviews, a couple of cases of extreme writer-rivalry/jealousy, some clandestine bisexual bedroom affairs, stalking lesbians, anti-gay campaigners out to rid the campus of gay libertine corruption of the young student minds – naturally murder most-foul would be attending harassed Nick’s Wharton conference! Copies of Wharton’s books are found with each body – is there a twisted serial killer at work?? I started second-guessing which Wharton novel would be found alongside the next victim.

Several characters from the first title in the series make a comeback, and on a welcome and positive note would be the re-appearance of Nick’s nemesis – campus police inspector Valley who projects a less hostile / homophobic air this time round. For the foodie lovers – we get Steak Dianne, spinach linguine, basil tomato penne, crabmeat mousse with dill, various chardonnays, Mandarin Napoleon, Vietnamese restaurant fare, breakfast waffles etc etc etc. For movie buffs – there are references and allegories made to films/characters such as Bringing Up Baby, Island of Lost Souls, Fatal Attraction, Laura, Chariots of Fire …. Marlene Dietrich and Margaret Dumont! The heightened air of danger or menace seems less in this novel compared to the first book in the series – at no time did I feel Nick was endangering himself through his sleuthing work and determination to save his academic hide from being fired.

I appreciate the continuing detailed evolution of Nick and Stefan’s relationship and domestic life but was rather thrown emotionally when one of the main characters was killed off. As an aside, I cannot believe the number of Wharton-based movies I’ve actually viewed over the past decade – some of whose main characters were quite emotionally torturous to follow (I really did want to reach into the TV monitor and slap Gillian Anderson’s Lily Bart in The House of Mirth or administer the chloral myself at the end). Having just finished this whodunnit – I am resolved not to start reading Ethan Frome or Age of Innocence etc anytime soon LOL!