Rating: 4/5

It's often a curious phenomenon, when a once-original work loses its novelty in the face of the many imitators. Once fresh selling points are overdone until they become stale clichés. Following the leader to where the safe money lies is far too common in our society and history.

Some tales endure better than others. Virtually all of modern fantasy genre can trace its roots back to The Lord of the Rings, either in gleefully taking up its mantle, or (far more common nowadays) deliberately straying away from it... but if you actually read Tolkien's old tale, you'll find that the vast majority is only skin-deep: what has stuck to the popular culture is the elves, the dwarves, the orcs, sometimes the halflings, definitely the wizards, the classic human-elf-dwarf-halfling parties, the dark lords and their hosts and their evil black ash-choked kingdoms, the vaguely medieval backdrop, and such - while the deeper themes of waning light and warmth, tragedy and eternal struggle against the impending darkness, divine intervention, isolation of the old races, and other such grimdark stuff remain relatively original. Hell, a lot of the dark and low fantasy stuff that's so popular nowadays, written as a backlash to Tolkien, is not all that much darker or lower as the works they're supposed to rail against.

But you probably know this already. I'm digressing.

What I meant to say is that not all stories manage that, and the Chronicles of Prydain, judging by just the first book at least, seems to be just one of them. Almost everything in it has since been adopted by the popular culture as a whole: you've got your evil dark lords, your plucky farm boys, your princes, your princesses, your magic swords, hairy sidekicks... at least there aren't any orcs. (I'm not sure if it actually did take anything from Tolkien, given that it was published only a few years after, or if it came up with this stuff separately or picked it up from elsewhere. In the end I guess it doesn't matter much.) I did not really find any deeper meanings or layers from its narrative, either. It all seems like fairly basic stuff - like there was nothing left in it worth reading nowadays.

Then along came Eilonwy.

All the while busting out Taran from his dungeon, it felt that she also freed this story from its initial confines. Bright and cheerful, talkative, proactive and useful to have around, and throwing all this shade at the somewhat dim main character, she was simply a delight to read from start to finish. It all even brought whole new perspectives out of the initially such a bland and one-note Taran! 

Then soon after her we're introduced to the loudmouthed bard Fflewddur Fflam, who on his own is not all that special except for his magic harp which honestly made me laugh at one point. The dwarf Doli feels almost original simply because he doesn't have an elf to argue with, and is obviously a grump with a heart of gold that endeared him to me just enough. His king was also fun to read about for a moment.

The rest of the cast won't impress quite as much, as of now, but this much is all it needed. The really good ones bounce against one another, bring new life to the duller ones, and make the otherwise rather unremarkable story work so much better than it would have without them. It proves true the old maxim of mine: it's the characters that make the story.

Now I've read through the entire series, and I'll likely pick them all up over and over again - taken as a whole, one of my favourite fantasy novels around. I'll heartily recommend it to everyone that thinks of themselves as a fan of the genre, and a fair few others that do not. Even so, this first book has a bit of a weak beginning and a somewhat anticlimactic ending, which, in spite of its other accomplishments and its formidable legacy, lose it its fifth star.