Rating: 5/5

This guidebook by Dan Millman has useful and wise information for everyone. This book is not your typical trite self-help book that's been rehashed 1000 times. 

Dan Millman has done extensive training in meditative disciplines, mystical practices, and other endeavors in the search for enlightenment. While he found these practices to be highly inspirational and wise, he also realized that these practices didn't do any good if you couldn't perform your everyday tasks in an enlightened manner. Thus-Everyday Enlightenment. 

The book offers 12 practical and well thought-out-of areas or gateways to pass through for optimal growth as a person emotionally, physically and spiritually. Some of the gateways are: self-worth, money, health, emotions, taming the mind, trusting your intuition, sexuality, love, and serving others. As you apply the suggestions in each chapter you'll find yourself becoming more successful with that particular gateway. When you combine all the insights and wisdom you've learned from the gateways you can't help but live in a more satisfied way. 

Dan makes it clear that none of us are ever going to perfect these gateways. They serve as signs and guides to lead us on the path of continual improvement. After all, enlightenment is what you do in the moment. In other words, it's the moment-to-moment awareness and actions that we bring to the present that make us enlightened. No one is ever completely enlightened-they just act more enlightened than others in their day-to-day affairs. 

I found many of the anecdotes in the book to be inspirational. Especially inspirational was the chapter about serving others. There are many wonderful stories of people doing extraordinary acts of kindness to help others. If you don't find these moving you might want to get your pulse checked. 

The wonderful thing about this book is that Dan writes in a clear fashion that is highly accessible to anyone. He also offers practical examples that aren't just fancy esoteric abstractions. Another thing of importance is that the information in this book doesn't depend on your personal beliefs, sexuality, religion or anything similar. The information rises above factional differences to a unified place that works for all humanity. However, you have to have the effort and willpower to apply the lessons taught. 

What makes Dan's writing so impressive is that from these common bonds of enlightenment that apply to all of humanity he elaborates on them in a way that has personal meaning. He doesn't preach to people but accepts them as they are and shows them a path to take. He realizes that everyone's path is a little different but at the same time it's the same as well...The paradox of enlightenment. Read this book for yourself and start applying the techniques and lessons contained therein. This will open up a move vivid picture of reality that creates happiness, enlightenment, and awakening.