Rating: 3/5

. . . I think the King is but a
man as I am. The violet smells to him as it doth to me.
The element shows to him as it doth to me. All
his senses have but human conditions. His ceremonies
laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man,
and though his affections are higher mounted than
ours, yet when they stoop, they stoop with the like
wing.
-act 4, scene 1

Henry V is a cynical war story about an illegitimate monarch who invades a sovereign country on blatantly false pretenses, threatens the enemy with rape and child murder if they don’t surrender, orders the killing of his prisoners of war, deceives and endangers his own men for sport, and—when the bloodshed is finally done—adds insult to injury by making the defeated king's daughter marry him.

Wait, no, surely that's not right. Let's try again:

Henry V is a rousing adventure tale about a kind and noble king determined to atone for his father's wrongs with feats of bravery on the battlefield. He treats his men like family, forgiving them even when they insult him to his face, and he commands them to handle the enemy with equal dignity. He's slow to anger, and goes to war only in the belief that ultimately his actions will bring together two rival nations in peaceful unity. And he's a romantic, too!

Or, um, maybe it's both? Or neither?

As I'm sure you've guessed, the point of this exercise is to show that your reading of this play will depend almost entirely on your own predilections and biases. That's true of all books, of course, but most authors can't help holding your hand at least a little—you're still supposed to think Jane Eyre is a pretty cool lady in the end, whatever reservations you may have about her. If nothing else, you can usually tell who the author is rooting for.

But Henry V doesn't make it so easy. Shakespeare's got plenty of unequivocally good or bad characters in his repertoire, but the best of his plays are the ones which hold a mirror up to the reader/viewer/performer instead. (On balance I don't think Henry V actually is one of his best, but it does illustrate this principle perfectly.) If you like a stirring tale of wartime heroics—"we happy few, we band of brothers"—that's what Henry V will give you. If, like me, you're predisposed against kings and imperial endeavors no matter their optics, you'll get plenty of affirmation here as well. Henry is an undeniably magnetic character, and his deeds are presented as at least ostensibly good and just (as they'd pretty much have to be in Shakespeare's day), but there's too much of an emphasis on the king's hypocrisies and shady dealings for me to believe that Will didn't know exactly what he was implying. And anyway, if you've read enough Shakespeare you know that even in the best of cases his feelings about rulers and their legacies were. . . complicated.

For all its nuance, though, Henry V also sees Will indulging many of his most annoying mid-career vices. Even setting aside the fact that the histories are rarely his most compelling work—sorry, it's just the truth—this one manages somehow both to take on too much (the First Folio title of the play was The Life of Henry the Fifth, if that gives you any idea of the intended scope) and to waste page after page on dull comic relief and peripheral dramas. Henry himself is absent from the stage for scenes at a time, while the inclusion of Falstaff's sidekicks Bardolph, Pistol, and Nym feels pointless in the absence of Falstaff himself. (He dies offstage in one of the early scenes, purportedly because the actor who played him quit the company after a dispute.) The nationalistic stereotypes I noted in 
  Merry Wives of Windsor
 are even more prevalent here, and the whole play is narrated by a Greek chorus whose main purpose, rather hilariously, is to apologize for the poor quality of the production. (Another bit of trivia: this is the only Shakespeare play to include an entire scene in a language other than English—and in typical Shakespearean fashion, the whole thing is basically a setup for a dirty pun en français.)

So I don't know. All in all, I think I'd actually like Henry V pretty well if it was just the scenes with Henry V. As is, I found it interesting to ponder but kind of a chore to read (which, come to think of it, is a sentiment I keep returning to with the histories). I imagine most productions probably do tighten up the script quite a bit, and judging by the predominately positive reviews here and the number of prestigious film adaptations the play's been treated to over the years my opinion is probably the minority one. I've just started The Hollow Crown, the BBC's recent take on the Henriad, so maybe Tom Hiddleston's performance in the title role will win me over.

For now though, I'm just glad to finally be done with the history plays (except for Henry VIII, which comes way later and barely counts) and on to Shakespeare's tragic period. It's been an illuminating and at times rewarding journey, to be sure, but my God will it be nice not to have to read about another Henry or Richard for a good long while.