Rating: 4/5

This doesn't seem to be one of Le Guin's more widely-read works, which I think is a bit of a shame. As I see it, this has to do with the fact that it's not speculative fiction, which in the eyes of many readers means it's "not Le Guin," or at the very least not interesting Le Guin. Now, I think that outlook is pretty damn questionable; yes, this is mostly a stab at realism, although "The Lady of Moge" feels like a folktale, but a more realist Le Guin =/= a Le Guin book that's less worth your time.

In the intro to my edition of The Left Hand of Darkness, Le Guin herself admits that sci-fi is less about trying to predict the future as trying to explain the present. so it's cool if, for instance, Star Trek begat the cellphone or automatic doors, but that's less important than how Star Trek engaged with the social issues of its time. Or maybe Le Guin's Hainish cycle will come true and people will spread across multiple planets and all the other stuff, but what matters more is how the protagonists of Left Hand and The Dispossessed and the others in that cycle I haven't read reflect the people and problems of our planet, right? That's not to say Gethen, Anarres and Urras are exact reflections of the United States or Le Guin's home in Oregon or even the whole of planet Earth, but it is certainly to say that these novels' protagonists, much lie the people of the United States and Oregon and Earth, are concerned with connection. Which is to say Le Guin asks questions of connection, or to put it in less academic terms (you can take the bookish twenty-something out of the MFA program, but you can't, well you know the rest), Le Guin's characters struggle to connect, and the conflicts come when the connections fail. Just like people on Earth.

Really, Orsinian Tales is the same way. Le Guin isn't so much the prophet of the future as an excellent and estimable chronicler of us as we are now. Her characters grapple with their prejudices (the running theme of both "Conversations at Night" and, in a different way, "Brothers and Sisters"), deal with the boot-heel of authority (In "A Week in the Country," the characters' efforts to live out their idyll are increasingly interrupted by a sort of Gestapo), and, as in the incandescent and terrifying "The Barrow," struggle with basic survival. But they try so hard to reach each other, to carve out these moments of connection amid their struggles. Which we also see all over The Dispossessed and especially the Left Hand of Darkness. 

Le Guin's biggest strength is rendering realistic and believable and complex human relationships, and she renders it particularly well here. I mean, "Ile Forest?" Now that story is a ride. Jesus Christ I felt so many ways reading it, and the ambiguous note it closes on is evidence of how fucking great Le Guin is. I'd wager it's the strongest piece here. The violence at the climax of "The Barrow" is also quite well-rendered, devoid of sensationalism and much more sensitive to the characters' inner states than the basic blood and guts. Meanwhile, the love stories of "Brothers and Sisters" and "Conversations at Night" avoid melodrama and caricature; they're grounded enough in grim economic realities and sprinkled with enough humor, beautiful sentences, and the flavor of a real culture with real mores, customs, and fears to just fucking rock.

A couple don't do as much for me. "An Die Musik's" characters seem rather like cutouts, a pitfall she handily avoids elsewhere. I mean it's pretty much J. Jonah Jameson chewing out yr basic sensitive artist, not a terribly great story. "The Room's" doomed romance and totalitarian undertones are effectively done in isolation, but they don't add a lot to the collection. However, when she's on, and she's on about three times as often as not, she crafts excellent work here. And that's why Orsinian Tales is an essential piece of the puzzle. There are no far-flung planets, no spaceships or disintegrating realities. There is a fictitious country, although it's never named as such, and even then is based on Central Europe, but that's as far as that sort of thing goes. Yet, like all Le Guin's work, it's about people and their hopes and their shortcomings. This book is badass, basically.