" I was proud to combine in my person a woman's heart and a man's brain ".

What happens when you learn to see the conflicts between what you are, what you believe, and what is around you, and these become unbearable ?
 I think that is the question that is being answered in de Beauvoir book.
 For me, beyond the pleasure of reading, ( because SB knows how to describe and make the atmosphere ) - it was an instructional book. Especially because it sets out clearly enough the development of a woman's consciousness in an oppressive bourgeois environment, and the ways in which this woman learns to avoid conflicts and to live under pressures that she did not recognize as such. 
 One of these ways is " partial blindness " , which I think is a somewhat common phenomenon for women who grow up in close contact with a culture created almost exclusively by men. They learn to identify with the male court, to take its way of thinking, and, if they remember, however, that they are women, to see themselves as " exceptions ". To consider that they have been " blessed " with a " masculine intelligence ". 

The impression that you are an " exception " , I think - is due to that " partial blindness ", which you do not realize at all, and to live in peace into a world in which you could not find your place, otherwise. The burgeois society of France at the beginning of the last century, considered sexual relations outside or before marriage - to be perfectly normal, of course, only for men. Simone is not interested in women's right to vote, she reads Plato, Leibniz, Nietzsche, and philosophy makes her believe that she has discovered the truth of the world itself, but her confidence cracks when this claim confronts reality, her so-called " privilege " being based on the most flawed of morals. 
 The book has many interesting passages to discuss.
It made me smile, for example, a phrase that indicates how the mechanisms of an absurd guilt are constructed, which can make a woman's life an ordeal : 
 " At the age of 5, it was explained to me that if I was wise and godly, God would save France ".. It also made me laugh the way Simone's mother - a fervent Catholic - caught with a needle the " dangerous " pages of the novels her daughter was allowed to read...And she, even though being alone in her room, did not detached them. Why ? 
 Even from here, a long discussion could begin..