Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars rounded up to reminded myself to read more of this author and recommend her to others.

Captain Jackson is a smuggler and a spy. Which side he is spying for depends on who you ask. Napoleon believes Jackson is feeding him information about the movements of the British navy. The British government is relying on Jackson to ferret out the mastermind behind a group of French traitors on the Devon coast. Who is he really? When he stumbles, slightly wounded, into Teignton Manor, the home of Sir George Lodge, his life takes an unexpected turn. For staying with Sir George is his daughter's dearest friend, Joanna Feniton. Joanna is known as an ice maiden around the village for her reserve but to Jackson, she appears formidable and trustworthy. It is Joanna's grandmother's dearest wish for her to marry Algernon Chalcombe, future baronet and London dandy. Joanna hasn't seen him since she was a child. What does he look like? No one knows. What kind of man is he? When he appears on the scene, he seems foppish yet something in his tone tells Joanna he may not be serious. Is he the right man for her? When Captain Jackson discovers what the French are up to, he knows the navy is in grave danger and time is of the essence. If he's captured by the French, it appears to all as if he has nothing to lose, but Jackson's heart has already been lost - to one formidable maiden!

Alice Chetwynd Ley seems to have followed in the footsteps of Georgette Heyer and continued writing "Traditional" Regency Romances (where the mystery is more the focus of the story). She was a contemporary of Heyer so I wonder how that formidable author felt about her rival? Ley also borrows a phrase or two from Jane Austen but yet manages to make this story entirely her own. It would have been a 4 star read if the plot wasn't so complicated! The reader is introduced to characters without names, characters with aliases and left wondering who the hero actually is. It could have been a 4.5 star read if the villain was revealed in the next chapter and not when they were. It would have made the plot less obvious, although I had already figured out that person was the villain. When I went back and reread the opening two chapters it became more obvious who the characters were but it was confusing while reading it the first time. I enjoyed the adventure and the mystery and even learned something new. I have to critique the comment on Robert Fulton being a genius because he did not, in fact, invent the submarine.

I really enjoyed the characters involved in the story. Even the villain was actually likable and somewhat sympathetic but not really well-rounded. Joanna, the heroine, is incredibly likable and relateable. She is not a modern day woman prancing around Regency England. She is willing to obey her grandmother and marry Mr. Chalcombe at first, but she hesitates a bit because she doesn't know him. Joanna is sensible and keeps her head in a crisis. She isn't all reserve and ice, just to the those she considers inferior for whatever reason or perhaps other girls are jealous. She's very warm to her friend Kitty Lodge but a bit perplexed as to her friend's silly behavior. To Joanna, if you love someone, say so and don't mess around with their feelings. Kitty is not as sensible and she is put out because her beloved doesn't seem to want to spend 24/7 with her. He  actually wants to spend time on his estates learning how to manage them! Joanna finds this quite reasonable, as do I. I would have less patience while dealing with Kitty.

Captain Jackson is a bit rough around the edges and doing a REALLY dangerous job. We know he's brave but he's not foolhardy. He knows the risks and is willing to take them. Jackson enjoys lightly teasing Joanna to get her to stop being so stuffy with him. We get a sense of his feelings for her at their first meeting, yet he isn't the type of man she is expected to marry. Mr. Chalcombe is the complete opposite. He appears rather foppish and stupid but his conversations with Joanna hint at teasing and sometimes he does sound intelligent. Chalcombe can get it together when it counts. I did NOT like Chalcombe. I admire Captain Jackson but I'm not sure I can love him without knowing anything about him. Captain Masterman is in love with Joanna too. He is a very proud man and doesn't seem to understand Joanna just isn't that into him. I'm not crazy about him. His sister is pretty awful in a mean girl sort of way. Kitty Lodge's beloved, Guy Dorlais was born in France but has resided in England since he was a boy. He appears to be loyal to England and to Kitty but the young ladies suspect he may actually feel otherwise. He seems very kind and likable but some signs do point to traitorous activity. 

For once in a Regency novel the older adults are not mean or horrid in any way. Joanna's grandmother is described as a battle-ax and she makes her husband miserable. I don't find her so awful. She's a strong woman and has lots of opinions and the only way she can express them is forcefully. She loves Joanna and wants what's best for her only grandchild even is Lady Feniton is ambitious in wanting a nobleman for a grandson-in-law. She's worried about her family dying out and that is understandable. Joanna's grandfather is a dear, sweet man after my own heart. He spends all his time in the library! Kitty's mother is rather silly but her hysterics are justified. Sir George seems like a sensible man but I don't think he spends much time with his women. 

This is a fun adventure story for fans of Georgette Heyer's early Regency novels.