Rating: 5/5

I FIRST read Jack London's "The Call of the Wild" as a Classics Illustrated comic-book in the 1960s. I was in my early teens and was hardly interested in who Mr. London was or what he did for a living. All I was interested in was reading comic-books and enjoying them.

Finally, I was able to read the 32,000-word adventure novella this year in September-October. The book ended up in my list of favourite books. I also felt somewhat disappointed with myself for not having read the tome during my schoolboy days or even my 20s. Anyway, better late than never!
The lead character of the book is Buck, a large and powerful St. Bernard-Scotch Shepherd. The first chapter opens with the first quatrain of John Myers O'Hara's poem, Atavism. The stanza outlines one of the main themes of The Call of the Wild: that Buck, when removed from the peaceful Santa Clara Valley of California, where he was raised at a judge's house, will revert to his wolf heritage with its inborn instincts and characteristics. 
Here is O'Hara's poem "Atavism" in its entirety so that you can enjoy it as well as grasp its significance as to why Mr. London used its first stanza to start his book.

Old longings nomadic leap,
Chafing at custom's chain ; 
Again from its brumal sleep
Wakens the ferine strain.

Helots of houses no more,
Let us be out, be free ;
Fragrance through the window and door
Wafts from the woods, the sea.

After the torpor of will,
Morbid the inner strife,
Welcome the animal thrill.
Lending a zest to life.

Banish the volumes revered,
Sever from centuries dead ;
Ceilings the lamp flicker cheered
Barter for stars instead.

Temple thy dreams with the trees,
Nature thy god alone ;
Worship the sun and the breeze,
Altars where none atone.

Voices of Solitude call,
Whisper of sedge and stream ; 
Loosen the fetters that gall,
Back to the primal scheme.

Feel the great throbbing terrene
Pulse in thy body beat, 
Conscious again of the green
Verdure beneath the feet.

Callous to pain as the rose,
Breathe with instinct's delight ; 
Live the existence that goes
Soulless into the night.

The suffering that the dog goes through in the first few chapters is bound to make you cringe. Sometimes you truly wonder how Homo sapiens can be so heartless. But then again all kinds of people make this world.
London spent almost a year in the Yukon collecting material for the book. The story was serialized in the Saturday Evening Post in the summer of 1903 in four parts before being published a month later in book form. The tome’s great success immediately made London rich and popular. More than that it had his name included in the canon of world-famous American writers. Authors like Ernest Hemingway and William Faulkner were influenced by his writing.

The Call of the Wild (cover of the Saturday Evening Post shown) is about the survival of the fittest.

If you have not read the book, make sure to do so in 2017. I guarantee that you won't be disappointed. It has thrills, chills and spills. Thrills as in thrilling chases; chills as in chilling icy weather and spills as in dog fights to the death with spilling blood. 
A few nights back I was able to watch the 1972 version of "The Call of the Wild" directed by Ken Annakin and starring Charlton Heston, Michèle Mercier, Raimund Harmstorf, George Eastman and Maria Rohm. It is a co-production between the UK, France, Italy, Spain and West Germany, which is why it has a multi-star cast with actors from all these countries. It was made in Finland which is exactly why the film has a breathtaking winter landscape. John Cabrera has done a magnificent job of the cinematography.
Even though the director has skipped some of the initial parts of the book and has made some changes probably because of avoiding not to make the film too long, he has still done a pretty good job by making quite an exciting film.

The DVD cover of "The Call of the Wild". 

A dog is indeed a man's best friend. Buck shakes hand with a human friend.

Charlton Heston, who plays Thornton, with his pet Buck.