Rating: 3/5

For manly action/adventure, one can’t lose with Clive Cussler. His books are the literary equivalent of a testosterone overdose. Some may call it toxic masculinity, I just call it a good time.

Okay, so his books—-especially his early stuff—-aren’t the most politically correct. They’re actually, to be honest, downright cringe-worthy at times, especially when it comes to Cussler’s track record with female characters. What few exist in his books are basically relegated to whores or secretaries. Occasionally, whorish secretaries.

If you can see yourself getting past all that embarrassing misogynistic stuff, his books are pretty readable.

“The Mediterranean Caper” was published in 1973, and it was the first of Cussler’s books to feature his hero, Dirk Pitt. (“Pacific Vortex” was, actually, the first book Cussler wrote featuring Pitt, but it was published much later, in 1983.) It wasn’t the best of Pitt’s adventures. Indeed, it’s actually pretty clunky compared to other Pitt classics, like “Raise the Titanic!”, where Cussler really started to find his groove.

“TMC” starts out interestingly enough. On a U.S. Air Force base on an island off the coast of Greece, a beautiful sunny day is interrupted by the unexpected arrival of an antique World War I German fighter bi-plane in Greece airspace. It suddenly lets loose a barrage of machine gun fire, damaging and nearly destroying all the expensive American jet fighters on the ground.

It just so happens that Pitt and his team of underwater scientists are looking for an extinct fish nearby. 

Pitt decides to play detective, but he must first slap, seduce, and ravage (in that order) a young German girl on the beach at midnight. She happens to be the niece of a rich German dude living nearby.

Somehow, all of this relates to heroin.

If you’re confused, it’s okay. The plot barely makes sense. But who cares? All you need to know is that Pitt goes after the bad guys, gets the girl, and saves the world. End of story.

To be fair, Cussler’s novels actually got better as he got older and wiser. His storytelling skills improved and, believe it or not, his views on women actually became a bit more enlightened. Well, a lot less neanderthal-ish at least.