Rating: 4/5

A Rather Clever Collection
7 July 2017 (Great Australian Bight)

	Well, that was annoying. I had finished writing my review of the Case-book last night while I was sitting on the plane, saved it to my external harddrive, packed up my bag and then headed off to my parent's house. When I got there I suddenly discovered that my external harddrive was missing. Fortunately I had backed the harddrive up on my desktop at home, however I hope that the harddrive basically disappears as opposed to ending up in the hands of some Nigerian Prince.

	What it also means is that I pretty much have to write this review again from scratch, and attempt to remember what it was that I said in the previous review. Oh well, that probably isn't as much of a problem as it could have been, though I do hope that the hard drive vanishes for good (that would be the better outcome). So, here I am, sitting once again on a plane flying at 30,000 feet over the Great Australian Bight heading to what is probably one of the, if not the, most remote cities in the entire world – Perth – namely because I've never actually been to Perth, and also because I watch to go and watch my football team lose (which is most likely what is going to happen because the away teams do tend to lose in Perth).

	Anyway, enough of that because you probably want to know more about this book as opposed to my current location and my immediate plans, so I guess on with the review. Personally, I found this book somewhat more enjoyable than some of the other Holmsian collections, in particular the previous two. It felt as if Doyle had gone back to his original style as opposed to just a collection of murder mysteries – these stories seem to be more like puzzles than anything else. Sure, there were a couple of murders, but just because somebody died doesn't necessarily mean that they were killed by another human being.

	The collection itself was interesting, and did seem to work more like a guessing game, though of course, as with Doyle's other works, it generally turns out that there is something that Holmes knows that he isn't letting on so it isn't necessarily possible to actually work out the solution to the puzzle. However, we do have some quite interesting stories, such as the one where an American with a rather odd name appears and claims that if he can find two other people with the same last name that he has then they would all inherit a rather expensive piece of property. This story actually reminded me a lot of the Redheaded League, which I also found to be quite clever. This is the thing that I enjoy about some of Doyle's stories – they don't necessarily involve solving a murder.

	With some of the other stories, you have this puzzle regarding a professor, wearing a trench coat and covered in some nasty bruises, dying all of the sudden. You also have an adventure where Holmes is asked to basically stop this woman from marrying what appears to be a rather suspicious character, though this particular character is actually quite well connected. The problem is that she is only one of a long list of partners who all end up in a rather sticky position. Also, conving somebody not to marry somebody with whom they are smitten with is a challenge in and of itself. Once again, we don't have a murder, and we even have poor Holmes being arrested, though the charges basically don't end up sticking.

	Like the previous collection, these stories aren't in chronological order, and one of them isn't even written by Watson (it is narrated by Holmes). As we remember from Volume 3, Holmes retired to tend bees, so what we are seeing now are casefiles that were closed, but for some reason or another kept hidden (or simply may not have been interesting enough to publish with the previous collections). Some of the stories occur after Holmes retires, some of them before. In fact it is even suggested that a couple are set after World War I (remember that Holmes' last case involved busting open a German spy ring).

	So, I can now add the entire Sherlock Holmes stories to my have-read list, though a part of me is a bit sad that it has now come to an end and the books returned to my father. However, maybe, someday in the future, I'll crack open the case books again simply to revisit the stories, particularly stories that I quite enjoyed. Oh, and before I forget, I should mention that in one of the stories we even meet Holmes' rival – not nemesis as in the case of Doctor Moriatry, but rather another consulting detective who proves to be just as capable as Sherlock Holmes.