Rating: 5/5

As someone who has gotten super into English history over the last couple years from Alfred’s Anglo-Saxon England through to some of the Stuart’s as I’ve read a general history on that period, I had finally got to the point of needing to read a book on Queen Elizabeth. 

In terms of biographies on English monarchs, I have read every Yale Monarch Series book for every monarch they have a book on till this point. Yet as of writing, this awesome series has yet to release one on one of England’s greatest monarchs though from my understanding it is in the works. Yet I couldn’t wait. So I look into a number of biographies and Paul Johnson’s is the one that got my attention. It came off as the type of biography. Fairly detailed, good analysis on the person the book is on, and a good documentation on the events of the reign. So something very Yale Monarch Series-esque. This book delivered. 

Elizabeth’s reign was one I had gotten quite familiar with. It was something from just general upbringing and learning about history I had some knowledge on then got much more knowledge on from reading a couple general histories of the Tudor period. So this book was treading familiar ground, but now with much needed insight into Elizabeth herself, her government, and so on. 

The book is an excellent biography on Elizabeth. It’s also an excellent telling of her reign. From the major happenings. To the important players. I liked that Johnson took some time to give background info on Cecil, Cecil’s son, Raleigh, Winstanley, and so on. Elizabeth herself was quite the character, but her reign saw quite many characters as well and Johnson gave them their spotlight. 

So I would have to recommend this book if looking for a biography on Elizabeth that I’d say leans a little more academic imo. Cause personally that’s what I’m wanting and if that is what you’re wanting, then look no further. While it is an older book published in the 70s, I felt like it still held up. Johnson’s writing was good and I imagine much of the info is still accurate as Elizabeth’s reign happened at a time where things were better covered. I mean we quite literally have quotes and some dang fine ones as well. And I’ll leave with one: Anger makes dull men witty, but it keeps them poor.