Rating: 4/5

Another giant anthology of speculative fiction -- quite low on horror, actually, but plenty of ghostly fantastic stories. All are the kind of things we might read on a chill autumn afternoon, or aloud, before a campfire. Just what I wanted! 

Some of these stories leave a deep impression, almost bringing back the magic of worlds first glimpsed in the reader's childhood (for me, in books like Terrible Things: An Allegory of the Holocaust, or my first peek at the art of Gustave Dore in a library, when I must have been five years old). "The Puppet and the Train" by Scott Thomas packed some indelible imagery, for me. "Crocodile Lady" is also pulsing with imagery, in underground London, presenting an exquisite, Stephen-King-like predator of children -- and a well-written heroine teacher. One of the few true horror stories here, "Outfangthief" by Gala Blau, combines mobsters, creepy surgeons, and vampires into a feminist brew that nearly caused me to faint as I waited for a ferry from the beach, during this past National Holiday week. (That's a compliment.) 

Probably the most impressive story for me was "Gestella," by Susan Palwick. It's reminiscent of genre erotica, with its werewolf and human in a sexual relationship, but writing that relationship so true to life that we get a glimpse of how speculative genre erotica can also hit artistic heights, talking about love's changes over time, about marriage, and wisdom, and meaning. 

More of the tales are sort of middling: they don't quite work, but I don't regret reading them. You can always learn a bit about craft. "The God of Dark Laughter" by Michael Chabon feels like a merely good story by a great writer -- I'll have to read again to say just what seems to be missing in this one. Anthony Doerr, famous for the novel All the Light We Cannot See, offers a long fairy tale, almost a novella, about love and magic in Montana, and it has wonderful control of tone, but ultimately left me a bit unmoved. Similarly, "Cleopatra Brimstone," by Elizabeth Hand, exemplifies a kind of punk horror tale that I think I'd like, but its elaborate plot is patchy with tonal changes. "Louise's Ghost," by Kellee Link, was fun but left me puzzled -- perhaps another read is in order. Similarly with "Prussian Snowdrops" by Marion Arnott -- it's reminiscent of Gogol, but I found myself bored. "Tom Brightwind, or How the Fairy Bridge was Built at Thoresby," by Susanna Clarke, seems entirely a waste of time. Why do people like her? Something about dramatic diction, and nothing to do with plot, I suppose. (It's a variation on the question, 'Why do people like Neil Gaiman?' Which is truly one of life's great mysteries.)

There are also poems in this anthology, and they're worth the extra attention they require to really appreciate. Romanian poet Marin Sorescu's "The Cowardly Coffin" is an absurd scene, but with enigmatic European motifs ("a plum or two," "our missile defense"). "Skin" by Charlee Jacob is a mildly Cronenberg-esque anthem. Kurt Leland, who writes a serviceable "Adolescence of Orpheus," logs his astral projections on his web site. Ellen Wernicke writes a pantoum, a wonderful form worth practicing. Aesculapius in the Underworld", by Ryan G. Van Cleave, took me like three readings, but it's worth it, a meditation that combines mythology with a noir-ish existentialism. 

I love these sorts of anthologies. I even listened to the bibliographical introductions. I'm tempted to just reach over and grab another one, but so much more to read beckons.