Rating: 4/5

3 1/2? 3 3/4? Well ...

 ... see the end

yup, another book I'm getting rid of today ... short, but as a hardcover it's taking up over 1/2 inch of shelf space ...  (added 4/26/15)

Suppose you teach creative writing, and you've given an assignment (call it a term paper) to write a novella. Your star pupil, Ms. Bainbridge, turns in something called Master Georgie (forget the "a novel", at maybe 50-55000 words, this is a novella, as assigned).

Okay, you read it, and enjoy it quite a bit. Also, you're pretty impressed with some of the inventive things this pupil has done. You give it something in the "A" range. Ms. Bainbridge shows a lot of promise. 

For example: instead of chapters, she has called the six parts of the work "Plates", as in photographic plates. It's an historical novella, taking place in the period 1846-1854. Right, this is 20-30 years after the very earliest steps in the development of modern photography; not only that, but at least two of the main characters are actually interested and involved in this early photography (although not playing significant historical roles, by any means). But even more to the point, Ms. Bainbridge has written these segments very much in the manner of snapshots in time, capturing a brief piece of the story, which takes place over a period of as little as a day, to as much as a few weeks.

Three different people take these six photographs (telling the story of that segment in the first person, thus also appearing in the plate themselves, so that the plates are all, to some extent, self-portraits). Myrtle, a waif that has been adopted into Georgie's family when Georgie is a young man, and falls in love with him, takes the first and fourth plates. Dr. Potter, a hanger-on of the family's who eventually marries Georgie's sister, takes the third and fifth plates. And Pompey Jones, a destitute, but smart, lad of about Myrtle's age, who comes into contact with Georgie and Myrtle by happenstance (appearing over on the edge of the first plate) floats in and out of view, and takes the second and last plates.

And Georgie himself? Frankly, even though he's easily identified in each of the plates, he doesn't really seem to be the main person in the portrait. But in this he is illustrative of all the persona who appear in these plates. They are portrayed from various views, but always somewhat out of focus, always from a slightly odd angle, with an enigmatic expression on their face (if their face is even shown full-on); that is, neither Georgie nor any of the other persons shown are ever portrayed in a revealing close-up.

So in summary, I found this a fun book to read, but also one which left a very curious impression. It's like looking at old pictures of people you just barely know. You wonder about them, questions form, but nothing is really answered, and in the end you just close the album and forget about them. You don't really care. There really is no story here: how could one make a story out of six photographs?

Originally posted in summer of 2012 ... Certainly one of the earliest reviews I wrote about a book just finished. 

Every so often someone runs across this review, and leaves some sort of evidence of their passing.

And when I look at the review again, I like it - mostly.

What has increasingly bothered me over time is that last question about a story from six photographs. It seems more and more a smart-Alec comment made by a reader who had not yet learned what he subsequently has, about let's call it post-modernist literature.

To make a potentially long comment short - of course a story can be made from six photographs, and this author has done a pretty good job of it. So I've raised my rating to 4 stars, and hope that puts me right with Ms. Bainbridge.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Previous review: Light in August
Random review: The Crooked Timber of Humanity Isaiah Berlin
Next review: Attention All Shipping

Previous library review: To the Lighthouse
Next library review: Doctor Copernicus Banville