Rating: 3/5

My edition of this book has a nice Preface by the author himself, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. He explained that he had written enough about Holmes and Watson so he said goodbye to them. However, he hoped that his readers will remember those characters for a long time. There were some readers who advised him not to end the series as it had formed part of their boyhood. Well, I was already in my middle age when I finally read this but still I appreciated it and for 10 months became part of my daily reading routine. I normally read this as a back up (if the first book proved to be boring) book in the morning early morning, during weekends and especially while resting at the gym lounge. You see, there are some books that I would not dare bring at the gym because some of the members are snoopy and form some kind of expression on their faces if they see me reading books that they think make my sexual preference the same as theirs. 

Yes, when I closed this book after my workout today, I also said goodbye to Sherlock Holmes as but I definitely enjoyed reading the whole canon. 

This book, his last collection of 12 (out of 56) short stories has works that deviated from the usual Watson as the narrator. Rather there is one “Mazarin Stone” narrated by an unnamed third person then there are two, “Blanched Soldier” and “Lion’s Mane” with Holmes as narrator himself. Also, that “Lion’s Mane” is already set after Holmes’ retirement. This gave me the inkling that Sir Doyle also thought twice before deciding to end this canon.

The Adventure of the Illustrious Client. Violet is the daughter of General De Merville and she is in love with a murderer, Austian Baron Adelbert Gruner. The murderer’s last victim is his wife but he does not get punished because the witness gets sick and dies during the trial. Holmes first sees the baron himself but the meeting does not help Holmes in anyway. It takes the other past mistress for him to get clues on what really happened to the victims.  Quite interesting. I thought that the baron was some kind of a vampire killer and then it turned out that he was just ugly and turned uglier at the end of the story. The story is entertaining but when the real baron is revealed towards the end, I said: “huh? okay” and proceeded right away to the next story. This is the reason why it took me a while to finish this collection. - 2 STARS

The Adventure of the Blanched Soldier. Godfrey Emsworth is missing and his friend James Dodd is looking for him. They both served as armies during the Second Boer War in South Africa. It has been six months since the war ended and since they were friends during the war, Dodd tries to contact him and since Emsworth has not responded, Dodd writes to his father. The father says that his son is on travel around the world but Dodd does not believe him. He thinks that Emsworth is missing so he consults Holmes for help.  This is one of the two short stories that are narrated by Sherlock Holmes instead of his partner, Dr. Watson. The reason is that “Watson deserted me for a wife.” The wife being referred here is Watson’s second wife since this was published after Watson and his first wife have separated. The story ends happily and hopeful as regards to the real condition (why is he called “blanched”) of Emsworth. Quite different from the other stories. I also liked the friendship between the two men. - 4 STARS

The Adventure of the Mazarin Stone. Count Negretto Sylvius still an important jewel called the Mazarin Stone. Together with his henchman, Sam Merton, Count Sylvius comes to 221B Baker St. to confront Holmes and ask why the latter’s henchmen are following him. After explaining that the henchmen are all him in disguise, Holmes pulls a series of tricks to make the count admit that he is indeed the thief.  This is one of the two Sherlock Holmes stories (the other is His Last Bow that are written in third person. Also, what is noteworthy here is the fact that there is only one setting: Holmes’ room in 221B Baker St. Based on Wiki, the reason is that that this short story is originally written for a theatre play.  – 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Three Gables. Steve Dixie, a black dimwitted man, tells Holmes to stay away from Harrow (a area in London). To know the reason for the threat, Holmes floated that he knows Dixie’s participation on the Perkin’s case (death). Dixie’s boss is Barney Stockdale and Holmes suspects that he is connected with Harrow Weald case as is tipped off by Mary Maberley, the lady who lives at Three Gables.This is the best story in this collection. It reminded me of Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The House of the Seven Gables especially because of the characters. Was it possible that this story was inspired by that classic novel by Hawthorne?  - 4 STARS

The Adventure of the Sussex Vampire. Mr. Ferguson suspects that his wife is a vampire because their son’s nurse has caught her sucking the blood of their son. Mr. Ferguson tells the nurse to keep quiet by bribing her. The baby is the 2nd son of Mr. Ferguson. The first one is the 15-y/o Jack whose mother is not Mrs. Ferguson. The family lives at their Essex Estate. The starting scene is very engaging. I thought that this was comparable to the gothic ingredient of The Hound of the Baskervilles.  - 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Three Garridebs. Nathan and John Garridebs are looking man whose surname is unusual: Garrideb. Holmes finds out that there is an American Garrideb who asks John Garrideb to look for another man who has the same surname and he will give John $15 million dollars. So far, John has found only Nathan who consults Holmes and so the American Garrideb is not pleased. I liked how the deductions were done by Holmes in the story. The basic premise is not very interesting because the Garrideb does not longer look like an out of this world surname. However, it might be the case when Sir Arthur Conan Doyle wrote this in June 1902.  - 3 STARS

The Problem of Thor Bridge. Maria Gibson is killed near Thor Bridge apparently by her children’s governess, Grace Dunbar. Maria’s husband goes to Sherlock Holmes to clear Dunbar. Despite the obvious evidences, Holmes proceeds to the investigation and by the power of deduction, finds out what are really happened.  Simple yet elegantly told. At first, it seems like a simple straightforward story yet when Holmes’ deductive skills come into play, the unearthing of the real story is just impressive. – 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Creeping Man. Professor Presbury is acting strange and his personal secretary, Mr. Bennett seeks the help of Holmes and Watson. Mr. Bennett informs the duo that the professor has just come from Prague and that he does not want a box to be opened and the letters with cross beneath the stamps to go straight to his master.  Prague should be an exotic place around that time that this was written. Maybe like Transylvannia where Dracula used to reside. No extraordinary flavor in this story except that Sir Doyle seemed to be thinking of going sci-fi. Do old man who are about to re-marry, this time with a much younger woman, have to resort to those things? - 2 STARS

The Adventure of the Lion’s Mane. Harold Stackhurst is a headmaster of The Gables, a preparatory school. Holmes is enjoying a weekend with him because they are friends when another teacher in the same school, Fitzroy McPherson arrives with blood and says something about “lion’s mane” before collapsing then dies. The third teacher, Ian Murdoch, comes after but says that he has no knowledge about the murder. Holmes thinks that Murdoch is the killer because he used to court Maud Bellamy, McPherson’s fiancée until the lion’s mare comes out.  Very educational at least for me. I grew up in an island but I never knew about this lion’s mane could be deadly. Maybe this is found only in that part of the world and not in the Pacific? I like it when I learned something from Holmes. - 4 STARS

The Adventure of the Veiled Lodger. Mrs. Merrilow has a lodger who is mysterious because she has not shown her face. Once, Mrs. Merrilow sees it by accident and it was disfigured. Another lodger complains and so Holmes and Watson do their investigation and find the history of the disfigurement. It is that time when the lodger is working on a carnival and gets herself a boyfriend.  This one is quite different. It is more dramatic than the usual illustration of Holmes’ power of deduction. This one has heart and Holmes is more of like a shrink rather than a detective. But I enjoyed it nonetheless.  - 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Shoscombe Old Place. John Mason is a trainer at a racing stable called Shoscombe Old Place. He consults Holmes because he thinks that his master, Sir Robert Norberton is going mad. The owner of the racing stable is the sister of Sir Robert but Sir Robert is betting on the horse called Shoscombe Prince because if the horse wins, he will be out of debt. When the sister-owner dies, Sir Robert has to hide the body while waiting for the derby where Shoscombe Price competes.  This was the last work included in this Sherlock Holmes canon. Yey! It’s a nice story and ends happily. There is nothing remarkable but it felt nice to finally read all the works. So, maybe that’s the reason why I liked this. I said “finally! At last!” and closed the book.  - 3 STARS

The Adventure of the Retired Colourman. A wife of a man leaves with her lover. The man is Josiah Amberley and the lover is Dr. Ray Ernest. The husband is the one who comes to Holmes to help track down the lovers. It turns out that the lovers have not eloped as the husband is telling Holmes.  Very nice story and I thought that the reason why the British edition put this as the last story is that this is better than the real last which was the Shosombe. This has all the usual elements of a Sherlock Holmes story: deduction, Watson being part of the plot, Baker has an appearance here, the drama of mature adult relationship, etc.  - 5 STARS

Thank you, gentlemen (Doyle, Holmes and Watson). I really had a nice time knowing you. We were together for 10 months and I will surely miss all of you. *salutes*

Now, my problem is what book to bring to the gym.