Rating: 4/5

despite the labelling this actually isn't a complete whitman, but i suppose its complete enough for anyone not writing a dissertation on him, which fortunately, is not me.

included here is the 1855 and deathbed editions of leaves of grass, specimen days, collect, and various odds and ends. virtually all the works cover the same themes - by far the strongest stuff is the civil war material and abraham lincoln's assassination. the civil war came at a unique time in american history where weaponry got exceptionally powerful and medicine was still stuck in the pre-modern era, so you had tons of mutilated soldiers dying of horrible infections and diseases in the hospital. whitman notes that the actual battlefield deaths were dwarfed by deaths following later

the nature stuff is decent but gets repetitive. his musings on the spirit of the american people and the nature of demoncracy enshrined in the constitution, etc, is both inspiring, after witnessing the country nearly tear itself apart, and hopelessly naive, absolutely failing to predict the rise of exploitative capitalism that would emerge a few decades after his death, nevermind the lunacy of the trump administration and fox news' war on truth. in much of his writings about the people, whitman almost sounds like a marxist

the early fiction here is terrible. he wrote a temperance novel which is omitted from here, i can't even imagine how much of a chore that must be to read. its interesting that whitman didnt appear to write fiction after the early 1850s - he probably knew it wasn't his strong point

its also interesting to see the literature he name drops. his views on american literature are what you'd expect of the time - a feeling of insecurity in that the country had just been established and trying to find his own voice. he does like poe but i dont think mentions melville once. most of the great american literature is from the 20th century anyways. on the uk side he seems to really like carlyle, so i might have to revisit him at some point