Rating: 3/5

Generally, I find it difficult to review omnibuses and collected works because the merits of some of the stories or novels in them tend to be better than others, which makes an overall opinion of the volume itself difficult to arrive at. However, in this particular one of Chandler’s crime novels, all of which features his iconic detective Philip Marlowe, my life has been made far simpler than I could have ever hoped for in this regard. For, personally, I find none of these stories themselves to be the main attraction here in the slightest. The true strength lies more in the writing itself. 

Although this might rile some diehard fans of the detective genre, it just has to be plainly admitted that Chandler possessed far more style over substance. Moreover, this is proven without any dispute by his method in creating these novels, which was somewhat Burroughs-esqe. He would cut and paste two or more short stories that had previously been published into one longer novel. In the process, he would then try to blend them together by changing a few names and their individual outcomes into a cohesive narrative. This goes a long way in illustrating where Chandler placed the most importance in his writing. It wasn’t the story’s plot lines but more with the language and character development, both of which he proves to have many strengths. 

However, when he combined these short stories into one longer work he didn’t use a fine toothcomb to look for any obvious inconsistencies or plot holes. Famously, and oft told, is the story about when John Huston came across one of these holes while filming his noble attempt of faithfully adhering to Chandler’s novel “The Big Sleep” [or at least as far as production codes of the time would allow him to be!]. So, he called the author up and asked him who had killed one of the minor characters in the story, specifically, the chauffeur of the Sternwood residence. To which, both the director and author were surprised to discover that he had absolutely no idea whatsoever!

I have never read anything by Chandler before but have seen Huston’s adaptation as well as a few other movies made from his books. Rather than hindering the reading experience I found that it actually helped visualize these characters all the more. Besides, due to the constraints of the film review board of the time, the book and the movies are entirely different stories in many ways. This left what was about to happen in the book still left to be discovered. Although in the end some of these were so convoluted that I gave up trying to figure them out and just let the language carry me to the conclusion with no worries about whether they made any sense or not. 

Despite the complex yet occasionally flimsy plot lines, Chandler shows himself to be an amazing stylist. I’m by far the first person to point out the level of Chandler’s prose. A great deal has been made about it by many before me, and rightly so. It is very striking and original from the very first paragraph onwards. However, considering the generally low bar set by the genre itself it doesn’t seem like he necessarily had to be that good of a writer to make his mark here. 

Regardless, he did wonders for the detective novel, along with Dashiell Hammett, that forever changed the public’s perception of them. Readers of all stripes can all appreciate what he’s done here. I found it nothing but good fun slumming through this oddly poetic and dark world. Many a turn of phrase found here seemed like high art…and other times to be self-parodying. In both instances, the effect was the same, pure pleasure.

Unfortunately, all of these books in this volume tend to be rather racist, misogynist and homophobic in many places but I suppose that’s to be expected for the genre itself, as well as the times it was set and written in. Whether you are willing to overlook this or not is a personal decision. For me, there are far worse examples of these attitudes being written today and in contrast those found here seem quaint and mild in comparison. Not that this makes them any less onerous. It’s here, but it doesn’t ooze and drip on every page as if its one of the driving forces behind the writing of the book. It’s a little jarring at times but largely incidental. 

Overall, the character of Marlowe is one of the good ones, an honorable man in many senses, despite a few oversights of judgment and cutting corners when it comes to the letter of the law. One can fully get behind his character without any pangs of guilt for liking one of the more despicable personas normally found in these types of books. I fully recommend anyone with even a passing interest in this genre or this particular author to follow through and pick up any one of his books without the slightest hesitation. This one is fine place to start!