Rating: 4/5

It seems to be almost a rule today that Biblical scholars assign a degree of fiction to the narratives outlined in the Bible, especially in the Old Testament. It makes sense to a degree. Who ever heard of the Philistines, the Moabites, the Edomites, the Amalekites, and where do we read about the great defeat of Pharoah's army in the annals of Ancient Egypt? In this very readable work, Werner Keller takes a look at the Old Testament narrative, and even some of the New Testament chronicles, and examines them in the light of history and archeology. 

The main thrust of Keller's arguement is that the places mentioned in the Bible are real, and have been discovered by archeologists in the past century of so. Ur, the city where Abraham was born, is a real place. There actually is tall ziggurat in the city of Babylon which could have been the tower of Babel. A number of ancient settlements in the Dead Sea area have been identified, and two of them may have been Sodom and Gommorah. The tunnel into the sewers of Jerusalem, the place where David's army is described as entering the city and conquering it from the Jebusites, has also been found. Finally, the city of Capernaum has been found, and some of the places that were referenced in the gospels seem to be there as well.

While archeology can only go so far to validate the claims of the Bible, the fact that the places described are real places is a good start. This book, however, is old, and there have been many more finds in Biblical Archeology which have confirmed more aspects of the Biblical accounts. The Qumran scrolls alone have shed a tremendous amount of light on the nature of Judaism and ascetic Jewish practices at the time of Jesus. Discovery of records in the ancient cities of Mesopotamia have shed more light on the events described in the Old Testament. It seems that the more archeologists learn about the world in Biblical times, the more that the Biblical accounts make sense. If this book had been written today, it would have been far more compelling.

If you are interested in biblical history, this is a great book to start with.