Before We Were Free  by Julia Alvarez was a great read. This book because it was told from the perspective of a kid, made it easy for me to relate and understand what was happening. The book is realistic fiction, based in the Dominican Republic and New York. Papi, Mami, Tio Toni play the main roles in the story while it is narrated by Anita, the youngest sibling. Anita has two other siblings; Mundin and Lucinda, who also play big roles throughout the book. Throughout the book we see what it was like to live in the Dominican Republic and how important the role of family is. We also see through the story what the title; Before We Were Free really means.

At first glance this book might not seem like a hard read but it is because of all the small and subtle things that the authors does that makes the book what it is. For example on page 93 when Anita is kissed by Oscar “...to be getting my first kiss!” Previously in the book Anita is in love with another boy from America. You could look at this and just see a girl having a change of emotions or could relate it back to the book. In the book America is stepping back and Sam is from America, and Oscar is stepping up and he's not from America. Even though I mentioned earlier how I liked how Julia Alvarez made Anita the narrator, I wish there would have been more than just her perspective. Because Anita is a child and still learning what is going on, and so are we, it is very helpful to have her perspective. Later on in the book when we know what is going on and we want to be more involved in the story and not on the outside it would have been nice if the author would have just mixed up the perspectives.

I would 100 percent recommend this book to a person who can look past it as a easy read and but a easy read with a big message. I would say kids from 6th grade up could read it but they might not fully grasp the magnitude of the book. This book did not feel like a school book to read but a free read book that you could not wait to get back to.