Rating: 3/5

This is the second book I read by Chitra Banerjee. After the first book, I bought all of Chitra's books. This one drew me in, and kept me engaged by the mystery of the man wearing white, who shows up at unexpected times, one time when the dreamer is killed in a car accident as she chases a man wearing white in a black car...

I was fascinated by the mother, the "dreamer" who dreams the troubles that people have, and the horrific events that are about to occur, and she reaches out to warn them...Her dreams take over her life. The dreamer's daughter is fascinated by her mother's life, and craves stories about her mom's life in India, before she came to America. Mom does not share anything about her Indian life. Dad and Mom do not sleep together. Dad is a binge drinker, not respected by mom or by the daughter.

When the wife is killed in a car crash, and the father remains alive, father and daughter build a new relationship together by reading the journals mom has left for them to unravel her secrets about her previous life, her wants, her desires, and her ability to be clairvoyant. Dad becomes the friend, the confidante, and the ideal father the daughter did not know she had.

The daughter has also been coping with a separation from her husband, and the tea shop she owns with a friend is failing. There is a mystery of a manager who opens the fancy new coffee shop that takes away all of the daughter's customers. There is the mystery of the man in white. I was disappointed not to really learn what those mysteries meant. Maybe I missed it. Or maybe those mysteries were no longer important as the daughter finally finds herself. Still, there was so much mystery surrounding these two people, that it did not make sense to me that one just vanishes and the man in white finally meets the daughter in a grove where she first sees him and is drawn to him, and he spends a few moments with her doing Tai Chi. 

I will continue to read Chitra's books, and hope that this dream-like story with unattainable answers is singular to this book.