Rating: 3/5

This play gives women credit for trying to make the world a more peaceful place as early as 2400 years ago. Women on both sides of the Peloponnesian war unite in a sex strike. No more sex until there's peace. 

This play's reputation is that of an anti-war drama. Ending war is a serious matter, thus it was my expectation this play to be a somber effort of the part of women to knock some common sense into the minds of their men. Instead it was a comedy first, and an anti-war message second. The foolishness and absurdity of war is laughed at which diminishes the attraction of war, but the comic treatment is too slapstick for my tastes. 

One part of the plot that's not as famous as the sex strike is the fact that the women occupy the Athen's treasury building to deprive the government of the funds required to wage war. When an armed person is ordered to clear out the female occupiers, he is flustered and hesitates because he's not sure how to use force on women. 

It's commendable that Aristophanes portrays the men of Athens as being such gentlemen that they would never use armed force on women. I have my doubts about this, and I suspect it was actually considered so absurd as to be funny by the audience. 

This is comedy written 2400 years ago. Some of the jokes require footnotes to explain why it's funny (i.e. making fun of other ancient politicians and playwrights). However the humorously indecent jokes about sex need no explanations. Aristophanes' writing is so bawdy that it's embarrassing to the sensibilities of polite company today. Men walking across stage with prominent erect penises begging for sexual relief can be accepted as a comic over-the-top characterization of men's sexual appetites and their expectations of women. Unfortunately, the power of women to force men to end war by withholding sexual favors is also an unrealistic exaggeration.

If Aristophanes were alive today, I have no doubt that he would have his own late night TV talk/comedy show of his own. His monologue would probably have a lot of words bleeped out.