Rating: 1/5

DEADBEAT, SKANKY SISTER: If you even so much as look at one of my boyfriends, I'll scratch your eyes out! I hate you, bitch!

DUMB-AS-A-POST HEROINE'S INNER MONOLOGUE: I didn't understand why my sister didn't seem to be happy to welcome me home after two years at boarding school.

DEADBEAT, SKANKY SISTER: Hahahahahahahaha! I set you up but good to be gang-raped by a bunch of horny, diseased seamen. You're not such an uptight virgin anymore, are you? I hate you, bitch!

DUMB-AS-A-POST HEROINE's INNER MONOLOGUE: What had happened to me? And what had happened to my poor sister? We must have both walked into a trap to be kidnapped and raped by a bunch of random seamen...who strangely seemed to be familiar with my sister...and...she didn't seem to be overly traumatized by all the kidnapping and gang-raping...and, in fact...was that the sound of her cackling laughter I heard right before I was taken to the rape room?...No, it couldn't be...We were both victims in this scenario, for sure.

DEADBEAT, SKANKY SISTER: Nananana booooooboooooo, I trapped your husband into having sex with me while he was asleep and you were in excruciating child labor next door, nanananaboooooboooo. I hate you, bitch!

DUMB-AS-A-POST HEROINE'S INNER MONOLOGUE: I was very angry at my husband for his treachery and told him so directly and in forceful terms. As for my sister, I didn't breathe a word to her. I had to keep being nice and invite her to my house parties otherwise my stepmother would have suspected that something may be wrong in our sisterly relationship. And nothing was wrong, nothing!!! NOTHING!!!....

DEADBEAT, SKANKY SISTER: Hey bitch, I need you to give me 5000 dollars...because I need it...for...you know...REASONS. You can totally trust me and you should believe this is for an emergency and for a good cause. And I still hate you, bitch!

DUMB-AS-A-POST HEROINE'S INNER MONOLOGUE: I had no choice but to pawn the beautiful, precious, unique pearls that my husband had given me as a symbol of his love upon our wedding since my sister made a convincing case that she needed this money desperately. And I had to do everything my sister told me.

Sadly, the book concludes without any further shenanigans from the deadbeat, skanky sister. I couldn't even concentrate on the worthless hero or any of the other WTFery (a religious fanatic villain who murders by the power of prayer and lusts after the heroine for example) because I was so fascinated by not only the heroine's but the entire cast of characters' complete, willful blindness when it came to the deadbeat, skanky sister from hell. 

Amazing.