Rating: 4/5

Down These Mean Streets
By: Piri Thomas

ISBN: 0-679-78142-0
331 pages
Publisher: Vintage Books
1967
$12.95

	
Down these mean streets by Piri Thomas is a very interesting book. It has a lot of details that would put you into the characters foot. Piri Thomas was a 12 years old kid who lived in the Spanish Harlem of New York. He grew up with his friends and they always had each others back. Piri was a boy living in a poor apartment. In the winter it would be freezing temperature in their house. His father had a job that would barely pay off for them to live. But then they moved into the Italian Harlem. And from there, Piri has been dealing with a lot of trouble.
	
This book puts you into the shoes of Piri Thomas. You can actually feel Piri’s feelings if you read this book. Every move and feeling he gets, you can feel it. It is amazing at how this book puts you into his shoes. I guess it is because of how he uses his words. It has a great word vocabulary. When I read this book I really enjoyed it, and I am not a fan of non-fiction books.
	
This book also has a great story line. It puts you right into the story. It puts you in the part where Piri had run away from home, and he doesn’t really know if he should go home or if he shouldn’t. And Piri is only 12 years old, and he has ran away from home, so he has probably been under a lot of problems with his life from this one part and you can tell because it is not likely for a 12 year old boy to run away from home. 
	
It also shows about family and love. In the beginning of the book, Piri wasn’t really treated normally. His dad didn’t really show that he loved him. His mom and siblings were close. The dad really just sat and watched television and demanded things. He also had a short temper. He never really showed Piri and his family that he loved them, but when Piri was in a lot of trouble, he did everything to help Piri out in time of need. Even though he showed it in a rough way, he stilled loved his family.
	
This book is full of many more thriving situations. It is filled with pictures made by the text. The story line just gets better as it goes. And even though you won’t notice it, the family will love each other. And so will other people as they meet up. And this book is a book that I recommend for people who really like life situations and books that are realistic.