Rating: 4/5

This is one of those books that everyone talks about but I don't think a lot of people read. It's also very easy to caricature, in part bc of the title and the brouhaha it prompted. It's also very dense and dry, so I'm not surprised that a ton of people haven't read it.

But, the argument is interesting. WJW argues that for most of American history, race and class discrimination against African-Americans were deeply intertwined. Even after slavery, the vast majority were systematically excluded from anything but the bottom rungs of the labor market. This is WJW's method, btw: race relations/hierarchies are shaped largely by A. the nature of the state as an official enforcer of racial discrimination. 2. The structure of the economy, especially the labor market.

This started to change in the mid-20th century, when the rise of unions, the peak of American industrial production, the Great Migration, and the New Deal all created opportunities for the formation of a black working and middle class. The Civil Rights movement, which WJW sees as a mainly middle-class movement, then stripped away most of the official state racial discrimination/segregation, although other forms certainly endured. 

In the 60s and 70s, affirmative action, the expansion of govt programs, and other forces increased the formation of a black middle class, but at the same time other economic forces, especially de-industrialization of urban cores, further undermined the black working and "underclass," giving rise to the problems of the modern ghetto (WJW's terminology). In other words, a decent sized minority of blacks rode the escalator up to middle class status while a larger pool stagnated in urban cores with erratic employment and, because of white flight, fewer resources.

This is where WJW arrives at his thesis: the black community in the US, by the late 1970s, was suffering more from class problems than race problems. He fully acknowledges that the existence of the black underclass is a product of racist historical forces. But, he says that the plight of modern African-Americans was not necessarily different from the growing white underclass in deindustrializing areas, where a lot of the same social pathologies and anomie emerges (something which was starting when WJW wrote this but has now accelerated). They had both had the economic legs cut out from under their feet and struggled to create stable social and economic lives as a result.

Consequently, WJW argues, affirmative action programs are insufficient for dealing with these problems. They are mainly a benefit to black people who already have the means to apply for colleges and middle-class jobs. Instead, he recommends a broadly based, largely colorblind assault on poverty, funding of schools and job programs, and construction of welfare programs. It's kind of interesting that WJW reasons his way to a very progressive conclusion from premises that conservatives might find appealing, but that's part of what makes the book interesting.

Still, I think there are flaws in this rather grand narrative. The CRM wasn't just a middle-class movement for integration; it was in large part a poor people's movement that sought jobs and economic equality too. Also, the black middle class still suffered from systemtic racism; just look at the gap in home prices between black/white owned properties or the discrimination that still goes on in renting. Lastly, I think WJW downplays continuing police violence and white backlash and other forms of racial inequality that prevented a more egalitarian society from emerging.

Nonetheless, this is a useful book for thinking about the relationship of race, labor, and economics. It's hard for me to recommend, though, bc it is so freaking dense and dull (thankfully it is short).