Rating: 5/5

This is one of the better Travis McGee novels, in my opinion, although I am sometimes surprised to find that a GoodReads reader I respect trashes a McGee novel I absolutely love while also praising to the skies another McGee novel that just barely worked for me. 

Tastes vary. 

Books I love may be books you will hate; the way around this, I think, is to find GoodReads readers with tastes similar to your own. That way, you know if they ★★★★★ a book that at the very least you will find it tolerable, and you may just find it a thrill.

Robert B. Parker used a shrink/girlfriend for Spenser to put a PC spin on everything he was doing and thinking, as they talked about his cases. The weakness in the Travis McGee series is, first that John D. created Travis in the Sixties era of Hugh Hefner, and second that although Meyer softens Trav, there is no way to make Travis McGee politically correct by any decade’s standard other than the Sixties.

John D. was by now (FREE FALL is ©1981) responding to this sexist backlash. Slightly. I think John D. was also on the final stretch of his run, and had recovered his second wind.

--

From CRIMSON:

She dipped a finger in her remaining half inch of Moselle and drew a slow circle on my chest. “Hmmm,” she said.

“Hmmm what?”

“I guess everybody has heard that ancient joke about how do porcupines make love.”

“Very very carefully,” I said.

She reached and set her empty glass aside. Her eyes danced. “So?”

I gathered her in. “Let me know if it gets to be not carful enough.”

--

Actually, my favorite part of this puppy is when Trav jumps out of a hot air balloon to avoid being killed. 

This resonates with me because I’ve done a bit of hot air ballooning. First off, did you know that Hot Air Ballooners have to file a flight plan? This has always seemed absurd to me, and maybe it is no longer necessary, it’s been awhile since my last ride. On my last balloon ride, there was a Velcro-failure on the third group: there were no deaths, since it happened at a low altitude, but the riders were pretty banged-up, and some of them may have gone to the hospital. Actually, I think that because of this near disaster, and others, Velcro-strips may have been eliminated from Hot Air Balloons. An Internet search is showing an improved balloon circa 2013 without a Velcro strip. Now, apparently, the pilot has an on/off valve at the top of the balloon to dump out hot air on an as-needed basis: Much Better! On my rides the pilots had a cord to pull that would open a Velcro strip in the side of the balloon to quickly dump the air out to make landings safer in the event of high wind. Otherwise the wind would drag the basket along, banging the passengers around. Problem was, if the pilot used the Velcro strip on the first or second trips, he would have to re-assemble and re-inflate the balloon from scratch, which would take time and expend propane. The second ride banged the balloon around quite a bit, which apparently loosened but didn’t quite break the Velcro strip. Until the flight of the third group. I watched them go up slowly…I turned away and was talking to a friend who stopped and suddenly pointed…I turned and saw the balloon going down quickly on the other side of a hill…I didn’t see it, but the basket hit an angled soft dirt hillside. I remember watching an earlier balloon being assembled and inflated, on my first ride ever, and worrying out-loud about the Velcro: “Velcro? This thing is held together with Velcro??” That pilot told me: “I’ve never had a Velcro failure. I’ve never even heard of a Velcro failure.”

--

Anyway, Travis McGee takes on a Biker Gang, Hollywood Power Players, Stuntwomen, and possibly the most frightening creature imaginable: an actress Superstar. @hg47