Rating: 4/5

”I was struck again as I had been for years by how my fishing so hypnotically wiped the slate clean again though only for as long as I was in the river. For a few hours though all problems--money, sex, alcoholism, generalized craziness--disappeared in concentrating on the flow of water, the likely places for feeding trout to be, the clear current or in the eddies next to the grassy banks or behind the large rocks and boulders that broke the water’s surface, forming pockets behind them that always seemed to hold a fish or two.”

  

Jim Harrison looking like a ne’er-do-well.

Whenever I’ve tried to fish, I’ve spent the whole time thinking about all the other things I’d rather be doing, but if my life was as screwed up as the narrator of this novel, I, too, might develop a liking for fishing. He is a man trying to escape himself, like a man caught in a burning building looking for an open window. He does best when his mind can focus on one thing, like trying to catch a fish. The world is complicated, and his reactions to it are to be self-deprecating and constantly keeping himself wrapped in a cocoon of drugs and alcohol.

If Ernest Hemingway, Edward Abbey, and Hunter Thompson stayed up all night boozing, whoring, and writing, this manuscript, stained with blood, wine, semen, and unidentifiable powder substances, might be the result. The editor would need to read the wrinkled pages with gloves on. 

Our narrator is a loser and is trapped in a loop that ensures that he remains a loser. To not be a loser invites responsibility and expectations. He chases women, but when they show interest, he nullifies that interest by seeing them as slobs, dopes, and sluts. He has wild thoughts of self-destruction. ”I would become a monk of violence and blow myself up---troublesome cock and brain full of romance---in a single deliciously orange explosion.”

But really he isn’t motivated enough to do much of anything, except drink himself into a coma. ”The bartender advertised last call and I ordered a triple Granddad as a suitable sleeping pill. Narcosis with the liver hit by a club.” When he meets Tim in a bar in Key West, he has found the spark plug that will finally motivate him to momentarily drift out of the rut of his life. Tim has recently returned from Vietnam, and the war experience has left him physically and mentally scarred and unhinged. He is up for anything, and fortunately for the Narrator, who is flat broke, he has a wallet full of money. 

They decide to blow up a dam and pick up a dame.

Sylvia is Tim’s girlfriend, and what makes her a more puzzling character is that she seems way too sane to spend more than one evening watching these two guys get wasted and having to put up with Tim chasing everything in a skirt except her. 

Whether through loyalty or boredom, she goes the distance. 

The narrator falls head over heels in love with her. The unattainable Sylvia, because frankly Tim would probably kill him or put him in so much pain that he would wish that Tim had killed him. As Tim starts to realize how the narrator feels about Sylvia, it becomes a new form of torture that he can exploit for his amusement. As they drive across the country, staying in the same room, Sylvia and the narrator are spending more and more time together as Tim disappears on further adventures of debauchery that go beyond the endurance of the narrator. Tim enjoys dangling Sylvia in front of the narrator and gleefully watches the misery this causes.

The narrator is sporting almost a 24 hour hardon. If he had some duct tape, he’d tape it down to his belly. Sylvia may have started the journey chaste and demure in the face of his lust, but as she receives less and less attention from Tim, she starts to encourage a controlled amount of attention from the narrator. 

Of course, it is all doomed. 

”’I love you. I won’t tell him,’” but the word ‘love’ sounded flimsy and childish from my mouth.”

I’m not sure how autobiographical this novel is, but it certainly felt like Jim Harrison was exorcising some of his own demons. He is exploring his own dissatisfaction with his own weaknesses, his own meanness, his own self-hating, and his own small minded need for what he is unwilling to put enough effort into attaining. The narrator’s desire to escape, to fish, and to be in regions less inhabited is a reflection of Harrison’s own desires. Some readers found the machismo, ultra-heterosexual, drug and alcohol spree off putting. I certainly understand that, but in no way is this a celebration of that lifestyle or a veneration of being these three people. 

It feels more like Harrison is sticking his thumb in an open wound in his own psyche. 

I would have certainly enjoyed this book more in my twenties. This is one of those baffling things about being a lifetime reader, the books I realize, decades later, that I’ve never read. I’ve read many Harrison novels, but somehow never read this one. I have very fond memories of his book Farmer and intend to reread it in the near future to see if it still proves to be one of my favorite books by him. 

  

Jim acquired some miles along the way.

R.I.P. Jim Harrison. December 11th, 1937-March 26th, 2016

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten