Rating: 5/5

I feel like I just read the beating heart, the source, of a strain of speculative fiction I have known since I was a kid. This is it, I realized as I read, this is the original. Where has Jack Vance been all my life? Why did no one tell me about him? The feeling is uncanny. I just read these books for the first time, and I feel like I have returned to a place I have always known. 

The first book, The Dying Earth, is surreal and melancholy. It follows several characters, mostly wizards and the creations of wizards, as they trek across this moribund wasteland, red sun sputtering in the lower sky, trying, obsessively, to find some kind of meaning before everything ends. It is beautiful and sad and strange as all hell. 

Then come the two Cugel books, which are something else entirely. They are extremely clever and comical adventures that will have you literally laughing out loud (and how often does a book make you LITERALLY laugh out loud? These two will). Despite their comic surface, though (and, again, there are parts that are EXTREMELY funny), there is a melancholy undercurrent to all this, and the narrative never lets us forget that these actions are all taking place at the end of the world, ancient sun burning out, old fortresses and palaces crumbling, few remaining humans scrambling about their meaningless, rural lives, just waiting for the darkness to come. It is this sustained and compelling contrast between the hilariously rational misadventures of Cugel on the one hand and the quiet, simmering undercurrent of melancholy on the other that catapults these books into the realm of the magnificent and unforgettable. These books are a unique sort of funny and a unique sort of sad at the exact same time, and together, the paradoxical effect of all this strangeness is one of recognition - yes, you nod as you read, yes, yes, this is familiar. Vance's control over tone is awe-inspiring. To those who may complain of "wordiness" or "purple prose," you are misreading the book - the prose is intensely ironic, and the majority of the time the characters use arch, pedantic rhetoric to disguise their base and embarrassing motives. Also, all the talk of the "plotlessness" of the Cugel books is nonsense - they are only plotless in the way that Homer's The Odyssey is plotless, which is to say they aren't. The plot encompasses the character and his world and his various attempts and strategies to live in it, at least until it dies. This has as much a plot as life has a plot. 

The final book, which is also the shortest, is the weakest. It is a fix-up of three stories, the first two of which are a clear step down from everything that came before. The second in particular is disappointingly tedious, and gets trapped in the kind of shallow slapstick the earlier novels skillfully avoided. 

The final story in the fix-up, though, "Morreion," is amazing, containing the most moving passages in the book. It tells of a bizarre trip across the universe to rescue a lost wizard. And it tells of endings, of things lost and forgotten, of ancient enemies long extinct. It is the most fitting denouement to this series I could have imagined, broadening the perspective from a single dying Earth to an entire dying universe, to the death of truth, of loyalty, of life, of everything. Retroactively, it helps to frame all that came before. The scenes when the wizards meet the lost wizard Morreion feel like something out of myth. That is precisely, in fact, the feeling evoked by much of this series - a sense of mythic origin, like we are reading stories of long ago that underpin our current reality. These places feel REAL in a way that we rarely find in fantasy fiction. Like Oedipus or Odysseus, we somehow feel that Cugel and Rhialto will always be there, struggling against the dark. 

In short, this is one of the best fantasy series I have ever read. If you are open to non-traditional modes of storytelling, and if you are willing to go where the stories want to take you, I cannot recommend it to you highly enough.