Rating: 4/5

EPILOGUE BY SUSAN ROSS INCLUDED

I really enjoyed this story. Spinster Primrose Dane witnesses a murder and hides in the bowels of London. She finds she's resilient and amazingly capable. 

Nightshade aka Luke Hawthorne, a thief who has now become respectable and very rich, comes to her rescue at the request of a friend. Prim is not an easy woman to rescue - mainly because she thinks her rescuer is working for the bad guys.

Both feel unworthy of the other's love and so their true feelings take a long time to present themselves.

Prim's reluctance to tell the name of the guilty party was a little annoying. I'm not sure why it needed to be a secret.

Regardless, I loved both our H and h and enjoyed the story immensely.

However, it needed an epilogue. So I wrote one:

The Rescue by Suzanne Robinson - Epilogue by Susan Ross

“Choke me…” Luke never finished his sentence since his wife’s glare caught his eye. Prim hated when he used that expression in front of the children.

Simon, his eldest son, now seven years old, stood before his father, looking at him with a question in his eye as he held a stray cat gently but firmly in his arms.

“No,” said Luke. It was a word Simon, who had a heart of gold and an angelic temperment, rarely heard and he didn’t take it well. Simon sidled up to his father and plopped in his lap, an easy enough thing to do since the family was enjoying one of their many outdoor outings complete with a huge picnic basket of tasty treats. 

“It needs a home,” said Simon, snuggling close to his father while cuddling the cat.

Luke sighed and hugged his beloved child close then looked at Prim. She, however, was watching their two younger children trotting towards them. Robert, fleet footed even at five years old, and Violet, a chubby three year old, had been quick to notice something interesting was happening between Simon and their parents. They’d left their explorations behind to stick their noses where they didn’t belong.

Violet dropped into her mother’s lap, thumb in her mouth as usual. Prim nuzzled her chin in the child’s glossy black curls so like her husband’s. Her children would always feel wanted; they were treasured above all else.

“This one’s different than the others,” announced Robert, kneeling beside his father and brother to pat the cat. “He’s a lovely orange colour. We don’t have an orange cat. We should call him Pumpkin.”

“Yeth,” agreed Violet. “That’s perfeck.”

“Perfect,” corrected Prim.

“Dat’s what I said. Perfeck.”

Prim sighed. Luke grinned. Then he looked at Simon, a mirror image of himself as was Violet. Robert, however, looked just like his mother, thank God. He wished they all had her golden hair and her lovely gray-green eyes rimmed with teal. Prim would not agree.

“Simon,” Luke said in his sternest voice. “We have five cats already and one is pregnant. We cannot have another one. We are becoming infested with cats.”

“But,” replied Simon, “we have NO mice and we have NO rats.”

“True.” Luke tried to come up with another excuse to forbid the addition of a new cat to the ever increasing menagerie of cats, dogs and injured wildlife his son was constantly bringing home. 

Simon tilted his head down and looked up through the silken blackness of his hair. Luke’s heart pounded. How he loved this child! His three children and his beautiful wife made his life complete. He was happy, content. All his dreams had come true. He shook himself. That was NOT the point. Things were getting out of hand. He had to stop the madness. 

But Simon was looking at him as if he was a hero. As if he were a man capable of fixing all the world’s ills. Nightshade folded like a cheap deck of cards.

“Fine,” the former terror of the bowels of London said. Robert and Violet cheered. The three children ran to the kitchen to introduce Pumpkin to the other inhabitants. Perhaps that termagant, Mrs. Snow, would quit. 

“Well, that’s putting your foot down,” said Prim as she held a strawberry to his mouth. 

“Choke me dead, Mrs. Prim Darling Dane Hawthorne,” Luke answered. And, ignoring the strawberry, he kissed his wife breathless.