Rating: 3/5

I first of all have to state that I did not know that this book was part of a book series. I therefore was very suprised to be introduced to the characters and story in a way that allowed me to get to like the characters and find my way into their histories without realising that these histories already appeared in earlier books (I realised halfway through the book that it was part of the series).

I really enjoyed reading the book, after having dealt with witch hunting in literature and history at university, and even though it was hard for me to get to like the protagonist at the beginning, I slowly started getting warm with his honesty and thoughtfulness.

Nevertheless, the book had some issues that need to be addressed.
As it was already mentioned, many things such as descriptions were repeatedly mentioned, which sometimes made it hard for me to enjoy reading. At some parts I found myself skipping descriptions, just scanning them for important new information (which I most often only do when I am reading something completely uninteresting). Additionally, I was just waiting for the things that are described in the summary of the book to show up at the very beginning and was therefore disappointed to find one of the major turns of the book already being described in the summary of the back of the book (though it is not really the book's fault per se but that of the cover). That was why I took one star from my rating.

The other star was taken because I found the ending quite unspectacular and was a bit taken aback by the fact that some open iends were completely left open. They are probably contínued in the next book, but I just missed the fact that (SPOILER!!) Nesta and her inn weren't even mentioned one time in the end. Was she really safe with the family? What about the depressive wive? etc.
Even though I'd have liked to answer this question I will probably not buy and read the followig book. Maybe after some time I'll think about it in another way but now I just do not like to continue or even start this series from the very beginning.