Rating: 4/5

Podkanye is a charming female protagonist, a young girl dreaming of becoming a spaceship captain. Named after a saint from Mars, we quickly learn that Podkanye is very devoted to her birthplace i.e. Mars, but also how much she is very much looking forward to visiting other planets in an upcoming family trip. Right from the start Podkanye reminded me of another teenage female protagonist, Holly the heroine of Heinlein's short story The Menace From Earth. Like Podkanye, Holly was born and raised away from Earth. Holly is a Luna Native i.e. Loonie, while Podkanye is a Marsman (because as she stresses, Martian only refers to the original species and inhabitants of Mars) but both of them belong to alien societies. Holly aspires to be a space ship designer, Podkanye wants to command one. Both young girls are ambitious individuals with a well developed moral compass. 

This book is basically a series of diary entries written by Podkanye and occasionally her hyper intelligent and potentially problematic brother. This diary opens up with Podkanye introducing her family that is composed of the above mentioned brother and her brilliant parents, a mother who is an accomplished engineer and a father who is an equally successful and esteemed historian. Podkanye then raves about the family trip that gets cancelled because of the mix up in the frozen babies factory. In fact, her family suddenly gets 3 new members all at once. Her parents didn't plan to have them all at once, but now there are here, Podkanye does what she can help and hides her disappointment about the cancelled trip. However, it seems that not all is lost because Podkanye has a brilliant uncle who is willing to help and take her and her brother on a planet hopping trip himself.

Now, based on my description, you might judge this book to be SF YA adventure but Podkanye of Mars is actually more a social commentary of the future. One thing I like about Heinlein's future history works is that they seem so realistic. He portrays future societies as complex and problem ridden as our present ones. You might call it pessimistic but I think his estimations are spot on. As much as we would like, it is unlikely that the human race will solve all of their problems with the advancement of technology. It is much more likely that we will drag our deeply rooted issues with us into space. 

Not that things are hopeless. There is always hope and Heinlein is good in showing that it pays to think and use your head. As a social commentary, this book is very successful. It examines a series of important subjects, ranging from politics to economics, from gender roles to parenthood, from personal liberty to parenthood. One sentence in particular stayed with me (Those who do not have time for kids should not have them) and made me think quite hard. I wonder whether it really possible for both parents to have a very successful and demanding career and to be there for their children, or is it always one parent (regardless of the gender) that makes some career sacrifices. I am not saying it has to be a woman and a mother who makes that choice, but maybe somebody must make it, for it is hard to believe that both parents can chase their career and be there for their kids at all times. Not unless we want to have a society where kids raise themselves without a moral compass. The number of children is something that needs to be considered as well. It is not the same to raise two kids and ten. Having children is a serious life long obligation and responsibility, something technology does not really help with. 

All in all, this was a great book to read. The story itself is interesting and well written, the plot is well paced, there is enough action to keep you on your toes, plenty of humor and enough food for the mind. It is an amazing book, perhaps not as intellectually ambitious or profound as some of the best Heinlein's works, but certainly worthy of a recommendation.