Rating: 2/5

The first three books in the series are in 3rd pov, but this one is in 1st pov. This really makes the flatness of the characters stand out.

The main character has no thoughts. No signs of intelligence or life. The kid is a 16 year old boy scout who only shows the barest of hints of interest in the girl who is suppose to be his love interest [they end up together at the end yet it just feels forced as there isn't any flirting or romantic interest expressed in any other way etc throughout the book). He's super polite, careful, and just has no real substance (or flaws). He just simply isn't human or alive by any means.

What do I mean when I say that? Well, there is NO emotional response or thoughts or anything when at the very end of his journey he finds out he's a prince and meets his father, a king he just saved, for the first time. What happens? NOTHING. Like...eff you so much. He's just mild and accepting and goes along with everything. No response or feelings or thoughts etc. He's not happy, overwhelmed, or any realistic intense emotion upon seeing his father, a king, for the first time in his life. I hate you author.

The book revolves around keeping all of the information from the king's kid and sending him off into the woods. The girl that he runs into is useless and ill tempered. USELESS. She cries. Often. Over silly and stupid things. Did I say how often she cries? I need to emphasizes this here. The only thing she does through the entire series is either needs to be protected, chitchatting with the main character/stating the obvious, is merely there existing, crying, or some combination of those. 

It's rather strange how suddenly Daystar at the very end of the book shows a high level of romantic interest in her [when until that point he showed no interest in her]. Sure, she's given a few cookie cutter 'But I helped roles', however they are rather forced. I have no idea why anyone would like her, or even want her. I'm assuming it's because he grew up in the middle of the woods with only his mom around and had no friends. That is probably the only reason why he could stand her. 

That was too harsh, you say? Okay, I'll explain further why she's such a terrible character. At the beginning she's a witch who can't use her magic. Then she's able to, but with the limitation of only being able to do so after being recently polite. Instead of being happy about this, she complains and grumbles about it. At the beginning she is able to use magic 0% of the time. Her response to learning that she could use magic, but only after being polite/nice can be paraphrased by "NUOOOOO! This is the worst thing ever!" Yeah, this sort of person is pretty much universally hated.

She is a rude idiot. For no reason. It's just her typical temperament. What a catch, Daystar!

Last, but not least, there's the fact that there isn't any compelling reason for Daystar to go see the dragon or hang out in the dangerous forest [thus the entire book shouldn't have really happened]. He knows nothing, his mum just tells him to go and not come back until he knows why he was sent away and is given a sword. A few random strangers tell him to meet the dragon king and he does so...even though he knows the forest is incredibly dangerous and he believes that he'd be eaten as tasty dragon chow by the dragons. There is no good/understandable reason why he meets the dragon king. Just one stranger and then a lizard suggested it... Yeah, sure, that's good enough reason for me to risk my life too.

There was a 'fake*' [read: pulled out of your bum] reason to not tell the kid about the magic sword [because then wizard/enemies will find him magically if he knew], but why the hell couldn't he be told that his father was the king, asleep, or that he needed to be saved? That's compelling reason to risk your life and meet the dragon king.