Rating: 4/5

The Once and Future King is, obviously, a modern variation on the Arthurian cycle. Allegedly, T. H. White’s primary source was Sir Thomas Malory’s Le Morte d’Arthur . However, while Malory starts his book with the story of Uther and Igraine, White hardly mentions Arthur’s birth parents. Moreover, while Malory sweeps away Arthur’s youth in less than ten pages and a couple of short chapters (I,3-7), T. H. White stretches this indefinite period into a full novel of more than 200 pages. The segment about the sword drawn from the stone is only retold — beautifully and emotionally — at the very end of White’s novel.

The bulk of The Sword in the Stone is an episodic narrative that consists of a series of adventures and considerations around young King Arthur, from the time when he was just a young boy and was called, in an affectionate yet slightly insulting way, “the Wart”. Around this young boy, a few older men, such as his foster father Sir Ector, his tutor Merlyn, his stepbrother Kay, the whimsical King Pellinore chasing the Questing Beast and the clumsy Sir Grummore (a character invented by T. H. White, playing opposite Pellinore, like the muppets Statler and Waldorf). The whole novel revolves around Sir Ector’s castle and the neighbouring forest, and quite a few episodes are about Wart being magically turned into animals by Merlyn: a fish in the moat, a hawk in the falconry, a wild goose, etc. In these woods, we also get to meet a character from another legend altogether: Robin Hood.

All in all, T. H. White’s novel displays a somewhat loose, slow-paced plotline and focuses on atmospheric and idyllic descriptions of the forest and countryside, the sky and stars, the techniques of jousting and falconry, the seasons that come and go, the pranks and funny episodes, the songs and fairytales by the fireside. It is a utopian and delightful book for all ages, that reads as a mellow, decorative and nostalgic reverie around the legends of young Arthur, with a narrator that is always gently present and introduces subtle and unworried references to the 20th century — never hinting at the fact that the book was written just before World War II’s darkest hours. It has very little to do with Le Morte d’Arthur : it instead made me think of the old infancy gospels (the legendary Apocrypha around the childhood of Jesus) or, even more, of the idealised images of the Middle Ages in the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry. Obviously (quite explicitly in fact), the story of this young Wart is also in line with the tale of Cinderella.

Walt Disney’s adaptation of The Sword in the Stone (1963) is not top of the line. However, it is still a charming slapstick musical comedy — the adaptation of The Jungle Book that would be released a couple of years later is very similar but better developed. In a way, T. H. White’s novel has also been a model for Monty Python and the Holy Grail, for young Luke Skywalker (Wart) and Yoda (Merlyn) in The Empire Strikes Back, and even J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter, a few decades later.