Rating: 4/5

Richard Leakey is the famous anthropologist who, back in 1984, discovered the no less famous 'Turkana Boy'; a nearly complete skeleton of a young Homo erectus having lived about 1.5 millions years ago. Using this fossil as a starting point, Richard Leakey delivers here a fascinating book of popular science, opening up a window upon palaeontology -its successes, its meanderings, its challenges. Himself coming from a prestigious family of palaeontologists (he is the son of Louis and Mary Leakey), in love with his job (of which he gives us to see, not without a certain sense of humour, both the highs and the lows) by focusing first on 'Turkana Boy' he goes back in fact to the roots of what make us human. 

Homo erectus was indeed a turning point in our evolution, 'the messenger carrying our humanity'. As he puts it: ''to understand the origins of mankind, one has to understand Homo erectus, its anatomy, biology, behaviours.' That's precisely, then, what he purports to do in here, using the remains of 'Turkana Boy' to gather hypotheses from its way of life to its cognitive and intellectual abilities. You bet, the open and contradictory interpretations, the controversies coming with such endeavour (genetics vs anthropology...) are obviously tumultuous! Having said that, once consensus have been reached the questions being raised turn out to be crucial so as to better understand who we are. Homo erectus might have been an hominid for sure; however, he wasn't human. Chapters about consciousness, culture and language are here deeply engrossing. They, above all, open new trails that may never cease to astonish us when it comes to find out what, exactly, distinguish us from these other hominids now extinct, or, nowadays, our cousins the other great apes.

Fascinating and informative, Richard Leakey tames here the quarrels between experts knowing full well that, nevertheless, we ought to stay humble enough to admit to our own past mistakes and the extend of our current ignorance. A very good read!