Rating: 3/5

Edmund White's short Proust biography, Marcel Proust: A Life, is a very concise and readable work. I was already aware of some of the tidbits of knowledge that White shares, such as Proust's influences, like Flaubert, Baudelaire, Ruskin, Anatole France and Balzac, though White (as does every biographer) claims that certain of Proust's sources of inspiration play a greater or lesser role than other sources contend (often to fit with their own theories on the author), and I was also aware of the alleged role that certain relationships, such as that with chauffeur Alfred Agostinelli, played in the crafting of Proust's masterwork À la reserche du temps perdu. 

We know that Proust's magnum opus is at least partly autobiographical (I would say that many of the characters -- the narrator in particular -- have at least a little bit of Proust in them, much as it is said that all of the main male characters in War and Peace are semi-autobiographical depictions of their author and as Ingmar Bergman has admitted that all of the male characters in his very personal film Fanny och Alexander bear some resemblance to himself). Proust, White points out, was not afraid to inject his own neuroses into his various characters (male and female), engaging in self-satire in the process. The question is, just how much of Proust's great work is autobiographical and who were all the models for the characters in this massive novel?

Many scholars contend that Agostinelli was at least one model for Albertine, even if there were others as well. And White directs us to other very plausible bases for Proust's other characters, such as the Duchesse de Guermantes, Monsieur Vinteuil and Madame Verdurin. But my biggest complaint is that White reduces the overall complexity of Proust and his sources to his homosexuality. I've not read any of White's fiction, but his own sexual orientation apparently figures prominently into his work. Nor have I read any of his other biographies, but as these are all (I believe) on French writers who were also homosexuals, like Jean Genet and Arthur Rimbaud, I suspect that he also reduces these writers to a label as well. 

The strength of White's work, aside from some compelling arguments and his chronology of the events in Proust's life (owing to Philip Kolb's meticulous work in publishing Proust's many letters), is that his work is allegedly the first to deal with Proust's sexual orientation in depth, theorizing on the role this played in the crafting of À la reserche du temps perdu, something glossed over or even ignored altogether by earlier Proust biographers. And White at least (in the bibliography section at the end of his book [though I think this admission should have come early on]) admits his "homosexual bias." While I undoubtedly found White's work very interesting, I also found it a bit on the gossipy side (which is not something I prefer in my biographies), though certainly less scandalous and more reliable than the work of someone like Kitty Kelley, the queen of trashy unauthorized bios, or any of those "tell-alls" written with an obvious (often malicious) motive. 

I think there is a good deal of worthwhile and reliable information to take away from White's book, especially when he is relying on Proust's letters, theorizing on Proust's method as a writer, or when relaying what Proust's contemporaries (like André Gide) have written about him. But at other times he seems to be groping in the dark, trying often to make connections that (while he makes compelling arguments) may not exist. The picture White assembles of the artist is a fascinating one, no doubt, but like a complex jigsaw puzzle that has been pieced together, if we carefully examine the complete work we find that the pieces don't all fit together as they should. And I don't think any biographer's efforts to assemble a puzzle, especially one as intricate as this one, are ever going to make the pieces come together perfectly. At best the arguments one makes may resonate with us, the readers, more or less strongly and we will be more forgiving in our assessment of the assembled puzzle, overlooking the gaps and misplaced pieces if we're satisfied with the author's work, feeling that it fits with our own preexisting assumptions and biases.