Rating: 3/5

"I never had a sense I was going to be star-crossed, or had a destiny. But I always had a sense of hunger, of desire, that life was to be used." -Harry Chapin

"Still, I had a vision that there should be some moments od absolute effortlessness where all the happy-ending movies came true. Where you were living a musical, where, at the right moment, the girl came around the corner, the orchestra struck up a beautiful chord, the camera rolled and focused on her gorgeous eyes and she smiled at you, and then, for the first time, you knew everything was right with the world." -Harry Chapin

"You know, Jim, when someone tells me something can't be done, what they're really saying is that they can't do it. That doesn't mean I can't." -Harry Chapin

"Nothing is worthwhile unless you are involving other people in an experience where they are stimulated to have an experience of their own...I believe that because you learn to fly doesn't mean that you go off on your own trip. You have the personal responsibility to turn around and reach out your hand to teach somebody else to fly too." -Sandy Chapin

"I believe the genius of America is a collective genius of all different kinds of people working together, maybe having to make some compromises, but arriving at decisions on an open basis rather than have small groups of leaders sit in board rooms and make decisions for all of us." -Harry Chapin

"Well my basic message is involvment. Selfishness doesn't score. History isn't changed by a bunch of people sitting safely in their rooms." -Harry Chapin

"But then I started to realize that, like anything else, you have to do things and not assume there's going to be one moment when it all falls into place. It's an effort if I'm going to be a person who wants to do things, and that when things are not easy I still do 'em and not find excuses." -Harry Chapin

"I was working on the external agenda of being an institutionalized good guy. But I realized I wasn't solving my personal questions. I realized you can be a hero to the world, profit the multitudes and still be a louse or a nonfactor in terms of home." -Harry Chapin

"It was like the encore of a play, with all the cast marshaled for the final curtain call."