Rating: 4/5

Classic English literature has seen some memorable stone-hearted misers in it's time, but they pale in comparison to Balzac's provincial Midas, Monsieur Grandet, father of the long-suffering Eugénie. Grandet's wealth is legendary in status and, inevitably, when plucky Charles, his elegant, dapper nephew from Paris, turns up, Eugénie, accustomed to her father's spartan frugality, is hopelessly smitten with him. One of the Granddaddies of realist literature, Balzac paints a tragic figure at the centre of the novel, the sweet and titular Eugénie, the miser’s once innocent offspring and her sad story is a cautionary one about what happens when an obsession with lucre and social position supplants human affection. She inherits her father’s financial savvy and avaricious ways along with his fortune but is miserably short-changed in the love department. Charles arrives at their woefully rundown house in the Loire Valley town of Saumur, where Eugénie lives with her pathologically tight-fisted short and stocky father, downtrodden mother who felt like an old cobweb, and their overworked panic-stricken servant, Nanon. While Eugénie and her mother have no idea how rich Félix Grandet actually is, his banker, des Grassins, and his notary, Cruchot, aren’t quite so clueless. The two men and their families jockey shamelessly for the old man’s favour and Eugénie’s hand.

Eugénie regards herself, her gloomy home, and even her father in a newly critical light after Charles’s arrival, and emboldened by her surge of feelings for her cousin, she dares to indulge him with real wax candles, free-range eggs, and extra sugar for his sweet tooth, but alas, if she thinks the sun will shine down on them for all eternity, she is mistaken. This provocative, entertaining moral tale about avarice written all the way back in 1833 remains astonishingly relevant today. Balzac, like Dickens, zeroes in on the dark side of rampant capitalism, but instead of focusing pityingly on the have-nots, he skewers his era’s crass characters through with more humour than moral outrage. Money is a vast topic in literature, probably second only to love. Perhaps Balzac manages to combine both in a remarkably incisive tale pitted with tragedy. Eugénie Grandet ultimately is about unscrupulous people, and while Balzac has prepared us for Charles’s dastardly behaviour toward the fluttering Eugénie, it still comes as a shock to learn that this sweet-faced dandy, who wept over his father’s demise, makes his fortune in the slave trade. Even in 1833, decades before the American Civil War, Balzac’s damning portrait of Charles’s descent into unscrupulous selfishness is unequivocal.