Rating: 4/5

Cherryh continues her rather dark sword and planet adventure here with another tale on one planet, this one a drowning world. While this still features Morgaine, Cherryh spends about the first third of the novel introducing the world through a peasant girl named Jhirun and her story. For whatever reason, the seas are rising here and much of what was arable land now lays under water. Jhirum lives at the 'edge of the world' and that edge is slowly, but in fits and starts, moving ever upward. 

While the people here are distant relations to the clans of Vanye's world, the rulers of the high grounds are halflings-- no, not hobbits, but the offspring of humans and qhal. Qhal, the race that build the gates, once ruled a massive empire with humanity as their subjects, and as part of their experiments. While most of the qhal are no more, their legacy continues, in particular, their 'gates' which allow for instantaneous travel between planets, and indeed, also in time. 

Cherryh gives us a bit more of Morgaine here, but she is still an enigma to be sure; totally dedicated to sealing the gates, she seems aloof the fate of the people she leaves behind, or the price they may pay in life to achieve her goals. Vanye acts a bit like her conscious with his sense of honor, but he is her servant and must take her orders, how ever much it chaffs. So, off to seal another gate, but of course, all kinds of trials and tribulations await them, as they must struggle not only against the constant flooding, but the enemy introduced in the last volume, who seems to be a rouge qhal transformed into a human body via the power of the gates. 

The world building here is a bit more intense, and definitely more bleak, and the befits a drowning world and the hopeless struggle of the survivors to claim what little there is left. Their only hope is to escape the planet via the gates, but yet, this world was invaded by Man from people fleeing another world a 1000 years ago and ripped it apart. The emotions run high therefore; little hope, the seemingly cold-hearted Morgaine (and her horrible weapons!) doing what must be done, at least according to her own moral calendar, and Vanye at times grudgingly doing her will in spite of his own, more humane ethics. Yet, we already know Morgaine's quest to seal the gates is only done to prevent another massive disaster that wiped out civilization at least once before. Can you say moral dilemmas? Quick read, but one that may leave a lasting impression. 4 stars!