Rating: 4/5

A book that grasps the reader at the first sentence and does not let them go until the last page.

“Legend of Deathwalker” is the seventh volume in the history of the Drenai. The action of this novel takes place between the events described in the “The First Chronicles of Druss the Legend” and “Legend.” Druss, once again will have to face the destiny and undertake a dangerous quest to save his friend.

While Druss will always have a special place for me, in this book he has been dwarfed by another protagonist: Talisman. I bet that Mr Gemmell modelled him on a real-life character; figure dark and surrounded by even darker myths. Analogies to the Vlad the Impaler, known more widely as Vlad Dracula, were apparent to me. Vlad, just like Talisman, was taken captive to the hostile state (the Ottoman Empire) in his childhood. This was meant to a guarantee that his father would never attack the sultan's authority. Talisman also goes to the elite military school where he turns out to be a talented strategist and a warrior (Vlad trained with the Janissaries). Anyone who would like to explore the history of the prince transformed into a vampire by Bram Stoker should read Vlad III Dracula: The true story of Dracula, the Impaler.

Back to the novel at hand. We have everything here: a crazy emperor, lost artefacts with healing powers, ghosts of long-dead heroes, fights, political machinations, more fights… Sometimes it feels a bit too much. Especially, the magic and miracles department is well endowed. I like Mr Gemmell a lot more when the heroes have to rely only on themselves and their strength or cunning instead of waiting for a lightning from heaven or sudden recovery are very much like deus ex machina solutions. I have had the impression that the Author either ran out of ideas halfway through or had too many of them and did not manage to work them neatly into one coherent piece.

Still, it is not a bad novel. It fills some gaps in the Drenai history: where did the greatest Nadir commander come from? How did he manage to unite his people? Who was he before he became famous? If Mr Gemmell developed these threads and gave up on the miracles, my rating would be higher.

It is my seventh Drenai novel and it is difficult to find something new in this book. Mr Gemmell uses the same schemes, tropes, and arc. However, what is surprising is that despite certain repetitiveness, I always read Mr Gemmell’s books with real pleasure. I recommend the Drenai saga, but I cannot say that this is the finest specimen in the series. Or maybe it is. Read it, and let me know what you think.

Note on the rating: 3,5 rounded to 4 stars (for Druss).

---
Also in The Drenai Saga: 

1. Legend ★★★★★ 
2. The King Beyond the Gate ★★☆☆☆
3. Waylander ★★★☆☆
4. Quest for Lost Heroes ★★★★☆
5. In the Realm of the Wolf ★★★☆☆
6. The First Chronicles of Druss the Legend ★★★★☆
8. Winter Warriors ★★★☆☆
9. Hero in the Shadows ★★★★★
10. White Wolf RTC
11. The Swords of Night and Day RTC