Rating: 2/5

***Lots of death and feministic ideals - possibly not best for younger audiences***

 The School Mouse has been sitting on my shelf and while on my kick to get books read and out of the house it seemed like it would help to make for a quick read. Furthermore with the author also being a bit of a well-known author I was hoping that this book would also end up being just as well written as that other work.

 Well if anything I must say this book takes the cake for being up there with the rest of the tragic classics of my childhood. The book starts off pretty strong but then goes down a dark rabbit hole in which death is willingly partnered with and although I do understand that mice make up for a great basis of the food chain the author doesn't leave that out in thoughts to his young readers although fortunately not much detail is given in the deaths. 

 Furthermore the mice are really on a weird par for the females are all domineering, take-charge and willing to throw a fit or bully to get their way. It is they who call the shots and even in the case where Ragged Robin accompanies his family it isn't as a defender but since he is being forced to, which is then of course then thrown back into his wife's face later on. The two main males (as all other ones end up dying) are all much weaker than the female counterparts both in physical format and also in temperament while demeaning themselves, mostly by their possible lack of brains.

 But the book goes even weirder towards the end when another female chooses she needs a boyfriend as well so she ends up taking a trip to fetch one of the barn mice while it is implied quite heavily that she is robbing the cradle with how little he is plus his complete lack of knowing what happens when boy mice and girl mice get together.

 Otherwise overlooking those three major issues that should be red flags to caregivers of young readers, the story was rather decent and does emphasize the importance of educating yourself even if you are the first. It is a tale of also helping others with your skills even if they think you are weird and helping older generations who may not have had the same opportunities to reach the same advantages as you if you can.

 The book does have some illustrations but all done in grayscale while unlike the cover art in which the mice are most realistic the inside mice are a bit more cartoonish.

 All in all the book can be a decent read even with its questionable content otherwise....