Rating: 5/5

Rating: 5+ / 5

I'll admit, I wasn't expecting much going into this, both based on the cover and the summary at the back. I'm not sure why, but it just didn't seem interesting to me to read about a girl who had found her "long lost family" at last and then had gone looking for them to fit in once more.

So often, it is the unexpected things in life that we end up liking the most, and that end up surprising us.

That is very much the case with me and this story--kind of similarly to how I at first didn't think I would like Re-Creations, but then I ended up loving it for everything that it provided! There are some similarities between the stories as well, such as how the house in which the family lives is quite decrepit and they seem to be on their last legs of survival; and, similarly, all of the siblings are just charming and so loveable!

Then again, The Enchanted Barn also has that same motif of a family down on their luck and with a lot of charming siblings, so maybe this is a form that does just work for me from Grace Livingston Hill stories, and therefore I should accept it as such!

Anyway, this is also a Christmas tale, as it turns out, which you can't blame me for not guessing, as it isn't really hinted at that either in the summary or the cover. Still, it's definitely a cozy Christmas read that I need to keep in mind for the future.

From start to finish, it's full of true heart and good cheer, as Marjorie, the heroine, quite literally forces her way into her family's lives, despite the protest of the family based on their pride of not wanting to take help--especially Marjorie's twin sister, Betty--and her parents' guilt over having let her get adopted in the first place, never mind the trying situation in which they found themselves. It's a story of a family getting together and learning to live their lives together with a new addition, and then it's also a story of finding faith as a handsome minister and doctor are both involved for a romance element with each of the twin sisters.

Add in the faith-driven brother Ted, the charming kid Bud, and the two baby siblings Sunny and Bonnie, and you've got a lovely family whose tale to follow as they go to reclaim their home at Brentwood--which is as lovely as it seems and as it looks on the cover!

Yet again, I'm charmed by Ms. Hill's works and am happy to add it to my shelves, to be revisited again and again and again in the future.

This is a message of hope, faith, family, and love that never ceases to delight me. A lovely, perfect book!