Rating: 3/5

Slightly unrealistic, yes, but as charming as ever. I'm beginning to see that Grace Livingston Hill is a big-picture author. No need to get broiled in all the details of complicated feelings, motives, and actions. Big-picture, black-and-white: that's how I think this book can best be described. Unfortunately, this sweeping approach to writing a story makes the story sometimes laughable and less than believable.

Setting: Rosedale, a quaint and somewhat rural town. Also set in New York. (Since the book was published in 1937, I assume that's the time period of the story; there were a few subtle references to economic troubles, which led me to believe it was set during the Great Depression.) Again, like many G.L. Hill books, the country is shown as superior to the city, as seen in the many descriptions of Rosedale's beautiful and cozy houses. Too bad those city-slickers can't appreciate the simplicity and tradition of Keith's childhood home. Likewise, New York and all of its underhanded dwellers is a place to stay away from; nothing good can come from living there, obviously.

Characters: These characters, although all classic G.L. Hill characters, seemed almost too black-and-white, cut-and-dry for me. Daphne Deane was a perfect angel, Anne Casper was a perfect demon, and don't worry--Keith Morrell could always be counted on doing the right thing, seeing through Anne's wiles. Keith was precious, I admit, but he came across as unrealistic because of certain decisions he made at various times. My favorite characters were Mrs. Gassner--because although she was a terrible gossip, she wasn't an obvious antagonist--and Donald, because his supporting character-brother role didn't stop him from exhibiting un-Christianlike behavior, which is realistic, no matter how strong of a Christian one is. All that to say, the cast of characters in Daphne Deane wasn't the strongest cast G.L. Hill has ever written.

Romance: Honestly, the romance didn't play much of a role in this book. It was more of an after-thought, just a "This is what's part of a happily-ever-after ending." Maybe that's why I didn't become as attached to Keith and Daphne. 

Mystery: Hate to say it, but G.L. Hill isn't much of a mystery writer. She just isn't that interested in details. Which is fine, and there's nothing objectively wrong with her writing style. It's only that the mystery wasn't written like it was a mystery novel--instead, it was written like the mystery was a side plot. 

Faith content: Where the romance lacked, the spiritual content made up for it. The remembering of long-ago Christian activities took a major part of the first half of the book. One major message at the end was basically this: once a Christian, always a Christian, despite if you've backslid.