Rating: 4/5

I have wanted to read this author for a long time now and I really liked her prose in this book. 

Set in rural South India just after independence, it tells the story of Rukmani and her family. Beginning with her marriage as a child bride to a tenant farmer with very little means, Rukmani's life takes a very difficult turn after a relatively easy childhood as the daughter of the village chief.

Only her husband Nathan's love and care provide her solace in a life filled with want and hardship. The difficulties of sustaining a family through farming are eloquently portrayed. The dependence on fickle nature for a healthy crop, followed by the unscrupulous nature of the merchants who buy it makes for an untenable existence. Added to this is the payment they are required to make to the owner of the land they live on and many times they are left with virtually nothing. As the family grows, the couple struggle even for basic necessities and stay afloat only because of their own determination and the rare glimpses of good fortune that come their way. However the building of a tannery nearby increases their suffering and they aren't immune to the tragedy and loss that follows its wake.

The narration is in first person by Rukmani and that was something I found very interesting, because it demonstrated her agency and initiative in providing for her family. Being a woman at the time was not easy, especially in the rural areas and in her situation and so her reasoning capacity and resolve were refreshing to see. She has a strange acquaintance with an English doctor,Kennington, who helps her and the other villagers in many ways. This character seemed to represent the colonial white saviour mentality and I felt the book could have done without him! 

The author has presented a very realistic perspective of a rural family and the way in which industrialization, land grabbing and other such developments affected them negatively, forcing them to look for alternate means of survival, while reluctant to give up the only life they have ever known. The moments of happiness that shine through are all the more poignant because of the various indignities they are subjected to. Rukmani's understanding of and reflections about human nature, poverty, death and also hope and family are unexpectedly profound.

It is a sad yet compelling read.