Rating: 4/5

In the final Accomplice book the baddies meet a sticky end and so, unfortunately, do many of the goodies. A darker tone in general predominates here, as the town is taken over by a travelling circus filled with the kind of terrifying clowns that make Pennywise look like a welcome addition to your daughter's bat mitzvah. You'll need to throw more than a bucket of glitter to sort this lot out.

Impressively, the chaos of Aylett's writing resolves here into something much better-planned than we had any reason to suspect – throwaway jokes and minor absurdities from the beginning of the series here come together in an accumulation of call-backs that assemble into something remarkably coherent. The whole sequence takes on the appearance of a puzzle-box, with clues scattered throughout, pointing to something portentous about what Accomplice is and how it relates to our own reality. If, as Aylett nudges,

Lucifer is a black glove we wear to hide our fingerprints

then what are we to think of all the demons in these books? They certainly have nothing on the run-of-the-mill human evils deployed by the Mayor and his shadowy masters. ‘Government,’ Aylett deadpans, ‘is like domestic abuse – it manages to make the victim feel guilty.’ As for poor Barny Juno and ‘his core audience of affronted bastards’, things are quickly coming apart – literally, in the case of Barny, whose house is disintegrating around him, leaving his menagerie of adopted animals milling around uncorralled:

Crowded species were flowing together, mates and foes mixed as though crayoned by a kid, wed in tooth and claw like saints beyond nameable colour.

One can only hope Steve Aylett is on drugs, otherwise you have to assume he's one side or the other of a serious breakdown. He makes his kaleidoscopic view of reality work for him, though, so that when he does let one of his epigrams fly (‘Work keeps you occupied during the period of your life when you might be achieving something’) it slams home with real force. This is a fittingly apocalyptic climax to a visceral, sui-generic and very funny series.