Rating: 1/5

WORST BOOK I HAVE EVER READ

She says, quite negatively, that women were once only considered to be kept as fallow gardens, yet in the next pages she states that she's only felt like she was a wild woman when she was a mother. Again, I felt she was just reinforcing the belief that women are still just "fallow gardens." Contradictory to the notion she was trying to convey that women are more than just a womb. 

Does the author need help? I feel like these are the scratchings of a crazy person. It was so non sensical, rambling and repetitive that I found it absurd and ridiculous. I was surprised to read that the author has a PHd and is a psychoanalyst... I guess she would have passed the bit where you over analyse everything - which I guess she did well, although terribly. 
It's so badly written and boring also. 
My mind is very open, I am very spiritual and I have walked the hard path, however this is just nonsense. 

I thought this would be a collation of stories written by inspiring women, however they were just ramblings of the authors, with no logical direction or factual references. 

On page 57 it says; "the young woman summons her psychic brothers. What do these represent in a woman's psyche? They are the more muscled, more naturally aggressive propellants of the psyche."

What a huge contradiction to the meaning of this book. The book is supposed to be an ode to women and their naturally strong 'wild woman' instincts. Inspiring confidence in its female readers. Encouraging our do it yourself/we can do anything attitude. 
Yet she continued to stay with the women are the weaker sex stereotype. 

The entire book is just explaining what a wild woman is "she is .. she is .. she is..." ok get on with it. This is not how you write a book. 

It reminds me of grade 1 homework I once did. We had to write as many pages as possible in our diaries, explaining what we did on the weekend; instead I took this as an opportunity to suck up to my teacher and filled the pages by writing "I really like Mrs. ... I like her very very very very very (x3 pages of this) much. That was a better story than this. 

As a woman and a feminist, she tried in her words to describe what a woman is. I feel she has a very singular view of women. I feel we are neither that complicated or that simplified. I say complicated because this book is very confusing. And I say simplified, as she quite often pigeon holed women as purely mothers, wives and caregivers. Yes we are those things, but some of us aren't and some of us are also maternal, yet happy not to be mothers.
We are strong without another's acceptance. We are beautiful without another's appreciation. There was just too much stereotyping and judging going on here. 

I don't understand anyone who could like this book but I guess I could have misinterpreted the whole book (I don't think so though). 

I was massively disappointed in this book, as I have been waiting to read this for so long, yet quite frankly, it is the worst book I have ever read - not kidding.