Rating: 2/5

I normally don't write negative reviews. But this novel far too long bothered me so I need to get out it of my system. I hope it helps.

Definitely the worst McEwan’s novel I’ve read by now. It’s creepy and stupid. I mean protagonists are stupid and some creepy things happen to them. Probably because they are stupid. Colin and Mary go for a holiday to take some rest, escape ennui and maybe rekindle withered desire. Since I’m generous today I imagine for them Venice, though I don't remember if the name of the city was even mentioned. Anyway, on the spot they’re wandering, drinking a lot, making love. Typical holiday stuff. 

During their tours through the city, they're constantly losing their way what probably had to herald impending disaster, they meet a mysterious man, Robert, who offers them his services as a guide . Charismatic and persuasive stranger ( is he really that one or maybe our dorks, to crown it all, are blind ones? ) invites them to his residence where they will meet his physically disabled wife, Caroline. And instead of take to their heels, one could see there was something wrong coming a mile off, our lovers accept invitation. It's hard to perceive every stranger as a pervert or psychopath with an axe but a bit common sense didn’t do harm to anyone yet. But, well if stupidity had wings these two would fly as (turtle)doves.

 The comfort of strangers  is one of the earliest McEwan’s works but we already can discern here typical to his writing obsessions that would become his hallmark. Dash of macabre, menace, quirk, meanness and surreal aura; though, to his credit, in his later works these ingredients are much better balanced. This one was promoted as mixture of thriller and study of dark sides of human psyche. Well, unfortunately to me it was unreliable, repulsive and unimaginable display of stupidity and cruelty. I found it calculating, with the aim of shocking a reader ( well done, Mr McEwan ) and depressing as fuck. But written as usual with impeccable, somewhat impersonal and cold prose. Thus two stars.