Rating: 3/5

"'Could a price really be set for light?'"

I really enjoyed entering the quirky world of Brother Cadfael with this series. Ellis Peters has combined two very cult genres to create a winning and original creation with all the charm and decency of a cozy mystery, and all the detail and light education of a historical fiction. Great concept, well-executed, and I'm looking forwards to reading the full length Broth Cadfael novels in the series later this year and at the start of next.
It's very rare that I give a crime novel a 3-star rating or higher, because I usually have to deduct for having guessed whodunnit before the big reveal at the end. Although this was true to an extent with the three mysteries in A Rare Benedictine, as the cozy genre often plays of the psychology of the different characters to create a heart-warming redemption for the suspect who appears most villainous whilst giving the comfort-shock of condemning the most innocent-seeming suspect, these novellas were detailed with so many additionally interweaving motivations that there were lots of things I did not predict in advance. So I got to feel good about myself for working out who the bad-guy was and I still got a surprise at the end! I really hope this structure continues throughout the full-length novels.
All the stories had an interesting message behind them. A schemer unaware that his cronies were just as ready to betray him as they were to betray he hapless monks. A vision of loveliness who makes off with an expensive set of candle-holders to put the money to more humanitarian use. And finally, the scoundrel son who rallies to capture his father's attempted-murderer. I enjoyed Cadfael's patience and resilience against the rumours which characterise medieval interactions between church and nobility. His sensitivity towards the near-blind brother who reverently seeks out the light, and the tormented brother who is shocked out of attempting to commit suicide by the attempted murder in the final novella were very touching and added a level of depth to this fun, light read.
Broth Cadfael himself is a very intriguing character. He is worldly and independent in a way that makes him the ideal detective, despite being cloistered his mind is very much that of a free agent. He seems calm, can be cutting and his astute psychological judgements of others bring out the best of the cozy genre in a male protagonist, which is unusual and refreshing in itself. I'm excited to learn more of the skulduggery of Shrewsbury Abbey!