Rating: 4/5

This was a great text into understanding Judaism a little more completely while not being a complete account of all of Judaism's tenets. I have to admit that my understanding is very shallow and I only understand Judaism as it's adjacent to Christianity. 

One thing though, and I can't really call this a criticism necessarily, as a long time listener and fan of Dennis, is that the book comes off, to me, as missing the mark on original sin.

The book posits that Judaism has no need for, or understanding of 'Original Sin', because we are all born innocent and then we choose whether or not to sin. (p84) But, then when comparing Judaism to Marxism quotes Genesis re: "the predilection of a man's hearts evil from his youth." (p100) This sounds an awful lot like original sin. Maybe I misunderstand, but do we really choose evil from the beginning? Or, is it only that after bar/bat mitzvah that it matters? 

I think this, in some ways, answers Paul's theology: namely that we all fall short of the glory of God. (Rom3:23). If Judaism has no need for original sin, then how does it reconcile that the "Bible appreciates that no human being can be perfectly fulfill all its laws at all times"? (p81) If we sin and then simply ask for forgiveness only to sin again, what have we accomplished? This is a frequent criticism of 'Sunday Christians'. There's surely more to it and any more depth on this is obviously outside the scope of the book.

I thought the inclusion of the intermarry chapter was odd and seemed unfocused unless your target audience is backslidden Jews; I've seen this argument in other reviews. I think the authors are more inclined to get anyone, Jews included, to be more clear on what they believe with respect to Judaism. I mean clearly the authors have an ideology here and a thesis to promote; this is apologetics for sure. But, for me, this is not question I would have nor is it a question that I would expect many to have.

The 'How do I Start...' is a great inclusion if for no other reason than the ability to look for other resources for further study. After this I will definitely look more deeply into Judaism's rich philosophical and theological history.