Rating: 4/5

Raymond Shaw is the son of Eleanor Iselin, perhaps one of the most interesting and dastardly characters in literature, certainly in Cold War literature. I enjoyed this book far more than I had expected, especially after the start which took some doing because of the 1950s jargon. But once I started speed reading it was like looking at an impressionist painting at the right distance so all the details come into focus like a beautiful picture.

Raymond was a veteran of the Korean War who spent time as war prisoner where he was brainwashed by the Russians and Chinese and shaped into a skilled assassin for use by moles at the highest levels of U.S. government. Enter Eleanor Iselin, who left her first husband for her second, Johnny Iselin, a former governor and current senator of his state who aspires to the vice presidency and more. Senator Iselin is a puppet for his wife, who never met a political organization she did not affiliate with or a position she did not take as a Russian asset deeply embedded into the American system cloaked with rhetoric and positions all red, white, and blue.

The political intrigue escalates as Raymond falls in love with Jocie, the daughter of Senator Jordan who is also the Iselins' nemesis. Initially, Mrs. Iselin forbade their union and so Jocie marries and immigrates to Argentina. However, when that marriage fails she returns to the arms of Raymond Shaw who serenaded her with one of his few, and perhaps only, demonstrations of emotion and affection in his life, declaring his love for her.

It does not end well.

There is no secret to conceal, this book has been out since the 1950s with two Hollywood takes (Angela Lansbury and then Meryl Streep playing the infamous Eleanor Iselin.) The book is fast, fun, and takes many twists and turns evocative of the era and true to the spirit and intrigue of the times. Oddly, echoes from the battle between conservatism and progressive liberalism in The Manchurian Candidate remain relevant today in which the lines between the good guys and the bad are not so clear cut.

This was a lot of fun, and now I'm ready to take on the films.