Rating: 4/5

Considering that Bliss is neither an expert or a diabetic, I feel that he understood and conveyed the process, the implications, and the shortcomings of the discovery. And although perhaps a little less detail would have sufficed, I would still recommend this book.

This book tells the fascinating and heart-wrenching story of the Nobel Prize winning discovery that is still responsible for keeping millions of people alive today. The author goes into much detail in telling the story, and at times it seems that perhaps he provides too much detail. But he does this, because he strives to present all available information to be able to discuss the allocation of credit, which has been much disputed by the inventors themselves, their acquaintances who took sides, and those who wished they could have been the discoverers.

Initially the story seems simple: Banting, the doctor ignorant to endocrinology has an idea. Macleod, the competent researcher at the University of Toronto is hesitant, recognizing Banting's ignorance, but eventually is convinced to provide some support for Banting, including a student as a research assistant, Best. At a later stage joins Collip, the visiting chemist, to help with the purification of the extract. Each sees their contributions to the discovery in a different light than the others would agree to, and this causes much competition and enmity. As a scientist myself, I understand the desire for recognition for one's work. But as a diabetic, it was heartbreaking to read about the amount of time and energy wasted on disagreements and competition within the group while diabetics were dying.

The book also talks about the initial reception, the first patients who were given insulin, the patenting process, the initial collaboration between Lilly and the Toronto group to mass produce insulin, and how insulin spread across North America and Europe.

Bliss also paid great attention to the before and after periods. He starts the book by talking about "treatments" before insulin, and ends it by highlighting more recent advances. He had insightful comments about what insulin meant. I also really appreciated that he recognized the shortcomings of diabetes treatment even today, that although with insulin "diabetes became a matter of the quality of life, not the speed of death", that quality is still lower that we would like.