Rating: 4/5

I'm not sure how to rate something like this. It's difficult for a few reasons, but mainly because Scott never got to edit these journals for publication and so their contents have been filtered through other people's hands with competing, varying agendas. Although the version I read (the Oxford Press one) said it was faithful to Scott's work (and by and large it was), there were big chunks taken out that only appeared in one of the Appendices: not always a place readers go to. I would argue that those removed sections are essential to understanding the journals and incredibly unique in the sense that you don't often get to see what might possibly have been taken out if the author was to edit themselves. 

Other than those removals, it is also hard to rate because the journals are not utterly polished and clean either. That sounds unfair – they are very interesting and there are spates of beautiful writing (I was particularly fond of the 'Impressions' in the earlier parts of the journals where Scott described daily moments in the hut) – but there is a definite sense that they might have been changed around and developed in further writing. I do wonder if there would have been quite as much pain-staking detail about the various lectures, for example. I absolutely love the concept of the lectures and it's fascinating to learn of the prevailing scientific ideas of the time but whether four pages on parasitology would have survived further drafting is doubtful. 

Really, a lot of this was me unfairly comparing this to Worst Journey in the World which is an utterly gorgeous and highly polished account which put me through every emotion. At the core of this book, the notion of Scott being unable to edit these journals is what makes them fascinating and so I am not rating them because of what he might have done in the future. 

Like Moby-Dick (my favourite book), this is definitely not something I would recommend to people. I read these journals because I am fascinated with the Terra Nova expedition and with Scott and the tangled historiography which followed his death and which still continues to this day. It's always important to go back and read actual people's words rather than seeing them filtered through other people's agendas (*cough* Roland Huntford *cough*). Now, reading primary sources still comes with an insane amount of agenda and contemporary and historical perspective and that's always something to be mindful of but going to the heart of history is never uninteresting. 

For the bulk of this book, everything is very pedestrian and more geared to the minutiae of the expedition. That's all very interesting if you're a polar obsessive like me but it lacked some of the emotion and personal connection which Cherry's account has. That's intriguing in itself and actually more sharply illuminated when Scott expressed his more inner thoughts. Someone on here wrote in a review that his diaries give the idea that he was very highly strung and moody and that is entirely the impression that comes across. The amount of times, certainly in the first half of the journals, he will be like 'Oh it's a DISASTER!' and then the next day, 'It's all okay again.' Gemini diva vibes. 

BUT that is why I think I connect more with Scott over Amundsen and some of the others. He is incredibly flawed and obviously makes mistakes (I would argue not as many as the 'bashing Scott' historiography likes to try and state) but like... That's somewhat understandable. It's unfortunate that it, like Franklin's expedition, led to tragedy (weirdly, I'm not as interested in Franklin as a person as I am in Scott though).

Many other reviews of this say how haunting it is. It definitely is. Everyone knows how this ends. But it is not only the writing which tracks Scott and his companion's last days trapped in their tent on the return from the Pole; there are moments of incredible chills throughout the whole thing. The ones that got me were the parts in the lead-up to the southern journey where Scott repeatedly said they should be fine and would not have a problem with hunger. Throughout the seasons before, also, there will be placid moments of *sledge diaries, comments on ice, science* broken by ephemera inserted into the diary of quotes about death and the progression of time and hardship. 

'He is not worthy to live at all, who, for fear and danger of death shunneth his country's service or his own honour, since death is inevitable and the fame of virtue immortal'. -Sir Humphrey Gilbert (who, as the notes at the end say, died on a return voyage from North America) 

Away from Scott, I did love the little looks at other expedition members too. Wilson is a gem (and about the only one who doesn't come in for some scathing attack. See below), and Bowers is just an absolute king. 'Indefatigable little Bowers' 🥹🥹🥹

I realise I sound like I have complained about this book but I still found it utterly compelling and that is why it is still more than worthy of 4 stars. It's just a strange one to try and 'review'.

The Appendices...

I would say that the Appendices of this version are just as interesting as the rest of the book and I'm glad I read them. I really enjoyed some of the Explanatory Notes which quoted from other expedition members' diaries (Wilson, especially). The Appendix which detailed the things cut from this version is ESSENTIAL to understanding the fullness of the journals. They give such a different impression from some of the other entries, with Scott ranting about various people and expressing his frustration. 

I really don't know why they were cut from this version. I understand why they were suppressed at the time but this edition touted that it was ultimately faithful to the original text. Maybe it was just assumed that such comments would be cut in any edits Scott made anyway. But they are so important to giving a uniquely intimate insight into this expedition.

(Can we also briefly talk about JM Barrie's description of Scott? There was not much to amuse me about this book (apart from the explanatory note of 'snapdragon', a Christmas game plucking raisins from a dish of burning brandy: 'Prohibited by modern Antarctic health and safety regulations') but that short extract was almost ridiculous in its awe. It really gave 'Scott punched me in the face once; it was awesome' vibes.)