Rating: 5/5

Everybody knows that there are no bears on Hemlock Mountain, no bears at all. There are no bears on Hemlock Mountain, no bears, no bears, no bears, no bears at all. Under this well-known belief, Jonathan’s mother sends him across the mountain alone to bring back an iron pot from his Aunt Emma. As Jonathan crunch, crunch, crunches his way across the snowy ground, he hopes upon all hope that there really ARE no bears on Hemlock Mountain because if there are, what would one, lonely eight-year-old boy possibly do?

Recipient of the Newbery Honor Book award in 1953, The Bears on Hemlock Mountain is a quick read full of fun, repetitive phrases such as crunch, crunch, crunch and tick-tock, tick-tock, which makes this an ideal read-aloud book. Helen Sewell’s pen and ink illustrations give the story a genuine folklore feel and wonderfully complements this story based on a Pennsylvanian tall tale. This book is recommended for readers ages 5 to 9 and grade levels 1 to 4. 

The story of Jonathan’s journey to his aunt’s home and back teaches the importance having courage, facing your fears, and following through on your commitments. At the end of the book, there is an inference about a bear (or bears) being shot and killed, which is fairly unexpected as Dalgliesh takes great care in establishing Jonathan’s love of animals and the respect he has for them. This last-minute act of violence may be disturbing to sensitive readers.

While I was researching quotes about courage and perseverance to use in this review, I came upon one by Japanese author Haruki Murakami that perfectly encapsulates what happens to our young hero: “When you come out of a storm you won’t be the same person that walked in. That’s what the storm is all about.” Jonathan’s mother would have never let her young son make the trek across Hemlock Mountain if she was certain there were bears (or we would hope so). Jonathan himself was worried about bears, although he’s not fully convinced that there are any either. But when the time comes for Jonathan to face his fears, he’s rational and clever and, as a result, finds that the boy who went up the mountain is very, very different from the young man who returned home. 

NEW!! Want to discuss this book with your homeschooler or classroom? There’s a FREE study guide available. Visit www.teacherspayteachers.com/store/The... and download your free copy today!