Rating: 5/5

If readers are interested in how business is conducted in the United States, a capitalist democracy, ‘Empire Express’ by David Hayward Bain will be instructive. Although the business was the construction of the first transcontinental railroad from Sacramento, California in the ancient and long-forgotten or unknown American era of 1863, and it was ultimately successful (although costly in lives and sweat besides costing millions of nineteenth-century public and private dollars), it couldn’t have been done without the mental and physical endurance of middlemen surviving destructive personal drama and strife, political corruption, and even more greedy and wealthy powerful men with strong psychopathic and narcissistic tendencies who insert themselves into the project hoping for opportunities for theft and self-aggrandizement.

Stories of Pure Altruism are only for the rubes reading the front pages of local spin-doctored sources, reader. How and why people conduct themselves in getting actual business done is generally not often or only for the welfare of the public. Business majors especially should put this book on their TBR list, although, in theory, stuff that happens like what happens in this book are now prevented by new laws and regulations, and a lot more watchdog institutions. 

Not. 

It was interesting to me that it was newspapers and journalists who broke the story publicly of the corruption of some members of the U.S Congress and some of their Wall Street investment enablers who supported the successful completion of a railroad stretching across 2,000+ miles. These journalists did so in the heightened political atmosphere of America’s post-Civil War era (1869), after the assassination of an American President, the still ongoing struggle to end slavery, and the dramatic creation of new western states. Three cheers for a Free Press!!! 

Without the Constitutionally-protected journalists and historians this book would not have been written and published. Without free access to government records, without democratic legal mechanisms of law, without the uncensored research of academics, without libraries, without voluntary contributions of willing family members who desire to reveal family history warts and all, this American-foundation story would be unknown. 

See? I am not entirely negative about American history and accomplishments, and I believe Americans are certainly not all mean and selfish capitalists out to screw everyone for money and power! But I will note, gentle reader, do the paperwork. We all need to learn and succeed by doing the backup paperwork and legal research in a democracy. Turning in the required forms, doing the grunt work of talking to lawyers and bank managers and city officials and, regrettably, politicians - reading and filing the Paperwork - is the true start of success in any endeavor in any capitalist democracy. Founding geniuses, inventors and dreamers of all business ventures pretty much will founder when they f*kc up on the paperwork, social connecting, advice getting and legal leg-work. Some one with charisma, chutzpah, but not much ethics, and maybe they know a lot about paperwork,,will certainly slip past you and claim your dream and work for their own. Hopefully, history will be kinder to you then the unscrupulous are. Free-press journalists and honest historians love paper trails...

Many of the stories behind major contributions to social happiness and class uplift begins with altruistic dreamers, technological geniuses, and genuine heroes who freely pursued their goals, helped by far-seeing folks with money and power. The story of the first American transcontinental railroad definitely begins and ends with happy and admirable chapters included with many heroic engineers, workers and risk-taking businessmen, giving of themselves and their fortunes in a seemingly impossible Herculean task! But finding and buying nuts and bolts (and bullets, which helped eliminate millions of the pesky Indians angry at the uncompensated theft of their country by the railroad companies and emigrants), screwdrivers and equipment, require the skills and compromises of hard-nosed businessmen, lawyers and politicians. Dreamers cannot do it by visionary imagination and wishes alone. 

Does the end justify the means? In America, frequently. 

Personal enrichment and powerful egos hungry for public acclaim often fuel huge paradigm-shifting technological achievements. When such an individual creates or makes possible a wonderful New Thing that also benefits millions of ordinary people, hooray, right? We can’t all be an Abraham Lincoln, Albert Einstein, or Steve Jobs, so good thing some people are amazing or amazingly lucky despite their personality faults. However, when hundreds of different men, each with the complex ambitions of an Emperor Napoleon, need to yoke themselves together in order to build something as huge as a Wonder of the World (or just a railroad across a country with four time zones with a hellish nightmare of topological landscapes), things get complicated. And nasty.

Gentle reader, if you are a kid or of a Pollyanna disposition, you can read heroic and patriotic versions of this particular story of Great Men, with the help of the U.S. government, who accomplished a miracle of engineering. However, if you are curious about how building enormously important historical structures which did indeed helped to empower and strengthen the American experiment, read this book.

Gentle reader, entire forests were cut down for the ties, workers were scalped, tunnel collapses and bad weather killed hundreds! Millions of dollars in vapor financing and stock deals with politicians frequently were negotiated, fell apart, and we're negotiated again hundreds of times. Communications were messed up, refuted, retracted or purposefully obfuscated previous approvals, responsibility and plans were unmade. Towns were created, like Reno, that did not exist until the railroad was built. 'Hell on Wheels' was a real thing, a movable town which followed the ten thousands of track workers, full of prostitutes, gambling halls, bars, theaters, alcohol, criminals - and no laws whatsoever. Interestingly, EVERYBODY was, profoundly disturbed and horrified by the Mormon towns, over and over, considering them more depraved even than 'Hell on Wheels'. No one who met Brigham Young left feeling very clean.

It wasn’t a pretty story. Sausage making never is. However, 'Empire Express' is a very pretty history book written by an author not afraid of dense and convoluted research. This book is not only a doorstopper physically, it is thick with seemingly day-by-day facts, figures and biographies, backed by journals, diaries, letters and historical documents, of the decades-long birth of the first intercontinental railroad. It ends with the creation of two rival railroad companies - the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific - who despite their lurid bastard beginnings, was a fantastic contribution to America. Trips which had taken three months of travel, for example, from New York City to San Francisco, whether by boat or in covered wagons, now took a few days. Everything changed. 

The book has an extensive Notes, Bibliography and Index sections. There also are pictures which are extremely interesting of the main 'characters' - the good guys and the horrible crooks - as well as of the rough terrain - mountains, deserts, rivers, canyons and deep valleys and hills, granite and clay and rocks and sand and high altitudes - that the surveyors, engineers, and workers (Irish and Chinese) struggled and blasted through to lay down track.

It's a mind-blowing book!