Rating: 5/5

No two people could be as different than the hero and heroine. The hero, a stern man with no tolerance for silliness or frivolous is a banker who grew up with a mother who lived through the potato famine of Ireland. He vowed to himself to work hard, to play no games or take any chances. He got a sensible job as a banker, one he's excelled at. He's courting the sensible choice for a wife, the daughter of the mayor. He may have a dull life but it's a productive one. 

The heroine on the other hand is what's known as a dreaming. When her parents died, they left her a fortune but she's unable to tough the funds for 7 years unless she's given written consent by her executor, the hero. But when he hears want she wants the money for, he immediately and sternly turns her down. See, she is an artist. Though everyone in turn say she has no talent for the arts it doesn't stop her passion and love for it. So, she's gotten it into her head to take her parents money and open an artist's haven, a place where dreamers like herself can come and live without fear of judgement. She wants this haven because she is extremely lonely and she feels like being around those who share her passion can fil that vow she has inside. 

One day in May, May Day in fact, everything changes. A fairy and a leprechaun come to town, though their true identities are hidden from the townsfolk. Instead they come as friendly visitors who take up friendship with the hero and heroine. They've been tasked with bringing two fated mates together, the artist and the banker. The day of the celebration, when the hero is dragged to the party by his soon to be fiancé, is a day that shook his world. While trying desperately not to be made a fool out of, the hero suddenly takes one look at the joyous and dancing heroine and sees what he never saw before- a woman. He never considered her anything but a child but now he is aroused by her attractive features and trim ankles. 

Much to his horror, he desires this strange woman who is absolutely no good for him what so ever. But when given a little bit of magic, he can't help but kiss her, feeling the passion between them and knowing he's never felt anything close to it with his fiancé. From that moment on, the hero's fall begins. His calm is rattled, his demeanor is frazzled and it seems like his whole world has suddenly gone crazy. Gone is the stoic business man and it's his place is a man lost to feelings and frustration. Every encounter with the woman who's responsible for all his headache is fiery and disastrous. She is a walking bomb just waiting to jo off and when she does, either his sanity, his job or his very person are expected to be affected. And he wants to get rid of her, he really does.... it’s just that every time he attempts to yell at her or knock some sense into her, he ends up kissing her instead. He breaks off his engagement because of this uncontrollable desire but being with this woman it not as easy as one thinks. She hesitated to trust him and he honestly believes she is trying to kill him. But when a plot surfaces that sees his ex-fiancé and the mayor trying to steal her money from the bank, he's done everything in his power to protect her, even if she doesn't want that help. 

What an unexpected surprise this book was. I started it because the cover suggested an easy carefree read and it did deliver on that front but it also brought humor, passion and two bantering characters that argued as much as they kissed. I loved reading about the hero's complete meltdown from the stuffy banker man he was at first. He steadily began to unravel and each time it was the heroine's responsibility for making damaging his calm. She unwittingly or accidentally snapped him from his dull and lifeless existence because she got under his skin and because of a little fairy magic. I freaking loved their characters and the story was so funny and adorable. I enjoy these types of book that show a stoic man and a free dreamer woman who are drawn together against all odds. I enjoy the struggle they have to find peace with these conflict emotions (wanting to both love and murder the object of their desire). because it gives the sense of frenzy and the notion that they while they may want to stay away, something about the other makes it impossible. As I said, I wasn't expecting to love this book as much as I did but I'm extremely happy to have it in my library.