Rating: 3/5

“The utmost was required of every man in the way of his duty.”

“Two Years Before The Mast” was not always an enjoyable read for me, but overall it was a good one, and maybe even a necessary one. Published in 1840, this book is the account of Richard Henry Dana, a Harvard graduate, who spent two years as a regular sailor on a merchant ship in the mid-1830s. 
This text is a slow read at times and often, especially early on, very repetitive. Thus it took me a while to really get into it. However, it is an interesting anthropological study of the life of an American merchant vessel in the 1830s. Mr. Dana was not really a writer, so I can forgive some of the elements of his style that I found grating to read. For example, for most readers Mr. Dana gives too much specific and very detailed information on the smallest details of sailing, pulling in sails, (especially during storms) minute details of ship life, etc. I could not begin to understand a lot of it. Historically valuable, Yes. Interesting to me, No.
Some praises for the book- I really enjoyed the chapter “California and its Inhabitants. This chapter focuses on the people of what was at that time a foreign country. It reveals a lot about the attitudes of the period, and was fascinating. I also liked how much the text kept reinforcing the Yankee work ethic. Hard work and hardship did not bug these men. The only thing that seems to really upset them is treatment that denies them dignity. I love that!
I believe the book really hits its stride in the last quarter. Dana’s descriptions of icebergs is simply beautiful writing. No way around it. In chapter 32, “Doubling Cape Horn” we read one of the most exciting and interesting aspects in the entire piece. Dana is concise and to the point in this chapter, and it works well.
The original last chapter of the text also offers some interesting thoughts on religion and its ability to aid the life of a sailor and it also cautions the reader against judging the economic value of sailing or overregulating it when they don’t know much about it. It is fascinating.
“Two Years Before The Mast” was an intriguing read. I feel my understanding of the world, and early America, is a little broader. For that, I am glad I read it.