Rating: 3/5

I'm giving this three stars, as there are two groups of people who shouldn't read this book: preteen girls, who might actually consider Podkayne a role model, and those who are Easily Outraged. To the second group I would point out the futility of expending a lot of feminist outrage, since author Robert Heinlein passed away in 1988 and wouldn't be a bit concerned.
I think I understand what happened. By 1962, science fiction master Heinlein had written a dozen Young Adult novels, all starring boys, and his publishers pointed out that he had a female fan base as well. But he couldn't just slap a girl's name on a male character, could he? No, she would need to demonstrate her femininity, by showing her happily caring for infants, occasionally bursting into tears, discovering the thrill of properly applied make-up, and incessantly flirting or playing dumb around the numerous men-folk in her life, since (direct quote) "It does not do to let a male of any age know that one has brains..." Ouch.
With all that girly stuff going on, Podkayne's initial aspiration of becoming a star-ship captain quickly fades into the background and eventually disappears all together.
In Heinlein's defense, it's not as though he had a lot of contemporary material to study. This book was memorable because it was one of the handful of books of science fiction books that had a female protagonist at all. The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction  by John Clute and Peter Nicholls (in print and online) provides interesting insight on this topic, under the listing "Women as Portrayed in Science Fiction."
It is also possible that we are all missing the mark. Heinlein insisted Podkayne of Mars was not a Young Adult novel, but a social commentary. The above observations could be reconsidered in that light; however, to me this novel seems more straight-forward than satirical.
 Meanwhile, those (both women and men) who recommended this book to me remembered it fondly from their own Young Adult days, probably impressed by the fun space adventures encountered by spunky Podkayne and her super-genius younger brother Clark. I'm reluctant to stomp further on their nostalgic memories.
So, enjoy this book like any other entertaining-yet-outdated science fiction or adventure story - laughing (or groaning) at the sexist and racist attitudes of an earlier era, while being grateful at the progress we've made since then. Don't take it too seriously, and you'll have more fun.