Rating: 2/5

Halfway through and it’s been an uphill climb. This is a poorly rewritten Scarlet Pimpernel (which the author openly states she modeled it after). It’s very hard to imagine a Southern Spaniard (?) saying “la” all the time and waving a lace bedecked arm in the Texas heat. He isn’t as witty as Sir Percy or as interesting. Half the time I had no idea WHAT his aim actually was. The writer throws in the Mexicans, French, Confederate Army and the Yankees and does very little explaining about any of them.
Christobal is supposedly in love with Jeanette from when he last saw her. Romantic… except he last saw her when she was seven and he was twelve. Hardly believable. Fine, let’s say he fell in love in the month since he’s back, Why doesn’t her try to court her properly to see if she’s receptive? Why doesn’t he take advantage of the wine-spilling scene (what was the point of that again)?
As one reader pointed out, the continuity makes for confusing reading. The author is fond of tossing in scenes for absolutely no purpose: Jen shoots the Frenchman and the in the next page he’s healed. What about the dire consequences awaiting her from his men? What about HIM? How did he get help? What was HIS reaction to being shot?
Another time she’s caught in a human stampede, has a burning building fall on top of her and loses most of her hair. Two pages later her hair has grown back and no mention is made of this. WHY put it in? 
Her mourning over her husband is inserted randomly in between her desire to smuggle goods to the south but neither of those points are well developed. And at the end we learn that it was never about loyalty to a cause that gave her the desire to put her life in danger, it was because… she was an adrenaline junkie. What a letdown.
Even the sex scenes were frustrating. We’re told he spent ages getting to “know” her in one scene but all the description we get is three sentences. Boring.
 The writer seems to suffer from tell, don’t show. The story jumps around with little transition. She wants to smuggle her cotton… next page it’s six weeks later and the cotton has been smuggled. How often did she do this? How many times did she sleep with the Frenchman? And Why doesn’t she EVER worry about pregnancy?
Props to the authors for proper research even if she goes for obvious tropes (Dixie, fried chicken). At least the heroine wears a corset (when she isn’t dressing as a boy). 
I also appreciated that Jen wasn’t entirely comfortable with her own sexuality since her husband never explored that side of their marriage, that Christobal went after her in a hot way, that we get to see Texas at a point most writers don’t touch. 
I guess I’m frustrated because I felt the book had so much potential. I finished the book but I don’t think I’m touching this author again.