Rating: 5/5

The Jailing of Cecelia Capture is, above all else, a novel about the complicated web of freedom and capture in which we find ourselves in society. Cecelia's identity as an Indigenous woman adds several layers of depth to this truth, and Hale is not afraid to explore each one. 

Cecelia finds herself in a jail cell for the majority of the novel, which forces her to reevaluate her life decisions and contemplate all the interconnected factors that led her to this moment. There isn't much to do in a cell than reflect, after all. In doing so the reader is taken on a whirlwind tour of Cecelia's life. Everything from her complicated upbringing by unstable parents, her relationship history, her vices, and her struggles to navigate the world in the present, all of them combine to form a compelling story of a woman in search of freedom. The story makes the reader question the meaning of true liberation, as well as what it takes to achieve it. Even if one is not imprisoned, are they free? What restrains them? What factors, personal or societal, hold them back from flying as an eagle would over the vibrant earth? Thus are the questions begged by the tale of Cecelia Capture.

The book also presses on prominent issues that continue to harm Native American communities to this day. There are mentions of selling family land on reservations in order to make ends meet, and Cecelia herself struggles with alcoholism throughout the work. What I appreciated most, however, was that this work doesn't simply say that Cecelia drinks; it provides the reasons why she started drinking and why she continues to do so. It also covers the ramifications of her vices on her life, which are both positive and negative, just as such a vice would be outside the novel. The issues in the book are muddied as a way to reflect their counterparts in reality, providing a much more enticing and realistic story than one built on stereotypes. I applaud the author's sincerity in that regard.

Hale also mentions competition many times in the book. It feels like Cecelia's life is a constant uphill battle for which she never gains proper recognition, which she also recognizes while imprisoned, and thus the reader questions their own life as a competition, too. This book made me think back on so much of my own life that I called some of my own beliefs into question. I can't answer whether I am truly free or not - or if any of us are free - but I can say that this book is more than worth reading for fans of Indigenous literature or realistic fiction in general. Cecelia Capture teaches us that we can all be free, even if the situation seems bleak, and sometimes all it takes is a little self-reflection to start the process. Only then may we spread our wings and truly fly away.

For all readers, I recommend The Jailing of Cecelia Capture.