Rating: 5/5

An exhaustive account of the life of the American artist and not particularly suited to anyone looking for a casual introduction to Sargent and his work. It took me forever to plow through this biography, not for any fault of the author, but because I had to stop every few pages and track down the historical references mentioned in the text. Maybe if I’d read this on a beach somewhere devoid of an internet connection, I could have rocked it out in a few days. I enjoyed all the detours.

…these two pictures also showed, despite John's reluctance to accept the fact, precisely where his true skill lay: his strength was portraiture. El ]aleo, for all its power to drum up excitement and spark intimidating claims, was a flawed performance. It had been conceived with a purpose. It had a job, an easy job, and the result was a shallow one….
…the picture was flawed by something John was powerless to overcome: he had little imagination. 

Ouch! Not something normally said of someone considered to be a famous artist. Only a few pages later the biographer states:

These three portraits showed more than nimble versatility; they showed John's limitless capacity for originality. 

In a bit of celebrity gossip:

Whistler had enough difficulty trying to take John's work seriously, but the fact that the stupid public loved it proved that he was pandering, unashamedly. John's admiration for Whistler's work, on the other hand, was considerable, but he was too shy to express it. While Whistler was dismissing John's portraits, John was steering collectors and patrons in Whistler's direction.

This sent me on a tangent to learn more about the bitchy James McNeill Whistler about whom I knew only one fact: he had a mother and that he painted her. I guess that's two facts. Now I know more.

In another tangent, I went off to learn more about Diego Velázquez, and from there I read a bit about the Alcazar palace in Madrid and the fire that destroyed it in 1734.

It’s like I’d fallen into a well of my own ignorance with no Lassie to pull me out. Instead, I screamed for Google.