Rating: 3/5

3.5 out of 5 stars.

I would have rated higher if not for the semi-insufferable protagonist.

Julia is a widow and the owner of the El Dorado bathhouse. She, along with a close group of female friends, are thrown into a mess of family dysfunction when she meets an old flame after years apart. He wants her to attempt to heal his paralyzed wife, inviting her and her entourage to his home to stay until she is healed. It becomes instantly clear that a whirlwind of darkness and mystery surrounds the estate and its occupants and Julia, with her mild sense of precognition, is thrust unwillingly into their problems, coupled with an attraction between her and David that still exists.

First and foremost, I did enjoy the book. Good pacing, kept me interested, plenty of detail and Wimberly has a good flow to her writing that discouraged me from skimming (a terrible habit of mine). However, Julia Van Cleef is a frustrating woman. 

I do understand that this is a vintage gothic romance that, for its time, embraced certain cliches that are less tolerable nowadays. But that understanding did little to curb my annoyance with how she acted. The author wants us to believe she is a mature, focused and respectable lady with morals she holds dear. However, throughout the book she acts the complete opposite of how she wants to be seen. Even admits her hypocrisy later on, so there’s that. 

Then her worship of David Damron being the reason for the sabotage of her character makes it worse. This man is highly regarded as an irresistible woman magnet with a power over Julia that robs her of her autonomy every chance they meet. And this is almost a decade after they spent a summer together and somehow her love for him so stronger than ever. Followed by flipping and flopping between accusing him of an affair, a crime and breaking her heart, all without communicating with him about these things, it gets to be redundant.

Then as revelations come to light, it definitely gets better and I start to actually like David. He surprised me and earned a bit of my respect for not carrying out an affair with Julia after his farce of a marriage with Alyson is revealed, wanting to keep her honor intact while Julia is all too ready to abandon her sensibilities for him. 

Towards the end I did predict correctly many of the twists and turn of the book, though I did not anticipate the main couple getting together. I went into Lady of the Mists thinking David was going to be the bad guy, but I should have known better. This was a product of its time and therefore it should have been clear to me there would be a happy ending.

If asked, I would recommend this book for lovers of vintage romance, I will be keeping this book in my personal collection.