Rating: 4/5

Voice in the Night by Velda Johnston is a 1984 publication. 

This is a paperback book I’ve had on my night table for ages. It is a part of my vintage paperback collection, although it’s not quite old enough to be considered truly vintage. Published in 1984, it is still over thirty years old, so I think it counts.

Velda Johnston is a name that sounds familiar to me. I probably read some of her books back in the seventies and eighties, but couldn’t remember for sure. 

The premise of this book is obviously a little dated- but I wouldn’t let that fool you. 

 Carla’s husband died after drunkenly falling into the raging waters of the River Azul. Needing to escape the nightmare of her marriage, her former mother in law, and the trauma of seeing her husband drown, Carla takes her young daughter and moves to New York. Four years after her husband’s death, Carla has found a good job, and is in a stable relationship. 

However, Carla has begun receiving phone calls from a man who sounds exactly like her dead husband, begging her to come back to him. Because Neil’s body was never recovered, is it possible he might still be alive? The only way to get to the bottom of the mystery is to return to Arizona and lure the caller out into the open, whoever it might be. 

I enjoyed this ‘retro’ thriller. Yes, it relies heavily on outdated technology, like landline telephones and of course there are no gadgets or social media to complicate the plot. That’s part of what made the book so suspenseful, though. There were two big surprises in the book I didn’t see coming and I found myself just as absorbed in this story as I am in newer releases.

This is the only book I seem to have by this author, and it seems the only way to get more of her books is to find them in used bookstores, online or otherwise, or eBay. Bummer! I will be keeping my eyes peeled for more of Johnston's books the next time I'm at my local paperback swap store. I did discover a few of her books on Open Library. Not the most comfortable way to read a book, but it’s better than nothing, since most of her books are out of print and not available in digital format. If this one is any indication, I’m sure I would love her other novels too.! 

Overall, this was very well executed thriller, especially for its time. The atmosphere was tense, and the twists were well-timed and very effective. Plus, I love that sinister cover!