Rating: 3/5

Interesting book and well worth reading as an introduction to the peoples of Siberia. 

That said I found it a little bit neither-one-thing-nor-the-other. First, as so often, the title is quite misleading: very little of the content is concerned with the life and/or working of Siberian shamans. It’s none the worse for that of course, but all the same it is a bit like buying a box of washing powder and finding it contains mostly dishwasher tablets instead. Almost the same – but not quite.

My other, more central criticism of a neither-one-thing-nor-the-other nature concerns the content itself. The book is a slightly disarming mixture of the history of Siberia, from the Russian imperial genocides to the present day on the one hand; and on the other, some interesting anecdotal travelogue items picked up on her personal travels across the region. 

I mean it in fact as simultaneously a criticism and a compliment: I would have hugely welcomed a lot more of both, the history; and Anna Reid’s experiences. She writes eloquently and clearly, and it’s a shame that she tried to cram both accounts into only 200 pages of text. It would have been gripping at twice that length, in my view. As it is, she is inevitably a trifle sparse on both fronts and that’s a pity.

All the same, she offers an intriguing insight into a whole range of peoples who have been decimated by ‘modernity’. It is hugely tempting to compare their fate with the native Indians of America – and inevitably Anna Reid does so at one or two points too. 

In that context I mention one key difference that emerges for me. In both cases, a mixture of ignorance and sheer brutality destroyed these ancient cultures. America’s experience was perhaps a little more individualistic and Russia’s maybe a little more imperial (i.e. Cossacks were sent out with the express objective of destroying entire tribes. I’m not sure the US cavalry did so that often). Both were equally awful in hindsight, but somehow the Russian experience seems to me more callous: when those US frontiersmen and women pushed the Indians aside, at least they then turned the west into the American dream. That’s not to justify it, but at least it offers a kind of consolation.

On the other hand, Russia did precious little with Siberia: having given it vodka and smallpox to ensure the damage was permanent, they have done nothing of note with this colossal near-continent, beyond the gulags – now thankfully gone – and also pillaging the oil in recent years. It breaks your heart.

Anna Reid ends on a note of murmured hope and optimism, vaguely hinting that the number of Russians out there has been dropping ever since perestroika set in, and quoting a couple of instances where native numbers have at least stabilised.. But it’s very hard to imagine how these peoples can ever really re-establish themselves fully, given that Russia has also taken away their traditional way of life. Still, forever is a long time. They did it once….