Rating: 3/5

(Spoiler alert) I enjoyed this story until the final chapter, and then I hit a brick wall. I was so disappointed at the ending. I understand that nowhere does the author call this a “clean” romance. But it is advertised as intentionally rewritten for the Christian market. However, the book ends with a sex scene. While not explicit, it is much too detailed for what I would consider a safe-to-read Christian romance. 

For the sake of readers who do not want to read sex scenes in romance novels (even if the couple is married, and even if the scene stops short of graphic but is still too detailed), I really feel that the author and publisher have an obligation to be clear when using terms like “rewritten for the Christian market.” This is such a pivotal and sensitive issue that the author needs to over-communicate to avoid upsetting readers. 

I also feel it is a disservice to the readers when they have invested their time and heart through the entire book, only to be hit with an unexpected sex scene at the end. The author is free to write any kind of book. But I feel that the readers deserve better communication and clarity up front, so they know what they’re getting into. I’m writing this review in the hopes that other readers like me will be forewarned.

I am sad to have to give a review like this. Up until the last chapter, I was thinking, wow, what great writing, characters, dialogue and storytelling. Granted, there were some anachronisms in the dialogue - in some places, the characters used modern colloquial expressions. While those did catch my attention and were a hiccup in the story, they didn’t stop my enjoyment of the story, and I just jumped back in. There was also a courthouse scene that made me pause and wonder how realistic it was and if it had missed a step. But again, I was so engrossed in the story that I just accepted it and kept going.

The relationships, the plot twists were so well developed and richly layered. I kept enjoying the story more and more and kept eagerly turning the pages. I really enjoyed this book right up till that unfortunate (and unnecessary) last chapter. There was actually no reason the ending needed to be drawn out that way. It could have ended beautifully before that chapter, and I would have ended this experience with a genuine cheer for a well written and well plotted story with characters I loved spending time with.