Rating: 3/5

This was a long story broken into 4 parts about King Arthur. took me awhile to finish mostly i lacked compulsion. with the first part being Disney's Sword in the stone which was the best part by far! Other parts were good, but the storytelling was often clunky. 

Sword in the stone by Disney is close in a Walt Disney way. I will say Arthur's adopted family is much nicer in the book. With Arthur growing up with Merlin trying to instill modern values into the young wart. part 2 is of the Orkney clan who is a vicious bunch which Arthur is a part of. through many underhanded things the type that Arthur is trying to stop. his son Mordred is one of these as unfortunately Arthur has a child with his half-sister before marring Gwenevere. Part 3 is the love story of Gwenevere and Lancelot and the search for the grail. which is sort of a retailing of Sir Thomas Malory. The last part is when Merlin returns right before Arthur's death to teach one last lesson to Arthur. 

The last part is where T.H White who is a conscientious objector to WWII living in Ireland mildly states his opinion. i got his opinion fine enough but he is not fervent. i know he is worried about the British communist, but Orwell composed his thoughts much better. On one side you have Hitler screaming his head off then you have T.H White using King Arthur to say, "Beg your pardon, old boy, can't we just get along". i understand he is trying to start dialogue. But he says alot without stating anything concretely. which is probably just my american take he was probably very forceful for a 1940's British Cambridge chap. i will say that the authorship is what weighted this down even the love romance of Gwen and Lance was bogged down by the writing style the knight fights were almost uninteresting compared to don Quixote which i just read. Worst of all there is weird modern references that crop in and by modern that early 20th century. One of the main problems is it is so dated. written eighty years ago to use a model from the past like king Arthur to conduct a lesson on a modern major issue like WW2 which humanity was going to solve without your Wisdom'd advice. Can only lead to that.

Great story of King Arthur in sword of the stone which i recommend to anyone. combined weird anti Irish bigotry with a flavorless Gwenevere and Lancelot love story. then topped off with a outdated morals lesson by someone who seemed unable to accurately state anything other than the importance of the sense of selfness which we have in abundance here in America, and i agree with. good read but don't expect much from the author!