Rating: 4/5

“The solution is not to bend things to fit our needs. This is a homicide case.” 
 “I know that, Harry.”

First published in 2002, City of Bones is the eighth in the long-running series featuring LA detective Harry Bosch. Harry is attached to Hollywood Division with partner of 10 years, Jerry Edgar, under Lt Grace Billet. Kiz Rider was promoted to Robbery-Homicide Division less than a year earlier, and Asst. Chief Irvin Irving, a political animal, is more committed to the preserving the image of the police and his own reputation, and he and Bosch have had a long-standing run-in. 
 
The title stems from a play on words: those used by the ME’s office to describe the grid system used by crime scene investigators to locate, unearth, and photograph artefacts/ remains in situ prior to transporting them to a lab for forensics, and also a term for LA itself, built on ancient La Brea tar pits, where bones, both human and animal have remained buried for thousands of years, occasionally rising to the surface.

The case opens with a bone retrieved by a dog, Calamity, at Laurel Canyon, taking it to his owner, a retired doctor who recognises it as a human humerus, possibly that of a child. Called to the scene, Bosch meets the attending uniforms, and is mutually attracted to rookie Julia Brasher. Within days the ME’s office retrieves almost half a skeleton from a shallow grave, some bones uprooted and dispersed by animals, high on a trail above nearby houses, with the media swarming for details. 

Forensics points to the bones being buried almost twenty years earlier, some showing fractures, as if a victim of sustained abuse, and the investigation turns to who the body is, and who lived in the nearby street at that time.

With the victim so young, the Police try to keep a lid on it, but news of a potential suspect is leaked to the media, compromising the investigation, with tragic results. Amid the blame game, Harry’s budding relationship with Julia Brasher has tongues wagging, and identifying the body takes second stage to office politics. Thus the book drifts for a while, with Bosch still methodically checking out possible witnesses and family members. 

To this reader it seems a peculiarly (though not exclusively) American thing of partnering of uniforms and detectives. Add to that Navy Seal “buddies” and Mormons travelling the world in pairs - perhaps a throwback to the days of the stagecoach with a driver and someone riding shotgun. And while a partner adds strength, it can also lead to challenges if the partners don’t always see eye-to-eye. Another avoidable death, the police covering for their own, and Harry Bosch considers his future.

This was one of the better earlier ones in the series, but I probably would have appreciated it more had I read it a decade ago, and more emphasis on forensics and less on personalities.