Rating: 5/5

Bikers, Balloonists, and Producers

Once MacDonald gets his hook in your jaw with the Travis McGee series, just try to wriggle out of its grasp. Can’t be done. For those who have dipped their toes into this classic American literature, there’s just too much here to back away from. 

In brief, McGee is a guy who lives in a houseboat in Florida and does favors for people, hoping maybe to salvage half of what’s recovered in what are generally situations where the authorities can’t get involved. Besides the action, what these novels are often known for is extensive commentary on modern life. McGee doesn’t like the 9 to 5 world and doesn’t like the overdevelopment and overpopulation of his beloved Florida coast. But, more importantly, what makes him tick isn’t necessarily tuning in and dropping out, but being a white knight on a steed and doing the right thing for folks that need such help. 

Free Fall in Crimson is one of the later novels in the series and features an aging MCGee who reminisces about the past and is at this point borderline monogamous. He’s asked to investigate a mysterious death of an old rich guy in a roadside rest stop that no one’s made much sense of and stumbles into a veritable nest of vipers that nearly proves his undoing. 

The start of the book is perhaps a bit slower and more plodding than some of the other books in the series. But stay tuned, there’s plenty of action to dive into before it all ends. There’s also a bit less of McGee’s philosophical interludes here, but the commentary is still there - just skillfully worked into the story. There’s an exploration of the nature of evil and, besides the monster whose evil is obvious, there’s others who through greed and lust also fall into evil little by little. There’s a thorough indictment of Hollywood here and all the horrors that can be hidden away and covered up by fame and fortune and the people who will go along with it and cover it up. The comparison of Hollywood with small-town apple pie can’t be missed. 

All in all, a satisfying read that might not be the best one to start the series with.