Rating: 4/5

Emily Eden’s novels, The Semi-Attached Couple and The Semi-Detached House, published in 1859 and frequently packaged together, as in the edition I read, are both novels that deserve more attention than they have received. 
The Semi-Attached Couple, written some three decades before it was originally published, is a charming and surprisingly critical depiction of the rocky relationship between a newly married couple. 

Helen Beaufort begins to have cold feet before her marriage to Lord Teviot, whom she accepted . . . on an acquaintance of very few weeks, and that carried on solely in a ball-room or at a breakfast,” and once they are engaged, they fail to communicate: “He was always quarreling with her—at least, so she thought; but the real truth was, that he was desperately in love, and she was not; that he was a man of strong feelings and exacting habits, and with considerable knowledge of the world; and that she was timid and gentle, unused to any violence of manner or language, and unequal to cope with it. He alarmed her, first by the eagerness with which he poured out his affection, and then by the bitterness of his reproaches because, as he averred, it was not returned.” This is a highly indirect suggestion that Teviot has a sexually passionate attraction towards this rather younger, certainly innocent young woman (the novel calls her “innocent” repeatedly), who shrinks from what little she is able to anticipate about the sexual side of her upcoming marriage. But everyone in her family assumes she is delighted at the prospect of marrying this handsome man with a title and multiple homes; the one sister in whom she attempts to confide expresses only puzzlement at Helen’s tears. The marriage proceeds.

Again, Eden only subtly suggests its consummation is less than pleasurable for the timid bride: “And now, whatever might have been Helen’s fears or hopes, her fate was sealed. She had turned that page of life over which she had lingered with distressful doubt; and now it must be read . . . . [S]he was depressed, half frightened, and half unhappy. Lord Teviot’s expressions of affection were almost as alarming as his anger; he was so energetic in all his professions, so violent, as it seemed to her who had been accustomed to the gentle love of her mother and the playful tenderness of her brother and sisters.” “Energetic . . . expressions of affection” that “half frightened” her? Meanwhile, the two hardly ever talk, in part because he is incapable of understanding her timidity and fear and also because they have little time alone before they acquire a houseful of visitors that require their full attentions. Far from resenting the intrusion, Helen found it “a relief to her to be spared those tête-à-têtes with her husband, which she had found so alarming in the outset of her married life.”
 

Perhaps half the novel is devoted to depicting the interactions among the visitors at St. Mary’s, Teviot’s estate, following the flirtations, courtships, and social manipulations of the various guests, which offers occasion for both two different love stories and some social satire, but the core of the novel is the story of how Lord and Lady Teviot struggle to understand one another. The fact is that most of the unmarried men and women struggle to communicate, as they so clearly come from completely “separate spheres,” and it’s astonishing that any of the marriages succeed. 

I found this novel quite entertaining, and recognize the influence of Jane Austen, who is directly referenced when one of the younger women houseguests asks her mother whether she objects to her (the daughter) reading novels, one of which, named Pride and Prejudice, looks “very tempting.” Austen, of course, ends her novels with marriage, so the hints of sexual incompatibility are a definite departure. 

Stylistically, Eden is no Austen, though one line did stand out for me: a Mister Fisherwick, the private secretary to a cabinet minister, is we are told, cold, dusty, and “had the air of an exhausted ink bottle.” Nice. 

Altogether, I found this novel a delightful discovery. I gather that the critical consensus is that it is inferior to the better-known The Semi-Detached House, whose success in 1859 led to Eden’s publishing her earlier novel with a title that suggests a connection between the two books that doesn’t, in fact, exist. Personally, I’m partial to this one. 

*****
As for the Semi-Detached House, it is its own take (sort of) on the theme of pride and prejudice. Its premise is that Blanche, Lady Chester, has leased a “semi-detached house,” which essentially what we Americans would call a duplex, but obviously nice enough for a Lady Something whose husband is an eldest son of wealthy Lord Chesterton. Blanche moves into the house because Arthur, her husband, is about to embark on a diplomatic mission to the continent. She assumes that the residents of the adjoining house will be inferior sorts of people an “immensely fat” mother who wears mittens and “contrive to know what I have dinner every day,” a little boy “who will always be throwing stones at palings and making me jump, and daughters constantly playing music badly. Of course it turns out that Blanche is being “over-fastidious,” but she quickly overcomes her prejudices and recognizes that the Hopkinson family, from whose points of view much of the novel is narrated, are, though certainly not as well off as the Chesters, are nevertheless as Austen would say, “well bred” and kind. They contrast favorably with Baron and Baroness Sampson, who are ostentatiously wealthy, proud in all the wrong ways but incapable of discerning who is genuinely aristocratic and who is not, and distinctly ill-bred—also Jewish, which basically amounts to the same thing. Sigh. 

The book’s theme is “To be sure how things do come about, just from a little neighborliness and kind feeling.” The Chesters help the Hopkinsons, and the Hopkinsons help the Chesters, several courtships are resolved happily, and a very Victorian happy ending is enjoyed by all—except those who don’t deserve one. 

The Semi-Detached House, written deep in the Victorian era, is, if anything, more coy about sexuality than The Semi-Attached Couple. A major reason Blanche isn’t traveling with her husband is that she is in a “very interesting state of health”—i.e., pregnant. At the same time, Eden clearly is amused that when Blanche’s father in law gives her a generous gift, “he ventured to say, ‘that though it was hardly decorous he should allude to certain circumstances, yet he was aware that Blanche must be making preparations for an expected happy event, and that he had brought his contribution to what he believed was called a _layette_.’ But this last word was too much for his delicacy, and he departed covered with confusion.” 

I found that bit funnier than many of the passages that were supposed to be jokes—mainly affectionate mockery of Mrs. Hopkinson or considerably less affectionate satire of the Jewish Baron and Baroness. 

I preferred the earlier novel to the later one, but I enjoyed both and am sad that Eden wrote only the two novels, as I would certainly enjoy reading more.