Rating: 4/5

Even though I have an ongoing personal project to read most of Thomas Hardy, I had never seriously considered his short stories until a group here on Goodreads started reading them, and I couldn’t resist joining.

These are Victorian potboilers destined for publication in magazines. No one’s pretending they aren’t. It clearly isn’t here that Hardy was applying himself with subtlety to characterization and theme. But for all that, I found this an engaging and likable collection, with a few strong stories and plenty of readable ones. Like most of his works, it’s set in the semi-fictional Wessex.

In “An Imaginative Woman,” a dreamy young wife and mother becomes obsessed with a poet whom she never meets, and this obsession fuels her frustration at her own unused and unappreciated creativity. Though highly melodramatic I found this a striking tale of domesticity and motherhood thwarting a woman's hopes and dreams, that could make a wonderful companion read to “The Yellow Wall-paper.”

“The Three Strangers” is a comic tale of a dark and stormy night and mistaken identity and asks the question, in a small rural community, do people feel allegiance to the law, or to their neighbours?

“The Withered Arm” has a supernatural tone that plays up both melodrama and coincidence. It reminded me quite a bit of both Tess and The Return of the Native with jilted lovers and folk magic… actually, despite the magical element this was the most Hardyian of all the stories, kind of Hardy on steroids.

“Fellow Townsmen” was a nonsensical entry about which the less said the better.

In “Interlopers at the Knap,” we’re treated to a supremely atmospheric beginning, with Farmer Darton riding down a long road at twilight, once a highway for Elizabeth I’s men, now a disused cart-track. He comes to a fork in the road, at which stands a sign post with nothing written on it (life, anyone?). And he chooses a way forward. Not all of the story lived up to this beginning, but it raises interesting questions about marriage, who benefits, who is likely to be made happy by it.

And “The Distracted Preacher” was just great fun, as a straightlaced young preacher moves into a village full of smugglers and falls in love with his landlady, who has a penchant for walking the moors at night in her dead husband’s clothing and has more than a few secrets up her sleeve. This story never feels serious, but with a set-up like that, who wants it to be.

Overall, these tales more than delivered on what I expected, with “An Imaginative Woman” and “The Distracted Preacher” standouts in very different ways. And all of them are written with consummate skill, despite some frankly ridiculous plots, I was compelled to turn pages.