Rating: 4/5

A classic French novel written in 1834 but set in Paris in 1819. 

Pere in the title means Father, and it’s in part a story of an old man’s obsessive love for his two married daughters. He was once a wealthy flour merchant but he gave all his money to his daughters while he lives in penury in a squalid pension run by a penny-pinching nasty lady.
 

Pere has a few pieces of silver left that he sells when his daughters need a new gown for their high-society lives. Both have wealthy, controlling husbands who are stingy with their money. Both daughters and their husbands are embarrassed by the shabby old man. Pere seldom sees them and spends his days sitting in parks waiting to wave at them when their carriages go by. That’s about all the interaction he has with them.

There’s a cast of 18 quirky Dickens-like characters, men and women of all ages, also resident in the pension. We have a young male medical student (whose skills come in handy at various times), a young woman disowned by her wealthy father, a vicious wanted criminal in disguise, and many others. 

Eugene, a young man resident in the pension, really becomes the main character in the story. Supposedly he’s a student but mostly he leaves classes after roll call. His goal is to leave his impoverished small-town background behind by marrying a wealthy woman and becoming a member of high society. Eugene has a well-placed cousin who is a high society queen and he works on her and Goriot's daughters to worm his way in.

We are presented with a very jaded and cynical outlook on the upper levels of French society filled with artificiality and deceit. All three society women Eugene gets involved with have other men in their lives besides their husbands, apparently with their husbands’ knowledge. And we know the husbands are not sitting by the fire reading Balzac. I say French society, but I should say Parisian society. It comes across very strongly in this book, as in many of Balzac’s novels, that Paris is the center, not just of France, but of the world.

One of the boarders makes a point of tutoring Eugene on the ways of the world. The boarder’s philosophy of society is basically ‘cheat him before he cheats you; kill him before he kills you.’ 

Combined with what Eugene sees himself, the young man grows to accept this sour view of society. He tells the medical student “Whatever evil you are told about society, you can be sure it’s true. It would take more than a Juvenal to describe the horror under the gold and the jewels.” [Juvenal was a Roman poet who wrote satires of society.] And Eugene thinks: “Finer spirits can’t stay long in this world. And how indeed can deep feeling reconcile itself with a society so shabby and petty and superficial?” 

Balzac (1799 – 1850) was a prolific author, publishing almost 70 novels and novellas with a goal of writing about every type of human character. Balzac called this endeavor The Human Comedy. The author praises Eugene at one point saying that as he matured he was learning to “distinguish the strata that compose human society.” His writing influenced Emile Zola, Charles Dickens, Marcel Proust, Gustave Flaubert, and Henry James.

Balzac was an early realist writer who is credited with introducing the idea of using characters in multiple novels. The character of Eugene de Rastignac ended up in 22 novels. In fact, the French use the term ‘Rastignac’ to mean an ambitious social climber. Balzac spent much of his life banging out books to pay off debts. He didn’t get married until age 50 and then died, supposedly from overwork, six months later.

Balzac was paid by the word and it shows in this story which comes across as somewhat bloated and sometimes repetitive. For example, we get five pages on the urban setting of the pension and the physical description of the house and rooms. Although I must also say it is a well-written lush description. Characters are left dangling at the end of the book, so that you wonder ‘well what happened to her?’ But still a great story.

Paris photo by Julien Tondu on unsplash.com 
A daguerreotype of the author in 1842 from Wikipedia