Rating: 2/5

This book seemed like a good overview back when I was in college, but now that I've closely studied World War II I'm just revolted by the numerous errors, poor understanding of the battles, and juvenile opinions. It’s painfully obvious the places where he didn’t do any fact checking and just blindly accepted the statements of ill-informed or dishonest sources. I'll just list my complaints for the battles that I'm most familiar with—a thorough fact checking of this book would be too painful.

First off, he chose to use some culturally insensitive nomenclature: "British" to mean the United Kingdom and all members of the Commonwealth; "English" to mean all of the United Kingdom; and “Holland” to mean all of the Netherlands. In the index he defiantly thumbs his nose at propriety by writing “Netherlands, see Holland”.

Page 130: He lists the usual secondary and fake reasons for the Panzer halt before Dunkirk: need for tank repairs, swampy terrain, and wanting to use the Luftwaffe alone. He does not give the primary reason: Rundstedt ordered the halt to allow the infantry to close up with the Panzers, and then let the halt drag on too long due to a power struggle between him and Hitler on one side and Halder, von Brauchitsch, and the Panzer generals on the other. Alistair Horne had this figured out in 1969, so Weinberg’s explanation was at least 25 years out of date.

Page 210: He gets in some juvenile Italian bashing. "[Graziani] was still contemplating either his navel or the sand dunes when the British struck" in their December 1940 Operation Compass. If Weinberg had put some effort into studying this campaign he would have known that Graziani was waiting for the completion of a water pipeline and coast road improvements before resuming the offensive. Weinberg has a double standard and doesn’t ridicule Auchinleck for taking several months to prepare for Operation Crusader in 1941.

Page 217: The British did not send paratroops to Crete in December 1940, they sent No. 50 Commando.

Page 222: In the 1994 edition he claimed that the British sent 3 “British” divisions to Greece: 2 Australian and 1 from New Zealand. In reality, only one Australian division was sent. He tried to fix it in the 2005 edition but still cocked it up, saying that 3 British divisions were sent: 1 Australian and 1 from New Zealand.

Page 228: The Germans at Crete tried to capture three airfields, not two. The Crete battle was three independent sub-battles so it would have been impossible for him to have made this error if he had read more than just a CliffsNotes summary.

Page 232: Rommel’s dash to the wire in Operation Crusader came before the Africa Corps attacked the New Zealand Division, not after.

Page 233: He unfairly condemns the Germans for abandoning the frontier garrison in the retreat from Operation Crusader. The facts are that it was unsafe for ships to use Bardia for an evacuation, and the garrison lacked the transport to be able to break out by land. By holding out until January 17, 1942, the garrison lengthened the British supply lines and weakened their pursuit. If the garrison had not held out, the British pursuit might have been strong enough to pull off a second Beda Fomm encirclement. The garrison’s sacrifice was not in vain.

Page 351: He makes it sound like in August 1942 Auchinleck was planning to abandon Egypt, Palestine, and Saudi Arabia if Rommel attacked again. After Montgomery made those claims in his 1958 book, he was forced to issue a retraction in the 1960 paperback edition. Weinberg was therefore 34 years out of date on this subject!

Page 415: He claims that in the Soviet July 1942 retreat during Case Blue, their units either retreated coherently or at least could be pulled together again. But by my count, 48% of the divisions were effectively destroyed. Weinberg does have the excuse of writing before the Russians opened their archives, but he should have waffled on this issue rather than uncritically parroting the Soviet propaganda.

Page 452: He condemns the Soviet pursuit to the south of Stalingrad as being slow in the weeks before Operation Winter Storm. But that wasn’t a pursuit, it was the formation of an outer encirclement line. You can legitimately criticize it for being weak, but not for being slow.

6th Panzer Division was not understrength for Winter Storm. It was fresh off the train after being rebuilt in France.

Pages 455-456: He misidentifies the Soviet Fronts attacking in January 1943. The 2nd Army, Hungarians, and Italian Alpini were hit by Voronezh Front, not Southwest Front. And Army Group Don was no longer fighting Stalingrad Front: it had been renamed Southern Front on January 1.

Page 458: He perpetuates the myth that the Waffen SS was favored over the regular army in delivery of weapons.

Page 599: The SS-LAH Division was sent to northern Italy, not central, in the fall of 1943.

Page 600: He gets in a gratuitous attack on Montgomery’s performance in Italy. There are plenty of things to criticize Monty for, so there’s really no need for this distortion. The context is that 5th Army had invaded Italy at Salerno and was having a rough time. Weinberg ignorantly thinks that 8th Army in the toe of Italy would have been able to help 5th Army if not for Monty’s malicious pettiness. Weinberg’s words are, “Now he missed the opportunity to recover high standing with the Americans by deliberately pausing after his unopposed landing instead of dashing northwards. Alexander would and could not interfere with Montgomery’s tactical dispositions; and Brooke, who was the great advocate of both the invasion of Italy and Montgomery as a key figure in it, neither explained to his protégé why the Italian campaign was so important nor sent a rocket to him even while sighing into his diary that the Salerno landing ‘is doomed.’ Montgomery never had such a chance again. Newspaper correspondents could drive up the Italian roads toward Naples, but the 8th Army rested on its laurels as their American and British comrades died on the Salerno beaches."

Weinberg either never bothered to read the relevant part of the British official history or chose to distort the history to support his vendetta. Alexander’s plan was for two divisions from 8th Army to advance only as far as Catanzaro, which was 1/3 of the 300 road miles to Salerno. For that reason, 8th Army was given only a minimal number of ships and trucks. It could not build up quickly and on the day of the Salerno invasion it was still not even up to the “light” scale of truck transport. I consider it likely that the light scale of transport meant that the infantry had to walk. That would explain why Monty allowed rest days to sit on their “laurels”. The German demolitions had been so thorough that 8th Army ran out of bridging material after advancing only 100 road miles. Logistical difficulties and the rugged terrain thus made it impossible for 8th Army to dash northwards. In 1949, Alexander admitted that in hindsight 8th Army could not have moved any faster than it did.

It’s insulting to our intelligence to expect us to believe that Monty did not know why the Italian campaign was important. He arguably had a better understanding of the situation than Eisenhower, Alexander, and Clark because only Monty realized during planning that sending 8th Army into the toe of Italy was a stupid waste of resources that had no hope of pinning down any Germans.

Regarding the newspaper correspondents’ publicity stunt, they stopped when they got to the Salerno beachhead. They did not and could not go all the way to Naples, and only a dilettante would believe that their stunt could have been replicated by a force large enough to make a difference at Salerno.

Pages 603-604: He falsely claims that the Allied invasion of Sicily caused the Germans to transfer multiple divisions from both Army Group Center and Army Group South to Italy. In reality, only the SS-LAH division was sent. The Germans kept a central reserve for contingencies like this.

Page 661: The British 10th Corps in Italy was to the west of the Americans, not to the east. He got the rivers that they were crossing correct, which means that he probably never looked at a map and just copied text from his source and assumed that all the British divisions were in the eastern portion of the line.

Next he gets in a cheap shot at Clark regarding the Anzio invasion. Like Monty, there’s a lot to criticize him for so there’s no need to be unfair. Weinberg calls his leadership “incompetent” for passing up an unspecified “opportunity created by the initial surprise”. Amateurs who’ve never wargamed Anzio proclaim from their armchairs that the Allies could have captured Rome and cut off the supply route for the Germans at Cassino. Then through magical thinking they believe this would have caused the Germans to panic and retreat north. No, this is the Germans we’re talking about here: Churchill’s gimmicky plans didn’t work on them. It would have just left the invasion force strung out and vulnerable to annihilation. By forming a perimeter and avoiding annihilation, the Allies achieved the best possible results considering the paltry resources that had been allocated. Churchill had forced the Allies to send a corps to do the job of an army and created a no-win situation, so the blame lies with him, not with Clark.