Rating: 2/5

Check out my 'reading middle grade for a magical week off' reading vlog where I talk about The Secret Garden: https://youtu.be/qDV2nQ5me58

I think it's very important to address and talk about the racism and ableism in 'The Secret Garden', mainly because I went into reading this totally unaware of the problematic nature of this book. I also feel like parents might also be unaware as I have been left comments on my reading vlog of this saying they had no idea, and will talk about those elements of the book with their children so they know how wrong the racism and ableism is in the book.

I'm also not here to be a gatekeeper. You can still read the book and enjoy it, I will not judge you for it. I just think that giving this book to an impressionable child could be harmful if the subject matter is not discussed with the child, because the author made no attempt to right the wrongs of the racism by the end of the book. I know it's because this book is 'a product of its time' and 'that behaviour was acceptable back then'. Well, guess what. The behaviour is not acceptable now. 

Mary begins the book as a neglected child who treats her servants in India appallingly. She even goes so far as to slap and abuse her servants. Nobody in the book bats an eye when Brown people are called "not people", and it's not even just Mary who has these racist views. You may argue that Mary undergoes a transformation by the end of the book and becomes a better person, and that she does. She learns compassion and kindness and is inspired to change. But does the racism ever get addressed? Does the author tell the reader that being racist is wrong? No. Mary becomes a better person without addressing how truly awful she was at the beginning of the book. 

Colin is also bed-bound and uses a wheelchair, and then suddenly, he can walk. He throws his disability away. I've seen people argue that he was never disabled, but I've also heard a lot of people with disabilities identified with Colin throughout the book until he was "cured" of his disability. If it had been made clear from the beginning that Colin could walk, then I don't think there'd be much of a problem. However, to bait readers with a disabled character who is miraculously cured is just another blow. Not all disabled people can be cured, and to give this idea that you can only be happy if you don't have a disability, well, that's extremely harmful to young people reading this book who are disabled. 

While themes of the book regarding change and growth is done beautifully through the tending of the garden, and how it ties in with nature, I still couldn't fully enjoy this book. I just had no idea about the racism and ableism, and I feel like a lot of people who go into this book might not know about it too. Again, I think it's okay to read it if you want, but please bare in mind that when you give this book to a child, it has these elements and open up a discussion with them about it.

Let's not act like racism and ableism is okay in this book just because it's 'a product of its time'. You know, there are hundreds of children's books published today that are better. Much, much better.