Rating: 5/5

First off, you really need to read Comanche Moon by Catherine Anderson before Comanche Heart because that is where Swift and Amy's story begins. They fall in love at a young age and get betrothed in the Comanche way. Swift Antelope stays with his Comanche tribe during their fight against the whites but promises to come for her when he is finished. She waits years and he never comes, so eventually she ends up in Oregan with her sister Loretta and Hunter.

At the start of Comanche Heart, it has been 12 years after Swift left Amy. He returns to her farm only to be told she died. Three years later, he makes his way to Oregon to find Hunter and Loretta after years of being a gun slinger and riding with the Comancheros. He is amazed to find his Amy alive and well, living as a school teacher near her sister. Amy has never forgotten her childhood love but is terrified of the hard looking Comanchero Swift had become.

Swift still loves Amy and is determined to have a life with her now that he has found her again. Amy is scared of losing the freedom she has at Wolf's Landing if she honors her promise to marry Swift. While she still loves him, she went through a lot in her life that has left her terrified of intimacy and all but broke her spirit. However, Swift is one determined man who is patient and willing to do whatever it takes to win Amy's trust.

I loved Swift and Amy's story! Amy went through so much in her life that she deserved to find happiness with her love. At first I was a little frustrated that she resisted Swift so hard until I found out the hell she went through while faithfully waiting for Swift to come for her in Texas - then my heart broke for her and I couldn't wait to see Swift heal her with his love. Swift had a hard life in the 15 years since he last saw Amy, but he jumps at the chance to start a new life. He is so kind and patient with Amy - he truly was a hero to me. This love story was beautiful and sweet. Swift and Amy deserved their HEA after living hard lives then managing to work their way through many obstacles to find happiness and a chance for a life together. 

Highly recommended for anyone who enjoys great romance! Read Comanche Moon first though - not only is it amazing but you see the start of this wonderful love story. Comanche Heart will be rereleased in June 2009!