Rating: 5/5

I Am David is a great book to read. It is a story about a little boy who has been in a concentration camp his whole life. David had one friend there named Johannes. Johannes helps him to learn stuff he needs. David loved Johannes alot but in camp if you were very smart you would be put to death. When David is offered a chance to escape he takes it. David struggles with the outer world, David wants to learn about the outer world but he is scared to talk to people. David has never talked or played with kids, when he is given a chance he doesn't realy want to but when he reilizezs that kids are not so bad he like them exept Carlo. David decides he needs a God but he doesn't know what one to choose. Johannes told David about his God the "God of green pastures and the still waters" David belives that this God would be the one for him. The God of green pastures and still waters has helped David twice David belives he has to give God something but what? David has learned how to be greatful, nice, helpful, and to speak properly on his way to Denmark with help from a few people. 

I think my favirot part of the book was when he thought the children were stupid and ungreatful. I also LOVED the part were King { The dog from the barn } gives his life for David. It is very hard to just pick one part I liked or loved. I realy liked the part were David saves Maria's life { David saves a little girl who he likes } from a fire. I also loved and love the part were he meets the painter and figures out that the guard{ The man who helped him escape } loves his mom but David has never met his mother. The painter shows him a picture of a women and her son named David. David then reilizes that the women in the picture is his mother. The guard has always been nice to David like giving him vitamins and milk for vitemen -C. I love that part because it is very sweet. I love this book very much.

I want people to read this book so they know why I love the book and hopefully they will love it to! I also want people to read it because I know that they will LOVE it to! " I Am David " or "David in Denmark" or " North to freedom" is a very good book to read. I recomend that people read it but only 9 and up read it because I don't think the age under 9 should be reading a book like this because it is just a little bit much for them. If the age 9 and under are able to read it GREAT!!!! But if not that is ok they will be able to read it soon. I cried at the end and I am pretty sure everyone who read it cried to. I want people to like it not oh it was good and I like so and so better. Im not saying people should like this book better then their favirot book I just don't want people saying it's a terrible book....

I am exited to read more Anne Holm books. Befor I read more of her books I am going to read "The Foundling" by Linda Hayner.

Im sorry if you dont like my review