Rating: 4/5

Sleeping Murder is the best murder mystery of Miss Marple, in my opinion. It is also one of the best murder mysteries by Agatha Christie. The novel has all the features one expects from a novel of this genre, and more. I'm only sorry that this is the final novel of the series. I'd have loved to read more of Marple mysteries like this one. 

The plot was cleverly done, and the story is very well written with a good, even pace. The mystery was intriguing. It begins when Gwenda Reed experiences a vision of a dead body in her newly bought house. Is it a hallucination? Is the place haunted? Or is a dead soul crying for justice? Gwenda is not sure. But she knows one thing. If this is an indication of a sleeping murder, she will not let it lie. So, despite Miss Marple's warning that she might be exposing herself to danger, Gwenda, with the help of her husband, is determined to unravel the mystery behind the cold case.

The story wasn't fast-paced. Rather, it had a steady, regular flow. Yet, this is one of the finest in Agatha Christie's repertoire. Agatha Christie's novels are known for their intrigue, suspense, and drama; all were found here. Also, there was a twinge of sadness running as an undercurrent throughout the story. The unfortunate plight of the victim touched my heart deeply. 

Miss Marple's involvement is very little in the novel. The investigation is mostly carried out by Gwenda and her husband. Nevertheless, her contribution to the investigation is indispensable. Her intelligence and shrewdness are quite impressive. With her sharp observations, she even averts another murder being committed! Oh, the dear old little pussy! :)

I truly enjoyed this bittersweet tale. I guessed the criminal early (which proved right), but that didn't hinder in any way my enjoyment of the story. I'm parting from Miss Marple with a contented heart after this great installment. The series didn't begin well for me. I didn’t connect well with Miss Marple. But with time, I came to appreciate her talents and became quite fond of her. Christie wrote some remarkable stories for this series. But above all, Sleeping Murder will come to my mind when I think of Miss Marple.

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/