Rating: 4/5

Booker T. Washington: the man, the myth, the legend.

The Man: Born in slavery, freed during the Civil War. Self-educated and then educated and then an educator. Husband to three wives, father to three children. Founder of the Tuskegee Institute, which educated youth, trained teachers, and taught the industrial trades. A brilliant orator. A bridge-builder and a champion fundraiser. Lauded by Southern blacks and whites and by Northern whites; viewed with a certain amount of suspicion and disdain by Northern blacks. A workaholic and a meritocrat. Admired by presidents, royalty, Mark Twain; the first black awardee of a Harvard honorary degree. A proponent of personal responsibility and initiative and the ability of the individual to triumph over their circumstances. A man of both vision and compromise.

The Myth: Although currently under some (positive) reappraisal, Washington's reputation has suffered over the years. His ability to compromise has been held against him: his celebrated Atlanta Address was renamed 8 years later by W.E.B. Du Bois as the 'Atlanta Compromise' - indeed, that is the title Wikipedia decided to label that amazing speech which galvanized the nation to support the education of freed black men and women. It is important to understand that much of the critiques against him came from a place of both admirably activist rhetoric and willful ignorance, from people who were not born into slavery and who did not live in the same land as Southern whites, from critics who saw as accommodationist his overriding goal of providing black people the training that would allow them to support themselves and their families while contributing to society. The criticisms often came from those who did not have to deal with life in the South, and who advocated that Southern blacks should simply, en masse, leave that land, rather than become partners with whites in reforming their world. Washington has also been unjustly accused of not caring if blacks were allowed to vote; such accusers have apparently not read Washington's own words, which clearly advocate for complete equal rights between blacks and whites - including the vote. Sadly, the white South did not end up operating in good faith when it came to Washington's ideas, despite praising those ideas mightily; as Du Bois has noted in his infamous critique of the man and his goals, Washington's positive outlook and constant advocacy were eventually met with further disenfranchisement and the legally enshrined civil inferiority of blacks by the South.

The Legend: So influential was he that the years 1880 - 1915 became known as 'The Age of Booker T. Washington'. He had the ear of the wealthy and the powerful; through his efforts and his genius at fundraising, he was personally responsible for the education, training, and empowerment of thousands upon thousands of black youth and adults. In outlook, he is the bootstrapping conservative to Du Bois' fiery progressive, the pragmatic realist and incrementalist to Du Bois' philosopher and melancholy pessimist, the forward-looking businessman to Du Bois' cynical academic. The believer versus the skeptic. Which of the two attitudes has won out? It depends on who you ask. Despite opposing viewpoints and their eventual enmity, perhaps both were right.

A Summary: The book was a pleasure to read. Given Washington's character (and the fact that it was dictated to a ghostwriter), there are no poetic flights of imagination. Nor are there depths of despair. Instead, there is plain-speaking, a few chapters of personal biography, a scattering of anecdotes both moving and amusing, many speeches and letters, many descriptions of appointments with potential funders, and a disinterest in dwelling upon life's tragedies. My overall impression from the book is that he had one goal in life and he did everything in his power to accomplish it: the uplift of his people. To Washington, the man who worked hard and worked honestly, who could provide for himself and for others, is the man who is truly free.

His Words:

"The whole machinery of slavery was so constructed as to cause labour, as a rule, to be looked upon as a badge of degradation, of inferiority. Hence labour was something that both races on the slave plantation sought to escape. The slave system on our place, in a large measure, took the spirit of self-reliance and self-help out of white people. My old master had many boys and girls, but not one, so far as I know, ever mastered a single trade or special line of productive industry. The girls were not taught to cook, sew, or to take care of the house. All of this was left to the slaves. The slaves, of course, had little personal interest in the life of the plantation, and their ignorance prevented them from learning how to do things in the most improved and thorough manner."

"In later years, I confess that I do not envy the white boy as I once did. I have learned that success is to be measured not so much by the position that one has reached in life as by the obstacles which he has overcome while trying to succeed. Looked at from this standpoint, I almost reached the conclusion that often the Negro boy's birth and connection with an unpopular race is an advantage, so far as real life is concerned. With few exceptions, the Negro youth must work harder and must perform his tasks even better than a white youth in order to secure recognition. But out of the hard and unusual struggle through which he is compelled to pass, he gets a strength, a confidence, that one misses whose pathway is comparatively smooth by reason of birth and race."

"More and more I am convinced that the final solution of the political end of our race problem will be for each state that finds it necessary to change the law bearing upon the franchise to make the laws apply with absolute honesty, and without opportunity for double dealing or evasion, to both races alike. Any other course my daily observation in the South convinces me, will be unjust to the Negro, unjust to the white man, and unfair to the rest of the state in the Union, and will be, like slavery, a sin that at some time we shall have to pay for."

"My experience is that there is something in human nature which always makes an individual recognize and reward merit, no matter under what colour of skin merit is found. I have found, too, that it is the visible, the tangible, that goes a long ways in softening prejudices. The actual sight of a first-class house that a Negro has built is ten times more potent than pages of discussion about a house that he ought to build, or perhaps build."

"In our industrial teaching we keep three things in mind: first, that the student shall be so educated that he shall be enabled to meet conditions as they exist now, in the part of the South where he lives - in a word, to be able to do the thing which the world wants done; scond, that every student who graduates from the school shall have enough skill, coupled with intelligence and moral character, to enable him to make a living for himself and others; third, to send every graduate out feeling and knowing that labour is dignified and beautiful - to make each one love labour instead of trying to escape it."