Rating: 3/5

Now, it may be theoretically and practically impossible to write an "objective" commentary on the strange beast we all come to know as the French Revolution. Yet what Tocqueville has accomplished here is a comparative study illuminating the brute fact that the Revolution completes the task of centralization (concomitant with the levelling of the provincial laws, customs and regulations (e.g. parlements or mediaeval law courts) clumsily pursued by the Ancien Regime as early as Louis XIV. When all dust has settled, Frenchmen found themselves well underway on the road whose foundations was laid by the royal power that preceded it. Tocqueville even goes as far as to claim that the Ancien Regime, partially driven by greed, and by demolishing ancient customs and introducing new reforms through royal institutions that had no mediaeval precedent, showed all the orders how the society could be made anew. On the other hand, the Revolution also introduced its own "savagery" into the mix--a savagery which Tocqueville tacitly believed was avoidable, if only we applied the brakes at the end of 1789. Yet the question of whether the Terror was an unavoidable outcome of the 1789 is a question that is beyond the scope of Tocqueville's study. He does devote a chapter on the revolutionary 'discourse' produced by the class of philosophes and social reformers which, in his expert opinion, only 'caught on' because the latter and the middle classes sympathetic to the plight of the landed peasantry have longed since ceased to interact with the actual peasantry in the matters of governance. Unlike England and a few other emerging absolutist states in Europe the steady accumulation of royal power corroded the collaboration between the noble classes and those whom they were supposed to govern and care for. The ensuing vacuum is then filled by the discourse of equality and freedom and dreams of radical reforms until all Frenchmen were swept up by the fervor. Still, are the years of 1792-3 unavoidable? Beyond his praise for the 1789 ("a time to be remembered forever" pg. 204), Tocqueville remains largely silent.
We are all heirs to the Revolution, and in our hearts and minds it always inspires admiration or disgust, but never indifference.