Rating: 4/5

Talk about misplaced revenge…Sheesh! The hero even knows it is misplaced. It isn’t like he believes that the heroine personally did anything to him, he knows it was her father…and it happened when she was 9….he has been lying in wait until she turned 20 to strike. Ding! Dong! She’s 20!

This is an absolutely ridiculous plot…with a hero that is unreasonably cruel to a woman that is 4 years older than his daughter…Oh and I loved every minute of it!!!!

 

Heroine: 20 year old virgin with auburn hair(this is a running joke in the book), adopted by her aunt and uncle. Her mom died when she was young and her father was a race car driver who popped in for visits once in blue moon to spoil his daughter, then took off again. She gets a job as a companion for the Hero’s daughter although she is interviewed by Clive, who she thought was the girls father. Boy, is she in for a treat. 

 

Hero-35 years’ old, blinded in one eye with a scar(Argh, Argh) which was caused by the h’s father during a car race. He was pretty messed up, in fact he was blind in both eyes and had other issues that took him two years to recover from. He is also quite sure that the h’s father caused the accident on purpose because he had threatened the H, as he wanted the H to divorce his wife so he could marry her instead. (The h’s father was no prize that is for sure). After the accident, his wife ran off with the h’s father only to die a couple of years later in a car accident with him. (They definitely deserved each other) Now our H is a traditional “eye for and eye” Greek. Even though the perpetrators are long dead, he feels the daughter should give him the sons that his wife was supposed to give him before she was seduced by the h’s dad. 
 

.Basically, the h is whisked away by Clive(who has no clue what is happening) to a house where she meets the H and realizes that it has been a set up. His daughter hates her on sight, because Daddy is all hers and she can’t spare to share him. The H basically tells the h, that she will marry him(despite the fact she has red hair), give him sons, and they will play it by ear. If she is a good wife, then he may be able to give up his pillow friends for her. The other choice is she stays there as his mistress without any benefits. She is stuck with no escape. He tells her how her dad was evil, and that he will go public if she doesn't go along with the plan. He also tells her that he has been keeping close tabs on her life. She was getting close to one boy, and he interfered. Then he had one of his underlings track her, living in the same apartment house as her. Donny was truly interested in the h, but she was not in him. Donny did not realize what the H was up to, but went along with it for a promotion. The marriage will take place the next day. But before the marriage can take place, she shimmies down a drain pipe 3 stories up, only to find the H waiting at the bottom. She falls and gets pretty banged up. They marry anyway, and he tells her that she can be on pins and needles as to when he will take her. He does get in some angry passionate kisses, and our h reacts to them. He leaves to go to Athens to visit his pillow friend. The daughter causes issues along the way. Then the daughter shows the h news clippings supporting the H’s verdict that her dad was a bad man and her mom committed suicide. She is able to leave the house while he is away and heads to London to her old flatmate. She plans her trip to Scotland to discuss her parents with her aunt and uncle. It takes her 2 days and wouldn’t you know it, the H is waiting for her. 
 
The H is very nice to her. He agrees they can spend the night with the aunt and uncle, and he genuinely likes them. The h and H share a bed, and she snuggles with him all night(no sex)
They leave the next day to go to his Island in Greece where his daughter is already. The daughter’s intended is also there. (In the essence of time, I won’t go into details about this) The h has also been told that the ow will be there soon. The h and daughter start to bond, and the h wants to go clothes shopping with her to get her clothes befitting a 15 year old, not a 50 year old. It ends up that the H doesn’t think h wants to go and he takes the daughter himself. He also brings back the ow. Ok so the ow is actually his secretary and cousin. BUT he tries to play her off as his lover. The ow doesn’t realize this, and at one point tells the h she is his secretary. The h confronts him on his lies and he says, yes she is his secretary…with benefits. He also bought the h some lingerie and dresses when he was with his daughter. The h is put off by the lingerie and a fight ensues. Throughout the story, the h and H are interrupted as soon as things heat up. They finally come together and it is not romantic…at all. It isn’t too detailed. However, he is taking his virgin bride out of anger. She protests quite a bit. We the reader are not privy to the whole act, however, most would agree that if it wasn’t rape, then it was walking a very fine line. This is actually brought up later when the H asks the h, do you think I raped you? And she was like no, because she wanted him. After their 1 night, the H takes off again and sends the h and his daughter to England. They are there for several weeks. The daughter and h are getting closer, and he calls his daughter but refuses to speak to the h. The h invites Clive, the right hand man of the H, to a wedding she needs to attend. When they get back from the wedding, the H is waiting for them. A very jealous H. She is glad she looks good. Then realizes that the green dress accentuates her red hair that the H despises. Come to find out he loves the hair, he loves her, and he comes clean about using his cousin as an ow without the cousins knowledge. She also finds out her dad wasn’t as bad as first thought. He had a brain tumor and that is what caused the accident. She finally tells him that she loves him(he said he has loved her since she shimmied down the drainpipe). He also declares he loves her more than his daughter(thank goodness she was not there to hear that)They go on to have some good loving, that will hopefully result in sons. 

So for me, this book checked off several things:
Cruel hero who is ott in love with the h almost immediately. 
May December Romance
Scarred hero(would have liked an eye patch argh, argh!)
h with a backbone
h with a temper that the H enjoyed
Ridiculous situations
The H never cheated on h, no pillow friends

I also like how Donny came back in the picture near the end, and he actually quit his job at what the H did to the h. The H rewarded him with a promotion….our H likes people with gumption! The ow will become great friends with the h, as the h already liked her and how great is it that her husband’s secretary is actually family instead of some ow wannabe. 

The biggest thing one will need to grapple with, is the rape/forced seduction scene. This is why rape in marriage can be such a hard thing to expose. The H was most definitely angry with the h when he took her. He had the upper hand and strength. It doesn’t matter that unknowingly he loves her and she loves him. It doesn’t matter that she responded and wanted him on some level. I (a little shame faced)can get past this and declare it passionate forced seduction, but others may not be able to brush it off as so.