Rating: 4/5

It was dark and stormy night. If you're allergic to genre cliches this might not be for you, but for readers who enjoy melodramatic tropes like the nostalgia of childhood treats this is a treasure. A Gothic mystery set not in a spooky and eerie old mansion, but in a spooky and eerie old hospital. A hospital that used to be "known in the grandiloquent nineties, as the Thatcher mansion." Wings have been added, the building updated, remodelled, and converted into St. Ann's Hospital, with "modern plumbing, electricity, a telephone to every floor"(!). This was Mignon Eberhart's first novel and the first appearance of Nurse Sarah Keate, who describes herself as "middle-aged" and an "old maid," but is adventurous and inquisitive, and does more than half of the detecting when a police detective, the young and handsome Lance O'Leary arrives to solve this closed-circle murder investigation. For a Gothic suspense novel this is fairly short and to the point. Eberhart's predessecor, Mary Roberts Rinehart wrote in a similar vein and her novels just kept getting longer as she shoveled on heaps of foreboding atmosphere. Speaking of foreboding, this is the second mystery novel I've read that made a point of citing Rachmaniniff's C Sharp Minor Prelude (can't place the other story). There's also a cat, of course. And a MacGuffin, here a gram of radium worth $65,000 (in 1929). Part of Gothic intrigue early in the century was the Gothic "other," a person of color, exotic and mysterious, who is here too, and the portrayal will seem racist to modern eyes. With hindsight it's easy to see the red herrings that Eberhart employs, and who according to the rules of melodrama can and can't be the guilty party. My favorite line in the novel (apparently a Turkish proverb) is: "As coffee should be: black as night, hot as hell, and sweet as love." The story pulls the reader in immediately and Nurse Keate is a character you want to know, sparkling and prickly at the same time. Eberhart and Keate may remind omniverous readers of Mary Roberts Rinehart and her nurse heroine-detective, Miss Pinkerton (Hilda Adams), who only appeared in a couple of short stories prior to Eberhart's book, but later had two novels of her own. [4★]