Rating: 3/5

This book was on my to-read list as soon as I heard of it—several years before I knew Meyer had in fact written a whole series of Sherlock Holmes books—because it combines two of my favorite pieces of fiction, Sherlock Holmes and the Phantom of the Opera. After reading Meyer’s two earlier books a few years ago and rereading THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA for the third or fourth time earlier this month, I was even more excited.

However, I think my opinion of this book suffered a lot from my being too familiar with and too attached to THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA. I already had a sense of how faithful to the Sherlock Holmes stories Meyer had been in his previous books, and already appreciated his style of approaching them. But I didn’t know what to expect from him in his treatment of PHANTOM, and especially since I had just read it, I really noticed every departure Some make sense from a story perspective (combining some characters or omitting plot points), but others just felt capricious or lazy, especially because of how closely he stuck to the original novel (as opposed to other adaptations) in most other respects. This was most obvious in the characterization of Raoul &amp; Christina’s relationship, but I had some pretty major issues also with the depiction of the Phantom, who comes off as flat and not nearly scary or mysterious enough. This partly comes, I think, from Meyer’s choice to have Holmes rather than Watson narrate the story (Watson narrated the previous two books). Holmes witnesses too little o what the Phantom (instead of calling him Erik, Meyer has him go by the English word “Nobody,” which adds needless passages about confusion, as of all the characters only Holmes speaks English, and this all for the questionable payoff of Holmes being able to make a lot of Odyssey references that feel out of place) does, and his hyper-rational mind is too quick to try to explain away what he does witness or learn, even when his explanations turn out to be wrong. I think having Watson’s credulity and excitability along on the case would have helped the Phantom keep more of his mystique. I also think Watson would have been more sympathetic to Christine and Raoul; Holmes is fairly patronizing and condescending towards both of them (Doyle’s Holmes might have been less than polite about clients to Watson, but he wasn’t as borderline-rude to them directly as Meyer’s version is to the two young lovers, which made it hard to feel invested in what happened to them. Making Holmes the narrator also results in a too-lengthy frame piece of Watson convincing Holmes to tell the story, which messes with the pace. 

There were elements of the book I did like, though. I really enjoyed the use Meyer makes of other characters and incidents from the Holmes stories, his incorporation of music (Holmes’ violin-playing is a pretty central plot point) and his incorporation of French history. He uses a lot of the same history Leroux did in crafting the original novel, but adds to and develops it in really interesting ways. The few original characters were also great, particularly the Watson surrogate (whose name I don’t know how to spell because I listened to an audiobook and French pronunciation is weird). So this was a good book, but unfortunately less than the sum of its parts. 

Format notes: listened to the Audible audiobook read by David Case. He did a pretty good job, but I really didn’t like the voices he picked for a few characters, particularly Christine and the Phantom (he made the Phantom sound mostly whiny instead of scary).