Rating: 3/5

For the last couple of months, this small book was what I brought with me to the church when I attended the Sunday masses. My daughter volunteered to man the overhead projector on the 8:30am slot and she had to be there before 8am and stayed for another 30 mins afterwards to shutdown and go out without showing herself to the people as she descended the stairs in front of the altar. So, I read this book only during Sundays for two months and it was quite fitting because the book is a compilation of writings, like a personal diary, of Dag Hammarskjold (1905-1961), who was a Swedish diplomat, economist and author. He was also the 2nd Secretary-General to the United Nations, served from April 1953 until his death in a mysterious plane crash in September 1961. He was also one of the four people awarded posthumously with the Nobel Peace Prize. 

This was his only book.

Varmarken (Markings) is a collection of diary reflections by Hammarskjold and these loose writings were found near his deathbed. My English edition of the book was translated from Swedish and has a foreword by W. H. Auden. It caught my fancy when I was digging through the stacks of second-hand mass paperback because it appeared old and the blurbs at the back said: "A Book of Meditations. A Revealing Spiritual Self-Portrait by One of the Great Peacemakers of Our Times." Prior to reading this book, I did not know anything about Hammarskjold. Maybe because he was a Swedish. Maybe because he died prior to the year I was born. But those words in the blurb properly captured the essence of this wonderful inspirational collection.

But this book made me know him. Even his innermost thoughts. And I liked what I read. There are many thought-provoking quotes, in prose and in poetry forms. He was a statesman but not your usual corrupt or manipulative politician. He was a rich kid (his father was a Prime Minister of Sweden in 1914-1917) but, based on his writings, he was down-to-earth and had a compassionate heart for financially-marginalized people. He was a Swedish (First World, rich country) but he thought of victims of wars, atrocities, famine and pestilence in Third World countries. Days prior to his plane crash in September 1961, he even wrote some very moving poems and they are printed on this book's last few pages.

After reading the book, I have many pages dogeared. I am flipping randomly now just to share with you some:p.3 "Never measure the height of a mountain, until you have reached the top. Then you will see how low it was."

p.70 "Is your disgust at your emptiness to be the only life with which you fill it?" 

p.88 "During a working day, which is real only in God, the only poetry which can be real to you is the kind which makes you become real under God: only then is the poetry real for you, the art true. You no longer have time for - pastimes."

p.89 "Prayer, crystallized in words, assign a permanent wave length on which the dialogue has to be continued, even when our mind is occupied with other matters."There was a time when the priest walked down my aisle while I was holding this book. Maybe he was wondering if I was reading a smut inside the church, while waiting for the mass to start or while waiting for my daughter to come out from the projection room. Maybe the good priest recognized the book even if he was younger than me. If he did, well, good for him as well as for many others who have read this book. Well worth the time. 

"Reading is never a waste of time," says Roberto Bolano (2666).