Rating: 3/5

The spinster is no plain-flower and the rake has a heart after all.
And the wager with the (shady) friend was so obviously going to come back and bite him. 
But then some hiccups/pitfalls in the story do make for a better romance. 

The h is bounced between her more or less ingrate siblings to look after their homes and families. But she's no poor relation, has a good amount of money to her name but still lacks the independence. They meet one night as her carriage meets with an accident and he (and his friend) rescues her. He thinks her to be a governess and flirts with her and she doesn't really rebuff him that much. He's been out of the country for almost 20 years after one scandal too many. Banished by his family till he comes to the title and returns wealthy but still with a whiff of infamy sticking to him. Not enough to banish him from ballrooms and drawing rooms though. Even when he decides to open a (classy) gaming hell with his friend. 

Now, as he's determined to win the wager, he woos her slowly but surely. While she's determined to rebuff him, even push her pretty and flirtatious niece at him, she cannot fight the attraction. And so, many small events roll out while their chemistry gets stronger and out of their control. He has a conscience that smites him but he's not ready for marriage ... and neither is she. But she's open and more courageous when it comes to facing her feelings. 
In fact, she's acts quite immaturely at times. Her going to his club (more than once) without a thought to propriety is a bit off. The last time when she flees - naked into the corridor and probably dresses there is unacceptable. She couldn't do it behind a screen or something? And then she walks right back in through the main door (with a new character) - complete over-drama. 

His history with her selfish, sloth of a SiL seems a tad unnecessary to me. What's the point? Strangely, the h's thoughts, misgivings if any on this are never shared. She learns of it carries on, showing no reaction whatsoever - publicly or privately. I cringed and laughed when she once questions him if he could be her niece's father? 
His old enmity with her brother, probably over the SiL, is another reason he wants to win the wager initially but he changes his mind later. 
Also, I find it odd when supposedly smart mcs/Hs have venomous friends but cannot see them for what they are. 

The scandal still comes to roost - with another scandal coming in from his past.
The end is a bit hurried. I wish the whole ending was done a bit differently.