Rating: 5/5

A VARIETY OF HILDEGARDE’S WRITINGS 

Hildegard of Bingen (1098-1179) was a German nun, writer, composer, philosopher, Christian mystic, and Benedictine abbess. In his Introduction, Matthew Fox (the former Dominican priest who founded the "Creation Spirituality" movement) notes, "Hildegard offers western civilization a deep and healing medicine for what may well be its number-one disease of the past few centuries: anthropocentrism... Hildegard brings together the three essential elements essential elements of a living cosmology. The first element is science... The second element... is a healthy mysticism... The third element... is art. Neither science nor theology is enough to awaken a people."

She asks, "Since God is Reason, how could it be that God, who causes all divine actions to come to fruition through human beings, is not active?" (Pg. 10) She observes, "As long as we are in this world, we cannot know the soul and its merits." (Pg. 169) She predicts, "Foreigners will invade Christendom and destroy Church institutions by taking advantage of the Christians' lack of weapons. All this is an indication of the coming of the Antichrist. These days will be saturated with filth..." (Pg. 247)

In one of her letters, she states, "I am but a poor woman who listens to the instruction of the masters." (Pg. 331) She adds in another letter, "I am but a poor creature and fragile vessel; yet what I speak to you comes not from me but from the clear light. Human beings are vessels God has made and filled with the Spirit so that the divine work might come to perfection in them." (Pg. 338)

She wonders, "What about those in the Church who through an interdict impose silence on the singing of God's praise? If on earth they have committed the wrong of robbing God of the honor of the praise which is God's due, then they can have no fellowship with the praise of the angels in heaven." (Pg. 359)

While as with other translations supported by Matthew Fox (e.g., 'Sheer Joy,' 'Breakthrough: Meister Eckhart's Creation Spirituality in New Transition'), scholars might debate its accuracy, this is still a very lively translation of a work that richly deserves modern readership.