Rating: 3/5

They say that you can’t judge a book by its cover. However, my copy of this features a man apparently plunging to his doom after falling out of a hot air balloon. That’s accurate which proves that you can’t always believe old adages.

Travis McGee agrees to look into the murder of a wealthy man. Rich guys are getting bumped off all the time in crime stories, but the twist here is that this fella was already dying of cancer. Was it just a robbery gone bad or was someone looking for an angle to get his estate? McGee finds a possible connections to biker clubs and Hollywood, and he turns to some old friends for help in gaining access to both of those communities.

This is a pretty solid crime novel overall. McGee gets to do his usual thing of acting as both con man and detective to try and figure out who killed the rich old bastard and there’s a decent mystery for him to unravel. The social commentary and McGee’s ennui with modern life are toned down a lot at this point almost as if MacDonald was writing him as being more accepting of the world although there is one memorable rant in which Travis bitches mightily about how he keeps getting put into more and more computer databases. I don’t think McGee would have been a big user of social media.

Since we’re up to 1982 we also see a reduction in some of the sexism that goes along with the adventures of the ole Sea Cock. In fact, Trav is a one woman man in this one after hooking up with a pretty hotel manager. Of course, she only got that job after being the secretary and lover of the rich old bastard who died, and she lucked into the gig after that. Because a woman could never just earn an important job like running a hotel if she hadn’t been trained in the ways of business by the guy she was banging. And the lady that Meyer has a romantic interlude with is also a successful owner of a chain of newspapers, but of course she had to inherit the business from her late husband. That’s even less important than all the work she did to get into bikini shape for her vacation. So it’s not exactly a great example of feminism, but baby steps are welcome at this point.