Rating: 2/5

I've always had conflicting feelings about Camus. He is a naive political writer; but I have always felt uncomfortable with my judgment of this naivetè. There are times when I suspect he had, in his reading of the world, reached a higher naiveté, the naiveté of wise men and the thinking faithful -- that he truly did understand more sophisticated views, but also saw them for what they truly were: sophistical.

There are a great many moments that reinforce this feeling. When, for example, moral questions brought about by recent events (shootings, bombings, the disaster that is our climate—that is, the usual, tired suspects) impress themselves upon you, when the world presents itself in its starkest, least subtle terms, it can be tremendously helpful to be reminded that the search for subtlety and nuance (the most recent instances of which might be the innumerable pieces being printed by Eggers, Saunders, and many others on the humanity of a certain sect of racist conservatives, as though this were some great secret, as if a sin could belong to anything but a human) is often more akin to navel-gazing than truth-seeking.

Still, I do not enjoy the essays in this book, and most days I find myself thinking Camus really was just naive in the common sense of the term. If the essays are edifying, they are more so as tools and reminders than as exemplars of thought or essais, in Montaigne's sense, into unknown moral, intellectual, or humanistic waters. These are not subtle or interesting pieces. They probe nothing, and deal with absolutes, rather than dilemmas. Therefore I cannot give the book a full-hearted recommendation. But I would like to, and that should say something in its favor.

It is a strange thing, to find yourself at once believing that a writer and his work have been tremendously important to you and your moral development, if only due to the thousand accidents of biography, and at the same time to understand that if you came upon him for the first time now, you would never give him a second glance. People often talk about coming to books too early to appreciate them; but what about coming too late? Happily, I found him at just the right time; and for this reason I wouldn't warn anyone away. Perhaps it is the right time for you, too. Come in, there are riches here. Just make sure you find the first course to your liking before you decide to stay.