Rating: 5/5

This book is absolutely fascinating, but it is not something you can pick up and thumb through. This book is a commitment to read. It's over 900 pages long and reads like an encyclopedia. This large volume serves as a reference compiling many lost, buried or otherwise hidden reports in the associated fields of archeology. There is a depth of information that needs time to be read and processed for those of us who are not professionals in the field. The book is well written with adequate definitions to many field specific terms throughout the book, but it is still a big bite to chew. I would not recommend this book to a casual reader who is not obsessed with the origins of humankind. As I said before, this book is a commitment. Many original reports are painstakingly quoted and reproduced in some length, translated from other languages. The length and depth of the controversies surrounding human origins dating back to the 19th century is indeed a fascinating revelation. Had I not read this book, I would have continued regurgitating the same nonsense I was taught in my college level anthropology class, for lack of having any better information to process and share. I have always been skeptical of some of the links in the evolutionary chain, and it has always been a nagging fascination of mine to find out more. This book helps to bridge the gap and introduce the missing information in a gradual and detailed manner, leaving behind any doubt that you are consuming a mere subjective take on currently publicly available scanty evidence. On a personal note, I took an anthropology class years ago, in 1997. My anthropology teacher was an old stuffy kind of guy, reading to us from our textbooks during lecture, typically without any relevant dialogue or explanation. One day he made a comment about the "mongoloid" heritage of the Finnish people and explained that it was likely due to the fact that the Finns were an isolated direct ancestor of "homo erectus" and not quite "homo sapiens sapiens". I found it fascinating as I sat in class that this man was insinuating that I, as a Finn, was barely "human" enough to have earned the right to have fire and primitive tools, yet there I was in college completely integrated with the rest of the "homo sapiens sapiens". I was offended to say the least. My interest in human origins was piqued at this point as I was confident that I was not being provided with objective and unfiltered information. I am happy I made the time to sit with this book. For a fraction of the price of my college class, I learned a great deal more and was not subjected to the cultural bias of my old Russian instructor. Had I really been a direct ancestor of "homo erectus", I guess it would have been appropriate for me to have just bonked him on the head with my caveman club...