Rating: 4/5

A fascinating analysis of the Vietnam War. I grew up during the conflict with the news showing excerpts nightly. This book was published in 1981 but is still relevant and educational. I never knew Ho Chi Minh means in English The Enlightened One and it is the North Vietnamese who come out as the oppressed side. B52 bombers dropping more bombs on North Vietnam and the jungles of the Ho Chi Minh trail than all of WWII with devastating costs to both sides. 

The history of the mistakes made by the politicians was simply catastrophic for both sides. When Kennedy sent two experts in the 60s to report back on the situation in South Vietnam he got conflicting reports and said were you visiting the same country. A common theme was lies told to Congress and the American people. 

Johnson and Nixon like Kennedy got conflicting advice and information which resulted in mistakes. Their blinkered belief that if South Vietnam fell South East Asia would all become communist. Completely wrong but noone gave alternative options. 

What I felt was missing was more analysis of Kissinger and is incompetence in the negotiations. Essentially the North Vietnamese negotiators ran rings around him. 

The opportunity of peace was missed so often with the defeat of the French at Dien Bien Phu. If America had listened to the French and allowed elections then millions of lives would have been saved. As De Gaulle said ‘I predict to you that you will, step by step, be sucked into a bottomless military and political quagmire.’ Prophetic words. 

A war opposed in the US by many, low morale of soldiers, corruption, confusion and distrust of the South Vietnamese military. Ultimately the fall of Saigon was quick, the evacuation of Americans and South Vietnamese supporters was chaotic and Kissinger was strung along thinking negotiations could result in a coalition government. Luckily when Saigon fell their was no bloodbath. 

Fascinating book. We’re lessons learnt. If we look at Afghanistan and Iraq the answer would be no.