Rating: 4/5

A wise and honest judge is Heaven’s unerring instrument. The people’s father and mother, both compassionate and stern; In his court the oppressed obtain redress of all their wrongs. No criminal there escapes, despite base fraud and guile. 

I can only wish modern day judges were as impartial and principled as this ancient Chinese magistrate. This is my first foray into the series, although it is the second book published and the 13th out of 17 in chronological order. These observations are irrelevant to the actual story which can be read as a stand-alone adventure - mystery - puzzlebox.
Similarly, the historical context that mixes the original source material from the Tang dynasty (7th century) with social and cultural anchoring in the Ming dynasty (14th to 17th centuries) is only important to academics and less to readers who only want a good mystery. As to why I have chosen to start my journey here, this is the first original Van Gulik story, after he translated the Chinese book about Judge Dee that he found in an old bookstore in Tokyo (Dee Goong An). 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

Judge Dee is appointed to take charge of Lan-Fang, a border city on the Western desert, under threat from a Mongolian invasion. The first pleasant surprise for me is that the story starts with a bang, as the official caravan is attacked by bandits on a forest road close to Lan-Fang, and that Judge Dee is quite handy with a sword despite his age, participating in the defence of his family and goods alongside his lieutenants.
The arrival in the border town enhances the sense of danger and of mystery, as the judge and his party finds that his predecessor has run away instead of greeting him and that the gates of the court room are locked. Lan Fang has been occupied by a local bandit who has gathered an army of cutthroats and army deserters to terrorize the locals and to collect protection money.

The way judge Dee uses the scant resources available to him, relying on psychological mind games and devious tactics that he compares to a chess game, made me an early supporter of his cause and of his skills. His first day in open court, after subduing the bandits, also showcased the quickness of his mind in spotting a fraudulent claim (the case of the three monks and their stolen statue)

Which bring me and Dee to the meat of the novel: three interconnected cases that the judge and his lieutenants must investigate properly, before the culprits can be brought to court. I think this is the most important distinction we need to underline to a Western audience: the magistrate at the time was also the chief investigator of crime, the executioner of the sentence as well as town administrator. Judge Dee examines clues, interrogates witnesses and can even order torture as he follows the leads.

 I am greatly intrigued, on the other hand, by two most interesting problems, namely the ambiguous last will of old Governor Yoo, and the murder of General Ding that was announced in advance. 

Governor Yoo was a well respected official who left behind a contested will between his older son from a previous marriage and a younger wife and minor child. The most important clue is a landscape painting, presumed to contain a hidden message, now in possession of the widow. Governor Yoo has also built a complicated maze at his mansion outside Lan-Fang city walls, the place that gives the title of the novel.
General Ding has retreated to Lan-Fang in disgrace, after he lost an important battle that has seen most of the troops under his command slaughtered. His son comes to judge Dee on his first day in town to warn of the impending death of Ding. The general is soon found dead inside his ‘panic room’ , a locked library chamber where he retreated after an anniversary dinner. Chinese poetry and sugared plums will be the only clues available to the judge.
A third case is the disappearance of a beautiful young girl, later found without a head. The clues here are a bunch of love letters and a local painter with a poor alibi.

 It is my duty to warn you, however, that I keep an open mind as to the portent of its secret message. It may either be in your favour or prove that you have been guilty of the crime of adultery. In either case I shall take appropriate steps and justice shall take its course. 

All three investigations are undertaken simultaneously, mostly by the lieutenants of the judge after he personally inspects the crime scenes and interviews the witnesses. A complicating factor that adds urgency to the proceedings is the presence of a secret agent that pulls the strings from the shadows and wants to bring a Mongol army to sack the town in order to cover his tracks.
But he will be no match to the intellect of Judge Dee.

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

 ... in this particular case mercy shall prevail over justice. 

I found some answers myself about the immersive and convincing setting of the story: Robert van Gulik really knows his stuff – starting with Chinese jurisprudence, literature and painting. The afterword points to the archival sources of all the cases he assigned to Judge Dee. I understand all the illustrations and the fictional town map are drawn by the author. For me, the work ethics of Judge Dee and the cultural references were the most intriguing. They are also explained in the afterword, where the lines of poetry found at the crime scenes and a visit to a recluse named Master Crane Robe are put in context.

 “The willow trees borrow their shape from the spring breeze; the rippling waves derive their grace from the autumn moon.” 

 What was better than a quiet life in peaceful retirement, devoting himself to reading and writing and giving full attention to the education of his children? What was the use of spending his every waking hour on all the wickedness and the sordid schemes of criminal minds, while life had so many good and beautiful things to offer? 

I don’t think it can be considered a spoiler to add these van Gulik revelations, since they refer more to the personality of judge Dee than to his actual investigations:

 Judge Dee, as an orthodox Confucianist scholar-official, venerates the Confucianist Classics which attach supreme importance to such accepted moral values as justice, righteousness, benevolence, duty, etc. Master Crane Robe, on the other hand, advocates the Taoist principle of the relativity of all accepted values, in complete harmony with the primordial forces of nature. 

I plan to read more books in the series: they are compact, fast-paced and informative. Lots of local colour that reminds me I’ve been promising myself for years to pick up a comprehensive and clear history of China that will help me understand better this ancient cultural space.

Recommended additional reading: 
- Guy Gavriel Kay has several beautiful historical romances set in ancient China
- I. J. Parker has a similar historical mystery series focused on Sugawara Akitada, an official at the ministry of justice in eleventh century Japan. She was probably inspired by van Gulik.