Rating: 5/5

There is a red and angry world.
Red things happen there.
The world eats your wife.
And eats your friends.
It eats all the things that make you human.
And it turns you into a monster.

As a youth I didn’t get Swamp Thing. And reading this as an adult it’s rather easy to see why. Before I get into any details, I have to just say that the prose in here is breathtakingly beautiful at times. This is not a book for children; it is a book for people who have seen a bit of the world and have experienced some loss, some fear, some responsibility, some of the things that come with adulthood. Because, frankly: how else could you identify with what happens here?

It is also not a conventional “superhero” story by any definition. Consider the following:

Moore's Swamp Thing had a profound effect on mainstream comic books, being the first horror comic to approach the genre from a literary point of view since the EC horror comics of the 1950s, and he broadened the scope of the series to include ecological and spiritual concerns while retaining its horror-fantasy roots - Wikipedia

Ecological and spiritual concerns? As a child this was far, far removed from my mind. Other than that, there are a multitude of things writhing beneath the (thin) veneer of “superhero” story: the nature of good and evil, what it means to be human, friendship and love, the effect of fear et al… (consider, for example, the story and eventual fate of the Monkey King). I should also mention the complex relationships between Alec Holland and his handful of friends, and specifically Abigail. And now I have.

It's raining in Washington tonight. Plump, warm summer rain that covers the sidewalks with leopard spots. Downtown, elderly ladies carry their houseplants out to set them on the fire-escapes, as if they were infirm relatives or Boy Kings.

Sometimes hopeful, sometimes bizarre, often crushingly depressing, but always beautiful. Alan Moore’s Swamp Thing is one of the best examples of this type of thing that I have read in, well, probably ever.

He’ll be pounding on the glass right about now…
…or maybe not now.
Maybe in a while.
But he’ll be pounding.
And…
And will there be blood?
I like to imagine so.
Yes, I rather think there will be blood.
Lots of blood.
Blood in extraordinary quantities.

It gets violent, yes. And quite so at times. But not in the most likeliest of ways. I was often surprised at the turns that the story takes. It really is a marvellously atmospheric Southern Horror. And, in a stroke of ingenuity, the artwork is often just as bizarre and off-beat as the rest of the affair.

It’s quite apparent that Moore was very careful to not walk the same ground that other writers were covering. He was taking the road less travelled.

And, even though they don’t really feature in the story, describing the Justice League:

There is a house above the world, where the over-people gather.
There is a man with wings like a bird.
There is a man who can see across the planet and wring diamonds from its anthracite.
There is a man who moves so fast that his life is an endless gallery of statues.
 In the house above the world, the over-people gather...
 And sit...
 And listen...
 ...To a dry, mad voice that whispers of Earthdeath.

So what is the down side here? Nothing really, but I do think readers have to at least bear the following in mind: Alan Moore only came aboard for the second run of this series, which means that by the time this book kicks off all the fundamentals had already been covered. That’s to say, Moore didn’t create Swamp Thing and he doesn’t tell the Origins story of the character. This had come before, and, since I haven’t read that yet, I do not know how that differs from, or impacts on, this particular part of the Swamp Thing mythos.

Have you ever been under?
All the way under?
Like I have?
Oh like I have?
-	John Hiatt