Rating: 5/5

Curious George Goes to the Hospital by Margret Rey was about a curious little monkey named George who was always getting into trouble because of the adventures he took. One day George was waiting for the man with the yellow hat to get home. He saw a strange box on the man with the yellow hat's desk and he became curious. He became so curious that he couldn't wait for his friend to come home. He just had to open it. When he opened the box, there were strange shaped pieces that looked like candy to the monkey. George put it in his mouth and before he knew it he had swallowed it. When the man got home he discovered George had already opened the box. He was a little disappointed because it was supposed to be a surprise. He said it didn't matter and they got to work putting the puzzle together. When they had the whole thing together the man with the yellow hat noticed there was a piece missing. When they woke up the next morning George had a tummy ache and the doctor didn't know what was wrong so they went to the hospital to get an X Ray. When the X Ray came back they found out that George had swallowed the puzzle piece. George had to get a minor operation done to remove the piece and had to stay at the hospital for a few days. On his last day there, Steve was able to start walking after his broken leg had healed. George was curious about the cart that Steve was riding in all those days and he climbed in it. He started to wheel it down the hall and before long he was going really fast. The mayor was visiting the hospital that same day and George was going down the ramp right toward him. George accidentally ran into the mayor and was really sad. All of the kids in the hospital were really excited and were laughing super hard. George felt better when the mayor started to laugh too. After that, the man with the yellow hat came to pick George up and they started to go home. The nurse came running out of the hospital right when they started to drive away. She gave George a box and told him not to open it until he got home. When he opened the box they discovered it was the missing puzzle piece and finished the puzzle.
This was a really good book. I liked that it had George being so curious and he was always getting into trouble for just exploring. One thing that I didn't like about this book was that it was so short. It should have been a bunch of different stories instead of just that one. I would recommend this to kids who like reading funny stories about Curious George or kids who like watching Curious George.