Rating: 4/5

*This review contains spoilers for "The Steerswoman," the first book in this series*

The second book in the Steerswoman series picks up very quickly from where the first one leaves off. Will has gone off to become a wizard, and while I have no doubt he'll appear in later books to help foil the mysteriously evil Slado's plot, he didn't make an appearance in this book at all, which, though I have nothing against the boy, made it all the better.

We're again left with Bel and Rowan together as traveling companions, and in my mind they make a very agreeable pair, with each covering the other's weaknesses in knowledge and figuring things out. They also compliment one another as characters, in that they have disagreements and can remain playful just the same. It's more fun when they team up against others, where we again enjoy Bel's quick wit and forward manner. This time, however, it's Rowan who is unused to the customs as they head to the Outskirts to take a look at the site where Bel's father found so many of the curious blue jewels, now believed to be part of a fallen guide star, so long ago.

For all the mostly useless walking around they did throughout the book (and it was pretty much throughout the ENTIRE book, as Outskirters tend to roam with their herd of goats) it was a captivating book. Bel and Rowan become immersed in tribal politics, which is interesting because of the different point of view the Outskirters have from the Inner Landers. Their job is to conquer the land, not live in harmony with it, and even their death ritual involves flinging body parts around to kill the land.

Again, I'm kind of at a loss to explain why I enjoyed this book so much, but I'd probably put it down to the characters -- I love how Rowan is always curious and thinking, and her discoveries don't seem put on at all when she makes them, like other books I can think of. And Bel's straightforward bluntness is continually refreshing, in addition to the tribe's.

I felt the eventual discovery of Fletcher as a magic user was expertly done -- a lot of the time, hints toward something like this stand out brazenly against the rest of the book, but these were subtle and had me wondering about him, not just waiting for him to be discovered. His death, however, was totally abrupt -- I wasn't even clear that was what had happened until a few pages later and I had to go back and read again. I don't know that one sentence is adequate to end such an important and influential character. I do applaud Kirstein for doing it though, as I always appreciate the more unexpected in that way. However, I definitely think he shouldn't have been killed before all information could be gleaned from him, even if it was for a blood rite. I must also admit that I was expecting Fletcher to eventually have the ban lifted on him when Rowan realized that he hadn't been lying about loving her.

Overall, I'm amazed at how into the book I was when I consider that it didn't seem like much happened in it toward the main plot. But I'll definitely be reading the others!