Rating: 2/5

Typical, teen chick lit, with a primary focus on personal growth and female relationships 

As the story opens, Mara Valentine is a senior in high school. She has been accepted at Yale and is fiercely competing for the position of class valedictorian against her ex-boyfriend, Travis Hart, who is a brilliant honor student like her. Travis is the only person Mara has ever dated. They were a couple for three months during their junior year, but he dumped her, because she wouldn't have intercourse with him. Which was actually a fortunate thing, because he is an unrepentantly promiscuous petri dish for STDs. (Having said that, I personally have trouble believing that a misogynistic jerk like Travis, with a reputation as a user, would have continually encountered girls at their school who are blithely willing to act as his current, temporary sex object.) 

Mara has such loving, supportive parents, it is not clear why she became so intensely uptight, because they have never pressured her. And she was not raised around her flakey 35-year-old sister, Amy, thereby deciding to be her complete opposite. Although, as to Amy herself, it is equally unclear why she turned out so badly, since she also received loving, supportive parenting.

The inciting incident that throws Mara's rigorously controlled life off track is when her parents bring 16-year-old V, Amy's daughter, who is the result of a passing fling, to live with them. They are absolutely convinced that they can reform V, who could definitely use a helping hand. V smokes cigarettes, drinks hard liquor, smokes marijuana, and is even more promiscuous than Travis. V is also a slob, who drinks out of milk and juice cartons like a cliche, gross teenage boy. Simultaneously, V is conniving enough to butter up her naive grandparents and wrap them around her finger. 

Within 24 hours of living in Mara's house, unsurprisingly, given that both of them are equally indiscriminate in their sexual encounters, V has intercourse with Travis in the boys' locker room during her first day attending Mara's high school. Though it has been nine months since she and Travis broke up, and Travis has been with multiple other sexual partners during that time, Mara is not only disgusted by V's indiscreet behavior, she is jealous. With self-righteous anger, she informs V that she has broken girl code by having sex with her aunt's ex.

It is almost Valentine's Day, and Mara hates this holiday because it is ridiculously sentimental, though logically you would think it would be because people are eternally teasing her about having the last name, Valentine, something that doesn't happen in this story. The only time Mara ever did anything remotely related to the holiday on Valentine's Day was a year ago, when she and Travis went around their high school together, selling flowers for a fundraiser, which they were participating in to pad their applications for Ivy League universities. 

On top of her very heavy scholastic load, Mara has a part-time job at a coffee shop called, Common Ground, which is owned by 22-year-old James, a handsome Cinnamon Roll who, at 50% of the novel, becomes Mara's love interest. James opened the coffee shop at age 19 instead of going to college, even though he is just as brilliant as Mara and had just as many options for an Ivy League education as Mara does right now. 

A 20-year-old college student named Claudia works at the coffee shop and has a huge crush on James, but he has never asked her out, and she is too timid to ask him out herself. Every scene in the coffee shop featuring Claudia onstage with Mara is dedicated to Claudia rhapsodizing to Mara about her unrequited adoration for James. When Mara and James eventually start dating, Claudia quits her job at the coffee shop and dumps Mara as a friend, claiming Mara is forbidden, by that self-same unwritten law of girl code, from dating a guy that her girlfriend is interested in, even if the guy in question has never reciprocated her feelings.

As is typical for chick lit, whether teen or adult, the primary focus is on the narcissistic self-obsession of the FMC, her significant female relationships, and her chance for romance coming in a distant third. 

Though we only are exposed to the first-person POV of Mara, both she and V are massively transformed in their own individual personalities and their relationship with each other across the course of the novel. Theirs is an "enemies to friendship" relationship. 

I would rate this novel PG, mainly because, though there isn't a lot of overt description, the whole process of Mara dating James and ultimately choosing to lose her virginity with him takes up quite a bit of page space.

I personally found it barely motivated as to the degree that Mara and V drastically evolve from their initial personality issues at the start of the book and their much more emotionally mature status by the end of a book. In addition, though I do understand that chick lit has little respect for the standard ground rules of the romance genre, it was also frustrating to me that Mara's relationship with James is left dangling at the end of the novel in a barely HFN resolution. 

I had free access to this novel in audiobook format through my Audible membership, and it is also available in ebook format through Hoopla.