Rating: 4/5

The stated purpose of this book is to prove then-FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover guilty of conspiracy &amp; treason in regards to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. While thoroughly researched and put together in a compelling manner, it fails on both counts.

Conspiracy: No hard evidence is ever produced in this book that definitively proves Hoover conspired with anyone to assassinate the president before November 22, 1963 or to cover it up after the fact. Several instances of phone calls/meetings/etc. between Hoover and those suspected of complicity in the assassination are shown but without transcripts of or witnesses to those conversations, the author repeatedly leans on words and phrases like: "apparently," "undoubtedly," "surely," "almost certainly," "must have," "obviously," "very possibly," "essentially," "presumably," etc.

Treason: The author does give ample evidence that Hoover was guilty of perjury before Congress and obstructed justice both before and after the assassination. The author also supplies a legitimate motive that could make these crimes treason (so JFK wouldn't enforce the mandatory retirement Hoover was facing upon reaching age 70.) However, with the aforementioned lack of proof of conspiracy &amp; the lack of any other hard evidence (correspondence/phone transcripts/etc.) proving why Hoover took the actions he did, intent cannot be proven. Without proof of intent there is no treason. At best, Hoover's felonies (and that's what perjury and obstruction of justice are) can only be called treasonous, not treason.

All that said: I beleive every accusation the author of this book makes to be true: (1) I beleive there was a conspiracy to assassinate JFK. (2) I beleive those responsible for it were primarily organized crime figures using rogue elements of the CIA &amp; FBI to execute it. (3) I believe Lee Harvey Oswald was just what he said he was: a patsy. (4) I believe J. Edgar Hoover &amp; the FBI executed a massive national cover-up of the true events. And (5) I believe certain members of the Warren Commission, acting in what they then believed to be the best interests of the United States, allowed the lone left-wing nut shooter theory to become official truth, while ignoring ample evidence otherwise.