Rating: 4/5

In the 1970s, many Westerners went to India to escape materialism, a concept insulting to Indians, according to Inder Lal, one of the characters in this book. This search for a simpler way of life felt patronising as most Indians lived in poverty. Inder Lal felt ashamed of the way he lived and could not comprehend who would choose such deprivation over material comforts. 

I found this book fascinating and satisfying. I’m not overly keen on the dual time period formula (I feel it’s a bit hackneyed now) but it works well here. The narrator, in addition to telling her own story, relates the story of her grandfather’s first wife, Olivia, who arrived in India in 1923 to join her husband, Douglas. The British community firmly believes that the Indians would not be able to manage their own affairs without them. There are few likeable characters. Despite being on another continent, they are all as class conscious as they would be in England, as we see by Olivia’s disparagement of Mrs Saunders, the doctor’s wife, because she doesn’t have the right accent. There is, of course, a parallel here with the Indian caste system.

Olivia becomes enthralled with the Nawab, a provincial ruler. [I’m more accustomed to seeing this spelled as Nabob but there are many spellings.] He is a complex character and there seems to be some ambiguity around his relationships with all the young men who live in the palace with him, including Harry who becomes Olivia’s friend and who is clearly in love with his host. Olivia is either too naive to see this or chooses to ignore it as it would interfere with what she feels is his romantic allure. She hides many of her visits to the palace from her husband, Douglas, a fact that strains credibility in such a small community. Surely someone would have noticed the chauffeur driven car arriving twice daily? Would Douglas really have believed she was only visiting Harry?

The narrator is Douglas’s granddaughter and she has come to India to research Olivia’s life and to have an adventure of her own. Unlike Olivia who chooses not to see the poverty just outside the palace walls, she is well aware of it as she lives in a poor community in which she makes many friends. The indifference shown to those who have nothing and no one, the living conditions of the poorest, the miserable lives of disempowered women, are all horrifying to read about. There are no heroes in this story. There is no taking sides. Having said that, the most acerbic observation is aimed at the colonialists: there are British cemeteries everywhere! they have turned out to be the most lasting monument.

For what is really only a novella, this is a complex and powerful story. As I’ve said, the dual time period formula is not my favourite. I dislike the parallels that arise between the two main characters as they seem, at times, too contrived. That is why it’s not a 5 star read for me but easily 4.5 stars.