Rating: 4/5

This book was a girl named Zoe escaping her home island, and going to mainland to meet her parents. Zoe's home island Norwich was getting smaller by the year because the sea was taking up more place. No ship was coming to the island for food or taking people or anything, and the last ship that carried people was away with her parents. She was supposed to get on the 2nd one, but it went without her. But Zoe didn't lose complete hope. She had a boat named Lyca to escape. She leaved all the people that were fighting to get on the boat, and went for an unknown journey with only a compass. After that she goes to a mysterious island named Eels island, where people lived who were unhappy. Most of them had similar ages as Zoe, and they were all controlled by the leader, Dooby. At first Dooby wanted to escape the island with Zoe, abandoning all his people, but Zoe refused after seeing Dooby's violence. Instead, she escapes with a boy named Munchkin, successfully goes to mainland, and meets her parents that she hadn't seen for a year. For my opinion, the ending of the book was a little disappointing, because it ended like on the middle of the story. I think it would have been better if it showed how Zoe and Munchkin got along and about them having their baby brother. Also, I think this book was mainly focusing on how the water is getting higher and lands getting smaller. It was shown as the mystery in the book, but after research I knew that it was because Earth was getting warmer. As it gets warmer, glaciers in the North and South Pole are melting, and it becomes water which makes the ocean bigger. Even though it takes so many years for an island to completely sink, I noticed that if we don't have any interest on global warming, things will go much faster than we expected. For example, the Galapagos island already sank because sea covered its surface. After reading this book, I resolved myself to walk more or ride a bike more than riding cars to delay global warming, or save electricity to emit less carbon dioxide.