Rating: 4/5

Achilles  - sexually ambiguous, rage-prone, has a sensitive tendon. 

 Patroclus  - 'best friend' of Achilles. Ruined everything for everyone. 

 Odysseus  - outsmarted the Trojans, had sex with a witch and a nymph. 

 Agamemnon  - worst husband, worst father, worst Greek, worst human. 

 Menelaus  - lost his wife, literally. 

 Helen  - the face that launched a thousand memes. Has the worst taste in men. 

 Paris  - the biggest fuckboy in Greek mythology. I don't condone child abuse, but I can see why his parents wanted to kill him when he was a baby. 

 Hector  - the perfect son, husband, father, brother, and prince. Tames horses in his spare time. 

 Andromache  - the perfect wife, mother, and princess. The Kate Middleton of Greek mythology. 

 King Priam  - had a hundred children. He's lucky child support didn't exist in ancient times. 

 Queen Hecuba  - had nineteen children and a horny husband. 

 Briseis  - in need of therapy. 

 Ajax the great  - the OG alpha male macho man dude-bro.

 Ajax the lesser  - I guess he was a beta male?

 Hera  - to quote Lizzo, it's bad bitch o'clock.

 Athena  - it's ok to be a virgin. It's even better to be a virgin goddess of wisdom, warfare, and handicraft. I support Athena's war crimes.
 
 Ares  - cute but psycho. 

 Aphrodite  - the OG Regina George. 

 The Myrmidons  - The Greek mythology equivalent of Navy Seals 

 Aeneas  - just kind of there. 

 Thetis  - Achilles' sea nymph mommy 

 Poseidon  - petty, vengeful, likes to play with dolphins in his free time (this has never been scientifically proven, it's just a theory)

 Hephaestus  - got cheated on by Aphrodite and tried to assault Athena, and for that, he will forever be on my shit list. 

 Hermes  - in charge of Mount Olympus' post office. 

 Artemis  - a cool virgin who likes to hunt. 

 Apollo  - doesn't know the meaning of consent. 

 Zeus  - doesn't know the meaning of consent. 

Should I review the Odyssey? Was Odysseus the victim of a curse, or did he just not want to go home to his wife? 'Lost at sea' is the Greek mythology equivalent of 'going out for cigarettes.'

Greek mythology is unhinged, and I wouldn't have it any other way. I have a confession to make: I love the movie Troy. Critics make fun of it. Historians treat it like a redheaded stepchild. I don't care. I love it. My opinion has nothing to do with a skirt-clad Brad Pitt.