Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars

Nectar in a Sieve is a short but powerful portrait of the fragility of life as an Indian farmer and the importance of family and love. The narrator, Rukmani, begins the novel as a young woman who has an arranged but love filled marriage with Nathan who rents a piece of land that sustains them. As the years go by and children are born, the line between surviving and thriving is thin and drought or excessive rain can ruin a year’s work in a few days. The absolute importance of the rice they grow is continually emphasized yet the inability to own their own land makes them constantly vulnerable to being evicted from their only means of sustaining themselves. 

There is a white doctor called Kenny who comes through the village every so often who will help when he can, he is a strange man who appears to despise the people he is treating while at the same time going begging for money from the wealthy so he can build a hospital. Everyone in the novel, strangers and friends, are doing what they can to get by and to make things better and on occasion morality has to be forgotten in order for this to happen. 

This is a sad novel and deals with a subject that we can see, from the countless stories of Indian farmer suicides every day, hasn’t changed much since it was written yet it is also one filled with love and an element of hope with some beautiful writing that hooked me from the very first paragraph;

 ‘Sometimes at night I think that my husband is with me again, coming gently through the mists, and we are tranquil together. Then morning comes, the wavering grey turns to gold, there is a stirring within as the sleepers awake, and he softly departs.’
 
Some Favorite Lines

‘Nature is like a wild animal that you have trained to work for you. So long as you are vigilant and walk warily with thought and care, so long will it give you its aid; but look away for an instant, be heedless or forgetful, and it has you by the throat.’

‘I took the paddy from him and parted the grass and there within its protective husk lay the rice-grain, just big enough to see, white perfect, and holding in itself our lives.’

‘For where shall a man turn who has no money? Where can he go? Wide, wide world, but as narrow as the coins in your hand. Like a tethered goat, so far and no farther. Only money can make the rope stretch, only money.’

‘The memories of that night are hard and bright within me like a diamond, and the fires that flash from it have strange powers. Some are blue and wrap me gently in their glow, or green and soothing like oxen eyes in the night; but there are others, yellow and red, that sear me with intensity. When this happens I call to the mists and they come, like clouds that cover the sun. But the fires themselves are always there, they will never be extinguished until my life itself is done.’