Rating: 4/5

Overall book rating: 3.8
Audio Book: N/A 
Book Cover: 3.5

Definition – ME: 

I said it, you have been warned. 

Now. On to the review.

My “dark and scary” little mind just went:

When I started this one off...

I mean.. the concept of having “The Network” a highly sophisticated, highly upscale and posh group of people who actually put human beings on a bidding platform to be sex slaves. Hmmm

Oh keep your panties out of a twist!

It’s consensual. There is no kidnapping ect. The “slaves” train for this auction. And they sign contracts on their own will regarding the duration ect. for these contracts.

I was rubbing my greedy little hands together in anticipation of unwrapping this EVIL happenings.

So, my conclusion on the matter:

1. Yes. The book was good I suppose. It was something else and did entertain me.

2. It wasn’t nearly has deliciously EVIL has the picture my wicked mind conjured up when I got to understand the workings of THE NETWORK.

If you are looking for a book giving you inside information and happenings of this mysterious group of very rich and apparently “strange” people who would like to spend good money on a living toy, then this... is not the story for that. 

I know, I know...

So basically this is a whole bunch of “memories” of what one of the MC’s experienced and are currently experiencing.

He is training a slave for The Network auction, but DON’T READ THIS IT’S A SPOILER!!!  we don’t even get to see the auction happening. It’s just something hanging there in the future. Somewhere... far away... without us witnessing it at all...

The story was good. It’s something else yes.

But don’t you just absolutely HATE it when you can already see the delicious awful goodness of something, and then it ends up being....well.. just that.

Another mildly kinky story.

So excuse my mild disappointment about this one. It’s all my fault really. I think 98% of authors are really just not comfortable going to those dark places with “Out of their Mind” readers like me.
 

5 Stars for the concept. 
3 For the execution

This could have been AWESOME!!!!