Rating: 3/5

As a fan, one strolls away from the later Jeeves &amp; Wooster novels with one’s hands deep in one’s pocket and a look across one’s face which can only can be described as perturbed. (Okay, ‘confused’ and ‘troubled’ would also be good adjectives; although ‘troubled’ might be over-stating things somewhat). You see there are still a lot of incredibly good jokes in these latter Jeeves &amp; Wooster novels, there’s a lot of laughter on the pages, one is never going to feel short-changed on the comedy front. Yet there’s also an intangible and indescribable lack of something. Quite how you would define this something is an issue which is beyond even the greatest minds, but the joie de vivre (as our French cousins would say) in one’s heart upon reading the later Jeeves &amp; Wooster novels most definitely comes with a caveat and footnotes. Undoubtedly this reluctance to fall to one’s knees and praise the later Jeeves &amp; Wooster novels with every ounce of one’s being is a quirk unique to those who’ve read and enjoyed the earlier Jeeves &amp; Wooster novels. One can find this reluctance worn like a scar on the soul of every single Wodehouse fan who has made their way right from the start of the saga to where one stands now with ‘Jeeves in the Offing’. As for all the joy within its pages, all the times it will make one laugh out loud, one can’t escape the truth that it simply isn’t as good as what went before. It lacks the spark and fizzle of the earlier Jeeves &amp; Wooster novels: a quality wonderful and magical which existed within their pages, and which made them some of the funniest books ever to have been written in the English language, is sadly absent here. That’s not to say that ‘Jeeves in the Offing’ is a bad novel. It could still easily find its way into any list of the top two hundred comic novels ever written (if not scraping into the premier one hundred and fifty), but compared to its predecessors, a magnificent something is just lacking. ‘Right Ho, Jeeves’, ‘Joy in the Morning’ and ‘The Code of Woosters’ tower over it as the magnificent works that they are; while ‘Jeeves in the Offing’, for all the amusement within its pages, doesn’t have that spectacular sparkling something. Not that one wants to give ‘Jeeves in the Offing’ a bad review. To misquote Mark Antony, one comes to praise ‘Jeeves in the Offing’, not to bury it. This is a delightfully funny novel. It is always a joy to meet up again with Bertie Wooster and his man Jeeves, a pleasure to accompany them on one of their, never uneventful, jaunts to Brinkley Court. If one is already a fan, then the self needs girding as one needs to be aware that this is a book which will amuse greatly, but still leave one slightly unsatisfied – and that is without a doubt a perturbing sensation. However if one happens to be a neophyte, if one has never read any P.G. Wodehouse and has been told that Jeeves &amp; Wooster is the best place to start and is wondering which volume to begin with, then by all means feel free to open the account with this one. This is a novel which will make any reader chuckle out loud, will beautifully introduce the uninitiated to Wodehouse’s brand of English silliness and to two of the greatest comic characters in the English language. One will have a glorious time reading this novel and will also have the hugely pleasurable sensation of realising that there exist other novels in this series which – for all the hilarity within the pages of ‘Jeeves in the Offing’ – contain that indefinable something which makes them some of the most magical pieces of fiction ever written.