Rating: 3/5

I found this third Diane Johnson novel about Americans in France just as worthy as Le Divorce and Le Mariage in terms of its humorous and serious look at the struggle for French and American people to comprehend and accept each others' cultural issues. Central in L'Affaire (2003) is Amy Hawkins, a newly wealthy dot.com executive from Palo Alto, who wishes to broaden her sophistication by living in Paris. The story begins, however, in the ski town of Valmari in the French Alps, where Amy becomes involved in the drama of an English-American couple who were injured in an avalanche. Amy’s ill-advised, but well-meaning choice to finance the elaborate medical care necessary to fly the elderly husband to England where he dies, is symbolic of typical good-hearted, but bumbling American judgment in all realms 
Throughout the course of the story, Amy acquires some skills through her French cooking classes, but she cannot buy culture. “No amount of effort will ever make Amy sound French." Complicating Amy's struggle is French-Tunisian snob Emile, a self-proclaimed anti-American. "He everywhere found examples of the detestability of Americans—brash, arrogant, loud-talking, and loud-dressing bullies with no understanding of other cultures, a complete lack of interest in things beyond themselves, and concerned only with American hegemony. He would not voluntarily make the acquaintance of one, and didn’t anticipate that he’d had to" (118-19).
 	Later, Amy asks Emile if, for all his assumed expertise on Americans, he has ever visited the United States. “Certainly, not,” he says (322). The eventual brief affair between these two characters indeed seems doomed from the outset. At her good-bye party, given for her French friends on the eve of her return to Palo Alto, Amy serves typical California fare such as enchiladas, nachos, quesadillas, prawns marinated in lime juice, and margaritas. Her friend Géraldine intervenes, however, to make sure there are some French-style hors d’oeuvres and two versions of the chili. “For those—almost every French person—who weren’t fond of spices, it would be chili without chili powder, more of a boeuf bourguignon with beans” (333). 
	 Johnson’s novels all end with an ultimately pessimistic view of Anglo-French romances. Most of the English or American pairings with French peoples fail or do not seem destined to last. But the romp through the cultural differences seems to have been an enlightening, if often aggravating, one for all involved. Differences in cultural practices and preferences have scarcely been resolved, disagreements as to which culture is the most sophisticated—or the least irritating—is still a matter of opinion on both sides.