Rating: 4/5

On Friday night, I had a dream about Barnsley. Don't worry, I'm not going to tell you about it - I know that even the most fascinating of a person's dreams turn to something like partially chewed corn-bread somewhere between the mouth of the speaker and the ears of the listener.

Suffice to say, this dream led me to undertake a pilgrimage to Barnsley - on the bus. Well, in fact, there were 6 buses involved.

Anyway, when I got there, I looked around but I couldn't find anything relating to the dream, so I bought 7 bags of sugar-free toffees from the market, this book from a charity shop, and came back home.

It was really important that I bought this book - not for any transcendental, world changing reason; just for the fact that I'd nearly finished the book that I'd taken with me, and bus journeys can be really long and boring without something to do; and the fact that I'm addicted to reading books. Not that I'm evolved enough to admit to myself that it's a problem. The fact that I have no friends or life outside of books and movies and work and marriage and ... (really, is that all I do?) ... oh, and writing reviews on Goodreads #selfsatisfiedsmile has no relevance at all.

So, where were we? Oh yes, I bought this book to read on the journey home.

I gotta say that I dig Jung a lot more than I dig Freud. He seems to be much less of a flake for one (no, you're right, I have no idea what a flake is).

I also found this to be one of those really interesting books that made me think about life and my place in it.

I have this theory that a good number of mental patients are, like, kinda faking it to some extent, so that they can get whatever attention they need, or divert whatever attention they don't need. It's, like, something in their toolbox that they pull out when they need a break from the responsibility of feeding the cat (or whatever).

This has, of course, nothing to do with this book, but I'm always reminded of it when I read tomes like this.

The book itself is well written and interesting; although 'interesting' is a concept that I suppose is highly subjective. I found it to be interesting anyway. It's written by one of Jung's friends, and it really does do what it says on the tin - it explains (to my satisfaction anyway) what Jung really said.

I really can't think of anything else to say ... unless you'd like to know what I did with all those sugar-free toffees when I discovered their laxative effect half way through the longest bus journey ever!?