Rating: 5/5

Colin Watson's 'Snobbery with Violence' is meticulously researched as the author takes the reader across the whole panoply of crime fiction, looking at how fashions have changed over the years from the early 20th century through to the James Bond era.

The author begins by stating, 'It was not until the later years of Victoria's reign - and then only with misgivings - that fiction, stories invented to entertain, was conceded to be anything other than a reprehensible invitation to waste time.' He cites 'the combined industry' of Scott, Lytton, Trollope, Thackeray and Dickens as being responsible for the novel's respectability. And he goes on to say that it was such as Smith, Boots and others (Mudie for instance) with their lending libraries as being responsible for aiding the change in reading habits of Victorians. 

By the beginning of the 20th century he felt that the advent of crime fiction had arrived and that it was divided into two categories, the tale of detection and the felony-based adventure story, or thriller. And to exploit it along game the lies of John Buchan, E. Philips Oppenheim and E.W. Hornung, plus others who latched on to the genre, to exploit it. Crime and mystery was an important ingredient of their work and other writers quickly latched on to it as being a remunerative way to make a living. So along came Herman Cyril McNeile, better known as 'Sapper', with his hero Bulldog Drummond. Of course, by this time Conan Doyle had dominated the market with his Sherlock Holmes tales.

But along came many others who throughout the ensuing years became extremely popular. One unlikely author was Edgar Wallace, middle-aged and with a mostly unsuccessful career behind him and he eventually earned the title of 'King of Thriller Writers'. Others such as Sydney Horler, Among others who particularly thrived at the time were Dorothy L. Sayers and, when the fetish for Oriental crime came in, Sax Rohmer, Earl Derr Biggers and Ernest Bramah. And Agatha Christie also arrived on the scene to make her mark on the genre.

Watson also has a chapter entitled 'Gifted Amateurs', perhaps a little unkind to label some of the authors he discusses, for while including HC Bailey as one of these is perhaps apposite, others included are SS Van Dine, Margery Allingham and Anthony Berkeley Cox seem to be rather ill-fitted. But I suppose it is all subjective.

He ends what is a most fascinating survey with Leslie Charteris, with his Saint, and Ian Fleming, with his James Bond and throughout the book he mentions other lesser known writers and gives examples of many of the author's Works to demonstrate his point. And it all comes together as an excellent assessment of the genre in a most readable, and enjoyable, way.