Rating: 3/5

Rating: 4 stars (really liked it)
After coming across David Blaine's latest TV special Real or Magic and watching his jaw-dropping card tricks performed in front of people with insanely wild reactions, I instantly became overwhelmed with curiosity and began researching more about this amazing man. I was surprised to find out that this magician wasn't exactly fresh news, and has been around doing these things for quite awhile. I guess since I was much younger (about 8 years old) back when he was performing his older stunts and releasing previous TV specials, I sort of missed out. So, naturally I found myself rewinding back in time and watching things like Street Magic, his first ever TV special from 1997 on YouTube, or going online and purchasing this book in order to read more into this talented and inspirational character.

If you are a David Blaine fan, chances are you've already gotten your hands on this book. If you haven't already, then I suggest you do. It has everything that reflects what David Blaine does; in other words, what inspires him to do what he keeps doing. Part of it contains sections of historical references and stories behind magic and how it has grown to shape into its modern-day era. It also describes the obvious message behind how David Blaine has been looking to change the direction it's all been going in--which has been perceiving magic as a hobby or a game to pass time rather than a talent or a form of entertainment.

David Blaine is known for his "in-your-face" kind of magic. The type that makes you second guess the impossible for reality. It's an illusion without the traditional use of smoke or mirrors. And that's what I love about it because that's what makes it all come across as more than just a magic trick, but something inspiring and motivational. Something that releases that inner child and makes people of all races, beliefs, and classes smile and laugh alike. Making them forget any boundaries or limitations as if they've just witnessed something incredible together in that one moment. I love that about it.

If you're looking for a book of magic tricks, you won't find it here. Blaine brushes lightly over a few small "how-to's" but nothing major or exciting. Just one or two simple tricks. 

What I also admired about this book is the style of writing. Although Blaine didn't personally write this book word-for-word, as a reader, you still can sense his personality seeping right off the pages. Blaine talks about his early stunts and the pressures and stresses he had to endure. About his early childhood and the struggles he faced when growing up and losing his mother or trying to make it big. It's almost written in a journal-type fashion. Like you're gaining a glimpse into his mind and what led him to be what he is.

I guess the main reason behind my admiration with Blaine and this book is his way of believing in no limitations. You can do anything you put your mind into, but it's easier said than done.