Rating: 5/5

Full of truth and creepy in its observations of 1995 America that hits home with even stronger resonance today, Blankenhorn asks, "Where are all the fathers?" and proceeds to answer that question by first showing us the history of the American family before listing examples and definitions of seven "father-types" that emerged as a result of the women's rights movements. Viewing this list, it's pretty obvious why so many American women are flocking to the "Twilight" movies. America is not just yearning for more fathers, we are getting DESPERATE! The old "Life Script" just isn't being followed anymore as the following list shows:

1. The Unnecessary Father-The "new idea" that American men are no longer a requirement in American families and for single mothers having a father for the kids is "important...but not that important".

2. The Old Father-aka "Father Knows Best" our own Grandfathers come to mind when we think of this man. The old school male: strong, silent, dominering 1950's patriarchy that America is now yearning for.

3. The New Father-I can't help but think of gay men because this is the father who takes on the traditional feminine roles of changing diapers and doing the laundry while his wife brings home the bacon. Blankenhorn admits this father is good but even in 1995 the idea just wasn't taking off. By 2012 no one's even talking about this guy anymore.

4. The Deadbeat Dad-Wham bam, thank you Ma'am. He came, he impregnated, she couldn't stand him, so he left. Single mom's only regret is that she had a relationship with him. My only gripe with this book is the word "pornography" is never used, not once.

5. The Visting Father-Here's my stepdad. He tries to maintain a relationship with his kids. He works hard. He pays his child support faithfully, but something went horribly wrong in our divorce culture of the 80's and 90's. By 2012, America is still paying the price.

6. The Sperm Father-Sperm banks were still a new idea in the 90's but by the 21st century no one thinks twice about a woman who choses to raise a child alone. No one questions the child's paternity. Sperm father is now the cousin of The Deadbeat Dad.

7. The Stepfather and The Nearby Guy-Blankenhorn should've also added "boyfriend" as that's the life script so many American women are chosing today but it doesn't matter, both men fail to fill the shoes of father figure-blood will always be thicker than water. This chapter hit particularly close to home for me as my own stepfather has always been a stranger to me, we've never been close, I've tried, but the poor man just can't be a father to children that are not his own. Congratulations to all the second marriages out there that have managed to make it work but its hard. As for The Nearby Guy, as long as the single mother has someone, anyone, to fill the shoes of father figure, it's a hopeless situation and in the 21st century of rampant child pornography and domestic abuse it's pretty obvious that more men, not boyfriends, are needed who are committed to getting married and STAYING married to the women who are lowering their standards. 

Nobody wins. That's the main message of this book. Poignant almost to a fault but these are issues that need to be brought to light. Bottom line-America needs more fathers for its women and children, not boyfriends or nearby guys. America needs a return to the "Good Family Man". Mitt Romney comes to mind. 
This is an important groundbreaking book. Read it and pass it on.