Rating: 4/5

"African Genesis” by Robert Ardrey was a book being passed around the teacher's lounge in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, where I was instructing Saudi soldiers in 1967. I bought a copy for myself in Istanbul on my way to Athens a few months later. I read it on the train from Turkey to Athens by way of Thessaloniki and finished it on the plane flying back to New York. 

Ardrey raised my suspicions when I learned that he was primarily a dramatist and screen writer; but his science writing was so good that I let that slide and took him seriously. Ardrey and Genesis led me to ethologists Konrad Lorenz and his study of causes of aggression and imprinting; Niko Tinbergen—hawk vs. goose theory; Desmond Morris—adaptive behavior, and later on Richard Dawkins—gene-centered view of evolution. And even later Jared Diamond in an oblique way and now Juval Noah Harari. It’s interesting to note that several of these scientists and researchers were either amateur or professional ornithologists, or drawn to the subject at one time or another, or to some form of speculative fiction. In my undeveloped idea of science, I looked upon such compelling speculations as suspect and untrustworthy, and indeed, true scientists have posed such doubts on the work of these authors.

As with Sigmund Freud, some of whose works I read and who made me feel that I understood him and who is now often largely debunked by academics in their respective fields, changed my life. I don’t know if Freud cared much about birds, but many literary writers embraced Freud, and again influenced my life in many ways. What I’m leading up to here is that these kind of “speculative” writers can be thought of as Indian scouts who creep up to peer over a rise in the plain to see what possibilities lie ahead and come back to us with their idea of a plan of attack or a plan of avoidance. I believe these pioneers in fields like ethology are good for generalists like myself to study.

When I first read Genesis, I had no idea that within a few short years I would be ensconced in Africa with my bride very near a portion of the Great Rift Valley near the Zambezi where it is postulated that Man really began.