Rating: 2/5

RE Acapulco Moonlight - this is very fluffy but a continual internal h battle between lust and love and the H wasn't giving any hints about anything. It also features car sex in the back of a Rolls - which granted it is a Rolls, - but that is just plain tacky for two adults and one of them is mega rich and could have waited ten minutes until they found a nice hotel - or even a cheap one.

The book opens with the h worrying about her recently divorced boss and his company. She is the huggable boss's personal assistant. The boss is a mechanical genius but not very good a business management and the new bank manger won't extend the company's overdraft. The boss is looking pretty bad but is casting longing glances at the h and she is thinking about a relationship - if they can save the company.

The answer to their prayers may be consolidation into a consortium where the boss invents stuff and the consortium runs the finances. The h and the boss are expecting the CEO to show up for a meeting later in the morning and the boss has been working all night, so he runs home to freshen up and the h is readying the books for corporate scruntinization. 

Guess what, no sooner has the h's boss taken off than the potential white knight shows up early. The h is gobsmacked by his overwhelming manliness and while trying to force her knees to stiffen, manages to give the white knight a nice over view of the company. The H doesn't seem to impressed with the company but loves the h's red power skirt and implies that he would like to see a lot more of what is under it.

The h thinks she is imagining things and manages to get the white knight safely off but is fretting that he missed the boss and that the company is doomed. Until the boss informs her that the H wants them in Acapulco to meet with the other members of his consortium. So it is off to Mexico we go.

Then tragedy strikes, the boss passes out on the plane and has to be in hospital for ulcer surgery. The boss asks her to think about marrying him cause he lurves her, but he needs her to step up for him with the H. The h had called the H to let him know the situation and he comes to collect her, some one needs to fly the little company's flag at the consortium convention and the h has a bikini, so she is pinch hitting in a sticky situation. 

The h is very attracted but wants to keep things professional, which is a little hard to do when the H is really sticking to her like glue. Her first night in Acapulco, she never makes it to her room. The H insists she dine with him and then just when the kissing started, the h falls asleep on the H's hotel room couch and he leaves her there. The next morning the H is very handsy and pulling her into bed when the company meeting diverts his attention.

He tells the h he has plans to use her to shield himself from one of his director's wives. They were having a hot affair until she married another guy and now she is looking for love on the side with the H. The h isn't happy about this, but whatever she needs to do in the cause of duty is how she is thinking.

The H maneuvers the h into all kinds of non business activities, with the OW being particularly catty and a yucky potential OM harassing the h as well. Meanwhile the h's head is telling her no, but her weak knees are longing to part and finally the h succumbs to the manly manliness of the H and winds up in his bed - where he tells her he loves the widening capacity of her knees and her too.

The h is happy cause she is in lust, er true love and is happily contemplating knee widening exercises. Then tragedy strikes, the h's room is next door to the H (very conveniently, he worked it that way.) After the morning conference with an afternoon rest scheduled, the h is wearing something brief and skimpy and runs right into the OW wearing even less and dismissing the h with the notification that her smoke screening efforts are no longer needed, she will be handling the H herself and she is not into menage's . 

The OW goes right on in to the H's room and the laughter is jarring for the h, but it was better than the passion loaded silence that followed. The h takes off and when the H catches up to her later, she asks if he is going to save the company. The H says yes and tries to put the moves on the h, but she informs him she is marrying her boss and that she was just keeping the H happy to help the company. 

She goes to get the boss out of the hospital, and instead of answering his proposal, she finds another girl from the office there and she and the boss look pretty cozy. So the h is out of a job and has no fallback position with the boss. She goes home and starts getting herself together and winding down her job. 

On her last day the H shows up out of nowhere, whisks her off to a side lane in his Rolls and proceeds to sex her up. He insists that it was love at first sight and that the OW was lying, he was trying to get rid of her as he wasn't interested. The h hurt him with her sexing for the flag impression but then he found out she wasn't marrying anyone and came to get a leg in. The h is ecstatic and is in love right back, they rearrange their clothing and start making wedding plans for the HEA.

This one was a quick, fluffy and okay read, but the car sex was not my cuppa - it was so high school, as was the H's innuendos and his smokescreen plan. Still they were happy at the end and there seemed to be no compelling reason not to buy the HEA, so all's well that end's well once again in HPLandia.