Rating: 5/5

Kathy Reichs’ “Death du Jour” is the second novel in the Temperance Brennan series of novels. In this instalment, Tempe is still pulling double-duty as a forensic psychologist in both North Carolina and Quebec, and the romantic tension between her and her police partner Andy Ryan, is heating up. 

 Tempe is asked to help uncover the identity of a centuries-old corpse, which is how she finds herself literally digging up a grave in the cold Montreal winter. But as she performs her investigation, even more bodies begin to pile up that, at first glance, seem completely unrelated. Young women, viciously attacked by dogs and left for dead and an entire family, including two infants, killed in their home. The crimes take place in both the United States and Canada, which makes their connection even more tenuous, but Tempe will not rest until all of the dots have been connected and the murderer is discovered. 

Temperance Brennan is just getting her footing in the series in “Death du Jour”, as it is only the second novel, but she is lovable and relatable at first glance. Divorced, with a college-aged daughter, she is one of the only females in a male-dominated profession, underrated and underestimated at every turn. Quirky, brilliant and with an acerbic wit, Brennan is a powerhouse of a protagonist. She narrates this novel, of course, and her personality shines through every page. Reichs’ character development is on a level all its own, which has attributed to her numerous books and well-deserved accolades. 

Of course, the novel can be a bit science-heavy at times (as can be expected with both Reichs and Brennan at the helm) with processes of dismembering a body and preparing its bones are described in detail, yet these tidbits also add an informative and informational aspect to the plot. 

As if multiple murders and their possible international connections aren’t enough of a hook, “Du Jour” has a cult component, which is always a huge pull for me. Reichs incorporates not only the cult’s belief systems and values but also includes an educational take on the basic knowledge of cult formation and membership.

Reichs always creates such brilliant plots and the character of Tempe Brennan is incomparable across the genre. Every novel I’ve read in the Brennan series provides me with knowledge and information I didn’t know I wanted to know, and I always give extra points to authors who can educate and entertain simultaneously. Although it will take me awhile to read all of the novels in the Brennan series, I look forward to the journey!