Rating: 1/5

For my entire adult life, and a bit back before becoming an adult, I have walked to the “Science Fiction” section of the book store and seen this book lurking there. The cover with the unzipped jumpsuit, “Ooh, silly me, is that my right breast?” has always vaguely piqued my attention, but never quite enough to inspire me to actually purchase the thing. There are, after all, Boris Vellejo covers not too far away, and those are going to draw my eye and empty my wallet faster when I’m looking for something “light” to read. Thinking that it would form a contrast with some of the other fair I’ve been doling out to myself, at long last I pulled the trigger on this one.

I am very, very sorry that I did.

This book is the worst reading experience I have had in over a decade. It’s a shameful piece of work that really should be acknowledged as a culminating nail in the coffin to a literary midget masquerading as a giant. Aside from the reprehensible themes, childish logic, an outright vile representation of women, politics and culture, the language is flabby, the plot meandering, the dialogue reads like a poorly scripted soap opera, and the characters are motivated by a perverse sense of the author’s sexual depravities and megalomania. Reading this book is like watching a Hentai version of The Turner Diaries written by a poor man’s John Galt.

I’ve read maybe six or eight other Heinlein novels in my time. Starship Troopers, Strangers in a Strange Land, Job: A Comedy of Justice, etc. Enough to have certain expectations about the content, both positive and negative. That is, I did not have particularly high expectations. Unfortunately, in this book, Heinlein fails to achieve even the least effective of his writing strengths while diving headlong into his deficits of character and embracing them as if they were virtues. It’s a despicable, masturbatory indulgence in which Heinlein presents his fantasy of femininity and social status wrapped up in obvious and poorly executed straw man caricatures of those whose political and social beliefs he opposes. I’m not kidding. They are literal caricatures. He puts an Indian headdress on the “chief of California.” That’s the level of humor and sophistication in this book. Notoriously lefty and democratic California in Heinlein’s imagination leads to a leadership that confuses “chief executive” with “chief of the tribe” and puts a feathered hat on the head of their government leader.

What’s worse than any of the outright obnoxiousness of this book is that it manages to commit the worst crime of science fiction entertainment: it’s BORING. BORING with a capital “What-the-Hell-are-you-talking-about?” There are seemingly unending dialogues about the particulars of credit cards in Heinlein’s dystopia (which he might suggest is a utopia.) Can I use my card here? Yes, I can. No, I can’t? Sorry, I thought I could. Will this card work now that the border is closed? What about your card? Let’s use this stolen card, but you’ll have to do it because it’s got a man’s name on it, so I can only do electronic transactions on it. Let’s use your card this time, the stolen card next time, and then my card when we get to the next city. What forms do I have to fill out to get a card in this country? Can we talk about this card but using the specie of another country?

Who could possibly care? This kind of thing may be entertaining to some CPA who dreams of one day committing credit card fraud in a dangerous time, but for the rest of us it is abject boredom at 21% APR. How Heinlein managed to put his own shopping around for a better rate on his credit cards into fiction and people read it like it is entertainment is utterly beyond me. And, you know what? It’s not science fiction. It’s not speculative science fiction. It’s not social science fiction. It’s just tortuous fictionalization of accounting and arbitrage. There are pages and pages of this. It goes on interminably as if it weren’t rambling filler from an author long past his own expiration date. It’s just sad.

...and then: the lottery. The main character wins the lottery after negotiating the price of the ticket from a street vendor. Now, what is the point in an author presenting a laissez faire society as a merit and then having his main character win a lottery as a plot point? Wish fulfillment?

Now, I’m going to get into something that I’ve been avoiding because, frankly, it’s just too disgusting and pathetic to merit a whole heck of a lot of thought... but I’d be remiss not to mention the way Heinlein presents sex, sexuality and women in this book.

Here’s some prose from the opening after the main character has been ambushed and captured by unknown assailants:

But why waste time by raping me? This whole operation had amateurish touches. No professional group uses either beating or rape before interrogation today; there is no profit in it; any professional is trained to cope with either or both.

So, we get treated to a rape scene. What’s worse is Heinlein’s handling of the subject:

For rape she (or he—I hear it’s worse for males) can either detach the mind and wait for it to be over, or (advanced training) emulate the ancient Chinese adage. Or, in place of method A or B, or combined with B if the agent’s histrionic ability is up to it, the victim can treat rape as an opportunity to gain an edge over her captors. I’m no great shakes as an actress but I try and, while it has never enabled me to turn the tables on unfriendlies, at least once it kept me alive.

And:

After he became flaccid he said, “Mac, we’re wasting our time. This slut enjoys it.” “So get out of the way and give the kid another chance. He’s ready.” “Not yet. I’m going to slap her around, make her take us seriously.” He let me have a big one, left side of my face. I yelped.

Now, the existence of a violent, sexual, or in this case sexually violent scene in a book does not, of course, mean anything in and of itself. The author’s treatment of the subject, however, is vitally important. In this case, Heinlein’s premise is that a violent gang rape is something that a woman (or a man, apparently) should not only be able to shrug off psychologically, but should ideally turn into situation where the victim can gain a tactical advantage. It’s a matter of training. (Fortunately, he leaves the details of that training unaddressed.) Later, the main character has no emotional problems that result from the assault and objects mostly to the physical hygiene of one her rapists (the one who slapped her) as the most unpleasant aspect of the event. Within days she’s off engaging in partner swapping sexual escapades as if nothing untoward had happened.

Quite simply, this premise is the product of a deeply flawed mind. The intellect that developed and presented such a concept as an ideal is someone with a serious lack of empathy or even basic human decency. It’s a repugnant premise, and one that not only should be recognized for what it is, but should color the reputation of the author and his legacy permanently.

Through the rest of the book we get Heinlein’s view of free love. His main character pursues her sexuality vigorously... but only in response to someone pressing her first. Her sexuality is presented as being open and free, but if examined carefully, she responds to sexual advances with deference and submission rather than a frank and open sex drive. Throughout the book her sexuality is at the service of those around her.

Heinlein does have a dynamic that could be used to rationalize his characterization in that his main character is an artificial person, one whose genetic profile has been “upgraded” in various ways from the human standard. Though it is not described as part of that upgrading, those enhancements could, in theory, include a sort of psychological or neurological change. While we do get information about her physical changes on more than one occasion, there is no content about any such changes to her mentality other than the circumstances of being raised in a crèche for similar “artificial” people. So, if one were inclined to give Heinlein the benefit of the doubt, it would have to be based on something outside the actual text.

What’s worse, it is here that we run into one of the other flaws of Heinlein’s clearly retrograde character and writing. One of the themes of this book is the rights of “artificial persons” in his future world. They are considered second class citizens, and often denied basic rights. His lead character often faces prejudices based on her status as an AP. Heinlein borrows or references any number of racial and social struggles in drawing upon this aspect of his novel.

However, if a reader is inclined to give Heinlein an out on the issue of rape and the sexuality of his main character based on the fact that she has been genetically altered to acclimate things like rape and the sublimation of her sexuality to the will of others then... she’s not human. She is a living sex toy. Her desires and behavior are the product of her design. In short, she has no human rights because she actually isn’t human. The ire that Heinlein presents at the prejudice against artificial people is, in fact, supported by his portrayal. It’s a wildly hypocritical plot device that appears to have completely escaped the author. Maybe it was simply beyond him intellectually, but it doesn’t read that way. It reads as a man unable to grasp how fallacious his logic is in the pursuit of weakly considered straw man argument.

The book is filled with such fallacies. In fact, I only made it through the whole thing because I was hoping that there would be some indication that it was a subversive exploration of such fallacies in science fiction literature. I hoped that in the end, even with it’s stunningly dull rambling sections on politics and finances, the book would wind up being an elaborate parody or satire of the themes that it presented. Sadly, no such reveal ever came up. The book is exactly what it purports to be.

So, on the whole, I’m going to have to give this book a single star, but only because there is no negative star capacity on Goodreads. I can only recommend this book to someone with an academic interest in the decline of an author whose reputation is overblown, his importance over-estimated, and whose work has clearly caught up to a sadly lacking intellect.