Rating: 4/5

The table of contents clearly shows the organization of White's thoughts on pole shifts. Obviously he thinks the crust of our planet has rapidly moved to a new location on many previous occasions, and points out evidence of fallen civilizations and frozen mammoths. He cites all the big names who have written on the subject previously, with chapters devoted to Charles Hapgood, Hugh A. Brown, Immanuel Velikovsky, and several lesser known names. There is an emphasis on opinions stating that the crust of the earth can change location extremely quickly - in a few days, or even a few hours.

Another section focuses on prognostications of the next pole shift, with quotes of Edgar Cayce, Nostradamus, Paul Solomon, and less well known psychics. A distinction is drawn between precognition and prophecy, then many prophecies of pole shifts are discussed, both from psychics and the mythology of various cultures. Later chapters cover scientific support for the idea that the rotational axis of the earth can change quickly, along with suggestions in preparation of such a pole shift in the near future.

Having previously read many books on these subjects, I was familiar with Hapgood, Brown, Velikovsky, Cayce, Nostradamus, and some of the other writers White cited already. But some of the lesser-known figures White quoted made interesting points I had not come across previously. Marshall Wheeler's discussion of "means taken to forever perpetuate the knowledge, so that, when the dread event transpires, the mankind should not lapse again into prehistoric barbarism" was one of my favorite new quotes. Hannes Alfven's magnetohydrodynamic theories, and the example of how the viscosity of a liquid can change with the electromagnetic field, were interesting to me.... especially the implications for how much less friction layers in the earth's crust may need to overcome during a pole shift in which the magnetic field is also changing. And although I doubt the premise is accurate, I also liked the unique idea that the equatorial bulge could remain stationary while the crust moves over it, giving the appearance of a shock wave tearing up the surface under which it would appear to be moving quite rapidly.

As I am also an author, and have written books in which pole shifts figure quite prominently (End Times and 2019 - and more recently - Pole Shift: Evidence Will Not Be Silenced) and I did find White's "Pole Shift" book to be a very useful collection of almost everything ever written on the subject. It should be even more interesting for readers who have not yet read many related books, as for such readers even more of the material will be new and fascinating.

As Greg Caton noted in his review of this book in 2006, White adds material in an epilogue a decade after the first printing and says he no longer feels there will be a pole shift near the turn of the millenium (around the year 2000.) As others pointed out, many chapters focused on some very questionable "crackpot" theories - and perhaps White realized that a good portion of his material was at best pseudo-scientific.

But in the epilogue White goes to absurd lengths to disprove reasonable assumptions, such as telling us that now he thinks the Berskovka mammoth could have died in summer conditions and been suddenly frozen at temperatures as low as negative 150 degrees "under known conditions... because sufficient meteorological conditions occasionally prevail." What a load of dung! My first thought after reading some of his most ridiculous reversals of opinion was that perhaps someone threatened White and made him retract points he made earlier. But at the very end he clarifies that he wants to be spiritually uplifting and not cause fear and panic, so perhaps he changed his tune, at least in part, to avoid worrying people. Despite White's bizarre abrupt-face, the overall premise that pole shifts have occurred and will occur again was and is still accurate.