Rating: 5/5

This was my third time reading this book. I first read it for an American Lit survey course in college, and something about Norris' tenacious and unwavering passion for truth on a grand scale pulled my 20-something idealism in a new direction. In particular, there's a thread of social justice that elevates this book from being a good story to a poignant social statement.

The story revolves around the growth of the railroad industry. At a time when the expansion of the railroads was being heralded as the vehicle for progress, Frank Norris was telling the rest of the story--the real story as it hit the lives of people who were subjugated and oppressed by the sprawling railroads. We follow the lives of farmers and aspiring business-folk who are crushed by the untethered demands of the railroads, and we watch with heartbreak as their lives are ruined by the greed of this new industry.

And something should be said about that title. The railroads stretched their tentacles across the land like an octopus, pulling all profit and entrepreneurialism into the cutting and crushing bit of its hardened beak. The octopus seeks to dominate absolutely, and so the railroads did.

And Norris told that story.

This book--as all of Norris' works are--is an example of the Naturalist movement in American Literature. Naturalism, among other things, sought to apply the discoveries of science to literature: scientific order in the world, random occurrences, and most of all the indifference of the universe. Contrary to the concept of a loving and benevolent God maintaining the order of all things, Naturalist writers portrayed the universe as a cold, indifferent machine that could and would crush anything that is in the wrong place at the wrong time.

The Octopus captures Naturalism as well or better than any other example of Naturalism. Stephen Crane and Theodore Dreiser are the names usually at the top of the list of Naturalism, but for me the number one spot is occupied by Frank Norris.

Needless to say, I highly recommend this book . . . for many reasons.