Within the Song for the Blue Ocean, Carl Safina encompasses the reader on his journey throughout the world to address “the only wild animals still hunted on a large scale” (Safina, p. 395). As he endeavors on this journey, Safina uses descriptive quotes to introduce the endangered tuna, salmon, and coral reef and how these organisms have been affected by industry. In addition to showing the effects of industry, Safina addresses conservation efforts, environmental views, economic stipulations, and political aspects. While all of these ideals may seem very separate and unique, Safina finds a way to connect them and entertain the reader throughout each page. 
	Safina’s writing makes the reader anxious to turn the page, as he writes the non-fiction book to read like a novel. He uses quotes that appeal to the reader’s senses, allowing the reader to relate to Safina’s surroundings. While describing the beauty of the dolphins he encounters, Safina writes, “Their fluid maneuvers are excruciatingly beautiful, a living embroidery of motion through the ocean’s wrinkled cloth” (Safina, p. 10). Not only does the quote trigger visual senses, but it entails feeling as well. In addition to sensory quotes, Safina uses his writing to introduce humor. While Safina describes a tense situation dealing with individuals holding guns in unknown territories, he manages to place the quote, “This is not exactly the place I’d expect to see the Avon lady…” (Safina, p. 419). This comical quote helps break the tension of the situation, allowing Safina to lighten the scene and continue with his thoughts. Through the sensory quotes and humor Safina is able to turn his non-fiction book into a one-of-a-kind novel. 
	Safina’s book expands far beyond the novel characteristics, as he delicately places factual evidence to support his thoughts. Safina does an excellent job of blending the factual quotes with sensory quotes, allowing the reader to grasp the facts while engaging in the book’s material. Safina demonstrates this when describing the importance of trees and water, as he discretely talks about the advantages of protein and meat within one’s diet. He is ultimately tying his research to the nitrogen cycle, without burying his reader in factual evidence (Safina, p. 312). In addition to blending facts, Safina strives to provide facts that pertain to the reader’s everyday life. He often introduces facts within feedback loops; such is the case when Safina relates the human creation of dams with the demise of the salmon population (Safina, p. 122). These aspects of the book make the facts interesting and dynamic to read. 
	Safina does an excellent job of relating the book to geography, introducing various ideas that can be comprehended with a low level of knowledge about the subject. At one point in the book Safina writes about various landforms created by water flows such as an oxbow lake, undercut bank, and flood plain. He uses imagery to help the reader understand these landforms and their creation (Safina, p. 208). Safina also addresses climate throughout the book. He demonstrates this concept by describing tuna’s ability to use their internal heating systems to cope with changing water temperatures (Safina, p. 57). By utilizing his emphasis on the fishing industry, Safina is able to make geographical terms comprehendible. 
While Safina’s ideas entertain the reader throughout his book, at times the reader questions where the ideas are leading. At one point in the book, Safina establishes the importance of the owl on the forestry industry. These ideas are placed amongst the ideas relating to salmon endangerment, which appears to have no correlation (Safina, p. 176-180). However, through this rant Safina is able to establish a direction correlation between the two animals and ultimately creates a causal relationship (Safina, p. 180). Although the reader questions Safina’s writing when he starts his rant, the relationship the rants establish creates more meaning throughout the book. 
	Song for the Blue Ocean is a great book for anyone to read. While the book focuses on an individual’s actions and how they relate to the environment, it is able to create relationships with other disciplines to relate to each type of reader. Carl Safina uses sensory quotes and humor to tie facts and ideas to individual lives, creating a strong connection between the book and realistic life. It is for these attributes that Song for the Blue Ocean is a must read, leaving other non-fiction books a difficult standard to surpass. 

Citation
 
Safina, C. (1997). Song for the blue ocean. New York, New York: Henry Holt and Company, Inc.