Rating: 3/5

A long time ago I had chanced upon the movie adaptation of this novel on TV. I could not watch it then as I had to do something. But, the name stuck in my mind for some reason. Later I learnt that the movie was based on a book and added it to my TBR. 

The Last of the Mohicans is the second book in The Leatherstocking Tales Series, but can be read as a standalone novel.

The story is set in the backdrop of the wars between the British and the French colonialists in North America during the 1700s. This is a typical adventure story wherein brave honorable men fight the evil villains to protect the damsels-in-distress.

The hero of the story is Natty Bumppo aka Hawkeye, a white woodsman raised by the Native Americans. Aided by his two loyal Mohican friends, the last of their tribe, Hawkeye would try to protect two British sisters and their companions from Magua and his Huron warriors. 

I was expecting a great read, but the book somehow did not live up to my expectations. I am not saying the book was bad; parts of it were really great. It depicted an America which is so different from the imageries that are usually associated with it. The America in the novel is the old America with pristine forests and the ancient way of life, but all these was starting to vanish due to the advancement of “civilization”. Some of the action was also fine.

The unnecessary detailed descriptions impacted my reading experience. I can understand the melodrama and the verbose prose, as well as the stereotyping of the Native Americans and women – the book was written in the 1800s after all. But, one aspect of the story was very difficult to digest – that the Hurons would give so much leeway to their captives and trust a white from the enemy side. Some long dialogues were also in French, which I had to skip totally. A few characters were very tiresome.

Despite my criticism, I might still give the first book in the series a chance. Readers who enjoy historical fiction might want to give this book a try.