Rating: 4/5

Thor Hammers Dead Horse

Thor Heyerdahl and his companions took a risky trip aboard a balsa raft from Peru to Polynesia in 1947. They proved that such trips could have been made centuries ago. What they didn’t prove was that such trips WERE made! I don’t want to knock the guy very much. He was brave as all get out and he writes very well too. He took these primitive reed raft trips from Africa to the New World and from Iraq to India. All these adventures will interest any reader with an ounce of historical imagination. I definitely recommend AKU-AKU and any of his other books. But read them as adventures, read them as showing what was possible. Definitely don’t believe that they prove very much else. 
 Heyerdahl early on conceived the theory that the Polynesian isles of the South Pacific were settled from South America. He was wrong. Linguistics, their pigs and chickens, and (now) DNA show that they were settled from the direction of Asia. AKU-AKU could be a case study in how not to do archaeological or historical research. First you ought to go to your site and see what you find. Then you make your conclusions. It’s a bad idea to develop your conclusion first and then go try to prove it. It’s not the same as inventing things that people need; then you imagine what an item could look like and try to produce it. History and anthropology are the opposites to this method. On the basis of his fantastic success with Kon-Tiki, Heyerdahl was heavily financed with a ship, supplies, a team of sailors and scientists who went to Easter Island for a whole year. They learned some very interesting things---for example, how the giant statues were erected (they weighed many tons each). They discovered that Easter Island was practically honeycombed with caves used by the old inhabitants to live, to hide, and sometimes to bury their dead. They were able to come to some interesting conclusions about Easter Island history. They realized that the old culture was not entirely dead despite the near-genocide of the population. There could have been some occasional contacts with South America, but nothing more than that. Heyerdahl was also bamboozled by the Polynesian inhabitants, who offloaded some highly suspect “antiques” on him. 
 Conclusion: great reading, this is a guy with guts, but who kept on beating a dead horse for far too long.