Rating: 5/5

Another excellent novel from the pen of Margaret Atwood – this is her masterly, fictionalised retelling of the life of Grace Marks and the part that she allegedly may or may not have played in the murders of Thomas Kinnear and Nancy Montgomery.

The story takes place in the early to mid-19th Century and is written for the most part around Grace Marks supposed retelling of her life story to the fictional Dr Simon Jordan – events unfolds to the reader as they are told to Dr Jordan. This includes Grace’s childhood in Ireland, her subsequent traumatic emigration to Canada and a life in service prior to events concerning the murders and her eventual incarceration. Atwood paints as usual a fascinating picture, which is not only compelling but has an all pervading air of authenticity throughout. Interesting too is the developing (imagined) relationship between Jordan and Marks and the effect that their interviews together have on each other. 

Dr Jordan is an aspiring and ambitious scientist – and due to the time in which the story takes place, this is a world of proto psychology, embryonic psychiatry – both very much in their infancy. It is also the parallel world of séances, possession, mesmerism, exorcism, and neuro-hypnotism – the difference between the two worlds often indistinct.

A major theme running throughout the novel is the treatment, subjugation, demonisation and conversely the romanticisation of women associated with or accused of violent crime; particularly by comparison to their male counterparts. 

This is all about class, gender, age, sex and power and Margaret Atwood shines a light on the many issues central to a story such as this one and in doing so, deconstructs the assumptions/presumptions seemingly held about Grace Marks at that time – and by extension about so many cases since that time, has anything actually changed?

This is a dark, gloomy and murky world where fact blurs with fiction, guilt with innocence, sanity with madness, love with desire, memory with imagination, truth with auto-suggestion, victim with perpetrator, science with superstition, good with evil, life with death…

Atwood also provides us with a useful afterword, in which she outlines the ‘known facts’ (such as they are) concerning Grace Marks and the Kinnear/Montgomery murders. Atwood reiterates that ‘Alias Grace’ is although having its roots in fact, is overwhelmingly a work of fiction. 

‘Alias Grace’ is a great novel, brilliantly written – highly recommended and not to be missed.