Rating: 5/5

First, a big thank you to Tilly for including Larkin’s 'Lines on a Young Lady's Photograph Album’ in her review of this book. After decades of having a baseless bias against Larkin, probably just his name and time, I sat down and read his collected poems: a wonderful read.

The initial challenge was to decide how best to read these poems. I finally decided on reading out loud, not easily done in a busy household, in order best to catch the rhythms and rhymes. It was also necessary to read these poems with tongue placed firmly in cheek: the better to catch the often present irony. To miss Larkin’s irony is to misunderstand much of his meaning. However, not all is ironic. There is also a great deal of loneliness, dissatisfaction with the contemporary social order and appreciation of many aspects of his English heritage. It all comes down to discovering the mood.

Larkin was not a simple poet. He studied the world around him, the inner worlds of his contemporaries and his own inner contradictions. He also liked to put forward images which did not always let the reader know where he was going until they had committed to a close reading. It is often like watching over an artist’s shoulder as she begins to sketch in a scene then moves on one colour at a time until, only slowly, does the image take form, as in essential beauty:

In frames as large as rooms that face all ways
And block the ends of streets with giant loaves,
Of motor-oil and cuts of salmon, shine
Perpetually these sharply-pictured groves
Of how life should be. High above the gutter
A silver knife sinks into golden butter,
A glass of milk stands in a meadow, and
Well-balanced families, in fine
Mid-summer weather, owe their smiles, their cars,
Even their youth, to that small cube each hand
Stretches towards. These, and the deep armchairs
Aligned to cups at bedtime, radiant bars
(Gas or electric), quarter-profile cats
By slippers on warm mats,
Reflect none of the rained-on streets an squares

They dominate outdoors. ….

That we are looking at billboards here was not immediately obvious to me but, once I happily saw the images coming together, I could not help but see them. 

The book follows Larkin, his poetry and English society from the 1940s through to the 1980s. The social changes during the 60s and 70s were immense and Larkin reflects them with interest, regret at what he has missed and at what is lost, as well as with a certain gentle understanding and empathy. In his first publication, The North Ship, (July 1945) at poem XX, he watches “a girl dragged by the wrists/Across a dazzling field of snow,”. “…she laughs and struggles, and pretends to fight;” He is filled with envy and regret that he cannot be like her, laughing and playing in the snow. Instead,”For me the task’s to learn the many times/ When I must stoop, and throw a shovelful;”.

From High Windows, (1974), we get:

When I see a couple of kids
And guess he’s fucking her and she’s
Taking pills or wearing a diaphragm,
I know this is paradise
Everyone old has dreamed of all their lives-

The bitter envy of 1945 has been replaced with a feeling of sorrow that the poet has missed out on something. The regret is sadder, gentler, more empathetic than 20 years earlier. One also gets the sense that Larkin felt a certain thrill at putting into print the words, “he’s fucking her”, for the first time. Society has changed and Larkin has tried to express himself more freely, enjoying a certain liberation with the times. This movement with the changes in society is seen throughout Larkin’s poems.

I shall end this review now with 'Annus Mirabilis', a poem I think reveals great deal about Larkin and his world, even if he did overestimate the effects of the so-called ‘sexual revolution’ (although I do recall thinking back then that we had invented sexual intercourse). [For best results, read out loud]

Sexual intercourse began
In nineteen sixty-three
(Which was rather late for me) –
Between the end of the Chatterley ban
And the Beatles’ first LP.

Up until then there’d only been
A sort of bargaining,
A wrangle for a ring,
A shame that started at sixteen
And spread to everything.

Then all at once the quarrel sank:
Everyone felt the same,
And every life became
A brilliant breaking of the bank,
A quite unlosable game.

So life was never better than
In nineteen sixty- three
(Though just too late for me) –
Between the end of the Chatterley ban
And the Beatles’ first LP.

Philip Larkin was a poet who understood himself, in all of his loneliness, despair and his all-too human disgust with himself along with a scattering of self pity but who constantly saw the rest of humanity with an empathetic eye, even when he expressed this empathy with a cynical tongue.