Rating: 4/5

One of the many things I remember from my childhood home is my mothers bookshelf which included the usual Readers Digest Omnibus books, a copy of Teach Yourself Italian, Norah Lofts, a book about Shackletons Adventures in Antarctica, Lady Chatterleys Lover and Peyton PLace. I can't remember if any of the books ever moved from their place on that shelf (which would indicate that someone was reading them) my mother never spoke about either of the two banned books and I was never, even slightly interested in looking at them let alone read them. My mothers copy of Peyton Place has long gone but a review on GRs rekindled the memory of it's place on that shelf and I decided it was long overdue a visit. Oh happy day, Oh joy when I started to read this! It tells the stories of three women (two from girlhood to womanhod) from small town NE during the late thirties and early forties and whilst many refer to it as soap I believe (along with many others) that nothing could be further from the truth. The stories of these women cover subjects, which at the time were pushed under the carpet, and in general ignored as either not taking place at all or only in the very rarest of circumstances, whereas in reality these things (incest, abortion, domestic violence) were situations faced by many women. It is also a book which is open about the sexuality of women which I guess at the time was something that women weren't, sexual that is. I can see why it caused a stir! It portrays people and situations exactly as they are, a side of people that at the time, some would like to think did not exist. The story though is not solely about women, many of the things that take place in Peyton Place happen to men and the story is as much theirs from the town big shot who rides rough shod over everyone and who raises his son to be equally as arrogant, to the newspaper publisher who seems to be to afraid to be controversial, and the little boy, raised by his strange mother, who harbours sadomasochistic inclinations.

I loved it and as this was a library copy intend to to get my hands on my very own copy sooner rather than later.