Rating: 5/5

Always a delight to discover yet another Nero Wolfe I haven't read yet. Stout has written so many novels with our beloved misanthropic detective of size, bless him, that it will be a long time before I will have read all of them.

Brief synopsis: A woman comes to Wolfe, a very, very rich woman I might add, but aren't they all?-to offer Wolfe about five years' salary worth of green backs to find her kidnapped husband.

If you've read any Wolfe, you know the routine. Wolfe and the lady argue back and forth. Wolfe has better things to do with his life, like sit at his desk, read classics and drink beer. The woman argues something sentimental, like, oh, how much she loves her husband and wants him back etc...Wolfe remains unmoved...meanwhile Archie, Nero's foot man is on the sidelines screaming in his head, "But half a million dollars, Wolfe, sheesh!"

What I liked about this mystery, and there was nothing I did not like, was the seamless way the characters: detectives, police, suspects and ultimately the guilty party, are introduced, woven in, and dispensed with as the case narrows down to who did it and why. 

Before we find out the why, a few people are murdered without any apparent reason. Naturally these reasons become apparent towards the end, and when we finally discover who did it and why, the reasons are logical (note I did not say moral) and the conclusion lands on two feet. Mysteries don't always do that, sometimes the author strains reasoning to make their solution work.

And as always, we have the witty and playful banter between Archie and, well, everyone else, since the Wolfe mysteries are narrated from Archie's first person point of view, which gives us a better view of the star: Nero Wolfe.

The story was written in 1961, which makes it a later work, but I think that, unlike a lot of mystery writers, Stout not only avoids being formulaic (well, as much as you can avoid that with murder mysteries) and his character analysis matures. 

Nero fans will enjoy this book and first time readers of Stout's novels will become Nero fans.