Rating: 5/5

Red Kayak, a realistic fiction book by Priscilla Cummings, is a great thriller with twists and surprises throughout. It ingeniously makes a riverside school setting into a story about revenge and ethics.
On the Corsica River in Maryland, Brady, the protagonist of the story, and his friends JT and Digger, were demoralized when their only source of fun, a dock on the river, was bought out by the Diangelo's. Despite his anger towards the family, the protagonist still befriends the Diangelo’s 3 year old son Ben. Suddenly however, Ben and his mom go on a fatal kayaking trip, leaving the former dead. Besides the Diangelo's, Brady carried a burden on his back, being the one who found the young boy. Subsequent to days of depression and seclusion, it became a disheartening surprise when Brady discovers his friends were the culprits. Faced with a life changing decision, Brady decided with wisdom from his dad that the truth is always the way to go. Although JT and Digger were very angry at Brady, they soon understood as well and pleaded guilty in court.
One Reason I really enjoyed this book because of its themes. Normally when I think of the theme “the truth is the way to go,” I usually think of a cliche fairytale, but Red Kayak combines this theme with a realistic setting that numerous young adults must go through on a smaller scale. Besides that theme Priscilla Cummings showed the underestimated outcomes when something important is taken away in 2 separate scenarios; 1 when the dock was taken by the Diangelo’s, causing Digger and JT to sabotage the kayak and 2 when Ben was taken by the river, causing Brady to go through a series of depressive states. These 2 scenarios create the two separate conflicts in the story, character vs. character and character vs self. It is truly ingenious how Cummings takes 2 equally important themes and makes them each the conflict and the solution. Besides theme, the author’s style of writing made the reader feel as if they were Brady. Cummings used her knowledge about the setting along with a unique dialect to create a strong feel for the setting. This complemented with foreshadowing, dialogue, and vivid descriptions made the book interesting and mysterious.
	In conclusion, I rated this book 5 stars for three main reasons, quality storyline, innovative use of theme, and unique style. If you enjoy action, mystery, and a touch of wilderness, Red Kayak is the book for you.