Rating: 4/5

If this was a youtube video, its title would be "Liberal aristocrat DESTROYS Reactionary chill and socialist cucks".

Tocqueville, a man of aristocratic origins and a son of the french revolution, holds no love for the revolutionary fervour that allowed him to get in the comfortable position of a public letterman. He also traces the roots of the future massacre and absolutism of the revolution from the centralizing movements of the ancién regime from 18th century until the year of the revolution.

He is not a historian, however how he says is more important than what he says - Tocqueville shows how the vices of the new State sprang to life during the reign of the last french kings. This is how he contradicts the arguments of Burke's pamphlet on the french revolution. Tocqueville is not a historian, so he might be unprecise in his affirmations, but is not so much how he talks about something but what he talks about. He describes a regime that slowly eroded the regional powers and obligations of the french public sphere and centralized it towards Paris. He describes a society micromanaged by bureaucrats appointed by the French king, and where public jobs become extremely more advantageous than pursuing a private entrepreneurship. The book also mentions how, through the centralization of local powers from feudal lords and local aristocracies, customary law was corroded by a confuse and imprecise legalism from Paris and how the poorer strata of society lost its possibility of recurring to the local lords and became dependent of a detached and uninterested caste of civil servants that had no "skin in the game" and no mutual dependency towards the the peasantry and city poor.

We are so used to think of the middle ages as a time of darkness but time and time again history shows that the way society found itself organized in those time followed a rational logic and not a superstitious or tyrannical one. When the State became an empowered being, it decided to rationalize life. This aesthetic desire of a rational, equanimous and centralized society was the greatest sin of the old regime, and the great obsession of the State in modern times.