Rating: 4/5

A Bird in the House is the fourth book in the Manawaka Series by Margaret Laurence - the common denominators being a female narrator and the fictional town of Manawaka, a small town in Saskatchewan, where the narrator currently or once lived.

In A Bird in the House, the female narrator is Vanessa MacLeod, a fourteen year old girl when the story starts and middle-aged whe her story ends. Vanessa’s early dreams are to become a writer and she acts as one from a young age. She is very observational, makes deductions about people and connections beyond her physical age and is always making notes about what is happening around her - both real things and her thoughts about possibilities for future stories.

This book is a series of linked short stories - short stories about Vanessa’s relatives and her interactions with them. The characters are wonderful. Laurence as usual creates well-developed and multi-dimensional characters. The story lines of each are not complicated. They are stories of every day life but captured my interest immediately and engaged me from the get go.

As in many of the books of the Manawaka series, Laurence integrates the thoughts of the female narrator into the story line. She does so in The Bird in the House as well, but Vanessa MacLeod is a fourteen year old and most of her thoughts aren’t just thoughts - they are right out there in the open, in the real world. She makes comments. She asks questions. She rebels. Her heart breaks and then she tells everyone about it. This narrator is not a “keep all one’s thoughts inside” kind of narrator. She is “out there and living in the moment” which makes her very endearing and one of my favourite Manawaka series’ narrators. One cannot help but be captiavated by Vanessa MacLeod.

As usual, Laurence’s writing is terrific - at times direct, often lyrical, engaging, wonderful about connecting the reader with its characters and carrying the reader along with the story line.
	 
Margaret Laurence is a stellar writer who deserves to have a greater following for her talents. She was creative and innovative long before it became popular to do so. Due to her premature passing; she stopped writing long before she shared all she had to offer. Based on the small number of books Laurence wrote and had published before she passed, she is regarded as one of the twentieth century’s great writers. It is a shame she didn’t live longer to write even more books so that people all over the world would hold her in even higher esteem - something her talents, vision, writing accomplishments and being so ahead of her time are so deserving of. 4 stars.