Rating: 5/5

I have to admit I was skeptical when I read the premise of this book. In essence, Sarno advises that the vast majority of back pain is psychosomatic. We choose to experience back pain rather than addressing the deeper psychological issues that plague us. These psychological issues can range from the important (e.g. physical abuse as a child) to the trivial (e.g. some jerk cut you off in traffic today). We would rather experience the physical back pain than deal with these often complicated issues. In addition, polite society doesn't appreciate us sharing these psychological issues in a public venue. However, our friends and family are perfectly willing to swap stories about chronic back pain. So, we swallow the pain caused by the deeper issues. Walla, back pain!

Sarno had some great support for his idea on the topic of ulcers which he also views as primarily psychological. This resonated with me, because I've often wondered, "Where did all the ulcers go." Everyone who was anyone in the professional world had one in the 1970s, then they disappeared overnight. Sarno believes this is because having an ulcer became synonymous with being worrywart which is again unacceptable in polite society.

His prescription is seemingly bizarre. You have to lay out all the things that have pissed you off in the past or are pissing you off now. If you can make an honest catalog of these issues and believe in your heart that they are the source of your back pain, your pain will magically go away. You don't even really have to address the underlying issue. You just need to acknowledge it.

I have to admit I felt like a schmuck recording every real or imagined ill that anyone had done to me, even though the exercise was done in private. It made me feel petty. I can also certainly understand why none of us are encouraged to share these issues with family or friends. It would irritate them!

Despite the fact that the exercise was uncomfortable, it worked. I rock climb, mountain bike, and ski. I do all of these aggressively for a 45 year old, and I have been free of back pain for almost 6 months now.

Despite Sarno's odd prescription, I would recommend reading the book if you have any chronic back pain. It worked for me!