Rating: 5/5

Feels totally undated and very much still relevant today. The focus on effectiveness, uninterrupted time and making deliberate choices on what one doesn’t do is formulated in a powerful manner
Executives aren’t paid for things they like to do, they are paid to get things done

Remarkably readable and clear eyed on leadership being a self discipline set of focussed beliefs and actions, instead of an innate quality. The actions are very concrete and brought in an easy to read manner, although hard to execute well, as is evidenced by the 50 years + popularity of this book.
Aphorisms and useful quotes below.

Quotes:
If meetings come to dominate your time, than your life is likely being ill spend

Stop what you wouldn’t start

Never confuse scale of impact with scale of organization 

Management is largely by example 

Without effectiveness there is no performance

Always ask what needs to be done and what do I need to do uniquely to contribute most to this? Align your agenda and time to the priorities.

Every decision needs to have the RACI clear and have some evaluation and midpoint check-in built in

Start with opportunities (and staff people on these) and not with problems in your reporting

Listen first, speak last

Brilliant insight by itself isn’t achievement 

Organization is a means of multiplying the strengths of an individual 

The customer makes the real and final decisions but is outside of the organization 

A bigger organization becomes ever more internal oriented, while the surface area, which directly interfaces with clients, does not grow at the same rate, same as in biological beings growing in size.

Time is always the limiting factor, especially focused, uninterrupted time

People decisions are time consuming, for the simple reason the Lord didn’t create people as resources for organization, they don’t come in the proper size and shape for the tasks that need to be done in the organization and they can’t be machined down or recast for these tasks. People are always almost fits at best.

Much more common is the workforce that is too large, with people just interfacing

One cannot manage his time until one knows where it goes. Only constant efforts prevent drifting.

Which activities I do can someone else do as well or better than me?

What is it that I do that wastes your time without adding to your effectiveness 

We far too often think our presence is needed for effectiveness 

A well managed organization is a dull organization, the dramatic things in such an organization are basic decisions that make the future, rather than heroics in mopping up yesterday.

People have become an impediment to performance instead of a means their to.
In a lean organization people have room to move without colliding with one another, and can do their work without having to explain it all the time. 

Meetings are by definition a concession to efficient organization, because one either works or he meets.

I’ve yet come across a crisis that could not wait 90 minutes.

Small driplets of time are useless, consolidate time together in blocks

Focus on contribution, what do you do for the organization instead of framing oneself as a manager of a department, or leading xx FTE

Effective executives focus on three themes: Achieve direct results (always come first), affirm values and create clarity, and finally build out talent in the firm and make the organization future proof.

The only meaningful definition of a generalist is a specialist who can relate his own small area to the universe of knowledge 

Start every meeting with the purpose of the meeting and the wanted contribution and close it with a recap on what was achieved and decided towards this purpose

Staffing from strength, not to minimize weaknesses 

There is no such thing as a good man, the question is good for what

Their question is never “what can he not do”, their question is always “what can he do uncommonly well?”

The second rule of staffing from strength is to make each job demanding and big

Start with what a person can do rather than what a job requires 

All one can measure is performance, and all one should measure is performance 

By themselves character and integrity don’t accomplish anything, but their absence fault’s everything else.

To get strength one has to put up with weaknesses

Making strengths productive is a moral imperative within an organization 

People being either readers or listeners in terms of how easy they absorb information.

What can I do?

If leadership performance is high this lifts up the average performance of the group as well

If we not already were doing this, would we start this? - A key question to always keep in mind when reflecting on actions 

Programme review, build in assessment of projects, to ensure resources are freed up for the opportunities of the future

Choosing tasks to not pick-up are critical for the success of executives

Solve generic problems with principles and general rules, and think through if one is willing to live with the “temporary” for a long time. Also don’t use old rules for new problems or specific, unique incidents.

Reality never stands still for too long - about the need to reassess decisions frequently 

Focus on what is right, measured against some clear boundary conditions which define success and performance, and use this to guide compromises instead of focus on what is acceptable 

Events by themselves are not facts

Unless one considered alternatives one’s mind is closed

Do not become a prisoner of preconceived opinions by enabling active discussion and constructive conflict and not defaulting to the plausible 

Disagreement is needed to stimulate the imagination 

Is a decision really necessary, think like a surgeon and don’t intervene unneeded in systems, and operate and do the job fully (one doesn’t do a half surgery)

Effectiveness needs to be learned

Effectiveness is after all not a subject but self discipline 

With courage knowledge becomes productive