Rating: 3/5

After watching the movie About Schmidt for my weekly_movies LiveJournal community, I did some reading about the movie because there were some things that I didn't really understand. I discovered that the movie was loosely based on a book, and that many critics felt that the movie was awful and the book was a lot better. After reading a bunch of descriptions of the book, I thought it sounded very interesting and decided to read it.

It took me -forever- to get past the first few pages. My word the writing style was difficult to slog through. I kept getting bored and putting it down to go do something more interesting. But then I spent two hours on a plane with only this book for company, and managed to make it almost halfway through. By that time, the book had improved significantly plot-wise and I managed to finish it a few weeks later. The writing never did improve, though...

The story is -significantly- different from the movie. Better, I would say, if the writing hadn't been so dull. Even the names are different, this guy is "Albert Schmidt", where in the movie he is "Warren". To be honest, they probably could have named the movie something else and no one would have guessed it was based on this book at all! The similarities are that a recently widowed and retired man's daughter is marrying a guy he doesn't approve of. Which I really felt like could be multiple stories without worrying about copyright.

Here, he doesn't approve because of antisemitism - that's right, the boyfriend is a Jew, and Schmidt doesn't approve. The guy isn't a slimy car salesman - in fact, he's a partner in Schmidt's law firm, who Schmidt trained himself! They don't live in the midwest, but instead there is a class battle that takes place in NYC and the Hamptons! The wife is dead before the book begins, and I don't believe we ever did find out how she dies except that it took a looong time to happen. And the BIGGEST change - Schmidt was very unfaithful to his wife, on every business trip he ever took and with his daughter's nanny at home... and after her death is living/sleeping with a 20 year old Puerto Rican waitress... his daughter is 28! And there is no kid who he writes to... but there is a homeless man who follows him around tormenting him, and kisses him at one point!

As you can see, if you've seen the movie, this plot is FAR more interesting! And I came to be more interested in the book as I kept reading... but the writing style is a HUGE turnoff.