Rating: 2/5

A novel that creates a strict internal logic that’s used to carry a narrative forward based on what it excludes (regardless of how inventive or unique the language is, or how much variance there appears to be in other ways on the surface via deployment of language) experiences unique challenges. One example of this where it’s pulled off masterfully would be Samuel Beckett’s trilogy (Molloy, Malone Dies, The Unnameable). The strict internal logic of this trilogy would be something along these lines: Restrict language to its sparest forms. Reduce plot to almost non-existence, unable to move forward. Have an anti-protagonist. Have the subject matter restricted to internal thoughts that don’t often reflect anything in the material world. Etc. The conceit itself greatly restricts the form, but working within that, Beckett achieves his prose’s crowning achievement. 

 The Runaway Soul  also sets great restrictions on a world that, paradoxically, is often rendered with extravagant (and inconsistently well thought out) prose. Of course, Brodkey’s world is different. The restrictive construct: Do not dwell on settings. We don’t need to know where they are. Every paragraph dissects a feeling in minute detail and is self-reflective to the intentional point of narcissism. Every sentence is a mirror into some deep, fateful insight that may be reversed in the next sentence. In  The Runaway Soul , the adult (one Wiley Silenowicz) looks back on his youth and reduces it to the self-absorbed feelings of new love, family love, family hate. The world of the child by extension is more important than the world of the adult. Repressed sexual experience and feeling, more important than anything. The entire book is taken up with family conflict (which is itself often highly sexually charged—SL and his son, Wiley [the Narcissus of the book, and presumably a Brodkey stand-in of sorts] have an uncomfortably intimate encounter or two; Wiley’s sister Nonie appears to abuse Wiley physically in sexual and non-sexual ways); Wiley in his encounter with Remsen at the end of the book spends 10 pages having them talk about masturbating in front of each other, whether they should touch each other’s penises, whether their penises should touch each other’s, etc; 40 pages of kisses with one of his sister’s female friends are rendered as if each kiss and grope is a battlefield, sex and relationship conflict and the tension of drawing nearer then further apart (never have so many pages been devoted to agonized and basically unconsummated sexual encounters, a full 350 pages of the 800+ page length is “the agony of failed sex”). 

Oh, sure, there’s other stuff in here (Wiley’s class consciousness seems right on point—the emotional trauma of being part of a failed upper class family, a family with some connections, is rendered in broad strokes; his sister Nonie is a truly dejected monster but not as detestable as some think she is, and Brodkey is careful to show the internal conflict Wiley has concerning the following opposites: (a) Nonie is a monster, and (b) Nonie is a woman worthy of sympathy, accursed through being put on the earth with her own narcissistic and difficult personality, etc. 

Most telling of Brodkey’s limitations is that the scenes (the book is 12 or 13 scenes rather than something with a plot; there are parts that could have been rearranged and I’m not sure it would have mattered) become more undisciplined as the book goes on. The encounter with Remsen seems as if he hadn’t really finished revising the section. Of course, after 23 years of waiting perhaps everyone was pressuring him to finally make the book available and complete it. 

It would be remiss to neglect sharing some of the insights that Brodkey’s Wiley has in the later pages of this book, as Brodkey labors to tie the narrative shards together. Deep in a sea of confounding prose, he comes up with the following: “One grows from having merely human curators in childhood to having outright enemies in one’s adult life, and they prevent certain actions, they propose limits to one’s will—one’s rewards—they want a cut of whatever we have…” And that, in a sense, is an excellent telling of what Brodkey has been showing us throughout the book. Wiley’s parents were limited by their poor health; his sister by her antisocial personality; him by his indecision, his vacillations, his confused idea of what being a “man” is, and so forth. But the question is whether the insight is earned by the lengthy conversations that trail off into nothingness (how often can the parents say the same thing to Wiley about how he should deal with his complicated sister? How often can Wiley and Remsen argue about socialism without saying anything meaningful and intelligent about it? Etc… are we reading a book about limited, confused people, or is it a limited, confused book?) 

Another interesting one, from a little earlier, when Wiley reminisces about his dad holding him: “I don’t want the world to be essentially different—[it would be] a stupid thing to wish for, who would ever be smart enough to know what such a world should be.” Brodkey here seems, however, to be undermining some project he’s undertaking—why undertake such a colossally complicated narrative over the minutiae of daily life in the absence of a desire to change the world? Still, the 2 insights are themselves things that strike me as being very true. 

Yet, Brodkey’s restriction of his content to childhood and over-emphasis on sex separates this book from the broad class consciousness and societal vivisection that Proust achieved (and it surely seems that Proust is a huge influence on this work, regardless of all the blurbs on the book from when it came out saying it was Brodkey’s own “genius”). Other writers have also done the whole “sex for hundreds of pages in a literary work” better also. 

In the end, I wanted to like this. I thought Brodkey really went for it here, with his considerable talents (he is a quite excellent writer in terms of innovative shifts in tone, on the sentence level, etc). In the end, sadly,  The Runaway Soul  doesn’t amount to much. But I did finish it, which it seems is more than many can say from my reading about the work, the conditions of its release, and how it was received.