Rating: 4/5

I read a lot of books on health and nutrition. Opinions and findings are wide and varied and so I take what I like, and leave the rest. 
I’m not a fan of cleanses, and so I skimmed the chapter on that. I also am of the opinion that drinking any water is the best choice, and so though ph drops and filters sound nice, to me that’s not a deal breaker. Just drink lots and lots of water.

I liked learning about alkaline vs acidic foods and lots more...here are my notes: 

“The optimal alkalizing dietary approach for creating and maintaining optimal well-being is organic, plant source only, 80% live food, and low glycemic. Dr. Young’s revolutionary teaching about minimizing fruit in the diet, especially sweet fruits, is both courageous and one that I share with him. The other components of the healthy alkalizing diet are good hydration, high oxygen intake, and highly mineralized food intake.… I would add one additional emphasis, which is to eat moderately, as excessive eating, even of the most alkalinizing food can also create acidity because it overloads the digestive system.“xiv

When in balance occurs, we get the signs of disease (or dis-ease): low energy, fatigue, poor digestion, excess weight, foggy thinking, aches and pains, as well as major disorders.
The top three killers in the United States are heart disease, cancer, or diabetes and all of those are directly linked to diet. The problem is that while Diet is the key not only to slimness but also to overall health and well-being, it Has to be a diet that properly balances our body chemistry.
The single measurement most important to your health is the pH of your blood and tissues. Page 3-5

80% of your diet must be alkalizing food such as green vegetables. Get at least 3/4 of your plate covered with alkalizing food. Page 6

The human body is meant to be alkaline, and the body will go to great links to maintain the appropriate, slightly basic, nature of its blood and tissues. Over acidification of body fluids and tissues underlies all disease. It’s only when it is acidic that the body is vulnerable to germs. The relationship between acid and base is scientifically quantified on a scale of 0 to 14 known as PH which stands for potential hydrogen. On that scale, seven is neutral. Below seven is acid and above it basic, or alkaline.
Two kinds of chemicals, acids and bases, or opposites and when they meet in certain ratios, they cancel each other out, creating a neutral pH. In the blood and other fluids and body tissue, it takes about 20 times as much bass to neutralize any given amount of acid, so it’s better and easier to maintain balance than it is to regain balance when the body gets seriously out of whack. Page 12 

Over acidity and microform overgrowth are inextricably linked. Microforms are a major source of acid in the body. Acidification creates a comfy environment for micro forms. We predispose ourselves to both conditions through various stresses. The main one is poor diet… Cell‘s work to adapt to the declining pH of their compromised acidic environment. They break down and evolve to bacteria, yeast, and mold. These in turn create their waste products, debilitating acids, which further pollute the environment. That in itself is a disturbance to the system, and in this way the whole cycle keeps rolling along.
Eating the right kind of food is the single most important thing you can do for yourself and your health.… The closer your pH is to 7.365, the higher your level of health and well-being, and the stronger your resistance to disease. Page 26 and 27

Chapter 3 confusing symptoms and disease
Symptoms are just indications that you are overly acidic. Germs come from within ourselves, and germs invading from outside the body can only contribute to a State of imbalance and stimulate secondary symptoms.

Weight
In a defensive maneuver, the body creates fat cells to carry acid away from your vital organs to try to protect them. In one sense, your fat is saving your life. When you eat and drink to make your body more basic, your body won’t need to keep that fat around anymore. sugar is an acid food pg 31

Top ten foods that cause allergic or acidic reactions: 
	1. Dairy products
	2. Meat and shellfish
	3. All forms of sugar
	4. Vinegar
	5. Mushrooms and algae
	6. Peanuts and peanut oil
	7. Corn
	8. Fermented foods such as soy sauce and miso
	9. Eggs 
	10. Alcohol
Pg 35

Microforms- bacteria, yeast, fungus and mold
Microforms deplete you’re supplies of b-complex vitamins, iron and other minerals. Another result of microforms draining off your body’s nutrients is that you have rapid drops in blood sugar levels, which again creates fatigue, poor endurance and weakness. -36

When you have an acidic body and when Coenzyme A decreases, such conditions as depression, anxiety, panic attacks, irritability, mood swings, and PMS often appear or become worse. 38

Diabetes-sugar is not a source of energy but an acidic waste product from the breakdown of body cells. The more sugar or acid we eat, the more we risk an increase in bacteria, yeast, and molds. 
Type two diabetes is the natural physiological and metabolic result of consuming large quantities of sugars and refined carbohydrates and meat protein, especially without engaging in regular physical exercise which could help compensate for such dietary practices. Cut out all forms of sugar, eliminate animal proteins, and get regular exercise. Pg 39

Osteoporosis: you can protect your bones and muscles and other organs with an alkaline lifestyle and diet. Keeping the body alkaline through diet and the right kind of exercise is the best way to slow down aging in general, and avoid all disease processes. Page 41

Kidneys are responsible for eliminating acids out of the blood and recycling alkalinity back in. Page 43

Cancerous cells: healthy cells in the human body thrive in mild, moderate, and high pH fluids( 7.3 to 11 PH). They do not tolerate even a mild acid state. Cancer cells, on the other hand, thrive in an acidic pH of 5.5. Cancer cells become dormant at a pH slightly above 7.365, and transform back to the microzyma or die at a pH of 8.5 pg 44

you can fight the development of a cancerous condition by increasing the alkalinity of your tissues, building in a diet based around green vegetables, fresh vegetable juice, unprocessed salts, good oil‘s, and alkaline water together with nutritional supplements, exercise, and alkaline lifestyle choices. You have to cut out acidic foods such as animal protein, alcohol, and sugar, and give up acidic habits as well(need more sleep and less stress). Page 45

Eating animal products and processed foods, ingesting chemicals, over eating, and excess stress of all types disrupt and weaken the alkaline state of the digestive tract. Page 59

In general, animal foods (meat, eggs, dairy), processed and refined foods, yeast products, fermented foods, grains, artificial sweeteners, sweet fruit, and natural and artificial sugars are acidifying, as are alcohol, coffee, chocolate, black tea, and sodas. Vegetables on the other hand are alkalizing. That includes a few that are technically fruits like avocado, tomato, cucumber, bell pepper. A few non-sweet citrus fruits such as grapefruit, lemon, and lime are also basic in the body as are sprouted seeds, nuts, and grains. Grains are acidifying, though a few like millet, buckwheat, and spelt are only mildly so. Raw foods are more alkalizing, while cooked food is more acidifying. Food saturated with hydroxyl ions or electrons are alkaline. Food saturated with hydrogen ions or protons are acidic. In this way the pH scale is also a measurement of the electrical energy in food or drink. Alkaline foods are full of electrons or electrical energy. Electrons are in fact what makes them alkaline. This is the energy the body runs on… acidic foods Pull electron energy from the body. 
The lower the acidity of the food the fewer alkaline buffers or electrons are required. The fewer that are required, the more the alkaline reserves and energy of the body are preserved. The conservation of all that potential provides a boost in your overall energy. Page 66

COWS - Chlorophyll, oil, water, and salt

Vegetables are your new best friends. They are some of the lowest calorie, lowest sugar, most nutrient rich foods on the planet. 67
Green vegetables and particularly leafy greens have the highest amounts of Chlorophyll. 
Fiber acts like a sponge, soaking up acids from the body. It also works like a broom, cleaning out the intestines. Page 68

Lack of water is the number one cause of daytime fatigue. without enough water you won’t have enough energy. You feel tired and weak. Page 72

Exercising itself accelerates the lymphatic process, that is sweating, getting rid of excess acids and wastes through that all important third kidney- the skin. 81

What to eat: 
Avocados, tomatoes, sprouts, lemons, limes, grapefruit, pomegranates, herbs and spices, vegetable juices, low-carb vegetables, non-animal protein, fresh fish occasionally.

avocados are 80% healthy fat and 15% protein. They provide more protein than cows milk. They contain all of the essential amino acid‘s which are the building blocks of proteins. They help lower cholesterol. Tomatoes and avocados are an ideal pairing. 88 &amp; 90

Sprouts or just about the best food you can eat. They can transfer their life energy to you.

Though lemons, limes and grapefruits are chemically acid, my test show that when they are metabolized in the body they actually have an alkalizing effect because of their high concentration of sodium and potassium bicarbonate salts. They have very little acid sugar. ..Squeeze fresh lemon and lime into your purified water throughout the day, especially before going to sleep for the night. Don’t take lemon or lime within half an hour before a meal, or for 10 minutes after you finish eating. It is best to drink an hour before eating, and then wait until digestion has taken place to drink more.91

The most common complex carbohydrate grains are the most acid forming, wheat and rice. They make mucus too. They have to stay in that 20% of your diet. Corn you should avoid all together. On the other hand amaranth, quinoa and spelt are only slightly acidic, and Millet and buckwheat hover between neutral, slightly acidic and slightly alkaline. Buckwheat groats and millet are high in protein and Digest slowly, keeping blood sugar balanced. Spelt contains more protein, healthy fats and fiber than wheat. 94

Avoid fermented soy products such as miso, Tempeh, and soy sauce page 99

What To Avoid:
Sugar (including white sugar, brown sugar, processed beet, cane, corn sugars and syrup‘s, maple syrup, Honey, molasses, sucrose, fructose, maltose, lactose, glucose, mannitol, sorbitol, galactose, monosaccharides, date sugar, turbinado sugar, candy, soft drinks, pastries, ice cream, chocolate, Carob and yes even natural sugars from fruit. The body does not need sugar. Artificial sweeteners are as bad or worse. Stevia ok. 

Simple carbs such as White flour, white rice, corn and potato.

Refined and processes, fruit, dairy products, processed salt, saturated and other and healthy fats, meat and eggs, stored greens, yeast, edible fungus, spur of the Lena and algae supplements, fermented and multi products, alcohol, caffeine, corn and peanut products, heated oils, microwave food, and artificial sweeteners. 

Chapter 8, food combining

Tips and tricks: When soaking dried beans or cooking cabbage add a dash of mineral salt to the water to make them less gaseous, reducing or eliminating the flatulence they can cause

Chapter 11 whole body cleanse 

Focus on alkalizing vegetables, especially green and yellow vegetables, and include healthy mono and polyunsaturated oil‘s, low acid sugar fruits like tomato, avocado, lemon, and lime, have soybeans, tofu, lentils, raw seeds and nuts. vegetable soup‘s, steamed fried vegetables, and lots of salads, with liberal amounts of flax, hemp, avocado, and olive oils added after cooking. 178

if all the information that follows seems like too much, remember that you can make quite a lot of progress using just concentrated green powder and alkalizing pH drops along with a alkaline diet. 184

During marathons or any extended athletic event, take 1 tbsp of salta one 6-8 Oz water every hour. To increase sprint speed in running or swimming take 1 tablespoon of salt in 6 to 8 ounces of water one hour before the event. Page 192

Chapter 13 alkaline exercise
Sweating is important. Perspiration moves acids out of your body through the pores in your skin. Sweating opens up your pores which allows both liquid and gaseous acids to pass through 13

Exercise is what you need to activate your lymphatic system, and you need to pump your lymphatic system to get and keep your body alkaline. Page 216
Choose aerobic exercise (jogging rather than sprinting). Aerobic means with oxygen. 
Anaerobic is without oxygen. It will make the body more acidic .

Lactic acid is the one usually causing the aches and pains you feel during and after exercise. It’s a sign your cells are primarily breaking down to release needed electrons for increased demands for energy. The waste product of this cellular breakdown is increased amounts of an acid known as sugar. 
When you exercise you should feel peaceful, grounded, connected to your environment, even euphoric. You’ll think clearly, you’ll breathe quietly and easily, through your nose and be able to chat while exercising. Page 219

Deep breathing helps release acid toxins from the body by increasing lymphatic slow. Page 223

If we don’t exercise our bodies, our bones and muscles don’t get enough stress to trigger bone and muscle development. The extreme case of this is what happens when we are bedridden, and are skeletons and muscles don’t even have to do the work of caring around our body weight: traumatic loss of bone density and muscle tone and strength. Page 228

Stay focused on your motivation. The gift of life and health. Be specific about your motivation to make this program a new way of life. If you stay focused on your own motivations, goals, and intentions, and gently but firmly turn down foods that could contribute to your condition, those around you will eventually understand and respect your choices. Page 233
Pace is vital. This is more like a marathon than a sprint. 235
Write down your goals and keep them where you can see them. Practice is repetition, and repetition of any skill increases your ability in that skill. As you practice these new, healthy habits, you will develop a skilled, intuitive way of feeding your body what it needs without feelings of deprivation. 236

Feeling guilty or down about your mistake is a waste of time, a drain of energy, and will only cause more acidity. Forgive yourself and just start moving forward again. Restate your motivation and goals. Page 237