Rating: 5/5

Moved straight on to this one after The Chalet School and the Lintons, since it's essentially the second half of the same book, and ties up the major plot points from The Lintons. As a result it's a rollicking read, with events and escapades coming thick and fast.

Joyce Linton peaks in her rebelliousness as she leads her supplementary French class in their torment of Miss Norman (and I found the response of the prefects to discovering this to be extremely thoughtful and touching, as was EBD's description of the reasons why Miss Norman was teaching girls who were far outside of her comfort zone). This leads to the threat of expulsion and the realisation (with a little help from Joey) of how she needs to change. Joyce's imagination seems to be entirely put to use in thinking of mischief, since she continues to be utterly unaware of the seriousness of her mother's illness, despite the fact that everyone around her is expecting the worst at every moment. Of which more later...

Meanwhile, Thekla's delusions of superiority and paranoia have been growing unabated. She is involved in the 'ragging' of Miss Norman, and her obsessive and reasonless hatred of Jo leads her to threaten Joyce in an attempt to keep her away from Jo, just as Joyce has turned over her new leaf. As a result, it is Thekla who is expelled (the first for the Chalet School, and actually quite a shock considering that most 'difficult' girls are rehabilitated by their time there (or by a brush with death). 

Towards the end of the book there is a long though entertaining description of the Sale of Work, which is more like a fete crossed with interactive theatre, as a result of which the school has raised more money than ever before and may be able to fund a new bed at the Sonnalpe!! ... and just as the celebrations start, Dr Jem arrives to take the Lintons (with Jo in tow, for Reasons) to say goodbye to their dying mother.

The final section of the book is utterly crazypants as far as anything like medical accuracy is concerned. I admit, I am not any sort of medical professional, but the account of Mrs Linton turning her face to the wall as a result of overhearing gossip and then resurrecting as a result of Jo telling her off in full head-girl mode is entirely bonkers. Despite this it is a surprisingly touching scene and since everything ends happily for everyone (except Thekla, whom - let's face it - no one could care less about), I am happy to forgive the bonkersness.

As always, highly recommended.