Rating: 5/5

Today Alyssa Milano called for a sex strike in response to Georgia's abortion ban, which raises two questions: 1) Alyssa Milano is still a thing?! and 2) Haven't I heard this before? I can help with the second thing. Milano got it from Aristophanes, who in 411 BC invented the sex strike and, for all you know, dildos.

  

It's 411 BC and Athens is deep in the Peloponnesian War with Sparta and everyone's pretty stressed about it. In Aristophanes' brilliantly simple idea, the women of both sides organize and throw a sex strike. "Stop fighting," they say, "Or no more humping!" The plot is that they say that and then it works. There's some stuff about dildos, for obvious reasons, but that's about all there is to it. Unfortunately it was a made-up story; in real life this didn't happen and Athens lost the war and that was basically the end of the Golden Age of Democracy. But the play is great - easily Aristophanes's best surviving play - funny and filthy and don't forget, the thing about Greek plays is that you can knock one out in an hour and a glass of wine, so why haven't you read this?

Translation and illustration courtesy of Valerie Schrag for The Graphic Canon

Alyssa Milano, who played a kid on the 80s TV show Who's The Boss and is now still a thing, isn't the first to try the Lysistrata strategy. It's been done in places as diverse as Colombia, Nigeria, and Italy. It comes up in the US every time Republicans do something particularly assheaded (so, daily).

It's not an ineffective strategy, and I don't mean to belittle Alyssa Milano, who performed the voice of "Bimini" in 2012's Beverly Hills Chihuahua 2 and is totally still a thing. Georgia's abortion ban is a nightmare and if this is what it takes it's a small price to pay. (That's what she said! Dunked on my own dick!) And the play's not ineffective either. Like all the best ideas, it's extremely simple and it involves dildos.

Translations
Valerie Schrag, as mentioned above, has a comic version for the Graphic Canon that's super fun but pretty direly abridged.
Douglass Parker has one for this common Aristophanes collection that's fine but it's trying very very hard to be as cool as Aristophanes was and failing. If you've found a great translation, please do let me know.