Rating: 4/5

Philip Larkin seemed to be everywhere in 2011 and 2012. Annus Mirabilis figured prominently in Julian Barnes's novel  The Sense of an Ending (so much so that critical analysis of Larkin took over a good portion of Colm Toibin's review of that Booker Prize-winning novella in The New York Review of Books):

  It is strange how much Larkin’s images of disillusion, fear, and self-betrayal have come to seem communal rather than personal, how the England he imagined—the drinking, the absences, the lost love, and the daily dread—have etched themselves into the general image of things. Thus many writers who dramatize English life have to tackle not only the substance of the world they inhabit or imagine, but the persistent shadows that Larkin left. While this has happened elsewhere—in Burns’s Scotland, for example, or Whitman’s America, or Yeats’s Ireland—it has come as a release, or a way of opening up the world. In the case of Larkin’s England, it comes with the sense of an ending, or, as he put it at the conclusion of “The Whitsun Weddings,” “somewhere becoming rain.”

The ending lines of The Whitsun Weddings were also the subject, famously, of one of Ian McEwan and Christopher Hitchens' last conversations:

  "I set the poem up and read it, and when I reached that celebrated end, “A sense of falling, like an arrow-shower/Sent out of sight, somewhere becoming rain,’ Christopher murmured from his bed, “That’s so dark, so horribly dark.” I disagreed, and not out of any wish to lighten his mood. Surely, the train journey comes to an end, the recently married couples are dispatched toward their separate fates. He wouldn’t have it, and a week later, when I was back in London, we were still exchanging e-mails on the subject. One of his began, “Dearest Ian, Well, indeed – no rain, no gain – but it still depends on how much anthropomorphizing Larkin is doing with his unconscious … I’d provisionally surmise that “somewhere becoming rain” is unpromising.’"

I bought Collected Poems shortly after reading that Toibin review. I read all of the famous ones (The Whitsun Weddings, Lines on a Young Lady's Photograph Album, Annus Mirabilis, Dockery and Son); made a few discoveries of my own (Sad Steps, Nursery Tale); and then shelved it with my small collection of poetry books.

Reading it front to back over the course of this past week and a half, and shortly after reading the disappointing  Time and Materials by Larkin antimatter Robert Hass, one is struck by both the monumentality of formal accomplishment and the almost laughably bleak outlook. Larkin's glass is not only half-empty, the part that is not empty is soon-to-be empty, and anyone who thinks otherwise is a vapid nobody blinding themselves to Truth.

Sometimes this combination of, to steal from Toibin, consoling form and unconsoled message can be delicious, as in the 1951 poem which is sardonically titled Next, Please and depicts the promise of the future as a distant armada:

  Flagged, and the figurehead with golden tits
Arching our way, it never anchors; it's
No sooner present than it turns to past.
Right to the last

We think each one will heave to and unload
All good into our lives, all we are owed
For waiting so devoutly and so long.
But we are wrong:

Only one ship is seeking us, a black-
Sailed unfamiliar, towing at her back
A huge and birdless silence. In her wake
No waters breed or break.

The gold-titted mirage of the armada, and the single ship hunting us. Larkin at his best makes genius look easy.

But he is TOO MUCH. Here is the blessing he gives to his friend's baby:

  May you be ordinary
Have, like other women,
An average of talents:
Not ugly, not good-looking,
Nothing uncustomary
To pull you off your balance,

Here is what a box of kittens for sale makes him think of:

  Living toys are something novel,
But it soon wears off somehow.
Fetch the shoebox, fetch the shovel - 
Mam, we're playing funerals now.

In a ponderous poem about the ponderousness of pillow talk, he rhymes "kind" and "unkind" - that's how much post-coital conversation pained him. A kitschy street advertisement for a beach town becomes a symbol of absolute decay in Sunny Prestatyn. And when he closes his most famous poem with the line "What will survive of us is love," there is no ambiguity such as divided McEwan and Hitchens over "somewhere becoming rain." It is the definition of irony here.

I loved this book, but it left me, ironically, wanting to run out into the world and embrace life and everything beautiful in it. Because sometimes a box of kittens is just a box of kittens. And rain? What do you think glasses get filled with in the first place?