Rating: 4/5

Mother Teresa is a remarkable woman with such pure desires to serve the one, like Jesus did. I'm inspired by her example and her words. Here are some of my favorites:

"If we were humble, nothing would change us--neither praise nor discouragement."

"Mother Teresa...has never felt compelled to write a literary work, not because she doesn't appreciate literature or is incapable of writing, but because to do so would detract from the natural beauty and intimacy of her thoughts and convictions... All she has done, in her own words, is 'follow Jesus' word (p. vii).'"

"She could have hidden behind the convent's massive walls and led a peaceful life. But Sister Teresa is one of those rare people who takes Jesus at his word... 'I had to leave the convent (Loreta) and consecrate myself to help the poor, living among them (p. ix).'"

"Sister Teresa started working with those she found first: abandoned children (p. x)."

"As a result of Mother Teresa's work--which she has always attributed to God's doing--other groups, equally dedicated to serving the poor, have come into existence (p. xi)."

"She has never considered any of these prizes and cash awards as personal property, but has merely accepted them in the name of the poor--and has spent every cent on them (p. xii)."

"Holiness does not consist in doing extraordinary things. It consists in accepting, with a smile, what Jesus sends us. It consists in accepting and following the will of God (p. 1)."

"Saint Thomas Aquinas assures us that holiness 'is nothing else but a resolution made, the heroic act of a soul that surrenders to God (p. 3).'"

"If we do the work for God and for his glory, we may be sanctified (p. 3)."

"We should go out to meet people. Meet the people who live afar and those who live very close by. Meet the materially poor or the spiritually poor (p. 3)."

"I believe that politicians spend too little time on their knees. I am convinced that they would be better politicians if they were to do so (p. 7)."

"Prayer does not demand that we interrupt our work, but that we continue working as if it were a prayer (p. 7)."

"'Lord, may I not so much seek
to be consoled as to console;
to be understood as to understand;
to be loved as to love.
Because it is in giving that we receive,
in pardoning that we are pardoned (Saint Francis of Assisi, p. 8).'"

"The first requirement for prayer is silence. People of prayer are people of silence (p. 8)."

"Give them today, using our hands, their daily bread. And, using our love, give them peace and happiness (p. 9)."

"I am asked what is one to do to be sure that one is following the way of salvation. I answer: 'Love God. And, above all, pray (p. 11).'"

"'Never forget, my children, that the poor are our masters... love them and serve them, with utter respect (Saint Vincent de Paul, p. 15).'"

"That mother was aware of the situation. She had the courage and the love to share her meager portion of rice with others. In spite of her circumstances, I think she felt very happy to share with her neighbors the little I had taken her (p. 16)."

"'The Christian is someone who gives (p. 17).'"

"Do not tire of giving, but do not give your leftovers. Give until it hurts, until you feel the pain (p. 17)."

"The more you save, the less you will be able to give. The less you have, the more you will know how to share (p. 18)."

"To share: what a beautiful thing (p. 19)!"

"I do not want you to give me your leftovers. Our poor do not need your condescending attitude nor your pity. The poor need your love and your kindness (p. 19)."

"If we worry too much about ourselves, we won't have time for others (p. 20)."

"Today it is very fashionable to talk about the poor. Unfortunately, it is not fashionable to talk with them (p. 23)."

"I have the feeling that we are in such a hurry that we do not even have time to look at one another and smile (p. 23)."

"When a poor person dies of hunger, it has not happened because God did not take care of him or her. It has happened because neither you nor I wanted to give that person what he or she needed. We have refused to be instruments of love in the hands of God to give the poor a piece of bread, to offer them a dress with which to ward off the cold. It has happened because we did not recognize Christ when, once more, he appeared under the guise of pain, identified with a man numb from the cold, dying of hunger, when he came in a lonely human being, in a lost child in search of a home (p. 25)."

"It is possible that our children, our husband, our wife, do not hunger for bread, do not need clothes, do not lack a house. But are we equally sure that none of them feels alone, abandoned, neglected, needing some affection? That, too, is poverty (p. 27)."

"If there are poor on the moon, we will go there too (p. 28)."

"Jesus comes to meet us. To welcome him, let us go to meet him. He comes to us in the hungry, the naked, the lonely, the alcoholic, the drug addict, the prostitute, the street beggars. He may come to you or me in a father who is alone, in a mother, in a brother, or in a sister. If we reject them, if we do not go out to meet them, we reject Jesus himself (p. 29)."

"The important thing is not to do a lot or to do everything. The important thing is to be ready for anything, at all times; to be convinced that when serving the poor, we really serve God (p. 29)."

"Poverty has not been created by God. We are the ones who have created poverty. Before God, we are all poor (p. 30)."

"Do not be afraid of loving to the point of sacrifice, until it hurts. Jesus' love for us led him to his death (p. 39)."

"God does not demand that I be successful. God demands that I be faithful (p. 40)."

"God has created us so we do small things with great love. I believe in that great love, that comes, or should come from our heart, should start at home: with my family, my neighbors across the street, those right next door. And this love should then reach everyone (p. 45)."

"Jesus announced which will be the criteria of the final judgment of our lives: we will be judged according to love. Judged according to the love we have shown the poor, with whom God identifies: 'You did it to me' (Matthew 25:40) (p. 45)."

"We should ask questions like: Do I know the poor? Do I know, in the first place, the poor in my family, in my home, those who are closest to me--people who are poor, but not because they lack bread (p. 51)?"

"Where does love begin? In our own homes. When does it begin? When we pray together. The family that prays together stays together (p. 51)."

"Pride destroys everything. To imitate Jesus is the key to be meek and humble in heart (p. 56)."

"At the moment of death we will not be judged according to the number of good deeds we have done or by the diplomas we have received in our lifetime. We will be judged according to the love we have put into our work (p. 65)."

"The first person in the world to welcome Jesus, to recognize him in the womb of his own mother, was a child: John the Baptist. It is wonderful; God chooses an unborn child to announce the coming of his redeeming Son (p. 68)."

"We should give God all the credit and be extremely sincere when we do so (p. 68)."

"Peace beings with a smile (p. 73)."

"To smile at someone who is sad; to visit, even for a little while, someone who is lonely; to give someone shelter from the rain with our umbrella; to read something for someone who is blind; these and others can be small things, very small things, but they are appropriate to give our love of God concrete expression to the poor (p. 75)."

"I never will understand all the good that a simple smile can accomplish (p. 75)."

"Let us never forget: love beings at home (p. 75)."

"It is better to have less in order to give it all to Jesus (p. 79)."

"If that person places his or her money at the service of others, then the person becomes rich, very rich indeed (p. 79)."

"If someone sees God in me, I am happy. I see God in everyone, and especially in those who suffer (p. 87)."

"There are many kinds of poverty. Even in countries where the economic situation seems to be a good one, there are expressions of poverty hidden in a deep place, such as the tremendous loneliness of people who have been abandoned and who are suffering (p. 91)."

"As far as I am concerned, the greatest suffering is to feel alone, unwanted, unloved. The greatest suffering is also having no one, forgetting what an intimate, truly human relationship is, not knowing what it means to be loved, not having a family or friends (p. 91)."

"It's we who, with our exclusion and rejecting, push our brothers and sisters to find refuge in alcohol and become drunks. They drink to forget the deprivation of their lives (p. 91)."

"People are hungry for God. They long to hear his Word (p. 97)."

"We all have the duty to serve God where we are called to do so. I feel called to serve individuals, to love each human being. My calling is not to judge the institutions. I am not qualified to condemn anyone. I never think in terms of a crowd, but of individual persons. If I thought in terms of crowds, I would never begin my work. I believe in the personal touch of one to one. If others are convinced that God wants them to change social structures, that is a matter for them to take up with God (p. 99)."

"Often we Christians constitute the worst obstacle for those who try to become closer to Christ; we often preach a gospel we do not live. This is the principle reason why people of the world don't believe (p. 100)."

"I was hungry and you gave me food...I was a stranger and you welcomed me, I was naked and you gave me clothing, I was sick and you took care of me... [Matthew 25:35-36] Our work is based on these words of Jesus (p. 103)."

"We do it all for Jesus and for the love of the poor (p. 105)."

"The work is nothing but a means to express our love for him (p. 107)."

"The most important thing in our centers is the opportunity we are offered to reach souls (p. 109)."