Rating: 1/5

Quote from early in the book: “Battersby knew she was the best, but society ladies were inclined to favor those frivolous Frenchwomen, which was disgraceful when you considered the war was just over. Downright unpatriotic, that’s what it was.” That made me smile.

Was looking for another predictable but cute read. I was having fun for a while. I liked Margery and her aunt, the butler and the brusque but talented ladies maid. I even like the earl’s friends who were silly but likable, with one notable exception. I liked watching Margery and the earl try to outwit each other and her mostly winning. Then she makes a silly mistake. I was scratching my head when she accepted three proposals in one night. It was pretty out-of-character for the clever person she had been presented as up to that point. It was pretty much down hill from there. 

Hated the Earl. Of course, I was hoping he would redeem himself. Enemies to lovers is one of my faves. That is NOT what this is. 

He is petty, but apparently well-liked and well respected by his friends. Amazing what a title will do. His friends were presented as regency caricatures, but this guy is an absolute skirt-chasing man-child in a nice suit. No redeeming qualities that I found. He was on the cusp of redeeming himself and then dove into becoming the worst possible version of himself. 

Miscommunication after the wedding followed by infidelity. Zero percent on board with any of that. And then he’s forgiven without any groveling. I don’t even think he apologized much. Just said “I fell in love with you sometime between the wedding and crawling out of this random hookup’s bed.”

The end.

He is the character the heroine should be saved FROM, not by. Apparently the only way to make this guy seem likable was to throw a kidnapping would-be-rapist into the mix. Yep. That is where we have set the bar. So stupid. 

This was written in a different era - like the 1990’s originally. But I need to remember to never be tricked again.