Rating: 2/5

The Magician		Sol Stein

I give up. I don’t often fail to finish a book but more than half way through I have decided that this is not worth another three hours when there are so many books yet to read. 

It’s not all Sol’s fault either. I decided to read The Magician after getting so much out of reading Stein on Writing, in which he talks about the process of writing and editing this book, with plenty of quotes. I checked the reviews and found them mixed, some of them mentioning that some books age well and this one doesn’t and I agree with that point of view. 

There are parts of the story that I like – the relationship between the young man and his father and also his girlfriend have a ring of reality and I can see why young people of two generations ago were attracted to this just as a previous generation were to A Catcher in the Rye. The book is well written, especially the dialogue. However the measure of any novel are the characters and their story and I just cannot get into this story and I have not found one character that I want to know more about. Most importantly, the writer has not convinced me - I do not believe!

My problem is my personal background. I have been a high school teach (of biology like the protagonist’s father) for 46 years and a psychologist/counselor to boot. I know Australia is different to New York but I cannot believe that the school football team pays off gangs of younger thugs to stay safe, even within the blackboard jungle. Football teams stick together and treat a low life who threatens their friends much more effectively than teachers or police are allowed to. Maybe I can accept that the American legal system is as dysfunctional as is painted her but I find the Old psychiatrist and his “investigation” of his simplistic theory of three personality types just unbelievable.

I think that in the 30 years since this book was written writers, along with schools and the legal systems may have changed a little but I think one aspect of writing has been revolutionised. Those writing novels set in specialised settings, for example the court systems and forensic detective stories now do a lot of research before they put a word on paper. Highly successful novelists employ researchers while beginners just talk to experts wherever they can trap them. I am not sure if Sol was writing from personal experience of his own schooling or he spoke to some teachers and students back in 1980. If he did and this is an accurate representation of a New York education then well done for surviving! 

Stein On Writing: A Master Editor of Some of the Most Successful Writers of Our Century Shares His Craft Techniques and Strategies