Rating: 5/5

"Night is funny. It's scary when you're inside but it's soft and beautiful and fun when you're out in it."

Wow re-reading this book brought back many childhood memories and I'm surprised to find out that my opinions about this book haven't changed one bit! I'm wondering if that's a good or bad thing. This was one of the first few books I read when I got into reading and I'm glad I picked this up. It makes me feel really nostalgic and I'm sure a person of any age can pick this book up and end up falling in love with it. It reminds me of Anne of Green Gables, at least some aspects of the book do. I read this multiple times when I was a kid and each time I read this, I found something new to laugh and be happy about. 

INTRODUCTION 
This book is about a group of children, particularly Nancy and Plum, who are living in Mrs. Monday's boarding house. Mrs. Monday is a terrible person. She makes all the children wear clothes that look more like rags and she makes them eat food that might have suited horses better, while she and an impudent child named Marybelle get to enjoy fried chicken and other delicacies. The children also had their meals taken away sometimes as punishment. The unfairness with which Mrs.Monday ran the boarding house was starting to grow on Nancy and Plum. They had been placed in her care by an uncle who never wrote them letters and never sent them presents. At least, they thought he didn't! 

  “All of life is a contest. The weak against the strong - the stupid against the clever - the honest against the dishonest.”

PLOT
The book starts on a cold and crisp Christmas night. Nancy and Plum are left all alone in the boarding house while the other children are taken out to enjoy Christmas. However, they don't complain about it and they soon find happiness in pretending that everything was going to be all right and they too soon would get to enjoy life. But how long can one go with just pretending that good things will happen soon. Nancy and Plum decided that they were going to run away and they never regretted doing so, because it changed their life completely! 

  “Well, whatever you and Nancy decide to be when you grow up, I know that you'll be happy because you have discovered the comfort and joy of reading.”

CHARACTERS 

Nancy
Nancy is the older of the two sisters and is lady like. She tries to be strong and optimistic for her younger sister and is in charge of pretending that they are content with their life when in reality, they’re not. She’s good at cooking and is a very empathetic person. 

Pamela A.K.A Plum 
Her name is Pamela but she called herself Plum ever since she was little. She’s quite different from her older sister, Plum’s more boyish and impulsive. She’s not afraid to speak her mind and she doesn’t mind hurting people who deserve to be insulted. Her offhand comments sometimes got her in trouble. But Nancy is always there to refrain her from doing so. 

  “I never feel that the things I tell Mrs. Monday are lies. I think that lies are only when you want not to tell the truth. With Mrs. Monday I want to tell the truth but life is easier if I don't.”

I love the writing style and even though this is meant for children, I would highly recommend this to everyone out there!