Rating: 4/5

People who hate this book seem to be most bothered by the lack of a strong plot. They seem to want Miller to be something he's not. Plot-oriented books often tend to be a hallmark of genre fiction. Literary fiction, on the other hand, deals more with in-depth character development. Although, Miller writes historical fiction, he does so from the vantage of a literary fiction writer. It's not fair to judge an author by a standard he does not aspire to emulate. That said, I agree with critics who allege that Miller seems to have difficulty figuring out how--and where--to end his books. But for those who want a strong plot, read genre fiction and stop complaining that literary fiction lacks enough action or forward momentum to satisfy, because it would be just as silly for someone like me to complain about a comic book because it did not feature strong character development or use enough metaphor.

Miller's historical novels tell stories, but the stories are secondary to the scene. He does something that few people expect from books anymore: he creates mood, atmosphere, worlds. Most people turn to movies, TV, and other media for that, but most of what those other media offer is gruel by comparison to the stews that Miller serves up. "Mood" does not do Miller's work justice. Every word and every detail are crafted to bring a long-dead world back to life. Miller excels at providing visceral realities to life in a way that simultaneously accentuates the exotic, yet also makes the exotic mundane and relatable. And nobody can put together metaphors like Miller, particularly where retired generals are being compared to other objects. He also has a sense of humor so dry it could be used to dehumidify my home in winter.

But as I said, people do not really turn to books for that kind of experience anymore, so it doesn't surprise me that his work fails to receive the kind of misplaced fawning and gilded hype that a simpleton like Cormac McCarthy gets.

Miller's style is organic. Sometimes a clear, well-defined story emerges from the flow of human life and society. At other times, events happen and people interact, and some of the elements of a complete, unified story are lacking, but rather than an oversight, it may be that Miller wishes the flow of his works to more closely resemble that of real life. In this aspect, Miller's fictitious Casanova seems more plausible--and more human--than the one bequeathed to us by history.