Rating: 5/5

This story wrecked me. It's a children's book but definitely of a dark(er) nature as it deals with experiences from WWI. And it is all written from the persective of Joey, the titular horse.

Joey was sold to a farm when young. There, he met Albert, his friend, brother, master. Albert's father, who bought Joey when drunk to stick it to a neighbouring farmer, is not a man one can like (easily), but Albert is not only young and idealistic but also kind and gentle. One day, Joey is sold to the Army for the war and taken away from Albert.
During the war, Joey meets another war horse as well as a number of people - soldiers of all ranks, civilians from different walks of life, ... 
Thus, this is the story of youth growing up (the horse as well as the boy), the horrors of war (especially this war as the author doesn't neglect to also point out some of the new inventions used for the first time during WWI and describe their effects both physically and psychologically), grief and loss, hope, love, and faithfulness.

World War I was not just horrible, but gave the word "horrible" a whole new dimension. There are many accounts out there but reading about such a scale of pain and suffering is never easy, no matter if the facts are conveyed in a non-fiction book or through fictionalized accounts. This book is no different. Add to that the fact that it is from an animal's perspective and you might understand why I cried so hard as seldomly before. The writing is simple and yet intricately detailed, every landscape comes to life and the people as well as animals are wonderfully portrayed with the appropriate layers to their personality traits.

This is also a Folio Society edition, meaning it is an illustrated version of the book. And what illustrations! Alan Marks not only added little sketches in some chapters but contributed these wonderful colour illustrations as well:

The icing on the cake, if you will, is this bookmark that was designed specially for this edition: