Rating: 4/5

I'm free!

Yeah, I'm never doing this again. Although this was a pretty good story, never again will I read a fantasy trilogy back to back to back.
This trilogy is a 2000 page story and I started this journey on November 11, adamant that I would lose myself in a fantasy world for a good long while. 
Well, it was over six weeks in the same story. I am a mood reader, ladies and gentlemen. So, what seems like a good idea at the time ends up an ordeal whereby shiny new things (and not so new things) accumulate on my to-read list and I'm longing to get through this story so I can indulge in new literary adventures. 
Not to say I regretted the journey, although looking back on the story as a whole, this could have easily been told in half the pages, I think. While J.V. Jone's writing chops improved considerably after book one, there is a lot of circling back where the narrative is concerned, rehashing what we already know, over and over again.

I knew going in that this was regarded as a pretty good series, and if it was exceptional I would not have minded spending the past month and a half in it. But it was just "pretty good", as far as I'm concerned, so I do wish it hadn't taken so much of my time.
True, I could have cut my losses anytime, but I'm intrigued with J.V. Jone's personal story and I'm rooting for her. I am well aware that the series that she has been presently working on is far superior to this one, but I wanted to start my experience with her from her beginning. No regrets overall, but as I am a mood reader I kind of did a disservice to myself for not taking breaks between the books. Live and learn.

As a side note I'm feeling at this point that high fantasy is not for me anymore. I hate battles and fight scenes (although Ms. Jones is not at fault here. They are nicely brief.), and the trope of coming of age scullion boy and inevitable wars leave me cold.
The reason I venture into fantasy is because of the imaginative possibilities. I don't want stories about war, I want stories that have interesting themes and if they are deliciously dark, the better. 
Take the poor seers on the island of Larn in this series. I couldn't get this thing out of my head the entire time and I love that. 

Overall no regrets. For everything that I mentioned, she wrapped up the story nicely and there are certainly some parts that will stick with me a while. Like the poor seers. 

This stayed at the "pretty good" level for me, so another 4 stars for the final book and the series overall. 

Now for those shiny new things...