Rating: 3/5

In this (probably fictionalized) memoir, Monica Dickens recounts her time as a journalist at a provincial newspaper (the lowest ranking reporter, and the only woman; thus it's always her turn to make the tea). I enjoyed this more than her earlier autobiographical effort , One Pair of Hands (about her time taking a break from debutante life to go slumming in domestic service), and may actually keep this one, but as was the case with the earlier book, I found her tone condescending. Although it's never made explicit why she has taken on this job in the first place, it's apparent that she sees herself as a sort of anthropologist, investigating the culture of the newspaper office and provincial life seen through its lens, which is well and good, but it seems to me she needn't have sneered quite so much. The subject is interesting though, and I was engaged throughout and sometimes even amused, as at this passage: 

 "It was now also the season for horse shows. These were not popular among reporters because they went on for so long and there was such a list of names to get right. A lot of the children had tricky double-barrelled names, and their horses were worse."

But even when I was chuckling a little, I noted that nearly every sentence or paragraph has a complaint laced in it somewhere. A good part of the book concerns little dramas and character studies of the other lodgers at her boarding house. Some of the unexpected camaraderie she finds here (among characters rather more vivid than the newspaper men in the office who I found indistinguishable from each other) makes for fun reading, but she also goes out of her way to emphasize the dreariness and squalor of the environment, and there are some unpleasant situations described in a light off-hand way, as though played for humor, an uneasy mix which I found off-putting. 

The book interested me enough, that despite not being at all sure if I truly like Monica Dickens, I find myself wanting to seek out her straight autobiography, An Open Book, to see if it will reveal how much of this one is true.