Rating: 5/5

It is precisely the Misfortunes of Virtue which Sade illuminates in Justine. Virtue, personified in Justine, is perpetually confronted by misfortune, and subdued by an omnipresent force, which, as expected from the Marquis, drips animalistic eroticism. Justine is, inarguably, a novel on depravity, but beyond its blatant decadent literature, Justine is also to be seen and appreciated as a historical document -- a passionate chronicle and assessment of a culture not governed by law, but through the despotic monarchy of King Louis XVI. It is, essentially, a work of political philosophy and a critique of Revolutionary France.

Despite its ardent imagery the novel expands beyond the prurient joyride evident in its erotic style. That is to say, Justine is a candid rebuttal of Rousseau’s views of the noble savage and the social contract. The Marquis expounds man's unfettered indulgence as being fueled by momentary impulse and pleasure-- blind to consequence, or affliction to others. In the Sadean demimonde, characters (and people), were placed in either a position to impose their desires or as the objects upon which the desires of others were imposed upon -- occasionally a character enjoys the magnificence of the two. The Marquis’s savage is not noble in any perceivable sense, but rather merely a bundle of lustful appetites sulking underneath the patina of civilization, anticipating the occasion to be satiated. 

Sade not only boldly decorated the macabre side of humanity, but he also glorified it and gave it a name—libertinism. He did so by drafting the most luxurious, nauseating, and magnetizing piece of writing since Ovid’s Erotic Poems. Justine is, arguably, the most extraordinary novel of the Marquis; the horrors narrated evoke a plethora of emotions in the reader—one minute inducing uninhibited sexual arousal, shortly after the arousal gives way to anguish, anguish to desperation, desperation into repudiation, until repudiation finally precipitates into cholera. It’s grotesque, inhumane, fascinating, and extraordinarily compelling. 

Admittedly, I was simultaneously horrified and strangely captivated by Justine.