Rating: 4/5

Casanova as a boy of 8 to 12 was astute, and as he grew conducted himself as one with a good head on his shoulders would. He was an adventurous boy, an abbé, a lover, a soldier, a prisoner, a fiancé, a theatrical manager, a musician; one who eats hair out of love, one who contracts STD and survives only to never learn from his mistake(s)... several times in fact, and he was only twenty(!); a man who is sometimes poor but often rich, and who learnt that people treat you differently based on how deep your pockets are. 

His tale is interesting, hysterical, and his escapades are almost too good to be true. I'm reading a translation from the original. I wouldn't describe it as beautiful, thought provoking material, and I think he didn't intend to write it as such either. It qualifies as palate cleanser in between my serious classics. 

"An object really beautiful ought to seem beautiful to all whose eyes fall upon it. That is all; there is nothing more to be said." 

"Man is free; yet we must not suppose that he is at liberty to do everything he pleases, for he becomes a slave the moment he allows his actions to be ruled by passion. The man who has sufficient power over himself to wait until his nature has recovered its even balance is the truly wise man, but such beings are seldom met with." 

"It is only necessary to have courage, for strength without self-confidence is useless." 

"As to the deceit perpetrated upon women, let it pass, for, when love is in the way, men and women as a general rule dupe each other."

"I cannot think without a shudder of contracting any obligation towards death: I hate death; for, happy or miserable, life is the only blessing which man possesses, and those who do not love it are unworthy of it. If we prefer honour to life, it is because life is blighted by infamy; and if, in the alternative, man sometimes throws away his life, philosophy must remain silent." 

If you don't read author's preface and gets shocked with the content, it is entirely your fault because "everyone ought to know that a preface is to a book what the play-bill is to a comedy; both must be read." 

"Most likely the reading of a certain class of novels causes the ruin of a great many young girls, but I am of the opinion that from good romances they acquire graceful manners and a knowledge of society." 

In telling a story, including truths that tell against you is "a simple secret that many men do not know, because the larger portion of humankind is composed of cowards; a man who always tells the truth must be possessed of great moral courage. I believe that a guilty man, who candidly speaks the truth to his judge, has a better chance of being acquitted, than the innocent man who hesitates and evades true statements." Pg 162 

"...I must confess that the thoughts which have their origin in misfortune are not without some advantage to a young man, for they give him the habit of thinking, and the man who does not think never does anything right." pg 216 

"Cheating is a crime, but honest cunning may be considered as a species of prudence. True, it is a quality which is near akin to roguery; but that cannot be helped, and the man who, in time of need, does not know how to exercise his cunning nobly is a fool." Pg 225 

"...if your duty bids you to conceal the cause of your bad humour, it also bids you not to shew it. Delicacy sometimes enforces upon a polite gentleman the necessity of concealing certain feelings which might implicate either himself or others; it is a restraint for the mind, I confess, but it has some advantage when it's effect is to render more amiable the man who forces himself to accept that restraint." Advocate's wife to Casanova, Pg 250

"To lose a passport is a misfortune which befalls only a thoughtless, giddy man, and the cardinal will for the future know better than to put his confidence in a giddy fellow like you." General to Casanova, pg 363

"You may safely bet a hundred to one that a young man who has once lost his purse or his passport, will not lose either a second time. Each of those misfortunes has befallen me once only, and I might have been very often the victim of them, if experience had not taught me how much they were to be dreaded. A thoughtless fellow is a man who has not yet found the word "dread" in the dictionary of his life." Pg 366 - he should have applied this dread to STD too.

Casanova should see the stats we have today: evidence shows you are wealthier if you are married, marriage benefits men more than it does women, and it also shows that women initiate divorce 70 percent of the time. 

In choosing to be intimate with the two sisters again after giving his word to Thérèse for marriage he says his "love for Thérèse was all the same, brilliant in my soul: this was a passing infidelity, but not inconstancy." - Clever fox!

"Pleasures which give activity to our senses, my dear son, disturb the repose of our soul - a proof that they do not deserve the name of real enjoyments." Yusuf Ali, a Turk, to Casanova.

"Time given to pleasure is never time lost, madam; the only time which a young man wastes is that which is consumed in weariness, because when he is prey to ennui he is likely to fall a prey to love, and to be despised by the object of his affection." Casanova to his employer's wife, in Corfu. 

Words: oppilative - archaic for obstructive/ constipating, onnanism!