Rating: 2/5

After I finished the last paragraph of this story last night, my 13-year-old daughter, without even looking up from her sketch pad, announced to her younger sister and me, “Well, just about everything in that book was wrong, from the first sentence to the last.”

I started to open my mouth to defend this middle grades read, but no sound came out, so I shut it quickly.

She's right; this book is one hot mess.

And yet. . . it is a beloved book. I see that most of my friends on here have rated it 4 or 5 stars. So, what's the deal? Why did we have such a different experience of this story?

Well, as I probed a little deeper, reading friends' reviews, I noticed that most of them had one thing in common: their youth. They had read this book as kids and they probably focused on one boy's year of living alone in the woods. They've most likely remembered the wildness, the unique forest foods the boy consumed, the freedom of living away from parents and siblings.

I get it. In theory, this is a great story. Or, it's a story that had great potential. In theory, so is Ms. George's Julie of the Wolves.

But, for me, there is still, too-often, a disconnect between Jean Craighead George's noble intentions of spreading the word about living more closely to nature versus her ability to present readers with a three-dimensional protagonist and a cohesive plot.

The three readers at our house struggled, from start to finish, with the protagonist, Sam Gribley. Sam has run away from home as a young teen because he claims he doesn't “like to be dependent, particularly on electricity, rails, steam, oil, coal, machines, and all those things that go wrong.”

Wha?? First, why would a 13-year-old living in New York City talk like this? Second, couldn't he have been pissed off at his parents instead? It would have made his situation far more relatable to all of us.

Also, what's with the goofy father who shows up from time to time to hide in Sam's treehouse and complains about his responsibilities? It was like Ms. George was trying to cram some sort of agenda down our throats, showing us how toxic life is for the "working man in the city," and it didn't ring true to me, that Sam's father, in the 1950s no less, would act or talk like this with his child.

And what in the hell was with all of the grown men who came to the treehouse to cuddle with 13-year-old Sam under his deer hide blankets? Was anyone other than me bothered by this? Why were these grown ass men cuddling with a boy in his forest home? 

It gets worse. When young Sam finds a man in the woods who appears to be running from the law, he tells the stranger: 

I don't know anything about you, and I don't want to. You don't know anything about me, and don't want to, but you may stay here if you like. No one is going to find you here.

He basically tells this "outlaw" that they are alone, no one knows where they are, and no one will find them. The stranger responds with: “You're a sight for sore eyes.” Yeah, I'll bet he is, buddy.

Um. . . maybe this was okay in 1959, but by today's standards, ain't no way I'm telling my daughters in 2021 to rub a stranger's arm in the woods and let him know that “no one is going to find you here.” 

(I did, instead, use this as an opportunity to tell my girls that, God forbid they ever run away to the forest and an outlaw comes along, they should take their pepper spray and spray it as close to the man's actual pupils as possible. Also, they should never forget that nails and teeth can make for excellent improvised weapons).

Grumble. Grumble. Grumble. I want to love Jean Craighead George's work so badly. She was a lip gloss wearing, taxidermy loving, blue jean baby who was almost never photographed without an animal on her arm, hip or lap. In short: a goddess to me.

The girls and I loved Charlie's Raven, but her other middle grades novels have disappointed me. I'm thinking I should skip the bulk of her fiction and contemplate her memoir, JOURNEY INWARD, instead. I think I'm far more interested in what she thought than what she thought kids thought.