Rating: 3/5

Didn't speak to me. I had a hard time catching the rhythm of the language; I didn't always know what he meant, no matter how many times I reread sections.

He lets the Spanish explorers off easy--Columbus, De Soto, Ponce de Leon, even Cortez are all men who came to the New World drawn by their visions, their ambitions, their desires, and they got swallowed and defeated by the New World, in one way or another. The Puritans, however, get his full wrath. Maybe he respects the Spaniards more, for at least attempting to see the "flower" of the New World, its glories and pleasures, whereas the Puritans, who similarly annihilated indigenous people and plundered the land as their own, maintained their own littleness and refused to be seduced, and instead turned inward.

The idea of the book is great: to pick out elements of history to reform, to recreate, but to understand for the first time. There are some good things to quote here:

Page 69: "Is it merely in a book? So am I then, merely in a book. You see? Here at least I find the thing I love. I mean, here *is* the thing, accurately, my own world, the world in which I myself breathe and walk and live--against that which you present."

Page 113: "Why does one not hear Americans speak more of these important things? Because the fools do not believe that they have sprung from anything: bone, thought and action. They will not see that what they are is growing on these roots. They will not look. They float without question. Their history is to them an enigma."

And this gorgeous bit of mansplaining, pg. 184, describing his correspondence with "one of the hottest women that [he] know[s]": "I liked her and enjoyed her letters. In one letter, among other things, she said that no one could *imagine* what it meant to a girl to lose her virginity. But yes, I could imagine it, better than she. It means *everything* in America."

I get tired sometimes, trying to remember to read things without judgment and put them in the context of their original time. I realize this is a stupid thing for a historian to say, but, nonetheless, I feel it. Especially when these authors from the lists of the "Great Works" contain so many voices that belittle people like me, or claim enlightenment for themselves when they condescend to imagine what life for "Others" might be like, and then congratulate themselves for the attempt, as if the attempt is automatic success itself.