Rating: 4/5

Well, it's taken me literally all year to read this book, but it's definitely been worth it. What's really interesting with this book is that it is basically two different ideas mashed together; one, a gorgeous pictorial look at the journey of APOLLO 11 and all the amazing, brilliant technology that helped humanity reach the moon; and the second, a selection of text from Norman Mailer's OF A FIRE ON THE MOON, which is a reflective, searing, psychological study of why we went there and what it meant (for America in particular). 
These ideas don't really compliment each other as much as they compete with one another, but there's lots of interesting contrasts to be found by packaging them together. Mailer's text really drives home how the racial tensions, soul-searching and self-discovery of the 1970s were right around the corner, and it's incongrous to my mental picture of the space program to see pictures of the astronauts in Vietnam at the end of the book, greeting hundreds of American troops. The overwhelming whiteness of the people at NASA in the photographs is also shocking to see, as are the photographs of Wernher von Braun and other Operation Paperclip scientists grinning like cats who ate the canary. 
At the same time, you can't help but be awed by the size of the accomplishment, the sheer scope of the idea. Mailer really struggles with this, and while I'll freely admit to reading some of the more hypnotic and/or sexist sections of his writing with glazed eyes (the constant references to himself as "Aquarius" feel like an unsuccessful, incredibly dated experiment), there are frequent insights that are just so spot-on that you have to hand it to him: Mailer is undoubtedly one of the most insightful writers of the 20th century. I particularly liked this bit:

All signs to the Vehicle Assembly Building said VAB. VAB - it could be the name of a drink or a deodorant, or it could be suds for the washer. But it was not a name for this warehouse of the gods. The great churches of a religious age had names: the Alhambra, Santa Sophia, Mont-Saint-Michel, Chartres, Westminster Abbey, Notre Dame. Now: VAB.

Altogether, a fascinating read. This will live on my coffee table for many years to come.