Rating: 5/5

What I like best about Francis' early work is that quite aside from the mystery angle, they are stories. Good stories, well told, well plotted, with decent use of the language. They don't depend too heavily on someone explaining the whole deal; while we follow the main character's thought processes, we also follow him as he goes through the labyrinth that reveals the plot. We are shown, not told. Hallelujah. Also, the characters both good and bad are people--with foibles, weaknesses and strong points. Even some of the killers aren't "bad to the bone", though on Planet Francis (at least so far in my rereading) they must of course be mentally deranged to even consider killing. Quite a lot of the MC's elucubrations are on the nature of true justice, and if it is actually served by destroying the lives of innocent bystanders in an attempt to reveal the facts.

Phillip Nore is naturally a jump jockey, and we are treated to a visit to the world of racing, which is the reason a large chunk of his fanbase bought and devoured his books from the very beginning. The best people in the right clothes doing the right thing--mostly. (Oh those green socks the arriviste wears! He can't help getting it ever-so-slightly wrong, because it's not in his breeding. Blood will out.) The too-large jockey who starves himself on cheese and tomatoes and black tea, which must be to save calories so he can drink Coke and champagne (not together, I might add) with his trainer or his friends. Nore is also an amateur photographer (as was Mrs Francis) whose hobby leads to some very unexpected developments. I have to say I spotted the killer about time said person made an appearance, and was furlongs ahead of the jockey throughout, but it's to the author's credit that the fact took nothing away from the reading experience. I realised halfway through that I had read this book sometime in the 1980s, but remembered nothing about it except the scene where Nore sits down in a basket chair and is recognised by an old acquaintance. He's also a commitment-phobic who sees himself as a drifter who just goes with the flow--but he can't resist a good puzzle, and he can't restrain himself from righting wrongs, even if it puts him on a par with the man he despises.

Reading with hindsight, I realised that the ten quid Nore offers for some information would be tantamount to 50 pounds in today's money--quite a lot for a ten-year-old child, and even for some of us adults. It was strange to read that he classes cocaine with marijuana in his own mind as "not deadly" compared to heroin. This was, of course, before we learned better, when cocaine was the party drug of choice among those who had too much money. I wondered also if I had been handed a US-release (or perhaps a re-release) copy, as at one point Philip mentions "fuck-ups" quite in passing. I doubt very much that either of the Francises would have considered using that word (no matter which of the couple you think actually wrote the mysteries) even in 1980. "Cock-ups" quite possibly, but the F-word would definitely have been infra dig.

All in all, still a cracking good read that stood the test of time. That England is gone, if it ever existed, but hey-that's why we read fiction.