Rating: 2/5

An odd book, re-read recently during a moment of nostalgia. Dream Park was written in the early 1980s, and its age shows in a couple of different ways. There's the obvious - people smoking indoors in the workplace – and the subtle.

Dream Park was written when RPGs like Dungeons &amp; Dragons were relatively new, and it was inspired by those games and by the Society for Creative Anachronism. But it doesn't have the feel of something written by actual gamers. The titular Dream Park is a Disneyland for gamers, where players can live out their games in the world's most elaborate LARP (written before LARPing was really a thing). There are holograms, special effects, hired actors, Hollywood deals to adapt big games both for smaller venues and for the screen. But at the same time, it buys into the idea that the Game Master's job is to kill off the players, not to give them a fun and challenging experience. 

The spine of the book is a murder mystery. A security guard is killed during a theft of industrial secrets. The security chief of Dream Park realizes one of the members of a current high-level game taking place must be the killer. He enters the game as a replacement player to track down the killer. 

This perfectly serviceable plot has a whole lot of holes in it. Somehow, there are no security cameras in place in the R&amp;D lab of the future equivalent of Disneyland? There were no internal alarms? Really?

Then there's the very odd sexual politics of the group of gamers.

I genuinely can't tell how much of the book's attitude towards relationships is a result of the authors' views, and how much is an attempt to project some kind of near-future morality. 

A lot of the gamers come in as couples – some are long-term, some are relatively new. But as soon as they get to Dream Park, a whole bunch of the members of the couples start flirting with strangers. It's notably the women characters that get this treatment and words like "tease" are tossed around. There's a lot of weird judgemental comments about body shape and some male gazey stuff going on. Lots of people get jealous. So… is this a future in which more people are in open relationships, and if so, why all the jealousy and petty bickering? Some of it becomes plot relevant later, but for the most part it pads out a plot that already has more than enough suspects and things going on.

I suspect that mostly the sexual politics of the late 70s were simply projected forward, and it hasn't aged well. At all. 

There are a couple of nice touches, mostly in the game itself. Dream Park, quibbles aside, does sound like a hell of a lot of fun. And the idea of engineers as a core class alongside warriors/mages/clerics/thieves sounds pretty solid. 

I might give The California Voodoo Game, written much later, a try rather than read Dream Park again.