Rating: 5/5

This book was filled with powerful truths for me, as Mr. Wiesel's books usually are. The premise: a madman takes in 5 stranded travelers in the guise of being a good samaritan and then puts them on trial with the verdict meaning that one of the five must die so that the others might live. Each of the five hold secrets that could damn them in the eyes of "the Judge". This story and Mr. Wiesel's always powerful words caused me to do much soul searching.

Favorite quotes (I will try to keep it down, there are a ton.)

"People are mistaken if they believe that the only choice is between silence and speech. One silence can hide another. In a moment of grace sometimes we are able to lift one of these layers of silence. But at once others arise and confuse us."

"I should say that silence can certainly be found in archives. The memory of silence is something we crave and seek. But as for the silence of memory - that, never."

"We derive our grief, as the artist does his inspiration, from the most mysterious point in our being."

"In friendship the ego is not dissolved in the other; on the contrary, it blossoms. Unlike love, friendship does not declare that one plus one makes one; rather that one plus one makes two. Each of the two is enriched by and for the other."

"Loving the unexpected is to define yourself in relation to miracles."

"Weeping is a miracle too."

"In the beginning, traditon tell us, was the word. But before that? Before the first word was spoken by God, what was there? It was from this silence that language was born. In wakening into life, and therefore to consciousness, man found himself enclosed in a silence that exceeded him and at the same time provoked him. He broke the silence in order to fulfill himself, in accordance with the divine will, and began, like God to mkae use of language. There comes this tension in us - the first tension, created by desire and violation - between spoken words, human language, and silence, which lays claim to being the language of God. The secret of the one matches the mystery of the other. But language, like silence, is not without its dangers; the poet and the visionary boht bear the burning seal of the words behind the words. In childhood, searching for the truth of despair man aspires with all his being to silence - to the mystic silence that suggests the inaccessible, the forbidden, and the beyond. Masters teach him how to purify everyday language through the silence of sacrifice, in order to hasten the end of all times. Let all men be silent, or speak without lying, without demeaning their souls, and the Savior will be there. And when he will be there, men will come from all over to salute him with long cries of joy and songs of happiness. But the Messiah, in his melancholy, will remain silent."

"What people who are alternately attracted by language and by silence don't understand is that there can be silence in talk and talk in silence. They don't understand that what is revealed keeps its own mystery."

"Miracles were for other people. It's always other people who need them. They happen for all kinds of people but not me. I have to get by without them. The prisoner cannot free himself from his own prison, says the Talumd. Nor can the sick man heal himself. But what about God, Father? God has need of man in order to be God. Who knows? Perhaps He too needs miracles."

"You must learn to dance. When you dance you lift yourself into the air. Only to fall back again? So what? When he comes back to earth, man is no longer the same."

"The love inside you will enable you to perform miracles. You will help our people overcome despair by celebrating joy and generosity, which have long been in exile, also awaiting their deliverance. And when this comes about, know that it is not you who have accomplished these miracles but the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. You are only His messenger."

"I pity you because you are without hope. I am not saying that you are in despair; that is something else. To be in despair can be useful and fruitful; to live without hope is not."

"Remember that it is not knowledge but the yearning for knowledge that makes for a complete, accomplished man."