Rating: 3/5

The real title of this book should be “where in the world will Chris Barton take a damned shower?” From the moment his life turns upside down he’s always going into bathrooms and specifically mentioning only washing his face, maybe using the toilet, and once or twice explicitly putting off a “long hot shower”. And this after he walks through hot Nevada and Arizona sands, gets blood all over him when an agent accidentally shoots himself, and rubs bathroom grime into his face as a disguise to escape some bad guys.

When the hot agent starts to seduce him, it reminds me of a Dracula comic from the seventies that I can’t find now: a woman is trying to seduce Dracula, and he is immediately suspicious of her, because, how can she stand the stench of the dead?

Chris would have figured this out too, except that Matheson keeps lamp shading Chris’s not trying to solve the puzzle. From the moment things start going bad, it is clearly a puzzle; Chris recognizes it’s a puzzle; he loves solving puzzles; people from his mother to the strange allies he meets tell him to use his skills to solve the puzzle. If he’d done the apparently natural thing, that he did all his life, and treated it as a puzzle, he would have figured things out pretty quickly. Instead, Matheson keeps giving us excuses as to why Chris doesn’t simply add up all of the strange things that have happened.

The mystery was pretty basic except for the first strange character he meets, Veering. But Veering didn’t have to mean anything. If Chris had never met Veering, the rest of the story would have played out pretty much the same, but without the overtones of mysticism Veering introduced. Chris actually edges into realizing this once, and then backs away from it.

Those who don’t tell him to use his skills to solve the mystery… tell him to work on the mathematical problem he’s been stymied on in his defense project job. Which was a big clue, if he’d ever stopped to think about it.

Matheson even subtly shows us that Chris’s psychological health is improving, such as by showing us that his appetite is improving in the second half of the book.

The possibility that the whole mystery was arranged to alleviate his nervous tension and jog his creativity seemed a stretch even with those clues, but it did occur to me once I realized that Veering was likely a red herring, mainly due to the incongruousness of people telling him to work on the mathematical problem he’d been stuck on at work.

That is my main disappointment with the book: not so much that the solution was relatively obvious, but that the writer’s machinations to keep Chris from seeing the solution were also relatively obvious. Matheson’s a good enough writer, and a good enough writer of psychological thrillers, that he could have let Chris solve the problem and then, for example, be drawn into not believing himself, or have let Chris see the solution and discard it as not complicated enough to fulfill Chris’s subconscious desire for adventure. Even I as reader kept thinking, it’s got to be more complicated than it looks.

Instead, Chris keeps thinking, hey, I should think about what’s happened, it might start fitting together. I enjoy that sort of thing. Nah, why bother?

Even Alexsandra falling in love with him makes sense, and Veering, as a psychologist, should have realized that possibility: people have a tendency to believe that if they’re doing something for not enough reward, they must actually want to do it, and pretending to fall in love with a man who smells like a bathroom floor had to count as “no paycheck is enough for this”.

The end does in fact tie everything together, albeit in a movie-complication-superpowered-government-agency-acting-stereotypically sort of way. But Matheson’s always been a cinematic writer, so that’s not surprising. There’s a great idea in here, and it is a thrilling story; but I expected more of him.