Rating: 4/5

”As I look back on my stories, it would be absurd if I did not wish my stories had been better, but if they had been much better, they would not have been published.”
~Raymond Chandler, from the Introduction 

A collection of shorter Philip Marlowe tales. Red Wind is worth the purchase price all by itself. 

Trouble Is My Business
”He wasn’t anything to see. He was just a little man who was dead with a big slug in his face and blood on him.”
Marlowe is hired to get rid of a dame who is working a rich man’s drunken son, but as in most of his cases, murder pops up almost immediately in a case where it shouldn’t. Marlowe has his usual hard luck, while showing less competence than usual, and drinking quite a bit more. A nasty, rich, skinflint client, an opportunist house dick, a couple of bozo hoods, a pair of world weary cops, and a dangerous chauffeur make up the balance of the cast. And, as usual, Marlowe seems to be catnip for the ladies. 
3 ⭐️

Finger Man
Marlowe is simultaneously involved in a case of political corruption (he’s a prime witness) and a fixed roulette wheel caper involving a gambler friend of his and a mysterious dame. The friend ends up dead, the mystery lady in the wind, and Marlowe framed for the murder. He’s left trying to clear his name and avenge his friend. A Persian cat plays a key role (nice touch)
4 ⭐️

Goldfish
Marlowe’s on a deadly treasure hunt in this one, following thin leads in search of pearls stolen nineteen years before. There’s still a $25,000 reward out from the insurance company. But Marlowe has deadly competition in the hunt, from a pair of chiselers willing to maim and kill for the prize. As usual, the story works up a body count, but Marlowe doesn’t lip lock with any dames for a change. 
4 ⭐️

Red Wind
”I don’t like being a witness. The pay’s too low.”
”He smiled at me. It was a lousy smile to be the last one you might see.”
This one is the gem of the collection, and can stand proud beside Chandler’s best novels (The Big Sleep, The Long Goodbye). Marlowe is an eyewitness to a barroom murder, and the murderer is out to silence him. Along the way Marlowe is drawn into intrigue that involves double blackmail, a pair of cops (one each of the nasty and solid varieties) and a classy dame in trouble. This tale displays the sadness, sensitivity, and essential decency just below the surface of Marlowe’s hard boiled edge.
5 ⭐️