Rating: 4/5

Picnic

The light shone down taking the shape of each lie,
 lifting each outline up, making it wear a name.
It was one day near the very end of childhood, Rome,
 out on a field, late April, parents, friends,
after a morning’s walk (nearly mid-century),
 some with baskets, some with hats,

(so does it matter that this be true?) some
 picking flowers, meaning by that a door that does not open—
And why should I tell this to you,
 and why should telling matter still, the bringing to life of
listening, the party going on down there, grasses,
 voices? Should I tell you who they are, there on the torn

page—should we count them (nine)—and then the girl who
						 was me
 at the edge of the blanket,
two walking off towards what sounds like a stream now?
 Pay attention. Years pass. They are still there.
And the sorrow kept under. And the quick jagged laughs.
 And all the while underneath something else is meant—

the ladder with no rungs perhaps, or things
 exist?
Meanwhile the wind bends the grasses flat then up again, like that,
 and at the picnic someone’s laugh breaks off the mouth
and comes to this.
 Waiting is different from patience, friend. This
is the picnic.
 “Unminding mind, keep in the middle—until” says the silly
						 book where
“Shiva Replies”.
 In the field four bluebirds land. Flish.
Then no wind for a moment.
 Then someone’s laugh, although they are lying,
and X who will sleep with father

later this afternoon.
 The mouths of the gods are stuck open really.
They are sated, exhausted, and still they must devour us.
 After lunch we take a walk.
We walk into their eyes, they cannot stop us,
 we slide on in, a half a dozen human beings
with the day

 off. Their faces are huge.
Back there someone laughs longer than before, too long.
 Click of prongs against a metal bowl.
And you, you have to take this as I
 give it, don’t you, eyes, mouth?
Breathe, friend,
 the sense here between us must be gotten past, quick,

as any stalk must be gotten past, any body,
 that the hollowness it ferries up slip into here, quick,
using shape as its cover,
 one of me here and one of me there and in between
this thing, watery,
 like a neck rising and craning out

(wanting so to be seen) (as if there were some other place dear god)—

 When I caught up with them they were down by the pond,
father with X.
 I looked into the water where it was stillest.
Saw how each side wants the other to rip it open.
 Later that day mother came up into the bathroom,
daylight toothy by then,
 color of gunsheen—dusk—

We sat there awhile, neither reached for the switch.
 It was not the thing we call time which was ticking
softly. Come here she said gripping my head hard in her hands,
 both of us facing into the mirror.
Then they struck out into the forest one here one there
 wherever they save it thickest wherever path or track
was absent. As if there were some other place dear god.

 Have you ever looked into standing water and seen it going
very fast,
 seen the breaks in the image where the suction shows,
where the underneath is pointed and its tip shows through,
 maybe something broken, maybe something spoked in there,
your eyes weeds, mouth weeds,
 no bed showing through, no pressure from some shore, no

shore? I looked in there.
 I thought “I should go in”. I thought “I want the fate
to come up now, make it come quick, this thing that is
 the predicate”—“is is is is” I thought.
The face stayed there.

 She put her hand out to the glass.
We both stared in—me in the front of her.
 She pulled my hair back very tight.
Took black and started in on the right eye.
 Put it on swiftly. Her hands smelled like wine.
She shadowed the cheek, held the lips open, fixed the
 edge red. She powdered, streaked. I

 never moved. Both of our eyes on the face, on
the third
 party.
Reds, blacks.
 The lights started to go we didn’t move.
The silver was gone. The edges on things. The face still glowed—

bright in the wetness, there.
 Why should the shut thing not be true enough
anymore?
 (Open up open open the stillness shrieked.)
Why do we think? What is the thinking for?
 When Psyche met the god he came down to her

 through the opening which is waiting,
the not living you can keep alive in you,
 the god in the house. We painted that alive,
mother with her hands
 fixing the outline clear—eyeholes, mouthhole—
forcing the expression on.
 Until it was the only thing in the end of the day that seemed

believable,
 and the issue of candor coming awake, there,
one face behind the other peering in,
 and the issue of
freedom. . . .
 Outside it’s almost spring in earnest. The Princess

known as Luciana
 back from the picnic
has spent one afternoon of light on the lawn tweezing hair
 from her legs. More drinks. The women talk.
Should she marry the arms merchant named Rudi?
 Is hisses the last light on the reddish berries, is is the much

blacker shadows of spring now that the leaves are
 opening, now that they’re taking up

place.

*

Transcribed by the dogged and generous Caleb xo