Rating: 2/5

There are very few occasions where my enjoyment of a book will depend on liking the protagonist of the story (or, in the case of nonfiction, the way the author portrays him- or herself). "Full Tilt" is such a case. 

Dervla Murphy gives an account of her incredible journey, travelling from Ireland to India via bicycle (or rather, from Iran to India, because the first leg of the journey is dealt within the first twenty pages). She relies on her letters and diary entries, leaving them standing on their own, hardly ever structuring them into a narrative, because"the temptation to make myself sound more learned than I am, by gleaning facts and figures from an encyclopaedia and inserting them in appropriate places, has been resisted."This will be a real problem for some readers, and it certainly was for me, because it means that we only ever see whatever Dervla Murphy decided was noteworthy enough to write down that day. And when this is the case, you really need to feel a connection to the author to be able to fully experience the story. 

For me, it didn't work. Dervla Murphy travels out of a liking for travelling by bike, and she picked her destination because it was the easiest to reach by bike at such a distance. 
She's obviously a very pragmatic person, planning ahead and trying to stick to her plans. She doesn't linger on romantic observations, and she has a very clear idea about the countries she's going to (even though that might change with her mood and, on a few occasions, with the people she meets). All this makes her perfect for this journey.

All this also means that she is as distant a narrator as I could have asked for. When I travel, I love to learn about the history and "statistics" of a place beforehand, I love to imagine the lives of people there, I love to eat new food and describe in every detail the impressions it let on me. I see travelling as a means of getting to be somewhere else, which makes me a polar opposite to Dervla Murphy, who sees going to somewhere else as a means to travel. 

I am in awe of what she did, truly, and I admire her for the strength to finish her journey despite all the problems that came her way. But I can't rate a travelogue on my admiration for the journey, I have to rate it for its "readability" and its connection with the reader. Which, for this, for me, was nonexistent.

----
Review can also be found at 238 books in 238 days.