Rating: 4/5

I have to give this one four stars because it was so compelling and unusual--actually kind of sad in a way  (although I disagree with some reviewers that the hero cheated--he did kiss the OW though). This was my second Kay Thorpe book this week, and I’m unsettled by it. In some ways, the two books I’ve read recently by her reminded me of a couple by Carole Mortimer, in which the real-life stuff intruded maybe a little too much on the romance--which made for an interesting but not really escapist read. 

In both this book and in KT's The Iron Man, the characters get together physically long before there’s any emotion between them, and it leads to a lot of insecurity that compels both stories. KT’s heroes are as alpha and cynical as they come, perfectly willing to take advantage of the heroines' situations to suit their own wants and ends. The heroines start off a little naïve and maybe even TSTL, but in both books, I found myself liking them for their practicality and clear-headedness and their determination to leave the heroes when enough is enough, despite having fallen in love with them. While in both books we get to a HEA (of sorts ), I actually found myself a little upset by the ending of NGP and I’m still sorting through how to take this story. 
 
Boogenhausen has all the deets and both she and St Margarets have some incisive commentary about the likelihood of the hero’s continued fidelity, and I have to admit that despite usually wanting to give our heroes the benefit of the doubt, I ended up with real reservations about this HEA. It actually made me feel sad. Not really how you want a Harlequin to leave you feeling, eh? But it says a lot for KT’s ability to write a thoughtful romance that doesn’t provide the usual easy assurances of love ever after.

KT starts off with a familiar-to-Harley-readers trope: the heroine willing to sacrifice herself to save her erring father. In this case, the hero has discovered that the heroine’s dad, the chief accountant of the hero’s company, has embezzled money. He’s threatened legal action—as he should!—and the heroine waylays the hero at his hotel and offers herself in exchange for the hero giving her dad a chance to replace the money. 

The interesting thing here is that the heroine makes the offer without even trying a less nuclear option first because she has such a bad opinion of men. She assumes that just asking for the hero’s forbearance would be futile (and even he points out that she could have started by just asking if he’d reconsider!). Lauren is gorgeous but has had men macking on her for years, seeing only her looks and never the person. As a result, at 23, she is still a virgin and hasn’t had a serious relationship and doesn’t have much faith in men overall. She’s attracted to the hero, but her main reason for offering herself is because she’s been conditioned to assume that men are NOT honorable and that he is certain to make such a demand anyway. This way, it’s on her terms.

Nick agrees to it, partly to punish her for being such an idiot I think. He makes a move on her, but gets interrupted by a phone call (in which he finds out that his mistress of two years has dumped him to marry a rich man). Afterward, he tells Lauren it’s on, but he wants more than a one-night stand—he wants her as his mistress, beginning with her accompanying him on a business trip. Lauren reluctantly agrees. 

Nick is definitely an old school alpha, implacable and uncommunicative and very "my way or no way." The first time he and the heroine have sex, it is borderline rape (she refers to it as such later), even though she has agreed to it and doesn’t say no. It's hardly honorable, but let’s not forget that it’s the heroine who set up the situation willingly. She’s clearly reluctant to participate wholeheartedly, but she lets him make love to her even if she’s determined to stay aloof, so there’s consent here, even if for dubious reasons. Since he doesn’t know she’s a virgin, she doesn’t enjoy the first time, but after that, they’re off the races. He does dress her up like a ho (in a couture way anyway) and parade her in front of his ex-mistress, which humiliates her, but he apologizes both for that and for his treatment of her and offers marriage. Knowing she’s being impulsive and foolish and aware that whatever it is she feels, it’s not love and he doesn’t love her, our physically besotted heroine finds herself agreeing, to her own amazement.

Nick is subtle and manipulative, and has reasons beyond his physical attraction to the heroine for offering marriage, although it’s clear from the start that he wants her very badly and feels possessive towards her almost immediately. But his motives are hardly pure: he mainly wants to use her for revenge against his Italian aristo grandfather, who first rejected his daughter, the hero’s mother, for marrying an Englishman and then emotionally blackmailed her into returning to Italy, causing 8 year old Nick to be the football in a custody battle. He’s bitter about his grandfather’s treatment of his mother, as even after her return to the family fold, he continued to reject and ignore her for years as punishment for not submitting to his wish for her to marry in accordance with his wishes. Arranged marriages are still a thing in Nick’s aristocratic Italian family. The very British Nick refuses to go along with his own, and Lauren is part of his plan to show the old man that Nick, his heir, isn’t going to accede to his wishes and to get some of his own back by introducing a wife who, although beautiful, isn’t “to the manner bred.”

Lauren is insightful about people and very quick to pick up on the situation and its nuances. She also has a pretty clear-eyed view of what purpose she is serving. She’s not hurt particularly, since she’s not yet in love with Nick, but she is mad that he has kept so much hidden from her about his background and motivations and not really willing to go along with his revenge plans—particularly when she finds out from Nick’s cousin that the old man is dying.

From here, the story focuses on a few main conflicts. First is the heroine’s sense that she and the hero really don’t belong in Venice in the midst of the suffocating luxury of his Italian heritage, and that in taking over the family concerns and conforming to a mold that he’s rejected his entire life, the hero will be sacrificing his own happiness just to foil the grandfather’s wishes. But even more central to the story is the exploration of fidelity and whether it’s reasonable to expect faithfulness from a man as highly sexed as the hero. Several characters discuss this in different ways: the hero’s cousin, engaged for an arranged marriage, seems to think that it’s unrealistic, and others point out that it’s natural to be attracted to other people even if you’re in love. The heroine struggles with this but it's clear to her that infidelity is not something she's willing to tolerate.

The hero and heroine have a fantastic and fiery sex life but she’s aware that it won’t last and without any emotional underpinning, the likelihood of faithfulness and HEA is slim to none. But there are intimations that the hero’s feeling for her go beyond just lust. But he is not super communicative and reacts really badly when she tries to make him promise not to see his ex-mistress again or to let go his plans for revenge, mainly I think because he’s so alpha and doesn’t like being told what to do (as he tells her). And it doesn’t take long for the heroine to realize that her feelings are engaged—she has her moment of realization in the midst of a fight with him, and it’s not a happy realization.

When the OW shows up in Venice, the heroine assumes the worst. The hero has refused to promise her he won’t see the OW and when she spies them in a clinch in the garden on the night of the ball celebrating their own marriage, she’s pretty devastated. She doesn’t say anything to him right away, though, and rather pathetically resolves to show him that what he has with her beats anything he had with the OW.

But it comes out in a fight later, and the hero (who gets really grabby when he gets mad) basically tells her that she just needs to trust him. For our heroine, who is really insecure because she knows love is not a reason they got together, that’s impossible.

So when the grandfather tells her, in an effort to get her to abandon the marriage, that the hero was with the OW a day or so before, Lauren believes him and runs home to daddy. The hero shows up and insists on talking it through, but she won’t give him the chance, particularly when he admits to seeing the OW. She locks herself in the bedroom but he’s still there when her dad comes home, and dad convinces her to come out. The hero sneaks into bed with her late that night and holds her down (which I found hot, I'll admit it) and tells her she’s going to listen. He only saw the OW, he claims, to tell her it was no use sticking around because he was in love with his wife. He also says that his grandfather told the heroine about their meeting to force the hero to come to a decision—his wife or his revenge—and he has chosen Lauren. He agrees with her that he would not be happy in the role of Italian aristo and plans to let his cousin continue to run that side of things while he focuses on his own life and business in England, which includes a country house and babies with the heroine—something she had fantasized about herself when she realized she was in love with him and was hopeful that eventually they might have a real marriage. 

So we arrive at the point where we normally would have a HEA, but then KT throws all kinds of spanners in the works. The hero admits to kissing the OW the night of the ball because there was moonlight and she was attractive and willing. The heroine is shaken but jokes that she’ll have to be careful or she’ll turn into a jealous shrew. And the hero says that he may look and even be tempted but that’s as far as it will go, because he loves her and only her. And to remember that. And she thinks to herself: 

There were going to be times when it would hardly be enough, she knew that already. Trust had to be learned. But if he had been a different kind of man, she wouldn’t be here in his arms right now, and that was something she wouldn’t have wanted to miss. ‘I’ll remember,” she said.'

And there we end. It’s gutsy and a little depressing, to be honest. I’m not sure how to read it, either—is KT saying that there’s a trust issue here; we should believe that the hero will be faithful and our cynical and wary heroine needs to learn to trust him? I mean, he kissed another woman even after he knew he was in love with the heroine, just because the moment was romantic and the OW was beautiful (and, remember, his girlfriend for two years until recently, so not like there was no feeling there). Or is KT saying that despite his assurances to the heroine, he will eventually cheat and the heroine is prepared to admit it to herself and willing to take the chance anyway? And who is reliable here? The heroine is as cynical as the hero is, despite her relative inexperience, so is her insecurity the result of that or because she sees the hero clearly for what he is? It’s impossible to say. And I don’t trust in their HEA because of that.

This one was intense and maybe too real world in its exploration of infatuation versus real love, fidelity and trust. There's a level of cynicism in the KT books I've read so far that gives them an emotional edginess. Pretty amazing to have such deep and morally ambiguous matters explored in an 80s category romance, and KT does it well. I can’t say I loved this book because I actually found it a little upsetting, but it’s definitely one I’d recommend for an interesting departure from the usual easy resolutions we find in these books.