Rating: 5/5

No doubts on my part. This novel deserves a 5-star rating. Challenge my rating if you want and I know I can defend it, tooth and nail.

At first, this seems to be just a story of an old man, Pere Goriot and how he ends up in the pupper's grave despite being a rich businessman when he's still strong. His fault is that he loves and cares for his 2 spoiled uncaring ungrateful daughters who get all his riches and in the end don't even care going to his deathbed. However, that plot seems to be just secondary to the story of a young man, Eugene de Rastignac who uses all the opportunities for him to climb the social ladder. That makes this novel partly a bildungsroman and should have inspired James Joyce to write A Portrait of a Young Man as an Artist. Part of this climb is one of Goriot's daughters, Delphine. The good thing about Rastignac is that even if he uses other people, he is also a caring and sensitive man. He and the houseboy, Christophe are the ones who stay by Goriot's side and finance his burial. 

Maybe I am already old and a father myself so I felt so sad reading the lamentations of the dying poor Goriot. My heart ached while he says this to Eugene about his daughters refusing to visit him: "God, if I could only hold their hands in mine, I would not feel any pain at all. Do you think they'll come?" I have read stories where a dying person asked somebody, usually a loved one, to hold his hand while he breathed his last because he was afraid. It should be the same feeling when we were kids and we wanted our parents to hold our hands as we walked outside for the first time. We were afraid. 

As for literary significance, Le Pere Goriot started the use of recurring characters and the story goes that the eureka moment happened when Balzac was writing this and declared that he thought we would be rich because of the idea. In this novel, the characters of Eugene de Rastignac and Vautrin, among others, appear in his succeeding works. Le Pere Goriot is also said to be the finest of Balzac's other works and it also started the idea of grouping these works into what he termed as La Comedie Humaine or Human Comedy which was a parody of Dante's Divine Comedy. The Human Comedy is composed of 90+ works by Balzac and they depict the slices of Parisian lives during Balzac's time (1799-1850).

Surprisingly, the writing is easy to understand and definitely not archaic. The parts involving Vautrin particularly the plot to kill the husband of a rich wife that Rastignac can marry at first gave me that feeling that this would be a crime thriller but it was just used to illustrate what Rastignac could be capable of doing to be rich. In the end, true to the bildungsroman form, when he looks back at Paris, having shed a tear for Old Goriot, he says: "Now, it's between you and me" and we know that he has just transformed to a better man.

Oh dear, my first Balzac and definitely will not be my last. My only problem is that he has 90+ more like this in his Le Comedie Humaine and how I could finish all those before I die. Considering that I still have 800+ 1001 books to read, I need to live up to 100 to finish everything.