Rating: 4/5

Joanna Parsons, upper middle class w/o a care in the world, married Carl May, who started his life in a kennel. Based on his tragic childhood, Carl didn't want children. Joanna was okay with this until she wasn't; she had a hysterical pregnancy when she was 30. Carl found this to be the ultimate betrayal - her unconscious had rejected him. He therefore played a trick on time and on hysterical pregnancies - he and Dr. Holly practiced parthenogenesis - asexual reproduction. They took one of Joanna's eggs and split it four times and implanted these eggs in the wombs of four women, effectively cloning his beautiful, perfect, but aging wife.

*spoiler alert*
I don't put spoiler alert at the top of the above paragraph b/c you the reader learn most of this from the back cover; all these details are covered in the first 33 pages of my copy. The stage has been set. At the time of the novel, Joanna is 60 and Carl is 63; Joanna knows nothing of her 30-year-old clones. She and Carl have divorced because Joanna was caught cheating on Carl w/ someone much younger; Carl then has this young guy killed (like he did their pet dogs - he was jealous of how much Joanna loved them). Carl is powerful; he runs a nuclear power plant. It is the 80s, and the Chernobyl disaster has just occurred, so Carl is at the forefront of the news. He has a new girlfriend who is "less than him in every way except age."

This book is chock-full of cleverness and begs for literary analysis. There is the clear reference to technology and genetics and the risk to human life. We are mere babes in the laboratory - humans can be cloned in this world, a world in which energy from nuclear power is only barely controlled, the implication being that cloning (stem cell research) is our next major disaster. In one interview, Weldon postulates that maybe old age isn't all it's cracked up to be - why do we strive to live longer when in fact those last 5-10 years are often riddled w/ pain and loneliness? Is all this stem cell business indeed only a search for the holy grail or never ending life? Why are we so afraid of death? (This conversation all happened using smoking as an example - she implies or questions whether those extra 5 years we get added on to the tail end of our life from not smoking are worth all the trouble?)

Fay Weldon is called a feminist; she talks around the designation in interviews (go read some of her interviews - she is totally fascinating and outrageous and amazing). However, note that parthenogensis involves an unfertilized egg and can notably be found in nature when males are in short supply. All of Joanna's clones are female; in asexual reproduction or apomictic parthenogenesis a successful genotype can regenerate quickly without wasting resources on male offspring who won't give birth - all offspring are better off female b/c females can have babies and continue the species. The above causes the science fiction imagination to kick - a world w/o men when sperm is no longer needed, or a way to reproduce when (good) men are hard to find. However, as we all know, clones are less fit b/c they are missing new, potentially beneficial genes from a second party, and Weldon gets into this a little as well - Carl wanted to make beautiful replicas of his wife, but once completed he cannot believe they won't also practice infidelity. This leads to discussions of the soul, of the concept of "I" (is the soul split in five parts or are there now five souls - is the soul tied to the DNA?) and of nature versus nurture.

This is a book about fractured women and about the future of the human race. I must read more by Weldon.