Rating: 3/5

Rebecca's Ten Life Enriching Lessons for Grownups:

I normally read children's books during Christmastime. Not only to catch up with my Reading Challenge (I am behind by 10 books as of this writing), but also, most of children's books have life lessons that can be good reminders for the coming year. New Year always means new beginning, new hope... Do you remember when you were still in school and after reading a story in class, the teacher asked you what was the lessons you learned from it? So, in this year's series of children's books, I will try to list the ten lessons I was reminded while reading a certain book.

1) We all can rise from mediocrity. Rebecca is a plain-looking 10-y/o poor child who is being sent by her mother to live with her two stern spinster aunts so as to have a better prospect in life. Mediocre in looks, she also started as mediocre in school but she triumphs over mediocrity in the end.

2) Speak up. Filipinos are basically shy people especially in the presence of white westerners. I think this was due to the fact that our country has been under Spain (white people) for 300 years and the USA (another set of white people) for 30 years. So, we are born to be submissive and subservient. Our American counterparts in the office oftentimes comment that we are silent during meetings and shy to offer our views and suggestions. In this book, Rebecca may have come from a poor family but she wins the heart of the Riverboro (Maine) people because of her loquaciousness and witty remarks.

3) Children should be spared from the sins of their parents. At the start, Aunt Miranda hates Rebecca because she looks like her dead father ("All Randall, no Spencer") who the aunt did not like for her younger sister and Rebecca's mother, Auriela. Children are born faultless. They should not be punished from or judged according to whatever wrongs their parents did. 

4) Don't underestimate the capacity of children to bear poverty, challenges and trials. We parents always worry about our children. We always think of them as helpless. Rebecca showed us that given so many problems at the same time: limited money to continue studying (and get brighter future) she also has to worry about taking care of Aunt Miranda and her injured mother back home, dead brother in the war and the unpaid home and farm mortgage.

5) Imagination can be boundless. Rebecca's main strength is her imagination that makes her question things or ways that we have been so used to that we accept them like blind men. I think this is by far, what I like most about her. However, I felt that this trait was not really given the attention that this deserved to make Rebecca's character truly unforgettable.

6) Children need adults to show them the way. Our kids (if you are a parent) or pupils (if you are teacher) are highly impressionable. Their whole beings are like dry sponge that are open and willing to absorb water. We have to be careful on what we show them. They look up at us like models.

7) Let your children develop friendships in school. When Jane becomes Rebecca's friend in school, both of them blossomed. They supported each other and if not because of that friendship, I don't think Rebecca would have surpassed all the trials and tribulations that came in her way.

8) Spontaneity can result to creativity. Sometimes we are too focused on structures (traditions, practices, policies, rules, etc) that they curtail our creativity.

9) Don't have too many kids if you are not rich. This seems too obvious and I admit that I am having a hard time completing my 10 lessons. However, if you really think about it, that time (turn of the century) and even now, or especially now, if you have 7 kids and you are a single parent, it should be very difficult to send them all to school or even to provide for their daily needs.

10) In the end, everything will turn out right. Rebecca shows to Aunt Miranda and to her mother that if we all strive to make things right, they will turn out right. At the beginning of the novel, her mother is worrying because of her decision to send Rebecca instead of Hanna to her sisters. But Rebecca makes a promise to her mother to be good to Aunt Miranda and Aunt Jane. The whole book is about fulfilling that promise as if saying to her mother that, in the end, everything will turn out right. It does.

Not as strikingly beautiful as Heidi or Pinocchio. Rebecca is half-Ugly Ducking, half-Cinderella. However, American children and young adults at the turn of the century were able to relate to her and this book because an instant bestseller when it first came out in 1903. (Source: Wiki). 

This is a classic American children's book so I guess there is no really use to criticize. It is an endearing story that can inspire all plain-looking girls to reach for their dreams by using their other positive traits and not to dwelling on their physical appearance.