Rating: 5/5

I’m a longtime admirer of Sylvia Beach, whose story this is. When I was twenty-one I went to Paris to try my hand at writing while starving. I turned out to be rather good at the second of these. While renting an icy garret at the top of the Hotel Novelty at Odéon, I made frequent visits to the Shakespeare and Company bookshop on the quai at St-Michel. Many visitors over the years have mistaken that shop for the one that coined the name, but the original Shakespeare and Company – a lending library as well as a bookshop – was founded by Sylvia Beach, daughter of a Presbyterian minister from New Jersey, with the aid of her mother’s life savings. Opening for business on the morning of November 19th, 1919, Sylvia specialised in books written in or translated into English, and in no time her shop became an essential meeting place for visiting English-speaking authors, some of whom used it as their Paris mailing address. The shop more usually associated with Sylvia was in the Rue de l’Odéon, but the first Shakespeare and Company was situated just round the corner, in the Rue Dupuytren. When I came across the address of the original shop some twenty five years after I stayed at the Novelty my mouth dropped open. The hotel was at 10 Rue Dupuytren. The original Shakespeare and Company was at number eight – right next door. It was like finding the bones of old Will himself in your sock drawer.

It was from 8 Rue Dupuytren that Gertrude Stein is said to have borrowed around seventy books in the two years before the shop moved to those larger premises round the corner. It was at number 8 that Sylvia, with no previous publishing experience, volunteered to produce the first edition of Ulysses in book form, and in the process became James Joyce’s most vigorous champion. There ought to be a commemorative plaque on the wall of 8 Rue Dupuytren, but there isn’t. There’s no indication whatsoever that the original Shakespeare and Company was housed there.

Sylvia ceased trading in 1941 after refusing to sell an officer of the occupying German forces her last copy of Finnegans Wake from her window display. Shortly afterwards she found herself in an internment camp, where she was held for six months. Almost exactly a decade after she shut up shop for the last time, an American bookseller called George Whitman adopted the name Shakespeare and Company for his own shop in the Rue de la Bûcherie – apparently with Sylvia’s blessing. The by-then celebrated banner gave his establishment a ready-made pedigree which to this day draws literary pilgrims by the planeload, most believing that they’re visiting the shop associated with all those famous writers of the past. 

Authentic or not, Mr Whitman’s shop, now run by his daughter – Sylvia Beach Whitman – filled both a gap and a need, not least for cold hard-up souls like me, eager for words they could understand and a spot of free warmth in which to pore over them.

(Some of the above is from my memoir, MILKING THE NOVELTY, but this isn’t intended as a plug. ML)
Sylvia Beach