Rating: 4/5

I was first drawn to Raymond Chandler's Philip Marlowe books by the old time movies. You know, the ones with Bogey and Becall; the hard boiled detective's and the femme fatales; the atmosphere so pungent you can feel it seeping through your TV screen even though it's in black and white and a cell phone could shoot a better picture.

So I thought I would give the books a try. The first one I picked up was the Maltese Falcon by Dashiell Hammett. I was a bit disappointed by it, because it felt too empty and dry.

So I decided to give Chandler a try. And it was like magic. Just a few pages in and you feel the warmth of the southern California days pouring in, the inky nights, the hot sun. You can smell the bay and feel the wind and hear the ocean sadly beating against the shoreline. You can feel the noir setting wrapping about you.

But the darkness is lit by Marlowe's sharp and witty narration. His dialogue is alive with the jaded weariness you could just hear coming from Humphrey Bogart.

And that might be the best part. The world seen through Marlowe's hilarious and weary eyes; his vivid, often sardonic and mocking, descriptions of people and places and even himself; his hilarious rejoinders.

The best description of these books is that they are alive. They feel real. They suck you in. 

At times, Chandler's description ( and by association Marlowe's) have words or phrases that my modern ears did not understand, but this is to be expected for a book so localized in its time and place. In a way, the world seems all the more vivid for it, and it's a world Chandler and Marlowe describe as dark and corrupt, but I cannot help wondering how they would see Southern California today.

The books are fantastic. My only complaint is often the stories and mysteries hang together by a thread, and sometimes the plot moves too quickly to follow, or turns on a tiny point that's easy to miss. But these are all small issues compared to the vividness of the writing, the delightfulness of Marlowe's dialogue and comments, and the realness of the noir world of 1930s/40s Southern California that takes you to an entirely other place and time.

Certainly a recommended read. Certainly a good read.