Rating: 4/5

Murasaki Shikibu was one of the women renowned for producing Japanese literature during the Heian Era. She is the author of the famous Genji Monogatari, and by the time this diary was written, she had already become famous as an author. As a lady in waiting to Empress Shoshi, Murasaki writes about the birth of Shoshi's second son, Atshuhira, in The Diary of Lady Murasaki. 

The translation of my edition is done by Richard Bowring, a British historian specialising in Japanese history and culture. He has done a highly commendable job. Without the detailed introduction provided by the translator, putting everything into context, I would not have enjoyed the book as much as I did. 

However, some confusions remain. For instance, I frequently had no idea who was who and how they were related. There were times when there was a list of names and while it might have made sense to contemporaries, many of these names are now almost obscure. Also, whom did 'Her Majesty' and 'Her Excellency' refer to? One of them definitely refers to Empress Shoshi, but which one? And it's a mystery who the other woman is. It could be Ichijo's mother or his first wife. 

The first half of the diary is a detailed description of the ceremonies taking place after the birth. Then at some point, the tone of the diary changes to become much more personal. As mentioned in the introduction, it does appear that only fragments of the original diary have remained. But though the rows of names and descriptions of robes does pall after a while, there are some interesting insights to the culture. 

It was amusing to read how much Murasaki appeared to despise Sei Shonogan, the author of the famous The Pillow Book. I wondered why until I did some research and realised that it made sense since Sei Shonogan served Empress Teishi, first wife of Emperor Ichijo, while Murasaki served Empress Shoshi, the second wife and consort. This speaks of interesting court intrigues but sadly, Murasaki doesn't get into any particulars.

Murasaki tends to be rather morose and depressed for most of the narrative when she is not in description mode. One does wonder what her story was. There was a time when she mentions holding Chinese books collected by someone close to her. Husband or father? Did she miss him badly and hence was so depressed? The book has left me intensely curious about this lady and her life!