Rating: 4/5

There’s been so much written about this controversial book that I’m sure I don’t have too many details to add that haven’t been covered before … so instead I’ll gather some thoughts that have been mulling around in my mind in the week since I finished reading it. 

First, I find this an important book in that it reminds us that this period in history – and the actions of the Germans - shouldn’t be blithely discounted with the standard “it happened because of the economic climate of the time.” As the mother of a high-schooler, I heard this as the primary lesson covered in their history class and it disturbed me greatly. As with most issues, I believe it’s more complex than that. 

Do I believe, especially after reviewing some of Mr. Goldhagen’s examples, that the common German people were more culpable than we speak aloud? Sure. It’s a disturbing thought. It should be. But before we jump on the condemnation bandwagon, I don’t believe this is due to some genetic marker inherent only in Germans (and I say this not because I’m partially of German extraction). Nor do I believe that dire economic times alone are enough to trigger such extremely sadistic treatment. 

I believe it was an historic “perfect storm” that included economics, bigotry and a charismatic leader, and possibly other things I can’t think of at the moment. 

Was there already an active bigotry against Jews throughout Germany? Sure. Throughout most of the world, in fact. Most Christian faiths at that time were disdainful of other Christian faiths, so it’s no great leap to acknowledge that they were particularly intolerant of Jews or any other non-Christian faith. 

And, as history has shown in instances such as Jim Jones’ Jonestown massacre, a charismatic leader can persuade large numbers of people to do appalling things and feel righteous about doing them. This is particularly true of religions, which have a tradition of creating an elitism among believers by convincing them that they’re superior to nonbelievers who may be lesser (even evil) human beings. Sometimes they even convince the believers that their souls are in jeopardy should they not eradicate nonbelievers. This didn’t begin or end with the Germans of WWII. 
I won’t even start in on the very human condition that makes these events possible (although, should you doubt that, I suggest you revisit “The Lord of the Flies”). 

I don’t disagree with those who state that Mr. Goldhagen is unable to be impartial with his research, or that the book is difficult to read. There were many times that I found the writing repetitive and pedantic. 

But I also find it an important book to read because, as I look around our globe, the air is easily stirred and there are “perfect storms” gathering all around us. Even among us. We need constant reminders of what all of us are capable of doing given the right situation. For that reason, I’ve given the book high stars and recommend that it’s worth reading.