Rating: 5/5

This is a beautiful novel. I read it about forty years ago, and have held on to it through numerous book culls. I just reread it, and it was as good as I remembered. The writing is gorgeous, the setting is immersive, and I loved all the characters. It can also be very funny at times. 

A lot of great lesbian literature was created in the early 80s, and this is an example of that. This is not to say that it’s particularly romantic or erotic, but rather that it mirrors the worldview and spiritual consciousness of many young lesbians of the time, a sense that a different world is possible and that we can work together to create it.

In some ways, the novel is a homage to the landscape of California – to its trees and flowers and weather systems. And it makes sense that the novel would feature “the big one”. It’s almost as though the earthquake is a character in the story. She changes everyone who survives her and moves through her. For some, she deepens their connection with the earth, and for others, she breaks apart their social systems and pushes them to create other, more communal ones. 

The hermit, Lucile Handy, is the central character, and she’s a singular being, attuned to the earth, to people, and especially to horses. She is a wanderer, but as the novel begins, she’s settled down to a job tending the horses at a feminist resort in Guerneville, California, close to rolling hills and redwood forests. 

The resort is owned by Silvia Silver, who is as free in her own way as Lucile is in hers, mainly because she has a fortune at her fingertips. There are also the townspeople, including the dramatic Zorra Beth. Then there’s the narrator, Mimi, who has visions, but is frightened by them and their accuracy. There are some great older women as characters too – Mimi’s mother, Olga, who wheels around on an adult-sized tricycle, and has visions of her own. We also meet Lucile’s very warm and accepting mother, Erma, who turns out to have her own big secret. There are even a few men in the story, and they find their own place in the plot. The horses are very individual and quite picturesque. 

Some quotes: 

&lt; The hermit has lived with her one bush of an eyebrow for longer than you have and she’s not embarrassed. Besides, she doesn’t even own a mirror. Maybe she pictures herself as just another horse. Surely she’s not aware she has eyes like diamond cutters, eyes that burn through to the honest bones of your soul and see nothing else, and all from beneath that dark tufted cliff of eyebrow, the eyebrow of the archetypal father in a delicately bony female face. The eyebrow overhangs her deep blue eyes like Judgment Day over the seeker. When she smiles, Judgment Day crinkles in the middle and the eyebrow looks like a dark bird poised with wings outstretched across her forehead. She smiles and you feel forgiven. When she laughs the bird takes flight. She laughs and you feel reborn. &gt;

&lt; Zorra Beth claims that she would like to shrink her own flamboyant ego, Lord knows she’s tried, if only for a weekend at a time, every exotic spiritual technique that might do it. She doesn’t know she’s trying to take the basil out of pesto. &gt;

&lt; The hermit knows many buckeyes personally. Here is one of her favorites, spreading out from a dip in the grassy hillside near Austin Creek. “Aesculus California,” she whispers as she rides toward it. “Buckeye, beautiful buckeye you.” The curves of the bare silver branches seem to reach out and pull the hermit’s heart open. She slides from Corina’s brown back and drops to her knees at the edge of the buckeye’s broad low expanse of branches. Seen from below, through the perfectly placed twigs, the sky is bluer than from any other vantage point. &gt; 

&lt; I don’t ask the hermit to name six ways the world could be destroyed. She would hear the pain in my question, and she would take me for a long ride or she would sit me down with a tray of coffee seedlings to plant into the black greenhouse soil – but though her response to my pain be immediate, the question itself would pass through her without finding a single resonating chord of concern. &gt; 

&lt; Rain drips from the poncho hood onto my nose as I walk, and with each step I feel the busy swirl of my mental landscape dissolve further into the unmistakable reality of this exterior. There is no doubt about it – my thoughts are water soluble, and minute by minute there is less of me and more rain. &gt;

&lt; A hermit is not a person but a state of being, a particular attunement on the radio band of consciousness, an ability to listen and hear, a state of grace. Hermits listen to weather reports from the source. They watch the news inside, they follow their own advice. The hermit in you is listening, now. Awake at three a.m., maybe you are listening to the hermit. &gt;