Rating: 5/5

"When I got over to Leonard's Christmas Eve night, he had the Kentucky Headhunters turned way up over at his place, and they were singing "The Ballad of Davy Crockett," and Leonard, in a kind of Christmas celebration, was once again setting fire to the house next door."

The Two-Bear Mambo (named from a nature program where two bears get it on) is the third book in the long-running Hap and Leonard series. I am seriously loving these two characters so goddamn much! Their banter is ::chef's kiss::

This installment begins with Hap stopping by Leonard's house on Christmas Eve, only to discover that Leonard has set fire to the drug den next door. Again. For the third time. Because of course. Just another day in Texas!

Needless to say, the police are getting fed up with these calls.. even if Leonard does help the drug dealers escape the fire in the end. Police Lieutenant Hanson makes them a deal to avoid jail time - all they have to do is track down his girlfriend who went missing. The same girlfriend who happens to be Hap's ex, Florida. She was investigating a case in Grovetown that involved a legendary blues musician, undiscovered recordings and a young black man supposedly committing suicide while in jail. Grovetown is notoriously racist and unfortunately the Klan is a constant presence. The locals don't take kindly to the duo sniffing around their town, asking questions. They do not let Hap and Leonard off easily. Far from it. This is by far the darkest volume yet!

Often Lansdale makes the reader uncomfortable. He isn't a safe writer. He takes on bigotry and violent racism issues head on. At times, the extreme language could overshadow the storytelling, but it doesn't. Because it's JOE FUCKING LANSDALE! With his brilliance at the helm, it never feels gratuitous. There’s an emotional depth to his work that lingers.

Profanity-laced, brutal and dark, yet so goddamn funny. This series will have you cringing one minute and earnestly weeping the next. Arson and ass-whipping and cynical humor!

Since I'm just getting started, there is still plenty more Hap and Leonard for me to get caught up in and this delights me! This has been my favorite installment in the saga, for sure! I am completely invested.