Rating: 2/5

I read this book for the first time maybe 12-15 years ago when I was a middle teenager (started young, what can I say). And it always stuck with me as one of my favourites from Connie Mason who at that time was my favourite (probably because I was a hopelessly romantic virgin with a head full of clouds, which wasn’t such a bad thing). 

But reading it as an adult I have a few major issues:

1. As an Australian living in Sydney myself it’s extremely clear that Connie didn’t understand Australian history or geography particularly well. 

Whilst the historical event, the Rum Rebellion, takes place during the events of the book it’s extremely simplified and ignores a lot about the surrounding context of the time. 

The Hawkesbury river isn’t that close to either Parramatta or the Sydney CBD. By car they’re about an hour or more between each. You wouldn’t go to Parramatta for the day from the Hawkesbury river by horse and cart, and the road between Parramatta and Sydney was dotted with many hotels along the way. 

And don’t get me started on the Aboriginal people - they don’t have villages, they’re nomadic. They, and their awful interactions with settlers, were very misrepresented.

2. It’s very repetitive. 
It makes every, except really Roy and Martha, look kind of bad. All the men are after Casey and all the women are after Dare. The former is more likely given the ratio of men to women in colonial Australia which was sadly sort of known for rape of convict women (particularly in the earlier days by soldiers), but how desperate are all the women supposed to be ? 

3. The writing is not good.
I mean it’s trash and it’s enjoyable as trash, but reading it as an adult I can’t enjoy it as much because I can’t ignore the bad writing. The conversation is stilted and boring, and some sentences repeat with a lot of little mistakes that really should have been picked up in editing.

Now don’t get me wrong l don’t hate the book, and it’s still a fun read because it’s light-hearted romantic trash, but it raised a lot of points to me that I couldn’t ignore. I’ve actually not read the sequels (or at least I can’t remember doing so) so I’ll give them a read next to finish it off. I’m not expecting them to be brilliant like I never expected this one to be, but as long as they’re entertaining that’s the most important thing.

I think though that I in context, in the modern conversation surrounding rape culture and feminism, as well as my own background in Heritage and history, will probably never enjoy these books, or rather any of Connie’s books, quite the same way again.