Rating: 4/5

This book was published in 1977 but has a very authentic feeling to it of what it was like to be in WWII and in England during the tough times. Wikipedia on Sheila Branford says During World War II, she worked as a volunteer ambulance driver, and I am sure those memories stayed strong in her. She is best known for The Incredible Journey. Unfortunately I didn't feel as strongly toward this book. While it was well written, the 3 parts felt a little disjointed, and the middle part told while on ship was not as interesting to me.

I know a lot of people don't like it when the dog dies in the end, so those folks will like the book from that aspect, but if you don't have sadness in the end, they often introduce sadness in the beginning of the book. Fortunately that is not too drawn out. I would rather highlight the happy part. A gypsy like lady with performing animals, including a dog, a monkey, and a donkey, helps rescue Corporal Sinclair, of the Royal Army Service Corps, from the advancing Germans.

I liked this bit when she entertains the soldier while war is approaching:

On the fourth note the toe began to tap, and the dog rose to his hind legs and began to dance. The tune had a lilting rhythm, and in perfect time he pirouetted in a circle, forepaws held out and head held high. The music changed in tempo, slower now, and at the end of each phrase the dog nodded his head so that the silvery bells accompanied each last three notes of the repeated phrase. Now he brought the forepaws into action, one at a time, each cluster of bells set in a different pitch to the nodding head. 

It was the performance of a virtuoso. The strangest thing was that there seemed nothing preposterous, only an inherent grace and precision. The little dog danced as though he lived for it, as though he would will his audience to listen to his bells and live for it too. 

Not far away, guns rumbled a reminder. Three-quarters of the western world lay reeling in the bonds of occupation, the wake of smoldering destruction left by these gray-green uniforms. A few short miles would soon end the agony of France, and then all Europe would be overrun — yet for this moment, in this one place, there was nothing but a silvery tinkling and a lilting tune and an audience who had become children again, spellbound before a dog who danced on a sunlit road to the bidding of the flute.'

Corporal Sinclair is able to stay out the Germans way, but he the gypsy lady is not so lucky. Then-

'An hour later, as he turned from wary custom to look hack along the road, he saw, less than a hundred yards behind, the furtive figure of a dog, slinking along on the verge. Sinclair stood stock still for a moment, his scalp prickling. The dog stopped too, cowering. A tiny face with anxious eyes and wrinkled brows peered over the dog’s head.'

This starts the succession of caretakers of the dog and of the little monkey.

Sinclair feels he has to help the pair (dog &amp; monkey) because of the lady helping to save him from the journey. Even when wounded, he doesn't want to part from the animals:

'“I will do his talking,” said the dry precise voice of the Frenchman as MacLean worked swiftly to change the dressing. “He wishes to tell you that he is not wounded, that he must walk off this ship, for he has these two companions who have come a long way with him. They have no one else apparently. He is obsessed. They are a trust. He must walk off, for if he goes to hospital he will be separated from them, and this is insupportable.” 

From there, the care of the dog is passed on to Sick Berth Attendant Neil MacLean. His 'Aye, I'll see to him, never you fear' pledge to care for the dog and get it back to Sinclair, continues in the theme to be faithful to the dog. The faithfulness of dogs to their people is a very common thread, but the theme of humans trying to be as faithful back can also be a great story line.

Part 2 of the book is on ship, the dog with MacLean now, and the monkey with someone in the ships mess. What I enjoyed most was Part 3 of the book. 

Maclean leaves the dog with someone and things go awry as the city is bombed by the Germans. 

The dog is adrift in a place of chaos. Here is another quote I liked:

' It seemed that Man was entirely preoccupied with his immediate survival and salvage and as yet his compassion could encompass only the humans of his shattered world. Often the mere animal offense of being concerned only with their own business of survival brought about the equally primitive reaction of the hand reaching for the nearest missile, or the toe of a boot finding its mark. That a hungry scavenging dog would feed on the overturned contents of a meat safe while ten yards away lay the body of the one who had planned to cook those contents offended by its very reasonableness; that rats should emerge sleek and prosperous from the same cellars where man now sought refuge, or a spider painstakingly spin a web across his newly blown in windows — all such behavior had somehow become a terrible violation.'

Another person who gets caught up by the bombing is an older lady named Alice Tremorne. She went off went to a pit in her garage where she had put up several bottles of sloe gin. She is there when bombs go off near the garage and trap her inside. This third part of the book I thoroughly enjoyed. How the dog and Ms. Tremorne meet is first told from the dogs perspective and then from the lady's. Here is her description:

'It was in one of these more lonely moments, during her second night if she had known it, that as she leaned against the pit edge, and clenched and unclenched her fingers against their growing stiffness, she suddenly heard an unfamiliar creaking in the immediate timbers. She shone the weak beam of the light in this direction, calling for help in a husky whisper, then suddenly, out of nowhere came the warm wet touch of a tongue on her fingers. Instinctively repelled she jerked her arm back; then as though to reassure her, she heard a soft whining and knew that this was not the repulsive questing of a hopeful rat. Her fingers moved again to touch a muzzle, ears, to be covered again by an eager tongue — it was a dog that had come out of the blackness to her, the only living thing that knew or cared apparently that she still existed.'

So there is some great stuff in this book. If instead of 3 parts they had made one part with less from the middle I would have enjoyed it more. 

On last quote: 'Yet another indomitable little dog had risen from the ashes.'