Rating: 3/5

My personal review of first reading begins: “Not one of her better efforts,” and that would be my TLDR review today.

This book irritates me in many little ways. Just for starts, I don’t like a hero who thinks nothing of forcibly kissing lower class ladies. I dislike the hero in Venetia for the same reason, and the only reason I don’t despise the hero of Devil’s Cub for it is that he’s perfectly right that the average virtuous young girl wouldn’t have run off with him like that, and because Mary so effectively mimics her sister I thought his theory that Mary was trying to cut her sister out, and maybe trick him into marriage in the bargain, was not completely unreasonable, even though it was wrong. I’m also more tolerant of someone doing something stupid and cruel in a rage than just because they think they have a right to it. I’m more forgiving of passion than pride, I suppose, and with Worth, it’s pure pride behind that kiss.

Then there’s the fact that the Taverner’s just happen to stumble over Lord Worth not once, not twice, but three times before they figure out who he is (and vice versa). I don’t mind that sort of thing in the Pickwick Papers, or in some of Heyer’s more light-hearted books, but it’s a bit much to take in a mostly serious book. And this is a surprisingly serious book, for a Heyer Regency; among other things, someone is trying to kill the heroine’s brother, and there’s an all-too-true-to-life sexual assault. Which latter fortunately doesn’t go much beyond kissing, but the heroine is understandably unnerved.

And I expect I’m alone in this, but while I enjoy Heyer’s Beau Brummel as a character, for some reason I am convinced he is not true to the historical personage, and I don’t like him being here anymore than I do the various Royal Dukes. Heyer’s historical ladies of Almacks have never bothered me, partly because I had never heard of them before, but mostly because she neither idolizes nor makes fun of them; the same cannot be true of the male historical characters in this book. I wish she’d renamed them – it’s not like we wouldn’t know who they were, but with a different name she wouldn’t be so thoroughly misrepresenting an actual human being who once lived and breathed.

But the big way it bugs me is the relationship between the hero and the heroine. I do not like the way the hero is constantly hitting on her, and then scolding her for daring to think he’s doing exactly that. That’s classic gas lighting, which in the real world is an abusive tactic, not the sign of a healthy relationship. Plus he shows no remorse for having kissed her against her will; on the contrary, he brings it up right regularly, either specifically mentioning it, or by calling her “Clorinda,” the name he’d assigned to her then.

At one point, he not only taunts her with the kiss, he outright threatens to beat her. He does then “apologize for the whole”, once he’s cooled down a bit, but the guy’s got a temper that makes him act childishly, which is dangerous in a grown male, and the narrative never recognizes this. Worse, through much of the book the reader knows that the hero is a good guy, and that he’s working behind the scenes to keep the heroine’s brother safe, because we see him in conversations the heroine is not privy to. So when the heroine starts to suspect the hero of being the one who is out to kill her brother, she looks right stupid. The narrative is very strongly on the hero’s side of things.

Not that the heroine is particularly admirable either. She makes no attempt to rein in her brother when he’s being an idiot, which gets them both into trouble more than once; she so predictably goes contrary to the hero’s excellent advice that he starts deliberately driving her to do what he wants her to by lying and saying he wants the opposite (even though every time she follows his advice, it goes well, and she recognizes this); she faints under pressure; and she’s the sort of idiot who thinks Brummel’s advice to be unique means flinging caution to the wind and engaging in a contest that most people considered foolish and stupid when it comes to young men doing it. Why she thinks this is a good plan I do not know, and her county bumpkin past does not excuse it to my mind.

Granted, she has her good points, as does the hero, but I find neither one of them particularly charming or memorable. And the same can be said of the book. It’s a Heyer, so still better than many another Regency. But I wouldn’t recommend it to someone new to Heyer.