Rating: 4/5

This is the third and final book in the original storyline (there's a fourth book published recently) of Wally Smith, alias Shonshu, a chemical engineer magically teleported to a fantasy World ruled by the number seven : seven ranks of skill in any given profession, seven cities ruled by swordsmen, other seven cities ruled by sorcerers, seven companions to form a fellowship for Wally, seven legendary swords created by master artisan Ciuxin, seven top swordsmen to lead the tryst (a sort of crusade) against the sorcerers, and so on ...
In the first volume, Wally had to come to terms with living in a violent world, with its strict rules of honor and with its Goddess intervention in his life.
In the second volume, Wally had to solve the puzzle of the prophecy describing his mission and to deal with the moral dillemas raised by the conflict between free-will and divine intervention. The sorcerers are introduced as mortal adversaries of swordsmen, with a second theme dealing with the perception of technology as magic to the uninitiated.

In this third installment, Wally has only two pieces of the puzzle left to solve : how to gain control of the tryst / crusade, and what to do with the ultimate sword he received from the Goddess, the symbol of his status as Chosen Hero. For the first part, he will have to defeat in combat the champion of the seventh rank swordsmen then put in practice some of the real world strategies from his time as a petrochemical plant manager in order to control the dangerously volatile warriors:

 The tryst needed not only Wallie's superior knowledge of the enemies' powers, but also some good management techniques – aim identification, cost-benefit studies, critical path analysis, command structure definitions, budgetary forecasts ... 

It is the second part that gives the series its epic scope and raises it above the average sword and sorcery adventure. There is little actual fighting beyond a couple of duels and skirmishes, with the rest of the novel concentrating once again on morality and responsibility, on duty, friendship and free-will ( The gods had forced this, snapping at his heels and driving him like a sheep into this pen ). From a localized war for control of several cities in a bend of the River, the coming of the Seventh Sword may signal either the end of civilization or the dawn of a new era.

The prose serves the theme remarcably well, with a lean, focused approach favoring character development and snappy dialogue over unnecessary descriptions yet the worldbuilding feels consistent and complex. The sense of humour tempers and balances passages of emotional upheaval, and the overall theme is one of brains over brawn, of chalenging the reader to figure out the pieces of the puzzle in advance. I had some slight issues with fortuitous coincidences in the plot progression  like capturing the chief adversary with a trap in the form of a children's toy hot air balloon  , but they are explained, like in the previous books, as 'the hand of God' - the same one that put the whole epic journey in motion. 

As my first David Duncan series, this was a pleasant surprise, well written, fast and entertaining, holding its own well against the grimdark favorites of the last couple of years. I plan to return to the author, after I read  The Death of Nnanji .