Rating: 2/5

I had read this book in the mid-90's and really liked it. Having such a selfish, post-modern mindset, it was a revelation to me then and I desperately need it to wake me up! While it has MUCH fabulous advice about love being a choice and details the kinds of love the Scriptures lay out for us and most of the marital counsel is wonderful, I threw this copy of the book in the trash when I was done re-reading it this morning. It had three flaws that I could not overlook, no matter how fantastic the advice about being a wonderful, loving mate might be. They were: 1. He describes Genesis 3 and the CURSE (for cryin' out loud, how do you miss that it is a CURSE and utterly ignore the clear context and the rest of the Scriptures on this one is beyond me. . .) as God giving Eve sexual desire for her husband when He says, "Your desire shall be for your husband and he shall rules over you." That is so abjectly wrong that I do not want to have such sloppy eisegesis sitting on my shelves lest someone (or one of my kids) think I condone this kind of schlocky theology. In the CURSE God is clearly stating that Eve will want to be the leader in the home. . .she will want to rule over Adam, but he will rule over her instead. This is not sexual, even in the most remote way. Ugh! 2. His explanation about forgiveness is off as well. Forgiveness is not an activity we engage in for our own selfish wellbeing. See an excellent article in The Christian Research Journal about forgiveness for clarification. 3. He advises married people, especially newlyweds, to disengage from their families of origin. . .move away from them, don't spend much time with them, don't talk to them all that much if you can avoid it, etc. Hello? "Leave and cleave" is not about abandoning your family of origin. Ed Wheat is the antithesis of a multi-generational visionary in this section of the book. It ignores the clear historical practices surrounding the application of this scripture in the culture in which it was written AND it neglects the mountain of scripture that negates what he is teaching. Husbands should MAN UP and rule their own households well and not be leeches on Mommy and Daddy, or letting Mama rule their new homes. They need to be a blessing to their wives and chidlren AND their parents. The parents in the family of origin are supposed to be blessing and edifying their married children and teaching and training their grandchildren. Kinda hard to do if you follow Ed Wheat's advice and move across the country, don't come home for Thanksgiving and never pick up the phone if it's your mother! (I dramatize, but the point is the same.) So, for these reasons, I chunked the book in the dustbin. There is plenty of great advice to be had about being a wonderful lover in ever sense of the word that isn't blighted with these serious errors.