Rating: 3/5

First of all, I think Malamud is a terrific writer. The Magic Barrel is one of my favourite books of all time, so I was particularly interested to get my teeth into a full-length novel, rather than the brilliant vignettes of that other work.

And I came away disappointed.

There is a lot to like here. Malamud's writing is as sharp and poignant as ever and there is a nice irony in him writing a detailed, spiritual biography of a biographer who is unable to capture the heart and soul of his latest subject (DH Lawrence). The characterisation of Dubin is another great plus. He comes at his principle character from every angle, pinning him down and casting every light onto his actions, movements and motives so that it is impossible for him to escape the spotlight.

And yet . . . Nothing much really happens, which makes Dubin an odd subject choice. Yes, there is some interest in watching him have what is, fairly simply, a mid life crisis, but Malamud has little original to say about the events and Dubin is, without question, an unsympathetic character and not a particularly interesting one. This is made worse by the fact that the surrounding cast seem to be drawn from caricature - Kitty, the slightly wacky wife with some depressive neuroses or Fanny, the free-love chick (well, I suppose it was the 70s) who (for reasons that are unfathomable and never really explained ) finds Dubin, 30 plus years her senior, wildly attractive. The children,meanwhile, are barely drawn at all and their experiences - a reaction to the Vietnam war, a typically 70s trip towards Zen - seem utterly functional.

This might have been ok in a book a hundred or so pages shorter, but Dubin - like his slog with Lawrence - goes on and on. And, again, the choice of Lawrence is peculiar. While there are hints at how Lawrences work and life might parralel Dubin's, they are slight. You don't really get a sense that having Lawrence as a subject was critical (or used in an interesting way).

Three stars then for the commitment to the characterisation of Dubin and the quality of the writing.

Now I'll go back to the short stories!