Rating: 5/5

An unusual collection of short stories featuring daughters and their mother-figures.

I gave this five stars for a variety of reasons:

1. Sheer range. The authors, the story style (semi-autobiographical, post modern, retelling of a fairy tale, historical etc), the cultures, the pacing - I wasn't bored for a moment, regardless of how much I liked each story. And the authorship ranged from very well-known authors (Sylvia Plath, Margaret Atwood) to authors I hadn't heard of. 

2. Pacing. The order the stories are presented in is fantastic. It can be difficult to keep momentum in a collection of short stories, but they were ordered in a way that made it easy to keep going on to the next story.

3. Topic. The stories weren't written for this collection, so they aren't all obvious in their approach to the mother-daughter relationship. As a result, there isn't an overarching message, which I really liked. Each story was allowed to bring up and treat differently the (often difficult) emotions brought up by the bond. Regardless of your relationship with your mother, you will find a story that you relate to and that makes you die a little on the inside. It ends up feeling very truthful, which I don't always feel when reading mother-daughter stories.

4. It just contained some really lovely stories. My favourites were 'The Voice of Authority' by Dina Mehta, and 'Everyday Use' by Alice Walker, because I related to them the most. I don't think I'll forget the story 'A Visit from the Foot Binder' any time soon either.

The other reviews here don't seem to like Jamaica Kingsland's piece 'My Mother,' and I can admit it's an acquired taste. It's heavily symbolic, and if you're not interested in working out the meaning of every sentence, it might be worth skipping. It reads like a series of dreams, so I guess it depends if you're the kind of person who likes to listen to other people describe their dreams. If you're interested in it, it reveals a really complex and intense relationship relationship where both mother and daughter fight for physical and emotional space, keeping in mind the unbreakable tie between them. I enjoyed it.

5 stars, will pick through it again.