Rating: 5/5

I really enjoyed this book. It surprised me with its subtlety and nuances. The novel is about a boy named Bix, and it's told from the first-person perspective of Bix's friend, Jerome. The book takes place in the 1960s, and Jerome is black, and Bix is white. Jerome first sees Bix at a baseball game (Bix is a shortstop), and he's immediately drawn to him, but they meet when Jerome is the first black student to integrate Bix's middle school. 
The book is extremely complex as it deals with integration, race relations (that scene with Jeb...), family, friendship, sports, mental health, and more. What I loved the most about this book, though, by far is Jerome's voice. He's such a well-developed character, and he's HYSTERICAL. I laughed out loud multiple times reading this book. He's just so funny. The thing I loved second most is the dynamic with Jerome's mom and brothers and Bix's family dynamic, which is surprising in its complexity for any book but especially a middle grade novel. When we find out what really happened with Bix and his family, I was definitely caught off guard. Finally, third most is the sports talk. I love basketball, so reading a book that has basketball as one of its main characters was really fun. I love the commentary and symbolism of Jerome's hidden court and the concept that the moves you make on the court are what make you, you. I also appreciate the relationship between Bix and Jerome and Jerome's honesty about his feelings about Bix. I also found the book incredibly honest about race, mental health, friendship, brotherly love, and family. I think that's what makes the book special to me--the honesty and no frills of Jerome but also of the story and the book itself. It reminds me of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest in that way. 
I highly recommend this book, and I will definitely reread it to get more out of it, especially because I read the ending on the beach and wanted to know what would happen next so read very quickly. A second time, I'd read more slowly and get even more out of it.