Rating: 5/5

I will complete my thoughts tomorrow 

As with other collections of short stories, I am now giving a quick update on all the stories, so ....
The Empty House
The wonderfully dramatic return of Sherlock and the capture of Moriarty's right hand man

The Norwood Builder
A man with a grudge tries to frame the son of the woman who spurned him. Sherlock flushes him out of hiding literally

The Dancing Men
One of my favourite short stories involving childish stick figures that convey messages to a woman who thought her past was behind her.

The Solitary Cyclist
Working as a tutor at a house in the country entails Miss Violet Smith cycling alone across a moorland twice a week, but who is the man with a beard following her, and what has happened to the odious Mr Woodley.

The Priory School
The Duke of Holdernesse's son goes missing from his school but was followed by a German master on a bicycle, can this be true. Holmes plays bloodhound following tracks across the heathland but is too late to prevent a fatality.

Black Peter
Holmes spends a day stabbing a pig with a harpoon, whilst Inspector Hopkins investigates the murder of the terror, that is Black Peter. First suspect is the son of a disgraced banker, is he lying or was Black Peter already dead.

Charles Augustus Milverton
Holmes is called in to be the intermediary in a blackmail scam with the odious Charles Augustus Milverton . Unable to secure the documents in question, Holmes resorts to plan B, but all doesn't go to plan.

The Six Napoleons
Lestrade starts Holmes on what appears to be a criminal fixated on Napoleon. What does this person have against the Emperor. However what starts as a joke soon turns serious with a murder thrown in.

The Three Students
Temporarily residing in one of Englands great University towns (hmm, I wonder which one), Holmes is called in when a professor realises the exam paper he has set, has been read by one of the students.

The Golden Pince-Nez
During a wild tempestuous November night in 1894, Inspector Hopkins braves the weather to call on Holmes and Watson. Professor Coran's assistant has been murdered at Yoxley Old Place, but not before imparting his dying words of "the Professor, it was she".

The Missing Three-Quarter
The captain of the Cambridge University Rugby team calls on Holmes when his star player goes missing just days before the Varsity match. Holmes is soon on the trail but has he met his match.

The Abbey Grange
Watson is awakened early one Winter morning in 1897 and thanks to Holmes is on his way to Kent even before the dawn. Insp Hopkins needs their help in particularly nasty murder, but he solves it before they arrive, or has he ?

The Second Stain
And so Watson relates the very last story of his good friend and companion, Sherlock Holmes. Well Sir ACD tried again to make it Holmes' last story, but we know again that didn't work. 
In this story Holmes is approached by senior members of the government in yet another missing document story. Only 3 people could handle a stolen document of such import and coincidentally one of them is killed shortly after. But where is the document ? And why has the rug been moved ?

A truly wonderful collection that demonstrates that Sir ACD, really is a (the ?) master of the short story