Rating: 5/5

I read this about two months after my second stay in Rome in 2019, so sadly never had the book itself in the city. The city though, was of course, on my mind, throughout. 

The Metamorphoses is an 8 AD Latin narrative poem which consists of 11,995 lines, 15 books and over 250 myths. It is known as one of the most influential works in Western Literature, influencing the likes of Dante, Shakespeare, Chaucer. It is accredited with having over 200 characters. My edition stands at over 700 pages long. Elements from the poem have been depicted throughout art forms for centuries. On a beach in St Ives, Cornwall, one year, I read Ted Hughes' Tales From Ovid, his brilliant retelling of twenty-four of the tales. (For a taster of the myths, it is certainly a good place to start, at only 250 pages.)

Most of the myths are familiar: Apollo and Daphne, Narcissus and Echo, the Rape of Proserpina, Arachne - Niobe, Medea and Jason, Theseus and Aegeus, Scylla and Minos, the Minotaur, Daedalus and Icarus, Hercules, Venus and Adonis, Orpheus and Eurydice, Midas, the Death of Achilles, the Ships of Aeneas, Ajax, the Fall of Troy, Ulysses and Circe, and countless more. It ends with the apotheosis of Julius Caesar. 

The short prologue reads, and distinguishes the theme of the entire poem:

   Changes of shape, new forms, are the theme which my 
spirit impels me
now to recite. Inspire me, O gods (it is you who have even transformed my art), and spin me a thread from the
world's beginning
down to my own lifetime, in one continuous poem.

Ovid says so himself; the art of transformation is the crux of this giant work. And it is true, we witness the Gods turning men into animals, stones, constellations. It is about love; it is violent; it is also witty, Ovid does not write without humour at times. I remember to this day the humour spinning from the absurdity of some of the events, made absurd by Ovid, who is always seemingly self-aware. At the end of "The Creation" in Book 1, from line 84, the first mention of a metamorphosis occurs, that of man: 

  Where other animals walk on all four and look to the 
ground, 
man was given a towering head and commanded to stand 
erect, with his face uplifted to gaze on the stars of heaven.
Thus clay, so lately no more than a crude and formless 
substance, 
was metamorphosed to assume the strange new figure of 
Man.

Where Ovid calls Man "strange", Hughes, to compare, likens us to Gods:

  Then Prometheus 
Gathered that fiery dust and slaked it
With the pure spring water,
And rolled it under his hands,
Pounded it, thumbed it, moulded it
Into a body shaped like that of a god.

"The Untangling of Chaos, or the Creation of the Four Elements", Hendrik Goltzius—1589

The gods are mischievous throughout. At times their actions seemed completely unprovoked, uncalled for, at other times, they were cruelly fair. Over the 250 myths we see gods and men fight, gods and gods fight, men v. man, heroes against creatures and gods, we see almost everything pitted against one another. And despite the humour, there are poignant moments of feeling, beauty and emotion. 

Like in one of my many favourite passages in the poem, the fall of Icarus in Book 8:

  He ceased to follow his leader; he'd fallen in love with the sky, 
and soared up higher and higher. The scorching rays of
the sun
grew closer and softened the fragrant wax which fastened 
his plumage. 
The wax dissolved; and as Icarus flapped his naked arms, 
deprived of the wings which had caught the air that was 
buoying them upwards,
'Father!' he shouted, again and again. But the boy and his 
shouting
were drowned in the blue-green main which is called the 
Icárian Sea.
His unhappy father, no longer a father, called out, 'Icarus!
Where are you, Icarus? Where on earth shall I find you?
Icarus!'
he kept crying. And then he caught sight of the wings in the 
water. 
Daedalus cursed the skill of his hands and buried his dear son's 
corpse in a grave. The land where he lies is known as 
Icária.

"Landscape with the Fall of Icarus", Pieter Bruegel the Elder—c. 1560 
[Icarus' legs can be seen in the bottom right of the painting, protruding from the sea, surrounded by feathers.]

Or, in Book 10, Orpheus leading Eurydice from the Underworld, which has always been one of my favourite myths; Ovid tells it hauntingly:

  Not far to go now; the exit to earth and the light was 
ahead!
But Orpheus was frightened his love was falling behind;
he was desperate
to see her. He turned, and at once she sank back into
the dark.
She stretched out her arms to him, struggled to feel his 
hands in her own,
but all she was able to catch, poor soul, was the 
yielding air.
And now, as she died for the second time, she never
complained
that her husband had failed her—what could she complain 
of, except that he'd loved her?
She only uttered her last 'farewell', so faintly he hardly 
could hear it, and then she was swept once more to the land
of the shadows.

And because I've somehow managed to avoid any of the metamorphoses in the book, the transformation of Daphne into a tree in Book 1: 

   [...] She had hardly ended her prayer when a 
heavy numbness 
came over her body; her soft white bosom was ringed 
in a layer
of bark, her hair was turned into foliage, her arms into 
branches. 
The feet that had run so nimbly were sunk into sluggish
roots;
her head was confined in a treetop; and all that remained 
was her beauty.

"Apollo and Daphne", Gian Lorenzo Bernini—1622–1625
[This is one of my favourite statues ever, life-sized and made from marble. It is housed in the Galleria Borghese in Rome, which I have never seen. It is my priority, on my next trip to the city, to finally see the sculpture in person.]

Ovid's report of Achilles' death is short and intriguing in Book 12:

  So saying, he pointed the hero out, still hacking the 
Trojans
down; then turning Paris' bow in the same direction
he guided an arrow with deadly aim at Achilles' heel. 
If Priam, after the death of Hector, had cause for rejoicing, 
this surely was it. So Achilles who'd vanquished the 
mightiest heroes 
was vanquished himself by a coward who'd stolen the wife 
of his Greek host. 
If he was destined to die at the hands of a woman in war,
he'd rather be cut down by the axe of Penthesilea.

(The most popular recent depiction of Achilles and the story of Troy is Madeline Miller's The Song of Achilles, which actually chooses to omit the concept of Achilles' heel as she used principally Homer's Iliad as her inspiration, where it is not mentioned as it is here in Ovid.)

I could continue quoting elements of the poem forever. The myths are immortal, of course, and this new verse translation by Raeburn is stunning: it is fresh, readable, but maintains a beautiful poetic voice. Hughes' retellings are also brilliant and I recommend them. I read them after Ovid's original, which I preferred, though it is a long-haul. Any lovers of myth should flock here. Ovid is witty, profound and above all, genius. Of the Roman texts I've read, studying Classical Civilisation in college, this is still the greatest to date.