Rating: 5/5

A GEN-X DIVINITY STUDENT RETHINKS SPIRITUALITY AND OTHER SUBJECTS

At the time this 1998 book was being written, Kristoffer Cox was a divinity student at Luther Seminary. 

He wrote in the Introduction, “My purpose in writing this book is to present to you something that has become very valuable to me, simply because I believe you too might find it to be valuable… this ‘something’ is the living God, who loves us, is very much concerned for us, and is actively involved in our world… As an Xer, I have spent a lot of time contemplating the universe, the existence of God, what or who that God is, et cetera… my approach bears a number of presuppositions regarding Christianity at the truth… my purpose is not to offer any amount of apologetic ‘proofs’ for the reasonableness of Christianity. This… is well beyond the scope of this book… The three areas I discuss in this book are: (1) our reality as we typically experience it, (2) the reality of God, and (3) the reality of living life in our world.”

He observes, “We are the first generation expected to have a lower standard of living than our parents… Moreover, as long as Boomers maintain the societal control that they so covet, Xers will only be allowed to operate within Boomer-prescribed guidelines. For example, the Boomer controlled music industry is why our generation had to find ‘alternative’ ways to produce and market our own music. I ran into similar barriers when trying to get this book published in a Boomer controlled publishing industry.” (Pg. 21)

He points out, “Close to 50 percent of Xers are from broken or remarried families… Our most basic relational unit, the family, became expendable. These and similar facets of our upbringings undoubtedly cause us great amounts of pain… Our early disillusionment with the false promises of our elders’ value systems has left us with apathetic, skeptical, and even revolutionary world-views. Our resulting views have both positive and negative implications. Positively, they are a defensive reaction against the lack of attention and false promises we have endured. One benefit of being home alone as youth is that we value relationships. We long for real, meaningful relationships, and we are skeptical of people who prefer to remain superficial. False promises have caused us to confront life’s institutions, including things such as government, religion, marriage, and even our world’s truth-claims, with caution.” (Pg. 23)

He explains, “In the remainder of this book, we will explore our vision and direction as Xers using the question, ‘What is the point of life?’ as our underlying motivator. This question is appropriate for our generation. Our future seems to hang in the balance. We seem to be cut loose from our moorings… But because we have been set adrift in an age when information flows like never before, we have the advantage of a more objective (although sometimes overwhelming) view of our situations and options in life than previous generations ever had. This … forces us, to rethink some of what were previously held by others as basic presuppositions to life.” (Pg. 26)

He notes, “when spirituality is something that we seek, either as the object of our search or for the enjoyment of the chase alone, we again fall into the trappings of following a project. The project of spirituality is found in all spiritual endeavors and religions, including many approaches to Christianity. Pursuing spirituality is a way that we hope to escape the realities of our creatureliness and it is therefore a project… Instead of freeing us from bondage to unpleasant reality, our search for transcendence actually becomes must another project bearing the opposite result of what we intended. Rather than freeing us, our quest for spirituality frustrates us and imprisons us in the same reality that we desire to deny.” (Pg. 41)

He says, “let’s now take a look at a few of the many parallels between our GenX experience and the Christian experience. First is that our concerns. Hopes, and dreams for our own generation and future generations seem largely to fall on deaf ears. Many of those who control our society refuse to take us seriously… Jesus experienced this frustration too. He was the bearer of good news about God’s healing love, forgiveness, and reconciliation… Second, we know about pain… we are deeply aware that our world and the people in it are far from perfect… Similarly, Christianity also suggest that our world is imperfect…. Third, we value meaningful relationships. Many of us were cheated out of some of our most primary relationships in life… God also values relationships. God advocates that we maintain strong, meaningful relationships with other people as well with God… Jesus accepted people as they really were, with all their imperfections… A fourth parallel relates to prejudice. We are sick and tired of the problems in this world unnecessarily caused by racial, cultural, social, and generational prejudices… God loves us all equally, regardless of our situation in life. In fact, God hopes for reconciliation!... God wants a level playing field and equality for all people. God wants us to life in true community.” (Pg. 54-56)

He asks, “trying to explain away the tension between God who is good and the existence of evil in the world is a pointless task. The tension is there---period. Why does this tension exist?... Why must we face tragedies like the Holocaust, untimely deaths of infants and family members, family breakups, and deadly natural disasters? In fact, why doesn’t God just completely get rid of all pain, including even death? The ‘why list’ could continue indefinitely. The answer to all of these ‘why’ questions is elusive. The bottom line is that God has not told us why we must live in a tension with bad stuff… we are not told why God doesn’t just take us all to heaven right now, ending pain and suffering for everyone. Does this mean that God is not good? Not at all! It just means that we haven’t been able to crawl inside the mind of God and get answers that we don’t have.” (Pg. 96)

He summarizes, “It might help us to remember that Jesus did not live and die only for Generation X. Through Jesus, God same to reconcile the whole world to himself… If God loves the cosmos, God loves Boomers too. We can say, then, that God is omnigenerational… All generations together, including Xers and Boomers, make up the body of Christ.” (Pg. 110)

This book will be of keen interest to not just Xers, but to all who are interested in the religious ideas of younger generations.