Rating: 4/5

I have mixed feelings about this book. On one hand, it is well written and lovely. On the other, it's severely lacking in romance, and that's half of the the appeal of Regency romances (the other being the Regency period). I thought about giving it three stars, but it's truly a well written book with likable characters and deserves a higher rating. The book is really about people's everyday lives. It doesn't have villains; it doesn't have high intrigue or drama; it's quiet and understated and, as mentioned, perfectly lovely. My biggest problem with it is that I wanted to spend time with Lady Charlotte and Sir Roland, and I ended up spending time with everyone else in their village and very little with them.

The premise is very simple and pretty much like the blurb. Lady Charlotte (24) has been like a mother to her brother (19) since their mother and then father died. She's extremely competent in taking care of the household and has no interest in London seasons due to her brother, but also because she's not interested in frivolities. They live a pretty quiet existence, and rely on their neighbor, Sir Roland (44, I believe) for sound advice. Sir Roland was a friend of their father and has been a good friend to both. The part of the blurb that is completely wrong is anything related to passion. Charlotte and Roland behave like friends the entire book until the one page with the declaration. To be fair, it's a very lovely denouement, which makes you wish there were a bit more romance between them throughout the book. Not necessarily kisses, but more like lingering touches or terms of endearment. The bulk of the story seems to be about the brother, the Duke, coming of age and the designs of grasping relations to ensnare the Duke. This was also done well and without high drama (the Duke is a very nice and responsible young man), but I did get tired of it after a while. There's more to the plot, which involves several characters, but it's difficult to talk about everything. It's basically all these events happening to the characters in this village with the focus on Lady Charlotte and her brother. 

I believe my enjoyment of the book was very much tied to my like of quieter stories without dastardly villains, sweet romances based on friendship, and mature heroines and heroes (no rakes). Even the age difference that I usually dislike was not a huge deal here since the heroine is very mature and older by Regency standards (as opposed to a silly 18-year old) and the hero's age was not really commented on or much part of the narrative. The author does a great job flashing out all the secondary characters and creates a nice little Regency world that I very much enjoyed being part of. If you don't mind the lack of romance, this is a very pleasant read. The style reminds me a bit of Joan Mellow and Arabella Brown whereas the romance is just a small part of the plot, and the character growth and relationships are the most important aspects.