Rating: 5/5

"...In the effort to compensate for losses abroad, each industrial nation attempted to supply its needs by exploiting to the limit its own resources of land and forest, water and metals and minerals. The fuel needs of the machine were considered paramount, but the effort to keep the machine operating led to destruction of basic resources needed for the production of food. Agriculture itself had long before been mechanized, industrialized, assimilated into the corporate empire, the farmland submerged beneath the growing cities or mined and stripped to produce the power needed to keep the cities functioning, the machines in motion, agribusiness alive. The immediate result, as certain cities vanished, was the economic strangulation of others. Religious fanaticism joined with nationalism and secular ideologies to destroy and sometimes to self-destroy the sources of power on which the overindustrialized nations depended. Invisible poisons spread through the atmosphere, borne by the winds from the guilty to the innocent. But all were innocent, all were guilty.

"The majority of nations had lost the ability to be self-sufficient. Now every nation was losing this ability. Those who suffered least were those accustomed to poverty and hunger; those who suffered most were the inhabitants of the rich nations. And in the richest nation of them all the harshest changes came to the few but precarious, monstrous cities that had once appeared, briefly, in that nation's arid West; in those desert lands where, as the cautious had foreseen, 'cities were not meant to be'. Most of the people had disappeared, fleeing to the greener regions from which, as everyone knew, their packaged food came."

I love Edward Abbey! Published in 1980, Good News is relevant today in our culture obsessed with post-apocalyptic meltdown, environmental degradation, and survivalism. Although the apocalypse didn't happen in this book, the world is dramatically different, suffering from an economic and societal collapse by overindulgence of natural resources. America is more The Road in this story than it is The Walking Dead and the bleakness of the American southwest is the perfect setting for a book that offers political commentary, typical Abbey-esque characters (Jack Burns, the tough old cowboy who never dies, outshoots sharpshooters even though he only has one eye, singularly focused on his mission, always helping the helpless with a sense of duty), renegade academics and students (enemies of the state), a stereotypical Hopi (a character written with all due respect and reverence for the sacred), and pretty incredibly spot-on predictions for the future. Some of the references are clearly dated but most of the time, it's hard to tell if Abbey wrote this in 1960, 1980, or 2010.