Rating: 5/5

Do you know the feeling? The one where you begin to read a book or see the first few frames of a movie or the first few notes of a song and you take a quick breath because you know you are about to be fundamentally changed? This is how I felt in the first few pages of this gorgeous book.

In "Walking on Water", Madeleine Le'Engle explores the relationship between faith and art. She spends most of the time reflecting on what makes certain art "Christian" or "non-Christian", and then rightfully concludes that the job of the artist is to serve the art. To serve the gift which they were given by God, and in this act of service and creating "art" they are glorifying God and therefore it is Christian. She also talks about how art that mentions Jesus can often be secular.

I wept tears of relief through much of this book. Through my entire life I have inherently KNOWN that art is not evil, that it is a gift from the Lord. In my adulthood, I have experienced shaming from other Christians for loving the things that I love. For reading books about dinosaurs, future worlds, and superheroes. For watching movies that are depressing and deemed "sinful" because they're not made by a "Christian" movie studio. For letting my child read books about witches, wizards, outer space, and fairies. She even spends time on the concept of "naming", one that I am often drawn to and moves me to tears when I encounter it in any work, even so-called secular art.

However I love these things because the Lord has drawn me to Himself within these stories. On the outside, a book like Harry Potter is written off by Christians because J.K. Rowling is not one. However, the fact that so often in my life I have been the boy under the stairs, the intelligent but lonely academic, the bumbling friend and yet have been called by Christ into a great adventure is to me a reflection and glorification of Jesus, even if that's not Rowling's intention. Isn't the Lord bigger than His work? Isn't this why we can truly see Him in almost everything, even the secular? (She does spend some time talking, as well, about how there is such a thing as truly secular art that misses the mark).

Reading "Walking on Water" gave voice to my struggles of faith and art in adulthood. I am not a writer, but I am a reader and an avid consumer of seemingly secular art. I am grateful for Le'Engle, and for her obedience to write down her passionate discourse and her own struggles with her faith and how it relates to art.

I recommend this book to everyone. Even if you're not a Christian. Even if you're not an artist. Even if you don't care about the relationship between the two. As human beings, we are participants in creation and we are deemed to be "God's masterpiece"... we are works of art. The relationship between art and faith often reflects our own views of how we relate to our Creator. I am thankful, for one, that I believe that we can walk on water as we keep our eyes on our Creator.