Rating: 4/5

Feeling invisible and unappreciated....

Reaching a limit and acting on impulse, Delia found herself walking away, hoping to leave her despair behind her.

Of course, there was only so far that she could go before her heartache caught up with her. So often a parent or spouse will feel like they have been trapped by their decisions in life. You follow the socially accepted pattern: marry, have children, raise your family. 

But when that family sees you only as an unpaid housekeeper and constantly belittle you and scorn your suggestions and opinions, you either bonelessly disappear into your marginal role in their life, or you strike out and make a better life for yourself.

I thoroughly sympathized with Delia: how often have we - as parents or caregivers - felt marginalized, unheard, taken for granted? Delia suffered enormously from her spontaneous decision to leave it all behind, but, ultimately, she gained from her self-inflicted suffering as well...

... and grew stronger...

Anne Tyler was very clever: ironically, Delia left her unhappy family home behind, only to find herself living in the town her ancestors originally came from! Delia was able to observe other relationships in the new town that had adopted her: everyone had their own set of burdens to carry. Sam, Joel and Nat all shared the same unconscious flaw: they were intolerant of their offspring's every action, constantly criticized and corrected them, and did their unwitting best to alienate their children's affections. 

No spoilers here but Nat's final, defeated speech about his second chance at fatherhood in his senior years summed it all up: time warp indeed! Back to the future with a vengeance! 

A very enjoyable, often humorous read: I'm rating this a 4.4 out of 5 rounded down to a 4 because I felt that this story went on a tad too long. Not sure what I would have edited out but I was pretty much emotionally spent by the time I turned the last page: the Grinsteads are hard work! 
Still, very highly recommended, because Anne Tyler is a treasure!