Rating: 4/5

Although I'd read a couple of Collins' short stories, prior to opening this classic novel (one of two the author is best known for) I'd never encountered any of his long fiction. But I'd long regarded this book as a must-read; so the occasion of a group read of it in one of my Goodreads groups provided a welcome impetus to finally read it. It proved to be a thoroughly satisfying reading experience, and hopefully won't be my last from this author, since I have two more of his novels on my to-read shelf.

I've shelved this both as "general fiction" and as "mystery-crime fiction." In many respects, it's a typical Victorian classic novel of manners, with many stylistic characteristics in common with other 19th-century British authors, especially Dickens (who was a great friend of Collins). The study of human character and human relationships is similar in feel and quality to what the reader would find in other well-written novels of the day. But the central strand of the plot concerns an unusually large, yellow-tinted fictional diamond (the titular "Moonstone"), supposedly sacred to the Asian Indian moon god, and plundered from his temple by medieval Moslem conquerors. In the novel's Prologue, we learn how this jewel was supposedly stolen again, from the treasure vault of a Moslem sultan, by a shady British army officer at the real-life conquest of Seringapatam by the East India Company in 1799. Our main story takes place ca. 50 years later, in England in 1848-49; and we learn on the first page of that part that there the diamond disappeared yet again, under mysterious circumstances. How and why will be the central question of the book, making it, as one reviewer described it, a "proto-mystery," published before the mystery genre was a book-trade thing, but a recognizable influence on the genre novels and stories of the later 1800s and beyond.

Collins was definitely a writer of the Romantic school, like Dickens, and like such writers as Doyle, Mary Elizabeth Braddon, and Dostoevsky, all of whom he perhaps influenced. Exotic elements and frank appeals to an array of emotions abound here. But the novel also has a real vein of humor, sometimes satiric humor of the Juvenalian sort. It's written in the epistolary style --that is, as a succession of memoranda, journal entries, and letters written by various characters (the prologue is also a letter); the diction is convoluted, in Victorian and Romantic fashion, with no shortage of big words, and the speaking style of the characters in their dialogue tends to be formal, as it actually was in the upper and middle class speech of that day. Some modern readers find these features off-putting (though I'm not among those that do). But the characterizations (both of characters you like and those you detest!) are masterful and enormously lifelike, and the crafting of the plot is perfect (or, as Dorothy Sayers said of the novel as a whole, "...about as near perfection as anything of its kind can be"). The mystery is a genuine puzzler; I guessed part (but only part!) of the solution fairly early on, and other aspects of the problem eventually had me completely mystified. (And even at times questioning everything I had believed about it up to that point!)

It can fairly be said that this is not a deep novel of ideas, in terms of messaging and thought content. Some reviewers profess to discern an anti-imperialist or anti-colonialist message here. Personally, I don't. Collins certainly finds it morally objectionable, and even criminal, to murder Indian natives and steal their sacred objects; but all of the decent English characters here agree with him, even if they have no apparent problem with forcibly conquering and dominating the same natives' country. There are aspects of the tale that cast Victorian class snobbery in an ugly light; but I think this is a perception that modern readers bring to it, rather than one that Collins is trying to create. An important character, Miss Drusilla Clack, is a mercilessly depicted religious zealot who thinks that she and her own ultra-ascetic, censorious ilk are the only true Christians; but I don't think Collins agreed with her on that, and I honestly don't think he intended to use her to attack Christianity, or religion as such, but rather just to pillory distortions of Christian faith. I do think there is ultimately a positive racial message here; but it's relatively subtle. So this is perhaps not a Great Novel, in the sense that some classic novels with deep moral and spiritual content are. But it's certainly a very, very good one, that I'd recommend unhesitatingly to any readers who enjoy older fiction, or who would like to start exploring it.

Note: The Dodd Mead Great Illustrated Classics edition that I read is enhanced by several black-and-white plates that reproduce paintings or drawings of Collins at various stages of his life, or illustrating scenes from the novel, and also by a number of excellent black-and-white drawings of scenes in the tale done by William Sharp, and copyrighted in 1944 (apparently for an earlier printing by Doubleday). It has a short (a bit over four pages) Introduction by Basil Davenport that mostly just summarizes Collins' life and writing career; it touches on the features of the real-life Saville Kent case that suggest aspects of this novel, but doesn't really present spoilers as such. (Davenport makes one major blooper here, though, where he confuses a "bloodstained nightgown" with a paint-stained one!)