Rating: 4/5

We've all heard of Superman. Whether you've read about him or watched his TV series and/or movies, many people can agree that Superman is a character that has been rehashed too many times. How often can we hear his life story without getting tired of it? We know this guy so well, that it feels like he's been around since...well, always. Man of Steel is nothing new in the plethora that is DC.

  

Told over 10 years, we watch as Clark Kent goes from high school to Metropolis to the Daily Planet. He invents the alter-ego Superman and has his mommy sew his costume. Superman's skin is unbreakable. You would assume he'd need endless replacement costumes during his career, what with all the flying around policing petty crime, but nope! When Clark wears clothes, they don't rip or get dirty. How nice for him.

Speaking of Clark thinking he's a cop, he flies over to Gotham City to arrest Batman. This guy is so full of black and white justice that he tries to turn Batman into a villain. Lol, right...

  

There are a few redeeming qualities to this story, though:

-Like how Lois is a badass. Crazy, but a badass. She has no problem driving her car into a lake, insulting the most powerful man in Metropolis, or grabbing a gun from a criminal during a hold up. Lois has an attitude that dares anyone to take her on. Clark's as dull as a wall, so here's hoping Lois can change that.

  

  

-Lex Luthor thinks he's a pimp and won't take no for an answer. He reminds me of a kid who just wants to join the popular club but was rejected. He's got the whole world, but he peaked in high school. He even goes as far as to 'clone?' Superman. The science of this is not explained, but we can guess the logic used is from 1938.

  

-The art is dated but that's part of the nostalgic fun. It's the 80s and you can tell it's the eighties, but it is drawn very well. You have to give props to John Bryne for remembering Lex's male-pattern baldness as time skips by. The color choices are pleasing to the eye and don't drag you out of the story (unlike seeing a high school Clark Kent with gorilla muscles).

  

It's interesting to see that as Clark (his true personality) he is clueless, passive, and almost pathetic with women. Superman does way better. Even when Clark is at his darkest, he seems feeble instead of strong. Almost like he lacks confidence in who he is as a person. This, I assume, stems from not knowing his origins, his biological parents, or what he's capable of. Or, I could be reading too deep into this and it's just really shitty writing (we won't even talk about the lame average Joe 'disguise'.

  

  

Oh, and it's not a comic without some random fake science side plot:

  

And a REALLY ugly villain:

  

Overall, 3.5 stars. This volume was very campy, but it was solid in its time. It helped lay down the bricks for what we know of Superman today. For that, I enjoyed this read.