Rating: 3/5

The best part of this book was the reference to "I Am the Very Model of a Modern Major General" by Gilbert and Sullivan. Now that I've gotten that out of the way, I can get down to some more specific critiques.

But before those critiques, I feel I should offer a disclaimer. I was homeschooled. I also go to a small private university with rigorous academic standards that I have started to realize are not standard college/university fare. Personally, I have always had a thirst for knowledge, sometimes wonder why not everyone is that way, and have intentionally pursued cultural literacy (though I would have just called it "being cultured" until reading this book) for many years. I'm not trying to toot my own horn and imply that I have achieved a higher level of intellectualism. I just want to say that I understand that I'm not in a strong position to go bashing our public school system when I have never experienced it myself or even had much interaction with those who have and when I have not experienced much outside of a small minority slice of the culture.

First off, this book is obviously dated, being published in the late eighties. However, the author acknowledges that the contents of cultural literacy (CL, for the sake of my fingers) will change over time as old items become obsolete and new ones enter the vocabulary. This is especially true in this era of social media with its viral youtube videos and meme-saturated vocabulary. I do agree that the core contents of CL remain relatively stable, but I think that even Hirsch could not have foreseen the rate at which even that core would morph over the years. As I perused the list of items known by those considered culturally literate, I couldn't help but think that many people today wouldn't know half the items on the list. Granted, some of that can be attributed to the natural state of flux in which CL will always be, but I think that other factors are the continuing decline of education in our country and the de-emphasis on the humanities that seems to be almost epidemic, even in many institutions of higher learning.

I found the chapter on the schema fascinating as I love learning about how the mind works. The way the human mind makes associations and sorts things out is so intricate and unfathomable--something that could only have been devised by a wonderful creator.

I couldn't help but feel that Hirsch is trying to advocate a cure-all for the problems of our nation. I agree that education is important--it's something I'm passionate about and plan to pursue as a career--and that improving our educational system will improve certain aspects of our country's state of affairs, and I also agree with much of what he says when it comes to CL equipping people to be responsible citizens and to improve their quality of life, but I know that America needs more than just educational reform.

I also have to wonder what happened to all those culturally illiterate people who went through the public school system of the 70's and 80's. How did they make it in the real world? Do they have jobs, can they support families, do they know anything? Excuse my sarcasm, but there were times while reading this book when I felt like Hirsch was saying that people who didn't attain CL would be doomed to a life at the lowest levels of the social stratosphere. One doesn't even need to know who Shakespeare is to be able to do well in many of the jobs out there. You don't know how much it pains me to say that, but it's true.

All in all, this book was informative, if a little less than engaging. On a personal enjoyment scale, I'd give it two stars. I gave it three because there's more that goes into a good book than how much I enjoy it. I've found that I will probably never see eye to eye with any non-fiction author who isn't a Christian because of our fundamental worldview differences, but that's not a bad thing, and I enjoy being challenged to interact with such authors.