Rating: 4/5

My paternal grandfather was one of those gruff old Midwestern guys who grew up in the Depression, smoked like a chimney, and had a hard time connecting with his grandsons when we were very young. And his granddaughters? Forget it. Let's just say he related better to adults.

So when my grandmother died and my grandfather subsequently took it upon himself to pick out birthday or holiday gifts for me, I inevitably treasured these items more than other gifts, if only because they represented to me his conscientious attempts to put himself into the mindset of a 13-year-old kid, which you can believe didn't come easy to him.

In 1987, he gave me a mass market copy of The Witches of Wenshar. I've carried this book with me ever since, though I haven't read it until now. 

The reason I waited thirty years is because, as a teenager, I wasn't really into reading fantasy. Science fiction, yes--absolutely. But fantasy, not so much, which is odd--because I was really into Dungeons &amp; Dragons at the time. But although I liked The Hobbit, I failed to read The Lord of the Rings past The Fellowship of the Ring, which, to me, seemed to be about nothing but endless feasts and strolling through dark woods talking about brotherhood or some such. This, of course, is not the kind of conversation I would have had with my grandfather, who was no fan of genre fiction. But as I mentioned above, the fact that he tried to pick out a book he thought I'd like is what made it special to me. 

Thirty years later, my interest in fantasy stories has strengthened, so I was--at last--ready to give The Witches of Wenshar a try.

What a great book! I don't mean a Great Book (this isn't something The University of Chicago should add to their literature courses), but a great fantasy novel. It features a fairly complex protagonist (Sun Wolf, a sword for hire whose gruff demeanor coincidentally reminds me of my grandfather's own personality), a strong female sidekick, an interesting cast of supporting characters (particularly the king's genre-defying daughter and son), a nice bit of world building, and a spooky (indeed, Lovecraftian) abandoned city on the edge of the desert haunted by spectral demons.

Furthermore, Hambly's prose is refreshingly free of cliche. The locations don't read as carbon copies of Tolkien's Middle Earth; the world feels real and lived-in. Though some of the minor characters might not be as well-rounded as a reader might like, none of them speak in the stock phrases of fantasy, and Hambly doesn't saddle them with that faux-medieval idiom that's so irritating when done poorly. In other words, this book doesn't read like so many fantasy novels I've read: that is, as if the author had written it over the course of a long, coffee-fueled weekend. 

This may sound shamefully stereotypical but, based on recent reading experiences (especially the novels of C. J. Cherryh and Ursula K. Le Guin), I'm starting to prefer the work of female genre writers to that of male writers (with a few exceptions). In trying to imagine the relationship between Sun Wolf and Starhawk as written by a man I can't believe Starhawk would have been as strong a character as she is (at least not if this hypothetical man who wrote the story had written it in the '80s). Perhaps that's unfair of me. The me of 2017 doesn't actually have much more experience with fantasy novels that the me of 1987, so I could be completely wrong. But that's the impression I get. 

Anyway, a very enjoyable novel. Thanks, Grandpa!