Rating: 4/5

Follow the Drinking Gourd is a historical fiction book about slavery. An old white sailor named Peg Leg Joe wanted to help free the slaves. He would help the slave owner around the plantation but then at night he would teach the slaves who worked on the plantation a song that would lead them to freedom. Joe went to every plantation that he could and taught every slave on those plantations the same song about following the drinking gourd. One day, a slave named James was going to be sold to another master, tearing his family apart.James, his wife Molly, their son Isiah, old Hattie, and her grandson, George all remembered that song and decided to follow the stars to freedom. They walked all night and by daytime, they hid in trees because slave catchers were trying to find them. When night came again, they walked and remembered Joe's song. They traveled for weeks but only during the night. They finally reached the river's end and they saw the new path leading to the freedom land. Peg Leg Joe was waiting for them so that they could cross the Ohio River together. Peg Leg Joe was taking them on a path known as the Underground Railroad. Along the way, the family would be hidden away in safe houses until it was safe enough to travel again. The families of the safe houses helped the slaves all that they could. The slaves were able to rest and their wounds were healed. They were offered warm beds, hot meals, clothes, baths and the most important thing was protection. Still following the drinking gourd, the slaves ended up on the shores of Lake Erie. The family of five boarded upon a steamship which carried them to Canada. At last, they were safe and earned their freedom because they followed the drinking gourd. This book is for children that are in the intermediate ages because slavery should not be taken lightly and more mature children should read it. All the illustrations in this book have a shape which is a rectangle. Within the picture, there is a definite line where the colors meet. The colors are more earthy colors like brown, gray, green and blue. There are not really bright colors because the illustrator is trying to keep the mood of the book sad because the topic is sad. Brighter colors are not used until the very ending because they get their freedom and are happy. I would recommend this book because slavery was an important part of our history. Even though it was not fair, it needed to be examined so that America did not do the same thing over again. This book would be great to introduce to students during Black History month so that they can realize the hardship that the slaves had to endure in order to get to the freedom land.