Rating: 5/5

I saw this as a film, a wonderful rendition, in 1959 when it was first released. 

The next time I saw it almost ten years later, I too was in a monastery, as a monk or priest-to-be. I was struggling with my belief and finally left, a reluctant atheist.I can clearly remember after the film, asking my companion monk why he thought Sister Luke had left her religious order.His reply was that she had lost her vocation.I was startled. 
Still am!!

To me, Sister Luke's religious order could no longer contain her. She was too much of a realist. She had neither lost her faith or her vocation.She had just kept growing and refused to stop.I, myself, felt that I was growing and regardless of the then bitter pill of atheism, with no Dawkins or Hitchens to support me - there were no popular atheists writing in those days - I followed my reasoned and reasonable doubts right out the Catholic Church's Front Door. I had sought help- to be told by one priest that my atheism was a big problem to me, but NOT a big problem. Another told me to separate my philosophical and theological worlds, as if two contradictory truths could co-exist in one mind.

I hope Sister Luke never regretted her chosen path. Me, I have no regrets about entering the monastery and absolutely none about leaving.
And none about my atheism which I now wear comfortably. Today I still can say with a sense of relief:"Thank God I left and Thank God I'm an atheist."(And She says:"That's OK ,mate.")

Sister Luke is a novel based on fact. Kathryn Hulme took her story from a real Belgian nun who in fact felt a deep nostalgia for her convent days. So like me she was reluctant but determined to follow her heart or instinct and has to some extent remained so.
I recall that she and Kathryn Hulme lived together and having just done my research Find that she and the woman portrayed in the Nun's Story were lifelong partners. Many gay people entered religious orders to give their lives a sense of purpose, some even becoming popes!!Two I know of in my lifetime. 

I have reread "The Nun's Story" and seen the film too several times.
It gives the best depiction of a monastic life I have yet encountered and shows how a fictional/storytelling genre can have a distinct advantage over a documentary/factual rendition. 
It is a read I'm sure you won't regret.

PS In conjunction with this book, the first person account of Monica Baldwin in her "I Leap Over The Wall" also about her convent life and her leaving of it would be worth a look.
This is a real Rip Van Winkle Story ,since she entered the convent in 1914 and left about 28 years later during the Second World War when society had made remarkable changes in every area -fashion, media,communications, transport,vocabulary etc etc!!!She does finally reveal why she left and I have not mentioned it here.