Rating: 4/5

A nice selection of essays for the armchair linguist. Occasionally jargon-heavy, sometimes humorous, and generally fascinating. Topics include place names, various dictionaries' roundabout dodges to avoid defining "sexual intercourse," terminologies for passing gas, and rotating strawberry madonnas (Steve Bonner's essay on Nullspeak was particularly enjoyable. It's worth noting that some of his nonsense phrases would make excellent band names).

Fun bits:
"I have often wondered why, if there is a word to describe a silent fart, there isn't also a word for a silent fart which smells, a silent one which doesn't, a loud one which smells, and a loud
one which doesn't. Such discriminations would, don't you suppose, improve the precision of the English language." P 87. Apparently the term for a silent fart, which must be a Britishism, is "fizzle."

Polysemania: "an abnormal awareness of possible ambiguity; an uncontrollable tendency to bring to mind the inappropriate or unintended sense of a word." 105

Joe Queenan's piece "When Everything Was Everything" makes the incomprehensible claim that the phrase "if you're not part of the solution, you're part of the problem" is extinct in the United States. Not only is that phrase alive and well, it's well-known enough tou have a geeky joke based on it: "if you're not part of the solution, you're part of the precipitate."

From "Assing Around" by Jessy Randall and Wendy Woloson: 

"/Working your ass off/ is the most difficult form of working; there is no further amount you can work. (Conversely, of course, if you do a /half-assed/ job-as opposed to whole-assed? - you have taken a cavalier attitude and not done all you should.) The phrase /sitting on your ass/ implies more than just sitting- since, after all, on our asses is where we all do that- but adds the sense of laziness: hyper-sitting." P 319 

"If someone wants to fight you, she might say she's going to /kick your ass/; a boxer in a match can be said to have had his /ass kicked/ even though the ass is below the belt and therefore off limits in a fair fight. What the phrase contributes in colorfulness it lacks in intensity-after all, the ass is probably the least painful area to be kicked." 320