Rating: 3/5

Finally finished! (I had the page count wrong on almost all of my updates.) 
I don't like to admit this, much less to actually do it, but there were parts I skipped here. For me, it had to happen. As much as I devour anything related to the Holocaust some writings mesh with you and some just don't. I'm not a fan of poetry and while I did find a few that really resonated, many more just didn't because of my lack of understanding for poetry. 
The 'Painters of Terezin' section was amazing and I can't wait to read more about that im particular. There is also a 'Drama' section, with only one featured, by Joshua Sobol, that I skipped. I didn't even start it - I knew by looking that I couldn't read something in that format. 
The fictional stories make up a far larger portion of the book than non-fiction and there is a seperate section titled 'Journals and Diaries' that was amazing, as one would guess. 
If you're even partially well-read in the matter of the Holocaust you'll encounter some authors you already know, you'll probably even come across whole stories that you've read. This happened to me three times if I remember correctly. 
I can say that every single story in the 'Non-Fiction' and in the 'Journals and Diaries' sections were enlightening for me. Out of the 'Fiction' section there were a few I didn't "like" if I can use that word. For example, Aharon Appelfeld's wasn't the best for me although I was compelled to finish it and Tzili really caught my interest. I'd love to witness some conversations between intelligent people about Jakov Lind's story that was included here. It's not for everyone, I thought it wouldn't be for me, and it turned out that while it was unlike anything I've come across it really had "it". Pierre Gascar's was another, and the last, that I felt wasn't "like the rest." (Can anyone tell I have a hard time finding words if they aren't positive when it comes to this?) 
In the end, it probably had something for just about anyone and while I consider it absolutely invaluable, because of it's length, the different arts featured, and the level of the writing, I'd encourage only certain people to go after this. I'm more of a memoir/diary kind of girl I guess. I am happy that I read this and I found an outstanding number of authors and books I hadn't heard of to check out.