Rating: 4/5

First off, don't miss the lovely stepback courtesy of Inka:

Awesome. Now for the story...

"An ambitious monarch divided them. Loyalty to King Henry compelled Rand to secure and hold Bois-Long for England; her loyalty to mad Charles obliged her to retain the château for France." 

The guy: Enguerrand (Rand) Fitzmarc has just been rewarded for faithful service to Henry V, and he's now the first Baron of Longwood. But that comes with a price - he's to cross the channel and marry the current mistress of Longwood - and she's French and loyal to the mad King Charles. This doesn't bode well for wedded bliss...

The girl: Belliane (Lianna) Bois-Long (Longwood) likes being mistress of the castle, and is none too pleased to learn that Henry of England has chosen a husband for her (an English husband at that!), so she finds herself a French one and makes it all legal before Rand arrives. So smart, she thinks she is, but her new (older) husband has other plans - he wants his son to be the heir to Longwood and that means not consummating the marriage. 

So...Rand arrives in France to claim his bride, but before that he comes across this beauteous maiden in the forest and he has no idea this maiden is his intended bride, and Lianna has no idea that the handsome stranger is the one she should have wed. Well now, the attraction is pretty strong between the two, and Lianna does need an heir and since her husband's off in Paris or something attending court, what's a girl who needs an heir supposed to do? Hmmmm?

This was a good, solid read, especially at the end where things end up with a bang at the Battle of Agincourt. Plenty of plot twists and turns, I'd have to say my only complaints about the story is Lianna's obsessive loyalty to the French. I understand loyalty to one's country and crown and all, but it took way too long for Lianna to wake up and see the forest through the trees, and poor Rand being the worse off for loving her and trusting with all his steadfast heart. I wanted to strangle her until the very end where she pulled out and saved the day. Whew.

This was originally published as The Lily and the Leopard and recently rereleased as The Mistress of Normandy, and according to the title page on the Kindle edition this is a "Refreshed version of THE LILY AND THE LEOPARD, newly revised by author". Without owning the original I can't compare line by line, but I do wonder how much revision was going on. Were the many typos from the original that were missed in the revision? Scanning errors that no one picked up on whilst revising this new edition? Who knows, but there sure were a lot of them. Not enough to distract from the story, but still too many to completely ignore. To instead of too, you instead of your, and then this one at the end:

"Realty barreled into her heart."

Ouch! I obtained a Kindle copy via library loan, but I might be a bit more annoyed if I paid full-blown retail for that version.