Rating: 5/5

I wish I had artistic talent so I could do some fanart for these stories. This was AMAZING. I've read some of Marie de France's stories before, but that was back when I was a teen, and it was great to finally sit down and read them again! And I discovered some new ones!

Guigemar

So, we're all in agreement that Guigemar is demiromantic, right? Anyway this story was very cute and I like how the heroine just leaves her trash husband! Also, it will never fail to amuse me how people think that medieval people were super prudish and when you actually read medieval stories it's just premarital sex and glorified adultery as far as the eye can see.

Equitan

Wow, this got violent. I like the heroine's discussion on how love can't exist without equality! She's a terrible person, but that conversation felt surprisingly realistic for this genre. I feel like I appreciate this story more now that I'm older.

Le Fresne

Ahhhh I've loved this one since I was a teen! I think this just might be my favorite by this author, but of course the werewolf one is also great. I have to say, the rumor the heroine's mom starts about some other mom that she knows (something something it's impossible to have twins unless the mom had sex with two different men???) sounds like a clickbait article you find on Facebook.

Bisclavret

GAY WEREWOLVES FOR THE WIN

Lanval

Okay, so Marie de France's Guinevere opinions are invalid, but literally everything else about this rules. Lanval's fey girlfriend is amazing and I have nonbinary headcanons for no reason at all except that I like her. Also, has anyone ever written a retelling of this? I've never found one before, but I'd be willing to read one!

Les Deus Amanz

Probably about 30% of dead mythological heroes would still be alive if they had just taken the good advice from the women in their lives. Anyway, the hero of this story is an idiot and I'm not sorry that he's dead. The heroine had a rough time of it and didn't deserve any of that, though.

Yonec

How come when this lady prays for a boyfriend she gets a shapeshifting hawk fey boyfriend but when I pray for a romantic partner, I get nothing? Is the quality of my prayer not as good or something? Life is so unfair.

Anyway, this was great and I need a retelling of this that gives the couple a happy ending!

Laüstic

I feel like this particular one suffers somewhat for being translated as prose instead of poetry, but I still liked it. I wish I could read these in the original French. Maybe one day I will finally sit down and learn how to read Old French.

Milun

Not sure about the swan abuse, but this was VERY cute otherwise. (Also this reminds me, I need to feed my geese.) I very much love how the son hears about his mom and dad's problems--mom is married to another guy--and decides that offering to kill his mom's husband is the reasonable thing to do in this situation. Oh my God. Luckily, the husband dies anyway, so no one has to commit murder!

Chaitivel

It would be less dangerous for a man to court every lady in an entire land than for a lady to remove a single besotted lover from her skirts, for he will immediately attempt to strike back. 
The more medieval stories I read, the more I am convinced that knights are feral. I think I could shine a flashlight at them and their eyes would glow like a deer's.

Chevrefoil

Again, I really wish I could read Old French so I could read this as a poem. This didn't have much of a story to it and I just wish I could read it in the original language.

Eliduc

Uh, wow, the husband is the worst man alive and his wife is a saint. Both the women in this story deserve SO much better, but I do like how the women support each other and aren't mortal enemies just because they love the same (trash) guy! Because women hating each other over a trash guy is my least favorite trope.

Anyway, this book was AMAZING and Marie de France rules. Everyone should read this.