Rating: 5/5

A very enjoyable legal thriller that goes beyond the courtroom.
"Fatal Flaw" by William Lashner begins when his protagonist , Victor Catl, answers a late-night phone call from an old friend and fellow lawyer. The man, Guy Forrest, has just found the bloody body of his fiancée Hailey Prioux in bed in her home. When Carl arrives at the house, he finds Guy sitting naked on the porch step in the pouring rain. Guy' s story is hardly credible even to his friend. Forrest claims that he fell asleep while in the hot tub located only a few feet from the bedroom where Hailey lay. He heard no intruder, he says, nor did he hear the shot that killed her because he had earphones on, listening to music at high volume while he soaked . Guy says when he awoke and went looking for her, he found the body, grabbed a pink cell phone, Hailey's, and called Carl.
The first shock is a lightning strike: Victor was having an affair with Hailey. His number was on her speed dial. Luckily, Forrest was too shocked by the sight of her blood-soaked body to make the connection. He believes his client guilty.
But that is only the first shock. "Fatal Flaw" has many. 
Carl feels compelled to defend Forrest, if only to keep his name out of the investigation. In fact, he snatches and hides her cell. He also decides to subvert his defense so Guy pays for murdering the woman both he and Victor Carl loved, passionately. Unlike some legal thrillers where the defense attorney becomes convinced of his client's guilt, in this book ( and this is not a spoiler as it is in the blurb) Victor Carl comes to the belief that Guy is, indeed, innocent. Finding evidence of another's guilt is the substance of the book.
The author delves deeply into Hailey's life and character and we come to know a lot about his client, the victim , her background and personality. As we do of defense attorney Victor Carl. This takes more than a bit of exposition and introspection, which is not a criticism. All of it is necessary to understand their motivations. Hailey is dead, of course, but the author makes come back to life on these pages. Guy seems a man who was in love was love. Vincent Carl is not always admirable in his actions and motivations, but he is honorable in his fashion and a great main character. As is Mr. Skink- trust me, not him, though. Of course, a crime novel is only as good-or as a bad-as its villian and " Fatal Flaw" has one that creeps you out.
I missed this novel when it came out a few years ago, but I am certainly glad I read it. I recommend it to everyone without reservation.