Rating: 4/5

"the work of horror really is a dance—a moving, rhythmic search. And what it’s looking for is the place where you, the viewer or the reader, live at your most primitive level. The work of horror is not interested in the civilized furniture of our lives. Such a work dances through these rooms which we have fitted out one piece at a time, each piece expressing—we hope!—our socially acceptable and pleasantly enlightened character. It is in search of another place, a room which may sometimes resemble the secret den of a Victorian gentleman, sometimes the torture chamber of the Spanish Inquisition . . . but perhaps most frequently and most successfully, the simple and brutally plain hole of a Stone Age cave-dweller. Is horror art? On this second level, the work of horror can be nothing else; it achieves the level of art simply because it is looking for something beyond art, something that predates art: it is looking for what I would call phobic pressure points. The good horror tale will dance its way to the center of your life and find the secret door to the room you believed no one but you knew of—as both Albert Camus and Billy Joel have pointed out. The Stranger makes us nervous . . . but we love to try on his face in secret.”

That is probably an overly lengthy quote which to begin this review with, but King encapsulates inside it what I found so compulsively readable about this non-fiction. 

Throughout the book, King moves from boy to man, and along the way introduces the reader to a whole host of horrifying titles, across the boards of all types of media. Many, especially those mentioned at the beginning of this book, I hadn't previously heard of. King provides synopsis (often spoilery) that briefly describe each before dissecting their horrifying genius and how they impacted him over the course of his life.

I found all this to be of immense interest, more so when I was already versed in the media he was discussing, but it was the discussions around these disparate titles that held fast appeal. It is only through the lens of horror media that we got to the heart of horror as a genre, but once done so King provides a startlingly deep insight into why it impacts us so thoroughly and continues to hold society in an equal measure of deep-rooted pleasure and fear.

The whys of horror rather than the titles are where I took most away from this but I also now have notebook pages filled with a such a vast number of movie and book titles that I have a lifetime of horrifying media already planned out ahead for me. And I'm not mad about it one bit.