Rating: 4/5

Until recently, the idea of historical fiction as a genre didn't hold much appeal for me. I can't say why exactly - the blend of historical figures with made-up peripheral people just didn't excite me that much. 

Last year that changed. I read Philip Roth's 'The Plot Against America' and found it to be so plausible (and frightening) that the worth of historical fiction became apparent. That is, if it's handled effectively. 

If I didn't love this Vidal work as much as 'TPAA', I certainly admired it, throughout. Since Vidal had political ties growing up (and even after he was grown), he certainly knew the territory and seems to have displayed its landscape about as well as an insider / outsider could. There are certain truths that reveal how little has changed in D.C. in the last hundred years or so - for example, this character quote:
  "Washington is filled with elected officials who are devoted enemies of the people. Think how many members of Congress represent not people but oil! Great geysers of bubbling prehistoric oil, the property of hard-faced men who worship profit."
and:
  Burden sighed, knowing the mood too well. "Well, if that is so, then let us say that there was a time in our history when a few men of influence wanted things to be better than they are, unlike today when all that matters is money..."
Vidal is especially good at zeroing in on character types, esp. those that are ambitious. 'Washington D.C.' is largely about ambition. From the days of FDR, through WWII, and into the Cold War, the novel follows the systematic process of one man's political ascent. 

Unlike the Roth novel, this is not exactly the stuff of emotional horror; still, the read is a swift one, bolstered by Vidal's elegant writing. Gore is more of a master than Roth when it comes to turning a phrase. 

If I can't exactly fault the novel, I think I might have liked it more had it been set closer to the nucleus of the U.S. Capitol. ~ but perhaps Vidal felt he had already covered that angle by way of his play 'The Best Man' (1960). What we get instead leans a little more towards melodrama a good deal of the time. It's interesting, of course; fact-filled and even largely compelling. But the effect is somewhat like the 'what if' presentation of either Harold Robbins or Jacqueline Susann as an intellectual.