Rating: 2/5

I'm guessing the 'major motion picture' doesn't stick too closely to the book, because the book is mostly about smearing vaseline on Tulip's vagina in the hope that she will successfully mate with another handsome German Shepherd. Spoiler alert: she gets off with a mutt instead. 

For the first chapter, I thought this would be the kind of book dog-lovers would love, and everyone else would shrug at and move on. The first chapters were mostly about shitting in public, and Tulip's facial expressions. This, I found delightful. I have a mutt, at least part German Shepherd, and she makes those facial expressions, and I love her deeply. 

Then, enter the vagina, and that's it for the rest of the book. 

There are all kinds of reasons one might want to write about one's dog's vagina, the most obvious one being that you're not getting any yourself. And sure enough, as reliably as Freud is photographed chomping on a cigar, wikipedia tells me that Ackerley was gay, and never found a husband. On the other hand, he was openly gay, so this can't just be the return of the repressed. 

I actually think Ackerley wrote the book this way because he's a horrible person, and perhaps knew that. 

Consider the chapter on shitting in the streets: at no point does he seem to consider the possibility that he could, say, pick up the shit in a paper bag or shovel, and deposit it somewhere more suitable than a shop-owner's doorway. Why not? Isn't this the obvious thing to do? 

Tulip is horrible to other people. Could he perhaps restrain the dog? Train her? Of course not. 

Could he spay her? Certainly not, though there's no reason given for this astonishing decision (though perhaps social norms have changed, and nobody desexed their dogs in the post-war). 

Moving on, Ackerley's attitude towards (his words) "the working classes" is... well, it's even more disgusting than his insistence that his dog get fucked by a German Shepherd. Which is already disgusting. He does describe the tremendous inherited diseases and so on that pure breed dogs suffer from, and yet, he's determined to create more pure-bred dogs. But fear not. He plans to kill the puppies. 

To be honest, Ackerley seems like the worst kind of English stereotype: dismissive of people who have to work to pay their bills, dismissive of other people in general, and with an astonishing inability to think about anything other than facts. Too bad he writes so nicely.