Rating: 4/5

July2016: I'm rereading this for the "Evolution of Science Fiction" group read here:
https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/...

The title makes it obvious, but this is an exploration of strange new creatures - not much of strange new worlds, though. Still, I can see the roots of Star Trek. Less obvious is the exploration of a variety of human ideas through a new science called Nexialism, the science of learning many sciences &amp; how to synthesize them. A science that turns out polymaths, I suppose. Elliott Grosvenor is the department of one on the Beagle. There is also the issue of a crew (all male chemically neutered) living together for years.

This was originally 4 short stories, not 3. Thanks to Buck for the TOC. My old 1950s copy doesn't have one in it, but it reads very well as a novel now, so I'm not listing it as short stories.
Black Destroyer 1939, (chapters 1 to 6) is about the Coeurl, one of the last creatures alive on a dying planet. 

War of Nerves 1950, (chapters 9 to 12) is about alien mind control which didn't do much for me. It was the weakest story in the collection, IMO.

Discord in Scarlet 1939, (chapters 13 to 21) might well be the basis for the movie Alien with a bit of the first monster thrown in. 

M33 in Andromeda 1943, (chapters 22 to 28) was one of the most interesting in several ways. The 'monster' was quite imaginative &amp; Grosvenor really struts his stuff.

I don't disagree with anything I wrote in my earlier review below, but I think I underrated the book badly. While much of the science isn't well explained, it's certainly not as magical as so much was during this time period. Both Star Trek &amp; the Alien movies seem to have grown out of this pioneering work &amp; I wouldn't be surprised if others got their inspiration from it. On top of all that, it's still highly readable so many decades later. I almost feel bad only giving it 4 stars. Highly recommended for anyone into the evolution of SF. Van Vogt was certainly one of the giants.

Old review (2008? Last read... 2000?): 3 stars. Van Vogt collected three short stories together into a novel. It reads well, though. As you'd suspect, the Space Beagle is an exploratory space ship that runs into several different first contact scenarios. One is a very interesting failure to communicate. The other two have a lot in common; extreme power, immortality, war &amp; stagnation. All have a lot of action &amp; are tied together by a new breed of scientist, one who ties together the various specialties. There is a strong theme of 'the left hand not knowing what the right is doing' among the various scientific specialties. Very well done.