Rating: 5/5

Say what you like about Roy Cohn (d. 1986), he was an amazing and at times mesmerizing celebrity, as adept at getting media attention for himself and his law clients as he was avoiding the shadows of his personal life. This is not to say Roy Cohn was an admirable figure, though he had his supporters. Cohn, the scion of a Democratic state judge from the Bronx, was a lifelong Democrat but developed a passion for sniffing out "pinkos" in his own party. His sexual life was predominantly homosexual (I would not call him 'gay' in the modern sense), who cruised for pickups and studs at Atlantic coast resorts and in Manhattan's cavernous Studio 54 nightclub, who nonetheless had made life hell for "Lavender" civil servants in the Fifties. 

To read Nicholas von Hoffman's well researched and written 1988 biography is to come away with two interlocking conclusions; "How did they let him get AWAY with that?" and "What a hypocrite!" A prodigy, Cohn graduated from college and law school early and bootstrapped himself into a position on Sen. Joseph McCarthy's red-baiting staff in the early Fifties. Cohn then toured Western Europe at governmental expense with his good-looking buddy David Schine, all the while looking for leftist books in the State Department libraries, trying to get those libraries to stock Schine's poorly-written "book" (an eight-page pamphlet, really) called "Definitions of Communism." A notoriously poorly prepared advocate in New York's courts of law, Cohn seems to have succeeded primarily on aggression, chutzpah (sheer gall), and a great deal of it's-not-what-you-know-it's-who-you-know. Von Hoffman says time and again that trenchant legal analysis was not Cohn's method, trading favors was. And von Hoffman was right. 

Later, as he was dying of AIDS most likely caught sexually, Cohn pulled strings to jump the queue on a government drug study to get early versions of AZT for himself, in the process denying it to some equally sick, younger men who had waited patiently for its release under FDA rules. (The story of this, allowing for a little dramatic license, is told more thoroughly in Tony Kushner's 1993 play cycle, ANGELS IN AMERICA.) While von Hoffman's book does hop around a bit from witness to witness, its research is excellent and the book is often surprisingly fun to read. For instance, he could have merely said that David Schine's underdeveloped and poorly documented eight-page pamphlet was looked on by experts, and emerged wanting. Instead, he wrote "[T]his pamphlet, when it was read by older, less rustic men and women, became the occasion for hoots, gibes, hollers, and endless ridicule [p. 142, hardbound version]." Such telling -- yet entertaining -- results must have caused the author enormous amounts of hard and fast work, as the hardbound copy of this book appeared in print less than two years after Cohn's death. 

Perhaps the best reason to invest the time in CITIZEN COHN is that Cohn was part of a cycle of history: just as he learned tricks and tactics from Senator McCarthy and his right-wing sympathizers, he passed on those strategems to a young real-estate tycoon named Donald Trump in the Seventies and Eighties. Therefore, reading CITIZEN COHN offers not only a key document in 20th Century American political history, but advances a warning for our own times in ways even the erudite von Hoffman could only anticipate at the time, but not yet fully appreciate. The book contains a generous (and significant) assortment of photos. 

Updated December 3, 2020.