Rating: 4/5

I don't often read westerns, aside from a few Louis L'Amour books, but one of the reasons I picked this one up was because it is set in West Texas, where I grew up. "Good Old Boys" is Texan for a particular type of club (it may mean different things to others) made up of men who grew up tough as shoe leather, working long hard hours from the time they were knee-high to a grasshopper, usually cowboys or ranchers, or men who work the land - and believe me, West Texas is a tough place to be a farmer. 

Hewey Calloway is a cowboy in a time that is just on the cusp of major changes. The old free range, where the cowboys drove cattle north from Mexico and Texas to the railheads in Kansas, is being fenced in by barbed wire. Automobiles and trains are beginning to replace the horse as the major mode of transportation, especially in the cities, but more slowly in the rural areas. And the people are changing too. Homesteaders are trying to wrest a living from the dry soil of the West, and entrepreneurs are inventing new things to make life easier at a dizzying pace. 

Hewey's brother is one of those homesteaders, with a wife and a couple of half-grown boys, and when Hewey decides to come "home" after a couple of years away, he finds great changes afoot. His sister-in-law thinks it's time for Hewey to settle down, marry, prove up on some land, and give up his wandering cowboy ways. But although Hewey is tempted by the local schoolteacher, he defines freedom as the ability to walk away any time he likes and go somewhere else and do cowboy stuff.

Unfortunately, Hewey's footloose and fancy-free ways get him and his brother and nephews into some trouble - trouble that may end in them losing the land they've sweat blood and tears to turn into a home - trouble that can only be solved by Hewey buckling down and putting his hand to the plow in a way he's never had to do before. 

Hewey is torn as he sees his freedom slipping away, but senses the call of civilizing influences as never before. What will he choose? The nomadic life of the good old boy, or the sweetness of love and home and family?