Rating: 5/5

“Wonderful things did exist. Even if they're only in my own mind.” 

Ann hears voices in her head. She was never sure whether they are her imaginings or whether these voices do indeed exist, but they always give her sound advice. Down the road lies the old Hexwood Farm where admission is prohibited - everyone knows that! Yet Ann notices an array of strange visitors entering the farm and never return. Curiosity draws her to investigate, but once in the wood, she finds her voices are no longer there and time and place in Hexwood seem to change at random intervals. 

Diana Wynne Jones has written quite an amount of books, and I can't comprehend why Hexwood does not rank among the most read. It is such a wonderfully complex and interwoven story that stretches across a wide board of genres. I love stories where the narrative seems to jump back and forth between different timelines. Here we have Ann from a perfectly ordinary contemporary setting, a troop of knights and medieval characters who may or may not be related to the Arthurian saga, as well as a futuristic sci-fi cast that has a dystopian undertone to it. Yet even when grouping events into those three parts, nothing in Hexwood is quite what it seems.

Ann is not our only narrative, in fact, her narrative only starts after a couple of chapters have gone by. Among others, we have Mordion the magician of sorts, Yam the robot, and Hume who isn't quite sure whether he is a true human but desperately wants to become a knight. There is also the Reigner organisation which consists of five individuals who control the entire universe. Earth is quite unaware of all this, just as much as Ann is unaware that the farm down the road is a Reigner institute of sorts. A so-called Banus is kept there - a machine that can play out dreams and replay scenes to find the best outcome. With a machine like that, you're bound to get quite the story.

Thanks to the many back and forths and the numerous narrators, I found myself often confused about characters' true identities and how everything would eventually fit together. And I mean that it's confusing in the best way possible. You need to pay attention to every small detail and many events won't make sense until the very last chapter. It also gives the book a great re-readability quality. 

And if a dream-machine with Arthurian elements, an enchanted wood, and outer space adventures aren't enough for you, Hexwood is a story that is incredibly funny, adventurous with action-packed scenes, genuinely sad and, unlike many others of Diana Wynne Jones' books, has a great and well rounded ending that does not leave you hanging with many unanswered questions. The characters are genuine and relatable - they are all quite unique and have different motivations and wishes. Hexwood has a new surprise around every other corner and even a sprinkle of romance - in fact, the romance caught me quite off guard and was yet another great twist on top of everything else. 

This is such an incredibly well-crafted work that I wish more Diana Wynne Jones fans would read and appreciate. But not just them, anyone who loves complex and interwoven stories can enjoy this work, even more so as it includes so many different genres.