Rating: 3/5

For the last three years, I’ve participated in Let’s Talk About It, Oklahoma, a program sponsored by the Oklahoma Humanities. The meetings take place in the Museum Broken Arrow on Broken Arrow, OK’s Main Street, now also known as the Rose District. Oklahoma Humanities has created a large number of themes and the host of Let’s Talk About It, Oklahoma—in my case, the executive director of the Museum BA-- chooses the theme for the fall or spring meetings.
Oklahoma Humanities describes Let’s Talk About It, Oklahoma this way: “Let’s Talk About It, Oklahoma fosters a love of reading and an appreciation for community conversation. It brings people of different walks of life together to explore new ideas, serving as a catalyst for self-reflection and inspiring open-mindedness.”
We have read a series of mysteries all set in or by OK authors. One series included biographies and memoirs of famous Oklahomans. Not all the books are by Oklahoma authors or set in OK, however. One series included Wonder, Tuesdays With Morrie, and Home is Where the Heart Is. The choices have all been worth reading and have moved me out of my comfort zone more than once.
This spring’s selections all feature Route 66, the Mother Road, in some form, either nonfiction or fiction. The first book in the series is Route 66: The Mother Road by Michael Wallis. Let me begin by saying, Route 66 is a lovely book. It is full of stories and pictures from all along the Mother Road. 
Chapter One, “America’s Main Street, “introduces Route 66. Wallis tells his readers that “Route 66. Just the name is magic.” He further describes Route 66 as “an artery linking much of the nation.” Indeed, Route 66 has become an icon in literature, film, TV, and art. Visitors from all over the world come to the US to drive all or parts of Route 66. 
Then by state, starting with Illinois, Wallis provides stories and pictures of people and places, many of them long-gone, that graced Route 66. I was particularly interested in the chapter on Missouri’s Route 66. My husband grew up in Springfield, MO, and he crossed Route 66 on his way to elementary and middle school every day. He has fond memories of Red’s Giant Hamburgers, a small hamburger joint on Route 66. 
At the end of Route 66, Wallis provides “Route 66 Resources.” That list includes books, both fiction and nonfiction, featuring Route 66.
Wallis has done a tremendous amount of research in order to produce such a comprehensive book on Route 66. Still, I find it an odd choice for a book discussion since it is packed with material, both text and pictures. It is the kind of book to pick up and read off and on rather than sitting down to read from beginning to end---that’s my assessment. And that is not a negative assessment. Many other books fit into that category so that readers can dip into and out of the book without losing any continuity the way they would with a biography or a novel, for example. I do look forward to the Oklahoma Humanities’ scholar’s take on the discussion when we meet later in February to discuss Route 66: The Mother Road by Michael Wallis.
Michael Wallis has an impressive body of work. His Web site offers extensive material about Wallis’s work and readers can sign up to receive his newsletter: http://www.michaelwallis.com.