Rating: 5/5

4.5 stars

For those who have read this book, 
“Ftt” 
I think I can end the review here. It says it all, doesn’t it? 

 I've seen a look in dogs' eyes, a quickly vanishing look of amazed contempt, and I am convinced that basically dogs think humans are nuts. 

John Steinbeck travels through America and the by product is a profound, humorous, delightful, and at times poignant literary treat.

 I saw in their eyes something I was to see over and over in every part of the nation - a burning desire to go, to move, to get under way, anyplace, away from any Here. They spoke quietly of how they wanted to go some day, to move about, free and unanchored, not toward something but away from something. I saw this look and heard this yearning everywhere in every state I visited.  

 It is an exploration of people and places, where Mr Steinbeck leaves trail of cattle and moose with broken hearts.

Charley is the best travel partner, who is a companion in loneliness, icebreaker when meeting new people, and best of all, he doesn’t fight over routes and playlists! 😉

 Charley is a born diplomat. He prefers negotiation to fighting, and properly so, since he is very bad at fighting. Only once in his ten years has he been in trouble - when he met a dog who refused to negotiate. Charley lost a piece of his right ear that time. But he is a good watch dog - has a roar like a lion, designed to conceal from night-wandering strangers the fact that he couldn't bite his way out of a cornet de papier. He is a good friend and traveling companion, and vould rather travel about than anything he can imagine. If he occurs at length in this account, it is because he contributed much to the trip. A dog, particularly an exotic like Charley, is a bond between strangers. Many conversations en route began with 'What degree of a dog is that?' 

The overall tone of the book was generally humorous and full of amusing anecdotes. Mr Steinbeck navigates his way through bizarre and odd situations.

The last part of the journey in New Orleans was particularly impactful and profound! 

The author explores that one way to learn about life or crack the code to life is to see new places and meet strange new people and listen to their life experiences! Howsoever bizarre or amusing they may be.

The writing was captivating and deeply introspective. Mr Steinbeck tries to explore the character and identity of America through this journey. He understands that by engaging in conversations with people he meets along the way, learning their life experiences, and trying to relate with their place as Americans within the society. Through his interactions with people, Steinbeck also emphasises on the differences in backgrounds and cultures of people from different states of America. He also contemplates on the consequences of rapid urbanisation and industrialisation he witnesses in his travels, and how it’s causing the loss of identity of culture of local communities. 

Through his journey, Steinbeck engages in deep self reflection, and contemplation, and tries to understand himself and the intricacies of life itself. 

 A number of years ago I had some experience with being alone.
For two succeeding years I was alone each winter for eight months at a stretch in the Sierra Nevada mountains on Lake Tahoe. I was a caretaker on a summer estate during the winter months when it was snowed in. And I made some observations then. As the time went on I found that my reactions thickened. Ordinarily I am a whistler. I stopped whistling. I stopped conversing with my dogs, and I believe that subtleties of feeling began to disappear until finally I was on a pleasure-pain basis. Then it occurred to me that the delicate shades of feeling, of reaction, are the result of communication, and without such communication they tend to disappear. A man with nothing to say has no words. Can its reverse be true - a man who has no one to say anything to has no words as he has no need for words?

 I knew beyond all doubt that the dark things crowding in on me either did not exist or were not dangerous to me, and still I was afraid. I thought how terrible the nights must have been in a time when men knew the things were there and were deadly. But no, that's wrong. If I knew they were there, I would have weapons against them, charms, prayers, some kind of alliance with forces equally strong but on my side. Knowing they were not there made me defenseless against them and perhaps more afraid. 

 She wasn't happy, but then she wasn't unhappy. She wasn't anything. But I don't believe anyone is a nothing. There has to be something inside, if only to keep the skin from collapsing.  

We are there travelling with Steinbeck in Rocinante, and from his stories trying to derive our own meanings from this muddle called life.

Very crisply, this book is awesome! 
Please read it. 
I loved it.
Highly recommended!