Rating: 5/5

Traditional regencies are simply not complete with a generous helping of comedy, and thankfully there is plenty of that in this story. The opening was slightly confusing, but true to this genre, it had a great comedic effect. 

Lady Letitia was visiting her widow friend in the country with a side mission to see her distant relative (greatniece, I believe) Lady Gloriana Hemsworth. Gloriana and her mother, the Countess of Faussley, had been living with some atrocious relatives, mushrooms as they were known (for wanting to gain entree to the haut ton through noble connections), and after her mother's death Gloriana had a very poor upbringing by these people. At the tender age of 15, she was seen as a giantess (5 ft 9 in height) and sensing that she needed rescue, Lady Letitia packed her off to an independent spinster aunt with whom she received an education befitting an intelligent woman. 

Twelve years later, Lady Gloriana is now Miss Anne Hemsworth, esteemed governess searching for a new position. Under much pleading from her contractor, she accepted a post to the Marquess of Wylington and his brother, twin boys of age ten who have been called the devil incarnate. They, of course, do not prove as devastating as their guardian, Lord Letham, who had returned after his travels to investigate if his manager is embezzling funds from the twins, and can't take his eyes off of the alluring governess. 

Woven like a web, none of the characters in this story make an appearance for no reason. There are murder plots afoot, rather bad ones at that, and Anne's grasping relations appear as well to further their own machinations. The twins' antics are especially adorable, and incredibly ingenious, as they come to love Anne so much they threaten the household with pranks in case she leaves. Lord Letham doesn't actually make his acquaintance with Anne until past 1/3 of the book, but their attraction is developed nicely and with much delight.

This was a great read and similar to books by Barbara Metzger, contain much humor in inter-woven plot lines and ploys (especially Lady Letitia's matchmaking) along with romance and heroic justice to the villains. If nothing else, read this book for the twins, who are truly a most ingenious pair for all of their antics and wisdom.