Rating: 5/5

Recently, I reread an old book by a favorite author Norah Lofts. The Old Priory is one type of book that she was known for writing—the history of a house book. She would create a fictional house and then tell its history through the point of view of the characters who lived there. Sometimes, as with The Old Priory, these were stand-alone books; other times, she wrote a series of three books about the house such as The House Trilogy, which included The Town House, The House at Old Vine, and The House at Sunset.

The Old Priory begins in 1590 with its purchase by a seaman who has unexpectedly come into a significant sum of money. The last of the book’s six narrators finishes in 1640. The story covers three generations of the house’s history.

During this time period, Queen Elizabeth I dies and the Stuart dynasty begins with James I and VI. The book ends before King Charles I is beheaded, and the English Civil War breaks out. Instead of detailing how the decisions and actions of the “great” affected the people, Ms. Lofts focuses on the domestic and social life of a small area in England. Who will marry whom? What are the results of an attempted murder? How do spite and hatred poison the future?

Her Priory stands in Suffolk, in an area she fictionalized in much of her writing. Main characters in one book would appear in others as secondary or minor characters in other stories. For readers who sought out her writing, this technique gave a sense of realism to her fiction by creating a world the characters inhabited with their own concerns and motives.

Although I didn’t know the term when I first read her books, this deep point of view method of storytelling drew me deep into her books. I cared about what the characters attempted to do. I knew why they did what they did, even if I didn’t always agree with the motives.
 
Today when I visit a historical house, I sometimes wish an author had used the site to tell the story of the inhabitants. A visitor can usually get some kind of brochure that tells when the place was built and what improvements/changes various owners have made through the years. All very interesting stuff. 

But what I looking for is who the inhabitants were. How did they live in this house? What joys and tragedies did they experience? Maybe it’s this need to know that lead me to write historical romance.