Rating: 3/5

COUNTDOWN: Mid-20th Century North American Crime
BOOK 170 (of 250)
Just think of all the books this 'college-hazing-pranks' gone wrong must have inspired.
HOOK - 3: "Wolfe and I sat in the office Friday afternoon...Wolfe was drinking beer and looking at pictures of snowflakes (as in snow, not politics) in a book someone had sent him from Czechoslovakia (yes, it used to be a country). I was reading the morning paper...I do read books, but I never yet got any real satisfaction out of one; I always have a feeling there's nothing alive about it, it's all dead and gone..." The "I" is Archie Goodwin, Nero's sidekick and the case they are about to embark upon involves an invent that took place well in the past but is brought back to life. It's as if Archie and Nero conjure this one up. If you've read a Nero/Stout novel, you might like the opening banter, if not, don't start with this one. 
PACE - 2: Takes a while to kick into gear, then once it does, it throws in a massive cast of old college mates, needlessly too many people, imo.
PLOT - 3: Great premise, and as I say above, one that's been copied (or did Stout copy it?) many times: a hazing prank goes wrong, a man is handicapped for life, and the man decides it is time for revenge. Murder 1 and 2 have occurred as the book opens, and murder 3 is about to happen. The problem is that there are about 30 college mates involved, all listed here, and much of the discussion/action leads nowhere. This cast could have worked with, say, 15 people instead of 30 and I think it could have been a better book. But MOST of this book feels like red herrings used for filler material.
CHARACTERS - 3: Paul Chapin as the injured student/adult is fascinating. Nero and Archie go at each other brilliantly. Andrew Hibbard might be the third person to be murdered, but then he goes missing. Is he in hiding? Hibbard's neice goes to see Nero...then about 30 other characters become involved and for me all these people feel like filler material.
ATMOSPHERE -4: Solid, the brownstone and the orchids and a college re-union and great lines like this one from Archie: "In my business I've seen it proved a hundred times that one thing you never want to leave in the bureau drawer is your curiosity."
SUMMARY: My overall rating is 3.0. This is my sixth Nero book and I've read 2* that I'd say are very good "who-done-it" novels: this is not one of them.