Rating: 5/5

This book stands alone as a brilliant introduction to exactly why the CIA is such a fantastic education for a chef. Nothing is left to intuition or presumed knowledge, everything is taught whether it is culinary maths or exactly how you lay out bones to roast for the perfect stock. 

Michael Ruhlman did most of the course both training to be a chef and writing about it as a journalist and so the book is rich with personalities and anecdotes.

Molecular gastronomy is not something that the CIA has much interest in. It is very much based on French gastronomy. But nonetheless you can't help thinking that building up to the fancy smears and spit foams of heston Bluementhal and Ferran Adria from the building blocks of a traditional culinary education is probably better than just going in one time with gels and the powdery crackle of dry ice cream.

More than anything Ruhlman shows what an extremely tough course is this Associates Degree in the Culinary Arts. 21 months of turn-up-even-in-blizzard-conditions or get marked down, chefs alwaysturn up, including proper professional experience not just at the compulsory externship but also in the four restaurants the CIA runs. These restaurants are open to the public who pay for their food, so they aren't about to smile politely at badly-cooked food because it was prepared by a student. 

At the end of the course, the students can go on to a Bachelor's degree, specialisations such as Pastry, or ones more science or business-based. All of them extremely expensive.

But once out in the real world, the newly minted chefs can command much higher salaries than chefs who are self-taught or trained at lesser schools. It's not just the kudos of being a CIA graduate, it's also that employers know they have been trained with rigour, that all the bases have been covered, that these new chefs lack nothing except experience. 

If you read and enjoy the book as much as I did, you will probably want to read The Soul of a Chef: The Journey Toward Perfection. Also an excellent book. It helps to have read the Making of a Chef first though as Ruhlman has already been through the CIA and is revisiting and so should you be to get the full flavour of the follow-up book.