Rating: 4/5

A very detailed and factual history of a interesting, tragic and moving story. 

~Spoiler alert~

Joseph (the Elephant Man) being unable to find employment because of his disabilities and disfigurement, had to be a part of a work-house which was for him pure hell. Finally, he got the opportunity to escape this nightmare by being the entertainment in a freak show, he was able to make a decent living doing this and begin saving money to buy a house. But England was undergoing changes, and many (understandably) begin to become uneasy with shows that displayed "freaks" and the police started to put an end to them. But this also eventually meant Joseph's only way to earn money was taken from him and he dreaded having returning to the work house more than anything. Having been robbed of the money he was saving and left destitute, he sent a message to a doctor who expressed interest in him while he was part of a freak show. The doctor broke some laws and took care of him into the hospital, eventually, various appeals to the public resulted in people being filled with compassion, and sending in the pounds to provide for Joseph to have his own room where he could read books, visit people and have some enjoyments during the last years of his life. What I liked most was the little the authors were able to include about the inner-mind of Joseph, of his childlike wonder and excitement, of the rich emotions and religious thought.

One issue the book brought to my mind again is how sympathy with those being "used" and the rage against capitalist who are doing the "exploiting", can result in removing the only means of employment for certain people. Such it is with things like sweat shops, though it is such a horribly low wage, in developing countries it's the poor folks only hope of improving their situation. But of course, the working situation and conditions seem unjust to westerners, so we protest and seek to get such exploiters put down. If we succeed we pat ourselves on the back, while totally oblivious that all these people who freely preferred the sweat shops to the alternatives, are now in far worst shape, even more desolate and hopeless than before. If we are to do away with things like sweat shops, freak shows, money for plasma, etc... because we feel these things take advantage of the poor, we need make sure charity or other ways of earning a living replaces the void.