Rating: 4/5

Well, this installment was far superior to the previous The Five Red Herrings. Although there is a bunch of code-breaking which I allowed to just flow by me as I did all the train schedule details in that previous volume. The difference was very much due to Miss Harriet Vane, an intelligent and spirited match for Wimsey.

In fact, it is her sharp observations on the station of women during this time period that made the book for me. She realizes that, if she remains single, it doesn't matter how well she does for herself writing detective novels, she will always be an object of pity and derision. Hell, we're barely past that state even in 2020! I can't tell you how many people are ready to twist an ankle in their hurry to pity me! Despite the fact that I have traveled a great deal, supported myself quite successfully, and arranged to retire at a reasonably young age. But because I've never married, some would consider my life a failure. It makes me laugh, but it seems to make Harriet bitter. She realizes, while watching Mrs. Weldon, that marriage and widowhood may not rescue a woman from this fate.

I think the author herself was coming to realize this situation for herself. She was educated, supporting herself (and an illegitimate son), writing successful novels that are chock full of witty observations and complicated plots, but she was still a woman and therefore not admitted into the top circles of the literary field. It didn’t help that she wrote mysteries, part of the despised genre fiction. That snobbery remains strong. 

I love Harriet ogling Wimsey when he dons a bathing costume to search around the infamous Flatiron Rock, where Harriet discovered the corpse that gets this story rolling. She reluctantly (?) teams up with His Lordship when he makes his appearance on the scene, and we witness her gradual conversion (or Peter wearing down her objections) to matrimony. Mind you, she hasn't consented just yet!

Well written, if a bit convoluted, but I did appreciate the final conclusions re: time of death, and kicked myself for not thinking of the solution! One got so used to thinking of the murder victim as a poser, it was hard to think that he might just have some basis for his beliefs!

Cross posted at my blog: 

https://wanda-thenextfifty.blogspot.c...