Rating: 5/5

"Gollys, Mrs Durrells,"
he said, his face red with wrath. 
  "Why don'ts yous lets Masters Leslies shoot the son of a bitch?"

 In life, Gerald Durrell would light up a room and his books elicit that same warm feeling.
His affection for the natural world lives on in the minds of those, who for decades, have enjoyed his magical stories.
This is the second part of his Corfiot trilogy, continuing from where My Family and Other Animals left off.

The bohemian Durrells have eschewed middle-class English suburbia for an unconventional life in idyllic Corfu. As in the first book, a procession of oddballs, fruit cakes and misfits turn up at their villa.
Best supporting character award goes to leathery-faced Spiro, whose pidgin English sounds exactly like Stavros, the kebab seller from a 1980s UK comedy sketch show.
"Honest to Gods, Mrs Durells, makes me scarce what that boy finds."

Fans of Durrell already know of his transcendent skill for observational detail.
For example, there's Mrs Haddock, the spiritualist, who is incapable of breathing while speaking, andwhosewordslatchtogether like a daisy chain.
And here he describes the beginning of his memorable meal at the Venetian-style villa of eccentric Countess Mavrodiki:
The first course that Demetrios-Mustapha set before us was a fine, clear soup, sequinned with tiny golden bubbles of fat, with fingernail-sized croutons floating like crisp little rafts on an amber sea. 
How overlooked is Durrell as a writer? Seriously, how many writers today can compete with that?
This bacchanalian feast continued until his pants were fit to burst, and was washed down with red wine which was 'as dark as the heart of a dragon'.

Other characters include Captain Creech, the salty sea dog whose incautious, uncivil bonhomie (even in the politest company) revolves around tales of Montevidean strumpets and rampant gonorrhoea.

This trilogy was a standard school read for British kids of my generation and there is absolutely no reason why his books cannot be read by adults. 
His writing is evidently better than most of the dross that is out there now.

If you haven't yet familiarised yourself with Gerald Durrell, and are wasting your time reading books that have men on the cover who, for some reason, have misplaced their shirts, then please find the time to do so. 
Not only a truly gifted writer, he was also a wonderful, wonderful human being!