Rating: 3/5

Rex Stout was the first major Golden Age author that I got really into. Re-reading him, with more context, he continues to impress. Someone looking for elaborate puzzle plots won't find them here, but from a “non-genre” point of view—as a producer of entertaining prose and memorable characters—he stands well above most of his peers. In general, I think his novellas are hist most successful works—narrator Archie Goodwin can carry things to an extent, but when we go entire chapters without Wolfe in the novels, I always feel like things are sagging, and the shorter stories tend to avoid that. Still, the novellas have their hits and misses, and while this collection has some good stuff, the third story is lousy.

“Bitter End” is a rework of one of Stout's early (non-Wolfe) novels. Although it was the first Wolfe novella, it wasn't reprinted in a convenient form until this posthumous collection. It's a good start; the opening scene is funny, the side characters are well-drawn, and the mystery is fair-play, something Stout didn't always worry about.

“Frame-Up For Murder” is an expanded version of another novella, “Murder Is No Joke.” The suspects are fairly bland, and an experienced mystery reader won't struggle to guess the main “trick” of the story ahead of Archie, but it's solid.

“Assault On a Brownstone” was a fully-written novella that Stout scrapped, although he took the first ten pages and turned them into another novella, “Counterfeit for Murder.” That novella features Hattie Annis, who is widely considered to be one of Stout's more successful creations; in this version, she dies without doing much of anything. This is quite poor; I see why Stout wanted to take a second wack at it (quite unusually for someone who notoriously didn't revise much). The murder isn't much (we hear nothing about the police investigation, for example, and given Wolfe's usual nature, it's unclear why he suddenly decides to care about it), and although I theoretically approve of tweaking the FBI's nose, they don't act outrageously enough to really serve as the villains. The investigation is pathetic; the FBI already know who the killer is, and neither Wolfe nor Archie do anything worth calling clever. The killer helpfully reveals themself at the end to make up for the fact that there aren't any clues or evidence. I get it; Stout was dead, his executors found a previously unpublished story, but sometimes things remain unpublished for a reason.