Rating: 3/5

I feel a bit ambiguous about this epistolary volume. It’s by Roman Catholic theologian and philosopher Alice Hildebrand. On the one hand, it contains good advice for the newly married woman. Much of what she says is both perceptive and daringly counter-cultural--she has the wisdom to urge self-sacrifice and self-control in an era deeply suspicious of anything that might trim the wings of one’s individuality. In addition, I love her comment that “Although love is a gift, it must be learned.” (A thought that applies to parenting as well as marriage!). 

Another interesting quote: “One widespread modern attitude aggravates our difficulties in marriage and in all our other relationships: lack of reverence. I don’t only mean lack of reverence for God. I also mean lack of reverence for other persons and even for things: the failure to recognize the inner nobility and worth of persons and things which leads to the failure to treat them with the deep, tender respect that is due to them.” She posits that the opposite of this necessary reverence is arrogance. 

On the other hand, I find her style off-putting. Her tone is so elevated it sometimes feels like a throwback to nineteenth-century romanticism. She says that in times of conflict, “The crucial thing at such times is to call to mind the glorious Tabor vision of [your husband] granted to you in your moment of falling in love. What you saw then, even though it might seem an illusion now, was the true [man].” That is, a wife is to believe, through force of will, that the wonderful man she saw during the time of courtship is a God-granted image of her husband, more “real” than the sins and imperfections of daily married life. In all honesty, I find this a terrible analogy. 

Perhaps it will resonate more strongly with readers who experienced the traditional head-over-heels kind of courtship. Me? I’m more emotionally cautious and intellectually driven. I feel far more in love with my husband now than during our engagement. More importantly, though, I think it urges women to cling to a superficial, romanticized picture of their husband’s “inner man” instead of just love the real fellow, simul justus et peccator, warts and all. I find it far more helpful to be urged to love, forgive, and accept my sinful husband (whose weaknesses are real!) just as I have been loved, forgiven, and accepted by God. 

Again, not a bad read; and I might be more enthusiastic about it if I hadn’t already read other books with similar sound advice.