Rating: 3/5

I found an older book with several classic Christmas stories that included “The Bird’s Christmas Carol” by Kate Douglas Wiggins, so I did a little research on the story. This story was first introduced by Wiggins in 1887 and became very popular during the first part of a 20th Century. It was used in elementary schools to teach children to help and sacrifice for others especially during the Christmas season. I decided that this should be one of the Christmas stories that I read this year.

This short Christmas story is about a young girl who was born on Christmas Day and was given the name of Carol after her mother heard a Christmas Carol. She became ill at a young age and her health started to decline. She was innocent and loving child that was blessed with great parents and a loving family. As her health continued to decline she had only one desire for Christmas, that she have a Christmas feast and celebration with the large, poor family that lived next to her, the Ruggleses. She works with her mother to earn money and sacrificed part of her own Christmas gifts to buy Christmas gifts for each of the Ruggles children. At the appointed time the Ruggleses came to Carol’s home and had a wonderful feast and then received gifts that Carol had selected for them. It was a wonderful evening for the children especially Carol who was overjoyed to see the excitement and delight of the Ruggleses. That night Carol passed away will listening to Christmas Carols with joy and peace in her heart.

I loved how Carol’s mother, Mrs. Bird, looked at Carol’s illness and declining health as a blessing in the home instead of a trial. Mrs. Bird said because of Carol’s health that the boys in the family did not fight or say anything that would distress Carol. The boys loved to study at school and read at home so they could come home and teach Carol the things they learned. Mrs. Bird said that she was a better woman every day because of Carol’s illness. This made me think, am I a better person because of the trials that I face each day? Am I thankful for the trials and tests of life and look at them as blessings?

Another thing I learned in this story was that giving is truly giving when it includes an element of sacrifice. Carol gave up part of her Christmas gifts so that she could use the money to get gifts for the Ruggles children. This was a powerful example to me that giving our excess is good but sacrificing is even better. I hope to use this example in my own life when I serve and when I give.

I recommend this short story to those who enjoy a good, innocent Christmas story of family, love, sacrifice and serving others.