Rating: 2/5

I need to preface this with: there are very few books in the romance genre that intrigue me enough to read them *at all* - let alone multiple times, as I have done with the first 4 books in the Calder series. I am going to read the entire series. I do think that *overall* it is a well done romance /adventure series, at least the first 3 books in the series were adventurous. I thoroughly enjoyed This Calder Range, the first book, and feel it is probably the very best, with Stands A Calder Man ranking close to it.

This Calder Sky, unfortunately, falls short for me for various reasons - the first one being the absolute bizarreness of the timeline. Following on the heels of This Calder Range and Stands A Calder Man, Chase Calder should be an adult somewhere in the 1940s, no later than the 1950s...yet this novel is obviously set much much later than that, more like the 1970s perhaps. This type of inconsistency really bothers me.

Furthermore, I am not sure why I didn't "pick up" on the sheer disgusting aspect of the statutory rape of Maggie the 2nd time I read it. The first time I read it, I was just a teen myself and thought it was awfully awesome and romantic to have an older man be smitten with you like that. Like Maggie, I did not have a good father figure, I had poor self esteem, and would have thrilled at Chase's attention as a teenager. The 2nd time I read the book I was much older - in fact, was a mother of two daughters. Not sure how I skimmed over that and forgot about it....this last time I read the book, I was quite appalled at not only Chase, but Philip being sexually attracted to young Maggie, but at least Philip respected Maggie enough to tell her to wait until she was finished with college before considering a relationship with him.

The aspect of taking the law into their own hands didn't bother me so much either until this last time I read it - I guess since I grew up watching Westerns and knew what fate awaited horse thieves and rustlers, I didn't see anything wrong with it the first two times I read this book. Now, again, I am appalled - mainly because the setting and culture was not the Old West, but modern day....

The Calders somewhat remind me of the Ewings of DALLAS (giving away my age) ...yet nastier than Bobby, but way nicer than JR.