Rating: 3/5

3.50 stars

Having found his name and read some famous pieces of his haiku in some old Japanese literary works, I finally came across this 5-story paperback late last month and delightfully had it to read. The Narrow Road to the Deep North is no. 5; Other Travel Sketches include no. 1 The Records of a Weather-Exposed Skeleton, no. 2 A Visit to the Kashima Shrine, no. 3 The Records of a Travel-Worn Satchel, and no. 4 A Visit to Sarashina Village. According to Japan: An Illustrated Encyclopedia 1 A-L (Kodansha 1993, p. 101), they were translated from their Japanese titles with its first year of publication as follows.
1 Nozarashi kiko, 1685
2 Kashima kiko, 1687
3 Oi no kobumi, 1690-91
4 Sarashina kiko, 1688
5 Oku no hosomichi, 1694
In fact, haiku is a form of Japanese poems consisting of 17 syllables, divided into 3 sections of 5-7-5, for instance,
Furuike ya, kawazu tobikomu, mizu no oto.
Breaking the silence
Of an ancient pond,
A frog jumped into water -
A deep resonance. (p. 9) 
First of all, I would like to say I don't know Japanese so reading such a Japanese romanized haiku above with full understanding and appreciation is simply beyond me; I rather enjoyed reading his prose depicting his travel sketches with witty and reflective inspirations from a famous, elderly and itinerant Buddhist priest whose haiku skills and initiatives have long been cherished and admired in and outside Japan. As for his and others' haiku in this book, I would try to read each with care and arguable understanding as well as some few ideas acquired from its basic interpretation.

Then, I think each translator has his/her own ways of translating the haiku pieces, in other words, it is probably infeasible to translate one, again the Japanese above as an example, into English with perfect rendition or with typical exact words. To put it briefly, each Japanese haiku piece can be translated as its translator wishes and decides as the best he/she can do. To illustrate my point, given the Japanese haiku above as Basho's most famous one (1686), the following translation taken from  Essentially Oriental: R. H. Blyth Selection (Hokuseido 1994) reveals another English version. (anonymous translator)
The old pond:
A frog jumps in-
The sound of the water. 
(illustration facing p. 262) 
Incidentally, I just visited the Wikipedia on Basho Matsuo and found the following third English rendition: 

an ancient pond/ a frog jumps in/ the splash of water
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matsuo_...)
in which I vaguely recall as my first Basho encounter many years ago. Basho newcomers are welcome to know him more on his works, fame, legacy, etc. by visiting this website.

There is still the fourth, translated by William J. Higginson: 
old pond
frog leaps in
water's sound
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haiku)

And the fifth, 
Old pond . . .
a frog jumps in
water's sound
(Soichi Furuta, "Haiku: An Art for All Seasons," in Japan: An Illustrated Encyclopedia 1 A-L, Tokyo: Kodansha, 1993, p. 489)

Furthermore, I found the sixth, 
The old pond, ah!
A frog jumps in:
The water's sound!
(Daisetz T. Suzuki, "Zen and Haiku," in Zen and Japanese Culture, Tokyo: Tuttle, 1988, p. 238)

The seventh,
An old pond: a frog jumps in-the sound of water
(Hiroaki Sato and Burton Watson, From the Country of Eight Islands: An Anthology of Japanese Poetry, New York: Columbia University Press, 1986, p. 282)

And, the eighth,
An old pond: the sound of a frog jumping into the water.
(Ryunosuke Akutagawa, Mandarins: Stories, trans. Charles De Wolf. Brooklyn, New York: Archipelago Books, 2007, p. 239) 

Nevertheless, his travel narratives would bring readers back in time to see and imagine what Japan looked like some 400 years ago as well as enjoy reading his and his friends' various haiku in this book. In the meantime, these following three excerpts should suffice as exemplary prose. First, Basho has written on a huge chestnut tree:
The chestnut is a holy tree, for the Chinese ideograph for chestnut is Tree placed directly below West, the direction of the holy land. The Priest Gyoki is said to have used it for his walking stick and the chief support of his house. (p. 107)
Then, on the magnificent nature in Matsushima:
 . . . The pines are of the freshest green, and their branches are curved in exquisite lines, bent by the wind constantly blowing through them. Indeed, the beauty of the entire scene can only be compared to the most divinely endowed of feminine countenances, for who else could have created such beauty but the great god of nature himself? My pen strove in vain to equal this superb creation of divine artifice. (p. 116)
Finally, on the sense of humor and witty conclusion (Postscript by Soryu):
 . . . What a travel it is indeed that is recorded in this book, and what a man he is who experienced it. The only thing to be regretted is that the author of this book, great man as he is, has in recent years grown old and infirm with hoary frost upon his eye-brows. (p. 143)

In summary, we could enjoy reading Basho's travel narratives as well as many haiku poems written by himself and his friends since we would know more from his itinerary prose and viewpoints in the Edo period in seventeenth-century Japan. As for the haiku, one of the famous Japanese poems, we would need more familiarity or probably practical advice from those haiku scholars in the universities worldwide or as background, basic knowledge and practice, please visit this site: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haiku