If it wasn't for the very Trollope-like title, I would think I just finished a Thomas Hardy novel! I think of Trollope as being in the comedic tradition, so I feel rather upended by a tragic Trollope novel. His villains usually get a more comedically appropriate ending rather than this villain who sinks further and further into vice. His ending is likely realistic for his vices. I wasn't holding out any hope for him as Emily does, but Trollope is more explicitly religious in this novel than in many of his others. I wasn't sure where he was going to go with that.

Emily drove me NUTS. Here's a line about her: "She had given herself up to one utterly worthless, and she knew it. But yet she had given herself, and could not revoke the gift." This is SUCH a Trollopian sentence in both its construction and in its characterization of women. It's interesting to be reading The Duke's Children at the same time as I was reading this one because I can see many similarities between Emily and Lady Mary. Lady Mary's story doesn't end in tragedy and Frank Tregear is not addicted to vice or worthless like George Hotspur, but Lady Mary is also completely blind to the fact that life and the world are so much bigger than one man, even a man one has given one's self to. "I can never love another man!" Trollope so likes to have women who are obstinately attached to a man. Huge eye roll. Is this simply a Victorian trope? A Victorian actuality? Is this me-the-modern-and-unmarried-reader chafing at Victorian views about women and marriage? I'm not sure...

In the Trollope Society discussion of chapters 47-57 yesterday, the man who introduced the chapters posed an excellent question about a number of the characters: "Are they morally upright or obstinate?" I love this question, and I'm going to be pondering it with many characters in many Trollope novels. I admire Emily's conviction that a man can be redeemed. Yes, I absolutely agree, with God's help! But her obstinate error is that she must be involved in his redemption. There are just so many stories of that not working at all. I honestly think that Emily was driven more by pride with her obstinate attachment to George Hotspur. If she was able to embrace the truth about George, it would have set her free for a life of goodness instead of chaining her to a life of degradation and death. I am so angry with Emily! 

This was a read for Victober 2024. Will someone else read it so we can discuss?!