Rating: 3/5

Son - I want to review this book Mater.

Mother – Do you really now?

Son – Yes mother.

Mother – I would not advise you to do so.

Son – Why mother?

Mother – Because it will ask too much from you (READ - What about me then? There won’t be anything left for me of you.)

Son – You are being ridiculous mother. I wish to do it because I feel this is right.

Mother – Then do as you deem appropriate. I shall say no more.

Son - I will mother. You can’t hold me now.

So I finally decided to review this book. A midst various voices in my head screaming against my attempt, I sit down to write with a confusion still hovering on my mind. What is it that author really tried to convey through this work? Is this really about the numerous emotions we go through while in different relationships? Is this really about Mother-son, son-lover or man-wife relationships? Or is this just an attempt to make a story more convincing? Either this or that I am too dumb to understand the intricacies involving the aforesaid. Ah but you see, I couldn’t make out the relevance of efforts taken on part of main characters to display such emotions. 

This book basically deals with the relationship shared by a mother and his son. The mother being too lonely clutches on to his second son (Paul) for everything. Her loneliness is attributed to the unhappy union which she shares with her man and also to the sudden demise of her elder son. She, owing to the hardships that she has faced, desires her son to succeed in life, like any mother would. But then each time a part involving the tussle between mother and his son (on the issue of his one lover or another) appears, I am instantly reminded of some scenes from the movie Monster-in-law (starring J Lo)! Of course it is improper on my part to compare the two where the latter is but a comedy, I am too tempted to compare the agony of a mother whose only beloved son (elder being dead and the third one rarely mentioned) is in a relationship! Ah, she is so scared to accept other woman in her son’s life!

What is more interesting to note is that most of the characters do not show a determined attitude when it comes to following a decision regarding relationships. The son is too confused to decide whether he wants to marry or not. He isn’t a misogynist (he loves his mother!) but then he turns away from every other woman who comes in his life for the inability to maintain an accord on a more intimate basis. He is too scared to give himself to the woman whose presence stifles him, although he doesn’t mind going to them for love. His struggle continues even after his mother dies (due to the overdose of medicine given by the son and daughter who couldn’t take her illness any longer). I am not sure what to make out of this. Since I am no expert on the subject of euthanasia, I highly suspect whether it was acceptable during the mentioned period or not. I also wonder whether author should have used the characters of Paul and his sister to actually bring about mother’s death or in other words to free them of the burden of her care. While my suspicion only standing due to the subject undertaken by the author. 

Three stars for the book because it does hold attention.

P.S. The starting part(dialogue between mother and son)of the review is inspired by writings of Paul Bryant:)