Rating: 4/5

ILL

 Freud was seriously addicted to cocain most of his life as an author. Furthermore he addicted several of his friends and colleagues and ruined one of them completely.

see review Posted by John Marsden at 22:39 Tuesday, 23 August 2011
http://marsdentherapy.blogspot.com/20...

"My beliefs about Sigmund Freud have been severely challenged by reading E. M. Thornton’s blistering attack on the founder of psychoanalysis.
...Thornton is claiming that just at the time Freud developed his most contentious theories, such as the Oedipus Complex, he was misusing and suffering the symptoms of cocaine addiction. How else, she argues can we explain Freud's belief in the sexual origins of the neuroses. My understanding is that Freud had come to the seduction theory because that is what his patients had been telling him and that Freud's reading and research in the late 1880s at La Salpetriere, which pointed to high levels of sexual abuse in French society, had made more believable the disclosures made by his patients. 
....."
see also
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/07/24/boo...

see also an account of Freud, Jung and the woman Sabina Spielrein, brilliant, who becomes a psychiatrist and who is involved in different ways with each of them, in this movie which is based on a book.
http://www.sonyclassics.com/adangerou...

and don't forget this part of Freud
http://www.amazon.com/review/R3DPVDDO...
By Craig Chalquist, PhD, author of TERRAPSYCHOLOGY and DEEP CALIFORNIAThis review is from: A Most Dangerous Method: The Story of Jung, Freud, and Sabina Spielrein (Hardcover) 
Isn't it strange that although this well-researched and readable book has been out ten years now, not a single analyst, Jungian or Freudian, has reviewed it here?
During my training as a depth psychologist I heard and read a lot about the Freud-Jung relationship, about its shattering on the rocks of politicking and father complexes, and a bit about the unfortunate Sabina Spielrein, one-time patient of Jung. At this point nobody in the field is shocked to hear about the Founding Fathers having sex with their patients, however inappropriate or damaging it may have been (Freud seems to have been a rare exception to this kind of acting out). 

What's troubling to read in this book is not so much Jung's having an affair with Spielrein--harmful enough all by itself--but the casual brutality in how he handled it: the resumption of it after she had attacked him and asked Freud for help, Jung's lame excuses for dropping her (even telling her at one point that he'd displaced an attraction to Freud's daughter onto Sabina--how nice), the coldness of his self-justification to Sabina's mother when she found out via letter from Emma Jung (basically: no fee was charged, so it wasn't really that bad--but if you wish to discuss it, that'll be ten francs an hour).... The shocking, manipulative sadism of Jung's repeated betrayals of Spielrein might make difficult reading for those who revere him, even granting that they took place before Jung's "confrontation with the unconscious....... But the submergence of the gifted if borderline-prone Spielrein is the real tragedy in this unamusing comedy of errors." much more here

A Most Dangerous Method: The Story of Jung, Freud &amp; Sabina Spielrein