Rating: 4/5

Not 3 1/2, 4
I enjoyed this play more than I thought I would, partly due to the excellent production of it I watched. Certainly more to think about here than the previous two comedies I read.

I. All’s Well That Ends Well

The name of this play has become almost a hackneyed phrase in the English language. It’s a phrase that hackneyed me has used countless times, since I became familiar with it so many decades ago. But for all that, it’s not one of Shakespeare’s more popular plays, and is seldom performed. 

No contemporaneous mentions of the play or quotations from it have ever been found. There are problems with the text; the style is uneven; and there’s no external fact or topical reference with the drama to accurately date its composition. However, the best passages have been taken as evidence of a maturity in the writer, hence it is typically placed in the latter half of Shakespeare’s works, and in my collection it has been placed between Troilus and Cressida (1602) and Othello (1603). This dating makes it the 25th of the 37 plays included.

Most critics have apparently agreed with Samuel Johnson’s verdict that although it has “many delightful scenes”, its characters are “not new, nor produced by any deep knowledge of human nature”, and that several of the most notable are quite unlikeable. My editor (writing in the middle of the last century) also notes that some modern readers are uncomfortable with moral aspects of the play. Both this observation, and the “unlikeable characters” seem silly to me. As always, Shakespeare, like any author, is writing for an audience, and his audience was the theatre audience of his own time. On top of that, I couldn’t care less about whether a fictional character is “likeable” … really, do you?

(Coleridge, by the way, went out of his way to defend Bertram, one of the characters easy to dislike, as perfectly justified in rejecting Helena as a wife - given his aristocratic birth and Helena’s station as nothing more than the daughter of a physician, basically a retainer of Bertram’s father.)

II. Shakespeare’s source

The source of this play cannot be argued about. It is based on a story in Boccaccio’s Decameron. The tale is found as the ninth story of the third day. One of Boccaccio’s female characters, Neifile, presides as queen on the third day, and thus relates that ninth tale. She has decreed that the stories on her day will be ones in which a person either has painfully acquired something or has lost it and then regained it.

The story she tells can be traced back to the Sanskrit dramatist and poet Kālidāsa in his The Recognition of Śakuntalā (which itself may go back as far as the 5th century).

By the way, my GR friend Alan Powers has mentioned to me that another possible connection between the tale and Shakespeare may be a play using Boccaccio’s plot written by Giordano Bruno, who had lived in London in the early 1580s. (Whether the play referred to is Bruno’s 1582 Candelaio I know not.)

III. From story to play

I thought for this play I’d write something about what Shakespeare did to turn Boccaccio’s story into a play.

III.a Boccaccio’s characters

In The Decameron (see this PDF: http://pinkmonkey.com/dl/library1/b1.pdf ), there are six characters. The first three are Bertrand, the young Count of Roussillion; Juliet, the young woman in love with Bertrand; and the King of France. These are all main characters for Boccaccio.

The other three characters are women of Florence: a widow; a neighbor lady to the widow; and the neighbor’s daughter, who is the object of Bertrand’s desires. (None of these women of Florence even has a name in the story.) It is only the second of these, the daughter’s mother, who gets much of a role in the story, for it is her to whom Juliet addresses her woes and makes her appeal. The daughter, in fact, is barely mentioned. 

III.b What Shakespeare did with Boccaccio’s characters

In All’s Well, the first three characters are presented as Bertram, Count of Rousillon; Helena is the young woman (Shakespeare changes her name); and the King of France. These characters play in general the same roles in the drama as they do in the story.

Boccaccio’s three unnamed women of Florence become, for Shakespeare, four women of Florence. The Widow is still unnamed, but becomes the mother of Diana, the object of Bertram’s passions. Both the Widow and Diana are implored by Helena for aid in her scheme. Two other neighbor women to the Widow, Violenta and Mariana, are introduced as fairly minor characters. So here we have the first noticeable change made by Shakespeare: he’s decided that Boccaccio’s Widow &amp; “mother” can be combined into a single character.

III.c How the Story, and Play, are told

This section is something of a spoiler, so ... (Also, its kind of anal, so ...)

Let’s look at the how Boccaccio told the story (and the length of the story that each section comprises); [and note the changes that Shakespeare made, together with the number of scenes (out of 23) that Shakespeare uses to tell the same parts of the story]. I’ve identified six sections of Boccaccio’s story. The percentages shown for Boccaccio’s story are based on word counts in the PDF. 

1. An introduction to set the scene, followed by Bertrand’s leaving for Paris, Juliet’s growing up at Roussillion, her disdain for suitors (still pining after Bertrand); Juliet hears of the King’s disease, and sees an opportunity of using her father’s cure as an excuse to travel to Paris. (10%) [3 scenes. Shakespeare dispenses with the idea that Helena is younger than Bertram, so that she needs to “grow up” over a period of years before the story can get going.]

2. Juliet in Paris is allowed to examine the King, and entreats him to let her heal him. She asks for 8 days to effect a cure, and also asks how she will be rewarded if successful. The King says he will match her with a good partner, and give her a dowry. When the cure is successful (in far less than eight days), she names Bertrand to the King. The King tells Bertrand who he will marry, Bertrand refuses. The King insists, Bertrand gives in (unwillingly), then takes off for Tuscany as soon as the wedding is over. (25%) [5 scenes. The play is quite close to this segment of Boccaccio’s story, and occupies a similar major part of the production.]

3. Juliet returns to Roussillion, and puts thing aright that have been allowed to slide because of Bertrand's long absence. All the people admire her. She sends a message to Bertrand that she will not hold him to what he doesn't want; he replies "churlishly", and tells her of the two “impossible” conditions that must be met before he will ever accept her as his wife. Eventually Juliet decides to leave Roussillion as a pilgrim, with the secret intent of going to Florence. (15%) [1 scene. Act III scene ii; Bertram’s “churlish” message to Helena is included, as is her leaving. But there is nothing about her management of the estate (because she is in no position to do this, in the play).]

4. To Florence, where she meets the widow and sees Bertram marching, The widow tells of a neighbor, whose daughter is being wooed by Bertram. There are then several paragraphs where Juliet speaks to the Widow and the mother next door, telling of her woes, how Bertrand has deserted her, asking for help, promising rewards, bargaining with the mother; who, though somewhat uneasy with the plan Juliet has, is convinced that Juliet has been wronged, and thus agrees to her daughter being involved in the deception. Thus Juliet lies with her husband many times, always in the deepest dark, obtaining the ring and other gifts from him, continuing in this manner until she is certain she is pregnant. She then rewards the mother and daughter, who leave Florence so Bertrand cannot find them again, and Juliet herself goes into hiding. (30%) [4 scenes. Besides changing the role of the Widow, and giving names to the other Florence women, Shakespeare has sharpened the story in this segment. The rather long discussions between Juliet, the widow, and the mother have been made much more concise, and Bertram is given some stage time along with Diana/Helena. And a single assignation is enough for Helena to accomplish everything on her to-do list.]

5. Bertrand, hearing that Juliet is no longer at Roussillion, returns to his estate. Juliet remains in Florence until she delivers twin boys, then begins her return to Roussillion. (10%) [No scenes. A few words scattered into a couple other scenes are enough for Shakespeare to accomplish what is needed.]

6. The denouement. Juliet arrives at Roussillion during a great feast, confronts Bertrand with the ring and his sons. He finally accepts her as his wife, amidst happiness and rejoicing. (10%) [1 scene. Shakespeare adds the King back into the play, now reconciled with Bertram – but then constructs a reprise of the former King’s displeasure with Bertram, who the King thinks is lying to him. The last scene of the play is far more complex than the ending of Boccaccio’s story.]

I’ll admit that assigning an All’s Well scene to one (or none) of Boccaccio’s segments is somewhat arbitrary. But having done the best I can, we see that of Shakespeare’s 23 scenes, only 14 of them can be linked to Boccaccio. The other nine are carried, on stage, not by Boccaccio’s characters, or even by his story, but rather by …

III.d Shakespeare’s new characters.

Shakespeare added four major characters to his play. In this section I refer to percentages of All’s Well …. These were determined by estimating the column-inches that each scene occupied in my Complete Works, and making the simplifying assumption that each character in a scene is there for the whole scene, regardless of how many words the character speaks. Think of these percentages as an indication of the amount of time a character has on the Elizabethan stage.

The four new, significant characters are: the old Countess (Bertram’s mother), Lafeu, Lavache (the Clown), and Parolles. In adding the last of these, he introduced a major subplot to the play.

Shakespeare has Bertram and Helena each on stage about 60% of the play, the King of France 33%, and the Widow and her daughter Dianna about 20% each.

Parolles is on stage 2/3 of the play! He becomes, in a sense, the main character! In fact, 40% of the play has Parolles on stage with both Bertram and Helena. Of Shakespeare’s other inventions, Lafeu is present for half of the play, the Countess over 40%, and the Clown about the same as the two women of Florence.

In sum, Boccaccio’s Bertrand and Juliet can still make claim to being the stars of Shakespeare’s play. The King of France actually plays a more significant role on stage than he does in the story (because of his presence in the last scene). But every other character in All’s Well who is on-stage more than a few minutes is either an invention of the Bard’s, or a character from the story modified by Shakespeare.

III.e Shakespeare’s main scenes.

Of the 23 scenes in All’s Well, six are each 8% or more of the entire play, and collectively make up almost 60%. The other 17 scenes range between 5% and 1% of the play.

Shakespeare devotes acts I and II to the introductory material and the Paris scenes. These two acts comprise about 45% of the play, and follow Boccaccio’s story fairly closely. They do, however, include the new characters, even as they set up Helena’s deceit. Four of Shakespeare’s big scenes occur in these acts: I.i (Bertram, Helena, Parolles, Lafeu and the Countess), I.iii (Helena, the Countess and the Clown), and both II.i and II.iii (the same as I.i, but substitute the King for the Countess).

The second longest scene in the play is IV.iii, which has not a thing related to Boccaccio’s story - the scene in which Parolles is shown to Bertram to be the liar &amp; traitor (among other things) that he is.

The longest scene (12% of the play) is the last one, V.iii. Every major character is on the stage except for the Clown. 

IV. Movie/TV

For this play I watched episode 3, season 3 of the BBC Television Shakespeare. This production starred Ian Charleson (Bertram), Angela Down (Helena), Donald Sinden (the King), Celia Johnson (the Countess) and Pippa Guard (Diana). I also particularly enjoyed Michael Hordern (Lafeu), Paul Brooke (Lavache, the Clown) and Peter Jeffrey (Parolles). This enactment was superior to either of the movies I watched for my two previous plays. The players seemed comfortable with their Shakesperean roles, spoke like they were Elizabethans, and were clear and understandable. It was as if a play on the boards had been filmed, rather than a popular production for a movie audience. Perhaps the fact that none of the actors was a “star” helped. 

The director, Elijah Moshinsky, seemed to approach the play as more of a serious drama than something done for laughs, or even as a play that would at least have a happy ending. To me, this raised the play up above the earlier comedies I’ve read, and also gave it a focus that I hadn’t sensed during my read. I loved it.

This production of the play is available in full on YouTube. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qjm7o...

By the way, starting at around 34 minutes is the scene in which Helena convinces the King to let her attempt his healing. I was quite surprised that the scene is played by both actress and actor as almost a two way seduction.

V. The Play and I – comedy?

This is the first of Shakespeare’s plays (in my old-age project) for which watching the play (above) really contributed to my appreciation and interpretation.

As I read the play, I thought about how it’s come to be classified as a “comedy”. A little research informed me that the “comedy” genre of Shakespeare’s plays is sort of a catch-all. Not a Tragedy; not a History; so a Comedy (the “Problem” plays being off in left field by themselves). The point being that there aren’t a whole lot of laughs in the play, not even of the suggestive, double-entendre type of banter that was plentiful in As You Like It. There is a bit of banter, usually involving Parolles or the Clown, but it’s not the same type – and when Parolles is involved, the laughs are always coming by another character insulting him, that is, laughter at his expense.

This was brought out in the TV production very well. But I was struck, watching that, by a rather sombre mood. This was highlighted by IV.iii (above), in which Parolles is shown, blindfolded, with his head pushed down on a table, and the soldier holding him saying, “There is no remedy, sir, but you must die … Come, Headsman, off with his head.” To which Parolles moans, “Oh, Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death.” Even though the “Oh, Lord, sir” echoes the Clown’s foolishness with the Countess in II.ii, it’s hard not to feel a pang of sorrow for Parolles, who must be experiencing the terror of thinking that his life is about to end.

And Parolles, after all, is not the only character with faults in the play. Bertram goes without saying; the King, having displayed a tyranny over Bertram in Act II, repeats the same dark fault in the last scene, as he is about to order another man to become Diana’s husband. Lafeu, a perceptive man, and one who earns our admiration for his kindness toward Parolles near the end, has nevertheless thrust his daughter forward as a suitable match for Bertram, no doubt calculating that to be connected with the Roussillion estate can be an advantage for him. Indeed, when we examine all the characters, we see in each of them, even Helena, examples of human beings like all others, who evince a combination of good and bad traits as they pass across life’s stage.

The King says, in the EpilogueThe King’s a beggar, now the play is done.
All is well ended, if this suit be won,
That you express content; which we will pay,
With strife to please you, day exceeding day.
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts.
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.This rather enigmatic speech does nothing to dispel a feeling of evening falling, life winding down as ever.

Comedy? More like a tragi-comedy.