Rating: 5/5

2020-07-24 - The title of this book is a challenge. For sure. I remember seeing a paperback edition of this book around our house for years when I was growing up and thinking, "how could a book claim such a thing?' How could selfishness possibly be considered a virtue? I wasn't much of a reader at that point, so I did not even crack the cover.

But then I met a fellow student in college who was reviewing in the student newspaper the books by Ayn Rand that he was reading, including this one. I remember quite vividly agreeing with 80-90% of what he said Rand's books were saying, and thinking - WOW, this is powerful stuff. So powerful that I then took time out of my studies to read an essay or two in this outrageously titled book. Just as he said - great ideas, so in touch with reality, so little appreciated, so applicable for a better world for all. A clue to this book, but only a clue, for those who know something of the enlightenment ideas, especially the Scottish writers, think: "enlightened (long-term) self interest" when you read the word "selfishness."

Over the next 5-10 years I read all of this little book's powerful essays, as well as:
Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal - which focused more on economics and history, much more in my area of expertise than the philosophy in this book.
The Fountainhead
Atlas Shrugged
Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology
The New Left: The Anti-Industrial Revolution
The Romantic Manifesto - partially
The Early Ayn Rand
Who is Ayn Rand?

Discussions of some hack &amp;/or hatchet-job biographies of Rand.
Speeches and debates by some of her distinguished students/admirers.
"The Passion of Ayn Rand" by Barbara Branden
"Judgement Day" by Nathaniel Branden

Many, many more articles attacking her with bogus references or summaries, snide remarks, usually totally off the mark and highly error filled - so often and blatant that it sure seemed they could be purposely mischaracterizing her ideas.

The two biographies that came out almost simultaneously about 10 years ago - 
- one very good by Anne Heller, "Ayn Rand and the World She Made" and 
- the other by Jennifer Burns, "Ayn Rand: Goddess of the Market" - just a disaster, analysis-wise, but with some very good historical content (mostly revealing letters to Ayn Rand from her readers), which the Ayn Rand Inst. allowed her to discover from their archive (and denied to Anne Heller!!!). Despite the fascinating letters from fans, Burns' grave misunderstandings of Rand's ideas and the intellectual foundations of the enlightenment from which they gestated, make the book a very poor choice to understand Ayn Rand.

Since this book (The Virtue of Selfishness) is a collection of essays, it is much easier to approach and try out Rand's ideas. Highly recommended. So important for understanding many of the awful trends of the her day and even more so these days. Try the one titled "Racism" as just one timeless example, and see if you ever again think of that subject the same way you do now!

Don't let the title put you off - check out an essay or two - see what you THINK of Rand's actual ideas. How you FEEL about them may change too. But first, try to grasp the logic, and facts she presents and if they actually coincide with reality, or are just fantasy, or lies. You do the judging, after an honest exploration. Don't just prejudge with biased info.