Rating: 5/5

This review contains minor spoilers.

Reputed to be one of Margery Allingham’s finest novels, The Tiger in the Smoke is an intelligent crime and detection novel set in a unique period of time – just a few years after World War II; a time when poor people were still very poor and had a rough life, when most men were ex-servicemen – many with terrible memories of violence and many having committed them for their country – at what cost? A time when London was plagued by smog (though that term was not used when this book was written, so it is called simply ‘fog’).

The fog/smog lends a darkness and opaqueness to many scenes in the story and permits the gang of ‘baddies’ move around unnoticed, aided by the fact that they are a motley crew ostensibly just begging loose change from the public.

The title refers to the principal murderer moving around in London, which is often known, even today, as The Smoke. This man is a psychopath with, we are told, no hope of redemption, though a clergyman in the story believes everyone is worth the time and effort to be saved. There is a moving and atmospheric scene when his desire to help this troubled young man overcomes his fear of danger, leading to interesting and realistic consequences.

Other than the murderer, the main characters are amateur (I think) investigator Albert Campion, Allingham’s most well-known creation; a clever and resourceful police detective named Charlie Luke (who often steals the scenes); and Geoffrey Levett, a former army officer, cool customer and thoroughly good egg. It is refreshing to read a crime novel in which the detective is not a bumbling idiot easily bettered by the private dick but actually experienced, intelligent and good at his job.

The story unfolds slowly and although we are given clues along the way it is difficult at first to figure out any motive for what is happening. Ultimately it feeds into hidden treasure and the bond between men involved in a clandestine and violent special operation that took place during the war. As the pieces begin to fit together we learn more about the characters, their histories, fears, capabilities and their dreams and desires.

Allingham draws her characters well, giving them a history, depth, motives/drivers and a rationale for their actions. These ring true and are what raises this novel above many others of the genre. Sometimes I can watch a film and a character may do something that obviously puts them in danger and I think why on earth would they do that? In this story, Allingham fleshes them out so well that you understand those reasons and can respect them for it.

There is a lot of action and ‘derring do’ in this book but also subtlety, thoughtfulness and intelligence. I loved it.
Five stars.

Interestingly, the book I read before this one was Churchill’s Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare, which was all about SOE and the men who undertook secret missions that were small-scale but hugely important to the war effort. These men, some of whom were unsavoury characters used for expediency’s sake (there is a war on you know!), were highly trained, including in techniques of silent killing and the methods of most easily taking out an enemy. This was fresh in my mind and fed into this story, adding a bit more weight to it for me.