Rating: 2/5

"You can't depend on your eyes when your imagination is out of focus."

‘A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court’ begins when Hank Morgan, a skilled mechanic in a nineteenth-century New England arms factory, is struck on the head during a quarrel and awakes to find himself among the knights and magicians of King Arthur’s Camelot. Seeing the power that Merlin holds over King Arthur and his court, the narrator proclaims himself to be an even greater magician, using his 19th century scientific knowledge to create supposed miracles. As his standing in court grows the Yankee embarks on an ambitious plan to modernize Camelot with 19th century with industrial inventions like electricity, schools, newspapers, currency, dynamite and fireworks but in the end he is unable to prevent the death of Arthur and an interdict brought against him by the Catholic Church which grows fearful of his power.

Mark Twain was undergoing a series of personal and professional crises when this novel was written in 1889. Twain wrote the book as a burlesque of Romantic notions of chivalry by certain authors of his time like Sir Walter Scott and celebrates homespun ingenuity and democratic values while questioning the ideals of capitalism and outcomes of the Industrial Revolution.

This novel is also one of the first works to feature time travel. Whilst the genre has certainly changed over the years, Twain does it well, showing both the influence of the 19th century on Arthurian times and offering at the end a reasonable explanation as to why history continued as expected. 

Twain satirizes concepts of class throughout the book, as the main character — while appreciative of Arthur himself — is determined to do away with all the inherent injustices of a societal order that holds some people to be better than others. Justice, in this book, is particularly brutal.

Twain's writing is sly and sardonic, and I was charmed by the early chapters in particular. As the narrator enters the court at Camelot for the first time he has an encounter with a young boy:

"He arrived, looked me over with a smiling and impudent curiosity; said he had come for me, and informed me that he was a page.
“Go ‘long,” I said, “you ain’t more than a paragraph.”

Unfortunately whilst I admired his writing skill I felt that the book meandered and became repetitive at times losing both direction and impetus as Twain climbed onto his own personal hobbyhorses. Equally I feel that the nature of monarchies have changed so much since this book's publication that some of the arguments put forward have become totally irrelevant, likewise you only have to look at what is happening in certain 'democratic' countries around the world to realise that democracy isn't all that it's cracked up to be either. A book written from a very American point of view.