Rating: 5/5

This book is an amazing piece of investigative journalism. Just imagine enmeshing yourself in the lives of a Puerto Rican family in the Bronx (mostly) for 11 years in order to tell their story. Then imagine telling their story with utter honesty, an unusual intimacy and a complete lack of judgment. You have a masterpiece that allows us to actually "experience" the unrelenting cycles of poverty, drugs and violence endured by many Americans.

This book is a commitment of time on the reader's part. In order to understand the choices this ghetto family makes, you have to put yourself inside the story. You have to quit wishing that Jessica and Coco and Cesar and Boy George and Mercedes would make different choices and look at life through their eyes. I found myself thinking about these resilient yet trapped people long after I closed the book.

The author is unflinching in her descriptions of the living conditions, codes of street conduct, prison mentality, sexual abuse, homelessness, unplanned pregnancies, educational failures, violence, infestation,and generational cycles of living on the edge. She did not glamorize, proselytize, sanitize, condemn or pity this family. Sure, I wanted to believe that Mercedes or Naughty or Eddie or Freddie would be the new generation that could break away from family patterns. I now realize how deeply engrained these patterns are and how difficult it is to test your family loyalty and branch off in a new direction. 

I used to naively think that money could do a lot to help those who live in abject poverty. Now I realize that it takes so much more. It takes camping opportunities and teachers like Mercedes fourth grade teacher who could look beyond her belligerence and truancy. This teacher looked into her eyes and saw layers of hurt rather than simply anger.A child needs to have models outside their family who both appreciate their culture and expose them to other ways of thinking. When we reach out a hand, we must be patient as it is our repeated actions that speak way louder than our words or money.

Cesar said it was his once in a lifetime "respite from acting tough" that he treasured most. 
Gang members don't get many respites.