Rating: 4/5

I may be a tad over-kind with that fourth star, but this is a fascinating novel which, if not really, really good, is still well worth one’s attention. Basically a history book written in the first person by an impostor, it recounts the notorious anarchist bomb thrown in Chicago’s Haymarket (or thereabouts) in the 1880s. Surprisingly—if you, like me, are attracted to an anarchist historical novel—is how well written is the love story there embedded. It’s not so surprising when you know that the novel was written by the notorious Frank Harris, he of the Grove press pornographic Victorian classic sex memoir, My Life and Loves.

The history is also handled quite well, as far as I can tell, if perhaps a tad dry here and there, since Harris meticulously takes us through the events leading up to the bomb throwing and then through its after-effects, from A to B to C without much artistry. Perhaps that’s a willful strategy though. The narrative is mostly functional if not original or all that alluring aesthetically. I did find myself looking ahead to see how many pages until the next chapter. Mostly, though, I was riveted, fascinated to hear the story of the actual event and the kangaroo court that followed. I’m always interested in learning more about political dissent in the USA pre-WWII having grown up with ‘40s-era parents, born myself during the height of the Cold War mid-Cuban missile crisis, just as baby boom eased into Gen X. It’s hard to believe now there was ever so many soapboxes and brave souls who stood on them in American cities preaching Marx, socialism, and anarchy. I never much trusted the Hippies and they were considerably less committed, it seems to me, to real working class problems. Hence my generation’s healthy punk rock skepticism of that strategy. Or maybe we were just assholes who wanted our own “movement.” It amounts to the same thing, I guess.

Philosophically The Bomb treats of the topic of my first novel (Inbetween) a bit, without really espousing one philosophy or another, that is to say it brings up the conflict between philosophies of armed and passive resistance to state coercion/the state’s monopoly on violence/the state’s abuse of power. The Bomb lets its characters do the talking on this topic quite well so we hear both the committed reasoning in favor of subversive violence to fight institutional violence, terrorism as a tool to combat the state’s monopoly on force, as well as the cry for passive resistance, martyrdom, and critical mass strategies to gain ground against tyranny. The novel even lets us experience the stages of decision, action, sickness, remorse, and eventual certainty of the narrator—he who throws the bomb and dismembers 8 policemen on the spot, wounding many others. All in all I found The Bomb a thoughtful ride well worth taking.