Rating: 4/5

To understand the Wars of the Roses and Henry VIII's obsession with France, we must look back at the Hundred Years War. At least that is what Desmond Seward believes and he is right. The source of the conflict he points out doesn't stem out merely from Edward III's claim to the French throne on account of his mother being the daughter of one of the most famous (and ruthless) Capetian monarchs -Philip IV "the Fair" but also from the times of Henry II. More than a claim, it was a question of sovereignty. The treaty of Bretigny wasn't meant to last and as soon as the French saw an opportunity, they took advantage of it to take the territories they had previously agreed on the English. Henry V's conquest was rapacious and brutal, but no less brutal than his predecessors or his rivals, and yet his death did not mean the end of the English France. Had his brother John, Duke of Bedford lived, or had his wife, Anne of Burgundy not died and he did not marry Jacquetta, France wouldn't have been lost and England would've maintained Burgundy's friendship. Yet amidst all this chaos, new men rose. From all walks of life, war provided them an escape from their daily routine, and many of them (including already established wealthy magnates) enriched themselves and some rose to become Knights and even Barons as is the case of a John Stourton or Sir John Falstaff (who became a Baron as well). I enjoyed the maps and the details that Seward provided about the battles, and was not surprised to see the rapaciousness that all sides of the conflict inflicted on one another, but I was very shocked on some examples he drew. Clearly war broke all moral boundaries. Even the Duke of Bedford (Henry V's brother) as popular as he was in Paris and as much as he was fond of the French people, he was no more ruthless than his predecessors and rivals. The level of violence inflicted by the English and French is just appalling.

The only thing I found confusing and this is my only critique is that he lent credibility to some popular myths such as Edward II dying by a hot poker which has been discounted by many modern historians and saying he was a known homosexual -which is another myth. And also his rednering of Henry V as one of the greatest military geniuses but the worst king in terms of savagery and comparing him to Hitler. If I am not mistaken, the way he described (and from what has been said of the other monarchs that went before and after him in this conflict) he was no less fanatic. In fact Edward III's were just as palling such as killing denizens of women and children and and the Black Prince's merciless pursuit of his enemies or destroying towns based on the actions of one and what he did to traitors, burning them, cutting them to pieces, etc. Marguerite of Anjou's appearance is another thing he got wrong but I passed this one since one description of her described her as blond but "somewhat dark" so that may have lent to the confusion of Seward describing her as dark.

Regardless, I highly recommend this book to anyone interested in learning more about the Plantagenets and Valois. I started reading on the Plantagenets a while back and I am glad that I've started again, this was a great companion to the other Plantagenet books in my shelf. I am eager to see what his opinion is on all the Plantagenets in his upcoming book.