Rating: 2/5

**plot spoilers**
This is the best book of Diana Palmers, which isn’t saying much, because I really don’t like her style at all. They’re abusive men—they don’t hit the character, it’s all verbal, but they might as well bash her upside the head with a 2 by 4 with the things they’re saying to her.

There are several things I liked about the book but they didn’t really stand up to the things that sucked about it.

I liked Tate’s heritage and the tribal dances he did when he went back home, but of course Cecily studied Native American culture, so she knows sooo much about it. If I remember right he’s the reason she chose that field, and this girl started shaping up to be a bit of a stalker/obsessive. The way she went after him was deplorable. 

The part where she throws crab bisque onto him in the restaurant and asks if he’s feeling crabby. He goes after her, to see her get in the car with Colby, or whatever his name was. She had just found out Tate paid for her way through college and her apartment and everything, and she feels that he saw her as a charity case.

I liked that he had helped her out when her stepdad was abusing her and trying to take advantage of her.

I loved the part where Colby comes over and has a black eye or a cut on his face where Tate hit him while he had a ring on or something like that. He thought Colby had slept with Cecily so he punched him. I really liked that part where it showed his jealousy.

What I really didn’t like was that when she goes down to his hometown for the celebration, she just talks to him like nothing’s wrong when she should have been hurt about him forgetting her birthday and acting like a jerk. 

It turned out he had a gift for her, a crab pin; that was ironic and sweet.
I absolutely hated the fact that he had been with so many women, and if I’m not mistaken they were all white women, women that were just interested in how a Native American was sexually, but didn’t want him for anything more. Oh boo hoo, Tate. Why would you go out with any of them if they treated you like that?

And there was this whole conflict between him and Cecily because he didn’t want children with a white woman and so couldn’t be with her. Uh, you’ll have sex with all these other white women, but you won’t get with Cecily. I’m failing to see the logic behind that. Anyways, he’s really careful about being safe so he won’t get them pregnant, but that still doesn’t make sense to me.

I didn’t like Cecily as a person at all. She was just unlikeable, not funny, not interesting, pretty much boring and what did show through was not likeable in the least. She couldn’t stay mad or hurt when she should have, and I didn’t like that she was practically throwing herself at him. There’s a scene when she was younger where he had driven her out to an archaeological sites and she’s kissing him and telling him she has a box of condoms and for him to teach her, and I’m like omg, have you no shame? 

The first time they sleep together it’s completely just the wrong setting. They’re in his mother’s house, I can’t remember if she was still in the kitchen while this was going on or not, but I thought the timing was all wrong. I didn’t like that Cecily wore glasses, because it came off as nerdy in here, especially since she had them off and Hunter wondered if she could even see him. Wow, great stuff.

I was pretty surprised when she left town to move somewhere else, and previously when she told a magazine editor that the women living with Tate and him were getting married. I absolutely hated when he cut his hair short, even though I did like it because he was in mourning after his fight with Cecily and all of that drama about her keeping the secret of his dad to herself. I hate that she cut hers short too, because I hate when female characters do that. He shows up to the wedding on the arm of that woman, and I was mad about that.

At the end he puts his hand over her stomach, the baby kicks, and he looks startled. And she’s all mother-of-the-year, already acting like she knows everything about babies and pregnancy and says something in a know-it-all manner like he’s an idiot for acting the way he did. I can’t remember exactly what it was, because it’s been a while since I’ve read it but I didn’t care for it.

This is the best book of hers that I read, and there are good qualities to it, but overall it wasn’t that great. I am just not a fan of Diana Palmer. Her male characters are abusive and just plain hard-asses, and her female characters are very unlikeable, annoying and have no backbone whatsoever. They have no shame and will repeatedly go after the guy even though he’s made it quite clear he doesn’t want her.