Rating: 4/5

I read many Christopher Pike books in my pre-teen/middle school years. I remember taking at least two of them to college with me: Remember Me and Last Act. I wish I knew what happened to those books, but I don't and probably never will. They could be somewhere at my mom's house OR they were read-to-death by me and those that came after me (my nieces and nephew) OR they were all sold in a yard sale OR traded-in to a bookstore. I truly have no idea. So instead I turned to eBay and found about 20 of my favorites significantly overpriced for books that retailed at $3.99 and are not in the best condition. I kick myself every time I buy used books from eBay or ThriftBooks because they always have difficult-to-remove stickers and/or are not in a condition I would call good but eBay's definition of good loosely applies. In the lot I bought of 16 books, the first one I read (Slumber Party) has a piece of...cupcake, maybe...chillin' in the spine with some kind of growth that has spread to multiple pages in either direction. Definitely not a book condition I would call good or even acceptable, but this seller thought it worth selling.

So back to Last Act. This has a lot of elements that a young-me enjoyed: 1) my name! 2) a story within a story 3) a mystery 4) chocolate cake. The book centers around a new-ish-to-town teen, Melanie, that lands a lead (as Melissa) in a school play directed by new friend Susan and starring Marc, a boy Melanie has a crush on. Melanie's character, Melissa, shoots Ronda (played by Rindy) and the last act of the play is the characters discovering who killed Ronda. BUT (SPOILER ALERT) on opening night shit goes sideways and Melanie ends up arrested for murder. The second half of the book is Melanie's attempt to prove she did not kill Rindy -- either on purpose or by accident. I can remember making my own list of suspects along with Melanie when I was a kid and I remembered the anagram of Stan Russel/Susan Trels as soon as I saw his name on page 36. Interesting to note that, like in Slumber Party, someone is always ordering a chocolate cake, does Mr Pike like chocolate? Fortunately not as much weird focus on body image and negative self-talk in this one, although Melanie is a little insecure and compares herself to the beautiful Rindy an awful lot, especially when talking to Marc. I'd forgotten all about Clyde though so that was a twist I didn't see coming.

I am 99% certain that I read The Catcher in the Rye because it is mentioned in this book (the ducks!) and while young-me probably had no questions about it, adult me is wondering why the ducks wouldn't migrate? Wouldn't they be fine even if Sam didn't bundle them up in his barn? Unless they are domesticated Mallards and Sam brought them there in the first place thus should be responsible for them because their migratory instincts were bred out of them?