Rating: 3/5

I sought this book out because I'd seen an old episode of Unsolved Mysteries which mentioned the case. It's actually out of print, so it took me some time to find it. Apparently there is also a movie based on the book, but I've yet to locate a copy.

The book is supposed to be a recounting of the events that surrounded Ben and Jean Williams, who bought a house in a subdivision of Newport, Texas in the early 1980s. The story on Unsolved Mysteries did include the Williams couple, but mostly covered bodies found in the yard of their neighbours, the Haneys.

As these stories tend to go, after moving into their newly built house the Williams started experiencing strange things. Toilets flushing by themselves, footsteps, cold spots, strange dreams, shadowy figures, and a garage door that would open and close by itself. Then over time, six members of their extended family were diagnosed with cancer, of which I believe three succumbed to it, another died later of something else. The Williams felt that the cancer and misfortunes were somehow connected to the house. 

They had heard rumours that the houses in the subdivision had been built over a cemetery, and eventually found this to be fact. According to their sources, the land had originally been part of an estate which at some point in the past had been owned by the McKinneys, who ran a farm worked by slaves. Later generations of those slaves had become share-croppers and worked the same land. At some point the McKinneys had allowed the slaves to use a parcel of land to bury their dead, which over time became a sort of pauper's burial ground for local blacks, they named it Black Hope. Burials carried on there until some point in 1939.

A company named Purcell bought the land from one of the McKinneys and built a subdivision, claiming it had no knowledge of the cemetery, despite evidence to the contrary. At some point while digging a pool the Haneys unearthed the remains of a couple who were later identified as Betty and Charlie Thomas.

Eventually the Williams came to learn that they weren't the only ones in the street having trouble with the paranormal, but they were the second to last to leave. According to the book, all of the eight houses were eventually abandoned and foreclosed upon.

As far as whether or not this book is the complete truth, who knows. I did notice some inconsistencies between the interviews people gave on Unsolved Mysteries and the events as they were put forth in the book. Furthermore, newspaper clippings featured in the book tend to indicate that some neighbours didn't have trouble at all which contradicts the claim that everyone in the street left. 

My feeling on these sorts of things tends to be that something happened, and in the aftermath, people being unreliable witnesses at the best of times, let alone under stress, expand on or mistake events, and even attribute potentially explainable events to the supernatural because they either don't understand the cause or they are just so beaten down by what is going on that they have a tenuous grasp of reality outside of their situation. 

I do believe that something happened to these people, what exactly will remain a mystery. As to the validity of the book as a whole, I'm a touch dubious due to the time frame, and unless they wrote down things as they happened I doubt their memories would be accurate over about 5 years, no matter how remarkable the events were. The book itself was entertaining enough, but written in such a straightforward way that at times it dragged a little. The subject matter carried the lacklustre writing however. Over all it's an interesting story no matter how you slice it, so I'm sure anyone interested in ghost stories based on someone eles reality would get something out of it.