Rating: 5/5

Why I decided to read this book:
Even though it is slightly embarrassing, my little sister was reading this book, and when I saw that it was a short stories book, I thought that it would be perfect for my english reviews. 

Category:
This book has short stories, so naturally, it fills out the 'three poems or short stories from one anthology' box. I personally really like short stories, because you can read them in 15 minute intervals, so if you have a bit of free time before you go to bed, you can just quickly finish one story before sleeping.

What I learned (with favourite quotes included):
1) No is Yes was my favourite story in this book because it had an incredible twist at the end. My favourite quote from this book was from when her father's house was on fire and Linda said "No." when a fireman asked if anyone was inside (her dad was inside). Linda was taught by her father that no is yes, black is white, etc. for human research. So basically, in the end, Linda's dad died because of his own research. I learned that all humans should have an equal and correct education. 
2) The second story I read was the one that my sister said was the best. It was about a boy called Sean and his sister had said "I wish you didn't have such a big mouth", then the next day, Sean had a mouth the same size as the width of a pencil. By reading this story, I learned that I should be careful of what I say because one day, it might come true.
3)"I know I can't tell Tara. She won't like the little face on my tonsils. She certainly won't like my extra eye. Once she wouldn't go out with me because I had a pimple on my ear. If I tell her the truth she will drop me like a brick." 
This quote was part of Tonsil Eye Tis'. I learned from both this quote and the story that you don't know what people are really like, what they hate, what they love, what doesn't really matter to them. So, even if you have a third eye somewhere, there might be someone out there that absolutely loves extra eyes. You just never know in life.

Interesting character/setting and why:
1) Linda, because she was taught everything oppositely, and I just wondered what it might be like in a world of opposites.
2) Sean's sister because she says that she wishes Sean had a smaller mouth, but when he actually did end up getting one, I think she would've been quite shocked at him and sorry for what she said. 
3) The angry gnome, because he was simply odd. Its eye glued onto the main character's (name not mentioned in story) tonsil, which isn't just interesting, it's weird.