Rating: 4/5

A great story dealing with the complicated nature of human relations (and a hint of criminality)

Page 35
The next day Guy and Belle, Sally and Martine all ransack Guy's house looking for hidden money. Guy is in charge of turning his father's drawers over on the bed and looking underneath for taped bills. Martine is in the closet, searching in his shoes and rummagin through shoeboxes of cards and photographs. Sally and Belle are downstairs, turning over chairs and tapping the floorboards with their feet. 
"Guy," Martine calls, "are you done with the drawers?"
He turns over the last drawer and his father;s balled socks tumble onto the bed in black and white disarray. He scans the bare wood.
"Yes."
"Then come and help me." 
Guy walks over to the closet and peers in. Martine sits crosslegged on the floor with a pile of photos on her lap. Guy sees a photo of himself in her hand.
"Don't look at those," he says "Those are ours."
"I was there when that picture was taken. It was at a picnic by the lake last year. Mom took the picture."
"I don't look like that anymore. Put it away. Did you find money?"
Martine puts the photo back in the pile and begins to scop them all back into the box. "No," she sighs. "He knew he was leaving. We'll only find money if he forgot it. You look in his suit pockets."
Guy steps into the closet and stares up at his father's brown and black suits on their hangers. "He didn't take any of his clothes because he's coming back."
"Maybe he is. Just look, Guy."
"He didn't hide any money because he's gone to get the money and bring it back. He's has a bank account in London. He went there and he's coming back with lots of money. He said I could go to London with him sometime, and he would teach me how to drive on the wrong side of the road."
"You're too small to drive."
He opens the front suit jacket and stares at the lining. Bright silk shines under the light of the overhead bulb. He runs his hand over the slippery fabric. He gropes the pockets and finds them empty. On impulse he tugs the jacket off the hanger and pulls himself inside it. His father;s suit jacket surrounds him, smelling warm and sick like his father, weighing down his arms and shoulders and the small naked nape of his neck."