Rating: 5/5

Guapa is a member of the ciguapas tribe. They live in the Dominican Republic and make their homes underwater. At night they come out to hunt for food and they are very fearful of humans. What sets the ciguapas apart from others is that although they are human, their feet are on backwards. This makes it difficult for anyone to track them. No one knew of this special characteristic. One day it was almost revealed. Guapa (her name means brave, bold and beautiful), went looking for food one evening before it was completely dark. She wandered too close to a house where a family was still woke and she tried on their clothes that were hanging outside on the lawn. A boy who lived inside, saw her and tried to befriend her but Guapa hurried away. The other ciguapas were concerned that Guapa's wandering would cause for their secret to be discovered so they asked the queen to speak with her. After a scolding, Guapa promised not to venture close to the humans again. But she was curious "what is it like to be a human?". One day she came up out of the water during the day and stumbled upon the boy and his family having a picnic. They invited her to lunch and in her effort to run back to the ocean, she stumbled and fell and twisted her ankle. The boy and his family care for her and when nightfall comes, the other ciguapas come in search for her. She leaves the blanket where she was laying and leaves a sea shell as a thank you for the boy and his family. From then on the ciguapas did not steal food from this family as Guapa told them how nice they were to her.

This is Dominican folklore written in such a lovely way. The illustrations add to the beauty of the story. I had to stop and study the way Fabian Negrin drew the backward feet. Very convincing!! Guapa, I would put at age 11-13 so students in that age range would be able to identify with her. She is young, beautiful, inquisitive and forgetful. Although she is different because of where she lives and her backward feet, she still shares the same emotions as a real human.