Rating: 5/5

Reread/taught/reread for a 30 year duration of my very old existence…

“Never for one moment since has there been any light that's stronger than this kitchen candle"-one of Blanche DuBois' many iconic lines from "A Streetcar Named Desire" (96). 

I first read "A Streetcar Named Desire" when I was a kid. It is my favorite play, and I've read it and taught it several times. I have watched the classic 1951 film many times almost in over a 30 year span. 

I read as an adolescent (because the 1951 film consumed me), then I read it in high school. Then in undergrad, and later for my graduate degree. In the almost 30 years I've known of this classic, there's always something new to discover, or in my case, rediscover. 

This recent adult rereading of "Streetcar" felt like getting gut-punched. It is a nasty, nasty story of lust, mental instability, and metaphor of a changing South, rapidly industrializing manufacturing companies from the North. 

It's a seminal work in Southern Literary Renaissance- the Southern Gothic, and a harrowing story of lost love. Blanche, Stella, Stanley and Mitch will forever be in the minds of those who read this deeply, dark play of lust, violence, of sexuality and hypocrisy. It is both an unsettling metaphor, and a reminder of harsh reality. 

For those who have never read the play, it's the story of fading Southern Belle and former English teacher, the iconic Blanche DuBois who has lost everything. With nowhere else to go, she finds herself at her sister Stella’s and her brutish, yet highly sexually charged brother-in law, Stanley Kowalski's mercy in a squalid New Orleans apartment. 

Blanche's flighty persona and pathological lies about her sordid past is too much for Stanley to bear- and he sets out to destroy her reputation because of his need to control the situation. She has squandered the estate that Stella was supposed to inherit. 

His ideas of realism and fantasy are the opposite of Blanche’s, with Stella and his friend Mitch caught in the middle of their battle of wits.

Blanche states, "I don't want realism, I want magic" (117) defiantly as she attempts to hold on to her dignity, and from here, after all her secrets are revealed, including her ill-fated marriage to Allan Gray, and her questionable relationship with one of her former students- all lead to an inevitable haunting, and cruel fate. 

The play is filled with bitter dialogue that will haunt the reader, as Blanche utters "I've always depended on the kindness of strangers" (149). 

The 1951 iconic film adaptation starring Vivien Leigh and Marlon Brando is equally devastating as the play itself. 

Their indelible performances live on as the flighty, and devastating Blanche; while Brando of course stole hearts with his heart-stopping, shirtless, and animalistic performance. 

Kim Hunter and Karl Malden also lent fine support as Stella and Mitch, and like Ms. Leigh, and except for Mr. Brando, all won Academy Awards for their performances. 

Note: If you want to read great backstage gossip about the behind the scenes of the film, read Sam Staggs’ “When Blanche Met Brando”. 

It’s also noteworthy to write that Leigh and Brando were friends off screen and actually supported one another through their difficult scenes. Brando even said that she was “perfect casting” as Blanche! 

Postscript: 

I also feel incredibly privileged I got to see Cate Blanchett perform Streetcar at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in what I call one of the five best performances I have ever seen live, which was a touring production from the Sydney Theater Company in 2009. 

Her Blanche has become embedded in my brain- and I was glad she was able to play a variation of Blanche in Woody Allen's film "Blue Jasmine". 

During the three hours I spent watching Ms. Blanchett duel with Joel Edgerton’s Stanley, the ghosts of Leigh and Brando were quietly held off on the wings of the theater. It was directed with sensitivity and harrowing clarity by Liv Ullman. 

2025 postscript: I once again saw this play at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in a production directed by Rebecca Frecknall. 

Starring Patsy Ferran as Blanche and it-boy of the moment, Paul Mescal as Stanley- it is a thoughtful production that gives Blanche and Stella’s relationship center stage, and the decisions as women they made in order to survive. 

Paul Mescal's being shirtless and his body not being so shredded makes him a lot more vulnerable than you thought. 

Stella's (Anjana Vasan) haunting words to Blanche, "there are things that happen between a man and a woman in dark that sort of make everything else seem-unimportant" (70) is a disturbing and fascinating mix of both being trapped in lust and sex- and domestic abuse. 

It’s a more contemporary vision that was quite dazzling in its execution and this time, Stanley takes a backseat. 

If you were in New York either in 2009, or 2025- these productions of "Streetcar" were definitely ones worth taking a ride on.