Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars

"I have had moments in my life, as has everyone, when something in memory clicks, when we are aware of a sensation of what the French call ‘déjà vu.’ Somewhere, some time, and God alone knew when, I had seen that bowed posture, the ample drapery spread, the arms folded, the head buried under the weight of shawls. But not in Rome. My vision lay elsewhere. The memory was childhood’s, blotted out by the years between."

Armino Fabbio, while in Rome carrying out the mundane duties as courier for Sunshine Tours, has a sudden jolt, a flashback of his past that will propel him to his hometown of Ruffano, Italy, in order to unravel a mystery that will haunt him if he does not act. Armino has not set foot in Ruffano since the end of WWII, when he fled with his mother and a Commandant of the German army, leaving behind the memory of a father and a brother who had both perished during the war. What he finds on his return are a deluge of sensations and nostalgic remembrances that were shaped by the impressionable mind and malleable consciousness of youth. 

The city of Ruffano is steeped in history with one legend looming large – that of the fifteenth century first Duke of Ruffano, Duke Claudio, otherwise known as the Falcon. His story is mirrored in a painting which hangs in the ducal palace, titled The Temptation of Christ. Duke Claudio’s likeness is depicted in both the faces of Christ and Satan, reflecting the dual nature of good and evil. Armino reads through a historical text about the lives of the Dukes of Ruffano and gleans further testimony as to the character of the infamous Duke Claudio: "His brief life is shrouded in mystery, for contemporary authorities do not enable us to pronounce with certainty on the enormous vices wherewith tradition and innuendo have blackened his memory. A youth of outstanding promise, he became intoxicated by good fortune, and casting off his early discipline he surrounded himself by a small band of dissolute disciples, and dismayed the good citizens of Ruffano by licentious outrages and revolting cruelties."
 
With the annual Festival in Ruffano fast approaching, an ambitious scheme to seemingly reenact the history of the city is masterminded by the much admired Director of the Arts Council. The various factions of students within the university in Ruffano are already at odds with one another; and it appears that the festival will somehow increase the tension and bring everything to a grand climax – one which Armino fears to be very dangerous and directed within an atmosphere of fanaticism. His understanding of the history of the city as well as the impressions from his own childhood will greatly influence his own role in the impending drama. "The proud would be stripped, the haughty violated, the slanderer silenced, the viper die in his own venom. The scales of heavenly justice would thus be balanced."
 
Anyone that has read my reviews in recent months will probably have noticed that I have been reading several du Maurier works – and that I have been pouring forth praises and enthusiasm for each novel! I just can’t seem to help getting caught up in the brilliance of her storytelling – the psychological complexities, the intoxicating atmosphere of the surroundings, and the remarkable presence of her characters in my imagination. This book is lesser-known in comparison to such acclaimed works like Rebecca and My Cousin Rachel, but its impact is just as powerful and perhaps even more meaningful. The battle between good and evil, the effect of memory on the perception of current events, and the opposing natures, or perhaps even duality, of creation and destruction are all examined by du Maurier in this compelling feat of writing. I don’t rank this as one of my very favorite pieces by this author (they can’t all be number one, after all!), but it is a must-read for any fan and one that I recommend highly. For the most part, it’s a slower, reflective sort of book that will make you ponder many of the themes presented.