Rating: 1/5

This review is of “Portrait of Desire” by Cassie Edwards.

The book begins in August, 1892, in Seattle, Washington. It is here that the heroine of the book, Jennifer Lynn Brewster, 15 at the time, is sitting in a church pew listening to a sermon given by her father, Reverend Frank Brewster. Jennifer’s mind, however, is on her late mother, Camille. Camille allegedly died trying to induce an abortion of a child fathered by one of Frank’s parishioners, Robert Harbison. On that day, Jennifer makes a plan to destroy Harbison. 

Fast forward six years. Now 21 years of age, Jennifer sets her plan in motion. On her trip to San Francisco, where Harbison currently lives, she meets Nicholas Oglesby, the hero of the book, and a painter who paints a portrait of Jennifer he titles “Portrait of Desire”. They fall in love and become lovers. 

When Jennifer arrives in San Francisco, she stays with her uncle, Thad. That relationship sours, however, over Jennifer’s displeasure over his lifestyle; namely, the fact that his mistress, Lil, is African-American. She also meets Harbison, who pursues, and later, rapes her. The shocking part, is that Jennifer, while this is occurring, feels pleasure.

Jennifer learns multiple painful family secrets, which impact her relationship with Thad. However, Jennifer eventually comes to terms with Thad, marries Nicholas, has three children-all daughters-and she and Nicholas have their Happily Ever After.. Or something like that.

Upside: Not a bloody great deal.

Downside: The characters are shallow, flat and undeveloped. Jennifer is supposed to be a religious woman, but tries to seduce and get revenge on Harbison, and hates the fact that Thad is involved with Lil solely on the basis of Lil’s race. There is way too much of Jennifer “picking up her skirts”, and way too many attempts by Mrs. Edwards to try to create drama by ending sentences with multiple periods...Spoiler alert: IT FAILS!!!! 

Sex: The sex scenes here are fairly mild, and just as uninteresting as the rest of the book was for me.

Violence: Before Harbision rapes Jennifer, he assaults her. He also ties her to a bed and encourages another “man” to rape her as well. The other individual passes out drunk before that happens.

Bottom Line: I found “Portrait of Desire” to be an absolutely pointless book. I cannot think of one redeeming, positive thing to say about it.