Rating: 5/5

Absolutely, unequivocally, superb! 

How many times have you heard in recent times, in the political spectrum that the men, Generals, making the decisions that send our young men and women into the line of fire, have no idea what it’s like at the front? They sit back and give orders while they remain in the safe confines of their headquarters. This might have been true during Vietnam. Thank you LBJ and Robert MacNamara. But not during General Franks watch. 
When I started reading, I flashed back to Dwight D. Eisenhower, Omar Bradley, Lucian Truscott and others. All of these men had very humble beginnings and one helluva a work ethic. Tommy Franks would have been right with these men if born in that era. Luckily for us, he wasn’t. He joined up ’64 and was baptized under fire in Vietnam. He, like his predecessors never took his rank as a sign of privilege, he took it as a learning opportunity, and learn he did. 
Many forget how corrupt and horrible the military was after Vietnam. Drugs infested all the organizations and respect for officers was lacking at best. It took men like Franks to rebuild and re-discipline the army. Was it easy? Hell no. But he would be laying the ground work for future fighters and leaders. It would first bear fruit in Desert Storm and then Anaconda and Iraqi Freedom.
You will be amazed at the cast of individuals he surrounded himself with and had the honor of serving with. Almost every one of these men earned their stripes in Vietnam, on the front lines, Grenada or Desert storm.
Now, how many think the higher the rank, the less paperwork and planning goes with the job? If you’re a title X, possibly, but if you’re a Major General putting together one of the greatest coalition forces the planet has ever seen, there aren’t enough hours in a day. Couldn’t help but think of Eisenhower and Operation Overlord. The parallels are striking! 
Like all men in the military, there is one animal they’d rather not deal with unless they are disgruntled or retired and looking for their fifteen minutes of fame. You guessed correctly-the Press. He didn’t care for the press and was always amazed at how bias their reporting was even when they were embedded with the coalition forces. He would give the press all they needed to know without jeopardizing lives. If they didn’t get it right, he could care less. His job was to fight as swiftly, efficiently and with the least amount of loss to life as possible. Cozying up to the press wasn’t in his job description. To this day, we are still plagued with the same slanted media, only much worse. Enough of that. 
After 9/11, Franks didn’t take a day off until the invasion of Iraq. A normal work day for he and his staff was sixteen hours, seven days a week. I was floored when I read this. But when you understand the direction he wanted the military to take and Washington, it was a monumental task. His focus, learned in Vietnam and Germany, was integrated co-ordination between all branches of the service. He tired of the mucking about of each branch fighting for itself and their importance. He convinced them, for the United States military to succeed, it was a joint team effort. If they work together, everyone will get credit. What a novel idea. Washington’s role would be policy and diplomacy. Let the generals do the fighting. 
How he achieves this is a great blueprint for any medium to large company that is having organizational problems. 
I could write another two pages on what a great story this is, but that is not the purpose of a review. It’s to entice new readers to give it a try. 

The only part I didn’t like was the epilogue, but I didn’t deduct any stars because all of the material before this was outstanding. It wasn’t well organized and too jumpy. It came across as a bit rushed in order to meet a publishing deadline. 

In every sense of the word, Mr. General Tommy Franks is an American and a Soldier! 

Five Stars!