Rating: 4/5

This is another collection of short stories starring Horace Rumpole, criminal barrister, aka Old Bailey Hack, as he does his part to uphold justice.

Mortimer is a late-20th century, liberal Wodehouse; or, perhaps it would be more accurate to say that Mortimer’s Rumpole is a late-20th century, liberal Bertie Wooster. Consider this passage:

...that evening an event of unearthly, not to say spooky significance occurred in Casa Rumpole, 25B Froxbury Court in the Gloucester Road. I was sitting by the electric fire, reading the depositions in a promising little indecent assault and taking a bedtime bracer of the old and Tawney, when the house was riven by the sound of a rich contralto voice raised in what seemed to be some devout ditty.

The Lord God Omnipotent...
The Lord God Omnipotent...
The Lord God Omnipotent...

sang what I first took for the ghost of some member of the Bach Choir, justifiably murdered long ago in Froxbury Court.

In one story that could have been written just this year instead of 30+ years ago, titled Rumpole and the Fascist Beast, Rumpole defends a man accused of offending under the Race Relations Act. The man is clearly a racist, but he is entitled to counsel and Rumpole quotes Voltaire to the jury - “I disagree with what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it.” We need more reading and emulating Voltaire these days, IMO.

Another good one is the final story, Rumpole and the Age for Retirement. Everyone else is determined that Rumpole is getting past it and should go out to pasture; coincidentally, Rumpole is defending an aging career crook whose family has decided he should retire and in aid of this cause, planted a piece of stolen art in his garage and then so informed the constabulary. The only problem is that said artwork is a priceless Italian master and no one in the family was sophisticated enough to realize its worth. After winning his case, Rumpole is lured to a dinner that is supposed to herald his retirement; only he turns the tables and refuses to retire.

But my favorite story in this collection is Rumpole and the Case of Identity. Rumpole shows that, for all his anarchist tendencies, is at heart, and soft-hearted at that, a rather conventional, if enlightened, Englishman. Highly enjoyable!