Rating: 4/5

3.5-4★
“. . . as blind obedience is ever sought for by power, tyrants and sensualists are in the right when they endeavour to keep women in the dark, because the former only want slaves, and the latter a play-thing.”

I saw reference several times to Mary Wollstonecraft around International Women’s Day recently and thought I should find this book. I read and enjoyed about a third of it, but I eventually got bogged down in the repletition and the language. The English literary style of the late 1700s is not easily skimmed, and I really just wanted a sense of her propositions, not chapter and verse.

I know I didn't read it all, but I read enough to recognise its importance and her passion, for which I give her four stars.

She certainly lets the fellows have it with both barrels! She frequently says that what might pass for an acceptable lifestyle in the seraglio (harem) is hardly an appropriate goal for young women. She rails against the injustice of inequality of power. The power of the rich over the poor, men over women, and men over soldiers who go straight into the military with no other education.

She hopes women won’t take offense at her appealing to their good sense and seeming to overlook their feminine attractions. 

“My own sex, I hope, will excuse me, if I treat them like rational creatures, instead of flattering their FASCINATING graces, and viewing them as if they were in a state of perpetual childhood, unable to stand alone.”

If that’s all women ever learn – how to be simpering coquettes, then no wonder men tire of them eventually when 

“they are taken out of their sphere of duties, and made ridiculous and useless when the short lived bloom of beauty is over*. . . 

(*Footnote. A lively writer, I cannot recollect his name, asks what business women turned of forty have to do in the world.)”

Anyone here over 40? You might as well give it up now.

It’s not just women she’s fighting for, though that was revolutionary enough. She was after equality generally. She’s not happy with royalty or with lords and ladies (the silly ones who spend all day on their fading looks).

“. . . the more equality there is established among men, the more virtue and happiness will reign in society. . . 

After attacking the sacred majesty of kings, I shall scarcely excite surprise, by adding my firm persuasion, that every profession, in which great subordination of rank constitutes its power, is highly injurious to morality.”

Women were to be uneducated (except in household duties), protected and innocent.

“Children, I grant, should be innocent; but when the epithet is applied to men, or women, it is but a civil term for weakness.”

Well said, Mary. Forewarned is forearmed. Turn the light on and wake women up.

“Gentleness, docility, and a spaniel-like affection are, on this ground, consistently recommended as the cardinal virtues of the sex; and, disregarding the arbitrary economy of nature, one writer has declared that it is masculine for a woman to be melancholy. She was created to be the toy of man, his rattle, and it must jingle in his ears, whenever, dismissing reason, he chooses to be amused.”

Toy, my foot! And she goes on about both men and women being physically fit and active instead of sitting around these days (not enough battles???), and that’s about where I left her.

She died not long after giving birth to her daughter, Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, author of Frankenstein and wife of famous poet many of us read in school, Percy Bysshe Shelley. 

Quite a family! Her work is available for free now online. 
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/3420