Rating: 5/5

Nothing is Black and White in the world of Balzac.

Hence his towering stature in the French Literary Pantheon, as evinced in the commemorative statue by the admittedly idolatrous Auguste Rodin. Balzac was a genius. Slightly mad, but very gifted.

You know, I guess each one of us is often pained and shamed by our own very spontaneous - and alas, often very public - displays of our own fallible humanity. 

And Balzac’s poor characters ooze their humanity from their very pores, for better or for worse.

In Father Goriot’s case, it is patently for worse - for his open trust in people propels him ineluctably into personal tragedy. 

Goriot is a naïf - as we ALL seem so clearly to ourselves when suddenly caught dead to rights. But Goriot doesn’t do like we do and hold his cards ever tighter to his chest. 

No, for he has been broken on the wheel of unrequited love: for you see, his affections are unreturned by HIS OWN ARRIVISTE DAUGHTERS.

Enters, then, another jeune arriviste: Eugène de Rastignac. And yes, his appellation denotes nobility, but it is a noblesse manqué. 

Financial scarcity has turned his family’s provincial paucity into penny-pinching. Except for the great rising family star, dashing Eugene. 

For him, the world.

And so his assisted star rises (on Goriot’s back), as that old man’s luck falls flat.

Balzac here weaves a hauntingly sad and beautiful fable of the bitter fruits of naïve love.

Bipolar like myself, he sees the world from both its good and evil sides simultaneously. He enchants and he horrifies.

Because he can so terrify us, it’s best to start out in our reading of La Comédie Humaine with the sunnier and less appalling works. Goriot seems about midpoint in his manic spectrum, hence a good place to start.

When I rated this book after reading it, I gave it four stars.

But now, shocked into stunned silence by B’s Cousin Bette, I give Goriot the full five, knowing now that it doesn’t get any better than THIS.

It’s the Creation of a True Master.