Rating: 4/5

I transcribed the thoughts of Merton in this spiritual handbook to understand his journey and message for myself. There are sections and passages in Merton’s work that I found difficult and obscure and I specified when I came across such. I don’t propose that my notes will make the overall experience any simpler or easier. I suggest reading the original No Man Is an Island to get the full message and see for yourself perhaps what I did not fully comprehend. 

I found "No Man Is an Island" difficult. I understood bits and pieces but it was not easy to put the puzzle together. I read to the middle of the book hoping for better light to come shining until I found paragraphs and longer sections of “bright moments”. I slowed down my reading considerably to reflect more on the message. I learned that Merton’s earlier work “Seeds of Contemplation” covered some of the ground and he further developed things in “No Man Is an Island”. I decided to read “Seeds of Contemplation” first and read "No Man Is an Island" very slowly, concentrating on every paragraph. It was a slow but worthwhile effort. These notes are from my second reading. 

Preface

Merton gives his intentions in the book: “to share … certain aspects of the spiritual life”. That spiritual life is the life of man’s “real self … the interior life … oriented towards God”. It will get us in touch with the “reality as it really is”. He intends to go over some ground that was discussed in the previous Seeds of Contemplation in a more fundamental and detailed manner. (p. ix-x)

Prologue 

Man tends to rebel against himself to find life’s meaning, has a great difficulty to see the meaning of life. We need to find our own individual meaning of our existence from within. Learning it from watching others can lead us to easy solutions not necessarily a virtuous thing. We may have become coarse to resist the fear and trembling and anxiety. We need to ask questions to find answers and be unafraid to ask them.
	 
There are lazy diseases like despair. It resorts to science and philosophy. “Clever answers to clever questions” have nothing to do with the problems of life. (p. xiii)

Merton says he wants to meditate in this book on the Catholic tradition, to understand it as a man of faith to make the faith part of his own life and live it.

The unifying idea he wants pursue is that as every man looks for his own salvation in life he wants to discover first “who he himself really is”. (p. xv) The second idea is as the title of the book suggests no man can find who he really is “in himself alone, but that he must find himself in and through others.” (p. xv)

The Gospel sums this up: If any man would save his life, he must lose it” and “Love one another as I have loved you”. (p. xv) St. Paul said “We are all members one of another.” Discover of ourselves in others in not subjective or psychological but an objective and mystical self-realization of losing and discovering ourselves in Christ. It is finding God who “built us together in Him unto a habitation of God in the Spirit” (Ephesians 2:22) (p. xvi)

Discovery of Christ must be real, not an escape from ourselves but an acceptance of ourselves, and others as we are with all our limitations.

Chapter 1: “Love Can Be Kept Only by Being Given Away”

1. Love brings you happiness only if you share it and it is reciprocated. Your own self-satisfaction that is selfish can only be temporary. You are not satisfied when you love someone who is selfish and receives your love selfishly and does not reciprocate.

2. Love does not look for the effect of bestowing it on others and is not interested in the joy that it affects. It only seeks the good of the beloved.

3. Loving another must be true and not blind. Loving blindly that does not distinguish between good and evil is hatred and it is selfish, a love for its own sake. When bodily passion exists it is what it is. You follow your passions and do not even bother to acknowledge that you are deceiving yourself. 

4. The virtue of charity is strong and clear-sighted. We must examine that our love for others is not insincere, or selfish. We must not seek it for pleasure of our own.

5. We must first love truth that comes from God and enter into the mystery of God’s love for our brothers. It is not a philosophical or abstract truth but concrete and practical living truth.

Chapter 2: “Sentences of Hope”

1. We will not be perfectly free until we realize our end not in visible things but in God. We must be free of material things to appreciate them for what they are but it is all through God.

We belong to God by faith and supernatural hops. We become confident and aware that He possesses our soul.

We can measure our hope by the degree of our detachment by hope. Perfect detachment gives us free hands to work. It shows us the what and the how. God becomes present in our lives and we will His mercy.

2. I must trust in God of my own free will and believe in His grace. I must believe I can love Him. If I do not believe that I do now follow His first commandment: “Thou shall love thy Lord thy God with thy whole heart and thy neighbor as thyself.” (p. 17)

3. We may begin with loving God first and hope in knowing He loves us. Hope and charity work together.

4. Loving God is the one desire that cannot fail. Even a desire to love Him is a beginning towards perfect freedom of loving nothing else first. We ask Him anything provided we love Him first.

5. Any limit on our love for and hope in God is a sin because by sin we withdraw from God and hope in and serve some other master.

6. Our hope must be supernatural above things and time of this world. We must detach ourselves from them. Our hope is in the promise of heaven and new earth.

7. The devil has no God, no hope, only has pride that refuses to love.

8. God is Lord of the poor, Father of mercy, and a jealous God of His prerogative as the supreme forgiver and of those who can hope even as the thief on the cross who believed.

9. We must want mercy even in despair and recognize the need for forgiveness. Hoping is better than oblivion to problems.

10. If we live with hope we are by the grace of God predestined to Heaven. We hope by our free will and God’s grace. Our Free Will becomes a grace from God.

11. Hope and faith that will to save all men to be saved must also be individual as it pertains to me. Hope and Faith tell me Jesus loves me.

12. Hope seeks God’s glory revealed in ourselves when we say “Thy Kingdom come.”

Chapter 3 “Conscience, Freedom, and Prayer”

1. We are prisoners of our own blindness if we look to other people or situations for how we should live. We deceive ourselves believing we are free or that we can make others or even our own body obey us.

Our free will does not allow us to be self-sufficient. We make choices too often directed by our “psychological compulsions” by our false selves not by our inner selves that would perfect us and fulfill our “real selves”. (p. 25) 

Pleasing ourselves will only keep us miserable most of the time. Yet there is something in my free will that tells me to love and do good to others. Others fulfill my freedom but we must not subject ourselves to a tyrant and serve him. That would be disorder. We will realize our freedom only if we serve the will of God.

2. Freedom must be used to a good end. Our conscience measures our actions. Blind love that finds no fulfillment brings no happy end.

We must develop a mature conscience to make good choices. Our conscience cannot be formed on other people’s dispositions towards us. We must be our own master of our conscience and have our own moral intentions. I must give my own love to another to be true. 

3. Our freedom is a talent given to us by God to trade to have more than we had and become more than we were. Merton makes an analogy between freedom and money. You are free with your freedom but like a wise rich man you don’t’ throw your freedom away like money out the window. You invest your freedom, not destroy it. You dedicate it as you grow, and see more purpose to use your freedom because you see wider horizons, charity, and closer union with God.

4. Our conscience gives a reflection of who we are. It tells us what we do, how and how well we act morally. It shows on our outward appearance but it manifests the soul within.

5. We develop our moral conscience by prayer but not our consciousness. It is healthier not to be always conscious of ourselves, to constantly examine our feelings and thoughts—it will paralyze us—we will be unable to act normally. Meditation should not be the time to look for religious emotions.

6. Perception of beauty in what is real and responding to the splendor of God’s creation that is all around us can bring us to an awareness of what we withdraw away from and become insensible to in a world in which we are constantly bombarded by stimulations of every kind.

We need to learn new ways of seeing things, not merely to withdraw from them to discover and respond to values that are hidden and find “ourselves and lose ourselves at the same time”. (p. 34)

We can lift ourselves through an aesthetic experience by contemplating a work of art, a poem, or a piece of music. We discover our capacity to a level of being we did not know we could achieve.

7. Such an awareness as through discovering higher level of consciousness should serve us to view things in a new way and to act above our normal level. We should look and respond to such “flashes of aesthetic intuition” in a prayer. (p. 35) Church art and music of Gregorian chant have been present in the Church as means of introducing the souls to lift them above towards a higher spiritual order. It draws the soul to God. Art that does not produce some kind of an uplifting effect is not art.

8. We must not ignore our subconscious mind. It’s a storehouse of our life’s “experiences” and it works in forming our knowledge of life’s realities. We must therefore at the least acknowledge that our subconscious does exist and that there are areas we must open our ears to with humility. (p. 37)

9. Our consciousness is secondary in our spiritual life. Our moral conscience has access to the ultimate realm beyond our conscience. 

The scribes who knew the law in the time of Jesus observed the law externally but did not understand Jesus when he was preaching to them that man must be born again “of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter the kingdom of God”. (John 3:5) St. Paul reiterated Christ when he wrote to the Corinthians “You are the epostles of Christ … ministered by us and written not in ink, but with the Spirit of the living God.” (II Corinthians 3:3)

10. Prayer strengthens our conscience and brings to light God’s law and unites our conscience with the Holy Spirit. 

11. We are born with conscience and it is not possible to deny it nor our spiritual freedom and moral responsibility. We must seek enlightenment to mature spiritually and live by the light of “prudent and mature conscience”. (p. 42)

12. The way we address God in prayer makes us what we are. We try to run away from God if we never pray. Praying to God with a “false and lying heart” (p. 42) is worse than sinning and never praying. A sinner is afraid of God. A proud man who sins and stands before God thinking he is better than other men lies to himself and to God.

13. Our praying is inspired by God Who wants us to pray, to trust Him, thank and adore Him, express our sorrow, and ask Him for mercy and courage and strength to grow in spiritual life. 

“Most of the world is either asleep or dead” to the coming of the bridegroom as in the parable of the Virgins. It is better to have the oil in the lamps even though we may occasionally fall asleep during our wait. (p. 44)

14. Our prayer is a gift of God. We should be grateful if we have it, and are able to address God in prayer, that we are thus privileged.

The lowest level of praying is words without attention or thought about their meaning.

We may also be praying and thinking about God or speculating about spiritual matters but our thoughts are not about our praying and trying to establish contact with God. This type of prayer is short of addressing Him.

When we address God with our problems and those of our family and others we may find little satisfaction from such praying but if we are humble we will appreciate what little light we receive from so great a God.

The way to purest prayer is through first entering into the great mystery, which cannot be explained but experienced. But it will also bring on unrest by reflecting on ourselves, then fear, doubt, and sorrow. We will realize our past sins and selfishness. We begin to revaluate all that is in us. But our prayer will become more sincere and grateful for the least amount of consolation. God will be present deep within us. The Spirit of God will move us secretly toward an internal solitude whether we are alone on in a busy environment. We will no longer seek consolation for ourselves and pray “without any thought of our own satisfaction”. (p.50)

Purest prayer cannot be reflected upon and we no longer will seek to do so. The soul only “seeks to keep itself hidden in God” in silence. 

Chapter 4: “Pure Intention”

1.	Our happiness comes from union with God and doing His will.

2.	God’s will is a great mystery and holiness. When we are doing His will we are “joined to the Lord” and “are one Spirit” (I Corinthians 6:17).

3.	Pure intention consists in doing God’s will not for our own good and happiness but doing good to all of God’s men. In seeking good beyond ourselves we will find our own happiness.

4.	We put into doubt whether God wills what is best universally if we fall into an illusion of preferring our won will even while yielding to God’s will. We must recognize that God’s will is always good. We must do so with perfect generosity and yield without doubt. God’s will is best for us when He wills what is universally best.

5.	Man who is in conflict between doing his won will and the will of God is not free and happy. It is best to “take pleasure in nothing but the will of God” (p. 56).

6.	Man who tries to follow his own will is confused and blind, overwhelmed by endless possibilities. If he examined some of his choices he would perhaps find that the best alternative is to do the will of God. This he does not want to do.

7.	We must be willing to do the will of God, not merely doing it. This means following God’s commandments, do nothing that is forbidden.

8.	God has first willed me to be. I an obligated in homage to God to be what He wants me to be and consent to live as a son of God. “If we are sons, heirs also and joint heirs with Christ” (Romans 8:17).

The Holy Spirit enlightens us how to live by the commandments and to understand the Gospels about Jesus. Holy Spirit comes to us through the Church and the sacraments to live in charity and self-sacrifice like Jesus.

9.	The Spirit of God awakens in us knowledge of God and His love for us, which God showed to us through Jesus who He sent to us. The Holy Spirit also teaches us not to live by flesh but to mortify its deeds. The Spirit of God will teach us how to live by His law of charity, peacefully, humbly, simply, and wisely so that we love others more that ourselves as Jesus loved us (John 15:12).

Prayer is the means to discover God’s will and gain grace to carry out our desire. 
 
10.	We can desire to know the will of God but must recognize that His will is a great mystery and we can only hope to recognize certain signs of His will. These are like roadside signposts that point to a distant city.

The prophets saw more of the diving light than ordinary men. We look for the signs with a right attitude towards life, what it is, and what is the purpose of our existence. God asks that we give ourselves to Him. This is more than our doings, our unselfish charity and obeying His commandments. To find our true selves in Christ we must lose our lives. This is what Jesus meant when He said, “He that would save his life will lose it, and he that would lose his life for my sake shall find it” (p. 64).

11.	Our intention must be pure in conforming to any sign of God’s will throughout our whole life and during times of uncertainly and darkness.

12.	We cannot know perfectly here on earth what God’s will is and therefore must only follow what becomes known to us and will that perfectly. We must love doing it not do it because we have to follow what is unavoidable.

13.	The dying thief on the cross led a life contrary to God’s commandments but in the end listened to Jesus and was saved. The Pharisees pursued perfection in keeping the law but did not see God in Jesus when He manifested Himself. 

14. This section seems to address the title of this chapter “Pure Intention”: I wish to do God’s will not because I have to and not of my own will. Such worship is hollow. I know God’s will is wise and I want to adore God and do Him homage of my own will because I know though I do not see His infinite love and wisdom.

15. “Pure intention” is a “secret and spiritual word of God” that we seek and give back to God (p. 89-90). We look for his voice in our contemplation and it becomes our spiritual “food”. 

16. Contemplation is not only an occasion for peace and recollection. Action grows out of it in charity to other men. We must care for what actions God will direct us towards. 

17. We become spiritually mature when we unite contemplation with action. Life of prayer and sacrifice can become difficult and incomprehensible. We must also do and live in God. Our actions do not rest on satisfying our own end. We work “in God and with Him... and in whatever weather He may bring” (p. 72).

18. Our intention must be completely poor which includes our spiritual being. We must renounce all things and not expect anything in return.

19. We seek God but do not expect to find Him right away. We find Him already by seeking Him. He is the “abyss of divine peace and fills our whole life with His gentleness and His strength and His purity and His prayer and His silence” (p. 75).

Chapter 5 “The Word of the Cross”

1. “The word of the Cross is foolishness to them that perish”, says St. Paul, “but to them that are saved “it is the power of God” (I Corinthians 1:18, p. 77).

2. We need to accept suffering with humility as an evil in us and not with pride stoically for that would be an illusion. 

3. Jesus died on the Cross because of the infinite love of God for men. He rose from death because God is stronger than all evil.

4. Suffering is never a vocation. It is a test. But the saints did not accept if because they like it. They answered “the demand of love by a love that matches that of Christ” (p. 80).

5. Our identity was stamped at baptism. We got a name and through the sacrament were identified as Christians and began to work out our destiny.

6. The identity that we got at baptism is in Christ, conforming spiritually to Christ “in his suffering” (p. 82). We come into the communion of the saints. But baptism though it brings to membership of others it also distinguishes us and our lives of “suffering and charity of Christ” that is unlike anyone else’s life (p. 82).

7. Our suffering and trials are part of our personal destiny. “It is the Passion of Christ, stretching out its tendril into my life” (p. 83).

(I ran out of space on goodreads: 20,000 characters.)