Rating: 2/5

2.25 Stars/5

Dana Warren Smith published this dated contemporary romance back in 1989. This is the only romance she wrote under this name. Then, in the 1990's, she wrote three more romances under Lisa G. Brown. There is very little known about her on the web except something one of her daughters wrote in 2009, "She teaches at Upperman High School in Baxter, TN. She has been especially busy over the last 5 years working towards her doctoral degree with an estimated date of completion in May 2010. She plans to retire from her teaching job in about 4.5 years."

HIGH STAKES is a reversal on all those romances where a man wagers he can win the love of a woman. Jamie Logan aka Jennifer Lynn gets sloshed and accepts a bet that she can spend a night with some guy in order to receive the last note written by her deceased sister. She wants to know what her sibling was thinking prior to dying in a car crash. Beautiful, rich and with a gorgeous boyfriend, she has it all. Except a caring personality.

Ren Garrett is sort of a loner. At 25, he leads a somewhat staid life working at a feed store while trying to make a go of his farm. He is not good-looking but his friendly manners draw women of all ages to him. He is content until Jennifer Lynn moves to town and treats him with some affection. She is out of his league and he knows this but he can't help but want something more from this pretty woman.

This could have earned more stars from me if I liked the, dare I say it, anti-heroine. And that is a first for me. I can't remember when, of all the romances that I have read over the years, I would ever have labeled a woman with this tag. For much of the story, Jamie thinks only of herself. She honestly knows what she is doing is wrong but thinks she is entitled to play this situation out for the greater good. 

Ren treats her with love and respect before finding out what she has done. I can't give away too much more of the plot except to say that I really, really wanted to like this romance more.