Rating: 5/5

This is another gem from The Cat in the Hat Learning Library in which the Cat shows his friends, Dick and on this occasion Sally [even though she is the spit-image of Jane in the other volumes!] some of 'the millions of birds ... [that are] alike in some things; they each have a beak and a tail and two wings'.

After introducing the world's largest bird, the ostrich, which the Cat points out is 'taller than me' and adds that he does not bury his head in the sand, as rumour has it, before moving on to the other extreme size-wise. The hummingbird is just five centimetres long and it lays eggs that are 'jellybean size'.

The flycatcher lives up to its name while the sound of the chickadee's song matches its name and the blue jay has 'feathers as bright and as blue as the sky'. The spoonbill lives in a marsh or a lagoon and has that spoon shaped bill and tailorbirds sew up there nests, not with thread but with shredded leaves!

The national bird of the USA, the bald eagle, may suggested to be hairless but he isn't and the Cat demonstrates this by giving one of them a haircut. As for the sound other birds make, there are plenty of examples of the sounds birds make from the parakeet's trill to the catbird, who 'meows like some cats that I know', says the Cat!

The New Zealand Kiwi, 'whose name rhymes with pee-wee', and the emperor penguin are examples of flightless birds and their unusual habits are discussed in detail, particularly the latter as their parenting skills are quite unusual.

And when birds want 'a winter vacation' they 'take a trip and call it migration'. The goose is an example and the structure of the 'V' shaped flock when they fly away is that the lead bird changes every now and again so that another can take his place and face the brunt of 'the wind in his face'.

When the tour is over, the Cat drives Dick and Sally home where they are presented with receive a pet store bird called a Ruzzamatuzz, a baby all covered in soft, downy fuzz'. Where the Cat leaves Thing 1 and Thing 2, who have been helping on the tour, is anybody's guess!