Rating: 5/5

Mrs. Dalloway is a story that covers the events of one day in Clarissa Dalloway’s life. This is true to some extent, but the story is more than that. It marks the events of one day but, at the same time, a backstory covers Clarissa Dalloway’s youth. And Clarissa’s inner thoughts are entwined with both parts. 

Two threads of the story run parallel to one another. Using stream of consciousness, one revisits her youth, recalling her choices, broken relationships, and unforgotten love; the other discusses Clarissa’s present life, her relationship with her husband and daughter, and her life as an upper-class society lady. Interestingly, Clarissa is seen not only through her own lens but also through Peter Walsh’s lens. I found these differing perspectives to be an interesting and colourful way to paint a true picture of Clarissa Dalloway. Also, Virginia has thought fit to add a bit of social, political, and economic commentary on life after the Second World War. 

Virginia Woolf is best known for her use of stream of consciousness. This style has both attracted and deterred readers. I'm a reader who finds the style attractive. I find it one of the most fascinating and colourful ways of writing. The thoughts, feelings, and reactions of characters, combined with an objective narrative have a personal charm for me. 

Other than Clarissa's story, there is also a subplot - the story of Septimus Warren Smith. Through this, Virginia brings out the suffering of the mentally impaired. The mental and physical pain, the delusions, and the desperation that ultimately pave the way for committing suicide are well portrayed that the readers are overwhelmed with pity. She goes even further to show the suffering their loved ones endure. Also, by alluding to Septimus’s mental condition to be a direct outcome of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Virginia exposes the terrible consequences of the War. In addition, Septimus’s story demonstrates the inadequacy and ineffectiveness of treatment for the mentally disturbed. 

The stories, the characters, their thoughts and observations, and their points of view are presented in such poetic language that it was a pleasure to read her, page by page, while it painted a vivid picture. The story is short but it has much depth. How Virginia achieves such a feat is beyond me. She is truly a gifted writer. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/