Rating: 5/5

‘Did you say the stars were worlds, Tess?’ 
‘Yes.’
‘All like ours?’
‘I don’t know; but I think so. They sometimes seem to be like the apples on our stubbard-tree. Most of them splendid and sound – a few blighted.’
‘Which do we live on – a splendid one or a blighted one?’
‘A blighted one.’

I write this while feeling a bit blighted myself, now that I’ve finished this splendid book. The events in this story are not quite “splendid,” but my reading of it indeed was. I don’t think a book has ever made me this conflicted. There were times while I was reading it, when I wanted to lovingly hug it to my chest. Then, the next page made me want to launch it out of the nearest window. 
I barely put my pencil down as I read, because I couldn't stop underlining and writing in the margins. Some of my scribbles were analytical, while others were basically me yelling at the characters. Hardy’s way of writing is extremely moving and HARDhitting (see what I did there?)
Almost every sentiment, description, and line of dialogue left me speechless. This description of Tess is one of my favorites, “He had never before seen a woman’s lips and teeth which forced upon his mind with such persistent iteration the old Elizabethan simile of roses filled with snow. Perfect, he, as a lover, might have called them off-hand. But no – they were not perfect. And it was the touch of the imperfect upon the would-be perfect that gave the sweetness, because it was that which gave the humanity.” Excuse me while I go shed a few tears…
There were endless amounts of time while I was reading when I thought “if only…” If only Tess’s mother didn’t… If only Tess… If only he didn’t… If only they… on and on and on. This book is a series of missteps, and at times it was very hard to read. It’s also quite difficult to miss all of Hardy’s very blatant moments of foreshadowing and metaphor. “Then she fell to reflecting again, and in looking downwards a thorn of the rose remaining in her breast accidentally pricked her chin.”
Hardy is brilliant at making the morality and beliefs of his characters very clear, while also ambiguous. There are characters which sweep you off your feet one page and the next you can’t believe how cruel they’ve become. While others you completely despise the entirety of the book. There is one character in particular, who I just can’t seem to put my finger on. I adore them, yet dislike their actions and choices all at the same time.
Tess of the D’Urbervilles is a story that I will be contemplating and admiring for many years to come. It itself is a blighted star, while also being a splendid one.