Rating: 3/5

Cornwell’s REBEL starts off with an excellent, humiliating and very painful enaction of the whole classic tar-and-feather punishment meted out by Americans in the 19th century, and it’s enlightening to find out just what this process entails. It’s this kind of minute detail that distinguishes Cornwell’s wide-ranging research from other contemporary efforts. For example, later in the story we learn what a ‘ganderpull’ means, and Cornwell pulls no punches in his in-your-face description of it. Sure, we probably would have been better off without knowing, but it’s all here and adds an extra layer onto the narrative.

The main thrust of this novel is a character-driven story about Starbuck, the son of a Northern preacher who, through a series of misadventures, ends up fighting for the Southern cause. As this is the first book in a series, Cornwell uses an extraordinary amount of padding and background information to shape his world, as well as introducing the dozen-or-so characters that provide the main focus of the story. 

As such, this is a slow-moving book that is surprisingly lacking in verve, although Cornwell’s prose is as tough and witty as ever. It does make for an interesting story, but it also means that this is a book hard to get into, which takes forever to get moving – right until the last pages in fact. 

The only action, so to speak, is in the last quarter, telling as it does the battle of Bull Run, the first of the war. Here, Cornwell is up to his elbows in astonishingly gruesome bloodshed and realistic, down-to-earth relating of man’s heroism and cowardice, and the feel of taking part in a military operation. It’s fantastic stuff, but it’s a shame that it takes nearly all of the book to get this far. 

As for the hero, Starbuck is from the outset the direct opposite of Sharpe, a rather whiny, by-the-book character who finally grows into a real hero – but again, that happens right at the end of the story, so you have to put up with his less-than-impressive characteristics right until then. At least he only had to do it once...