Rating: 3/5

Re Pillow Portraits - The title comes from the H, who is a world renowned artist, leaving little sketches of the h in various expressions on her pillow. The h is a 22 yr old single mum who is trying to make a living as a ghost writer of famous people's biographies. Her boss sends her to the H as his ghost writer and the h is instantly attracted. 

She is attracted, but after the experience of single mumhood with no support when she was 19 and her boyfriend pretty much left her in the lurch, she is extremely wary of any involvement with men. She has been an orphan since she was a teenager, and pregnancy ruled out university, so her career and her daughter are her big priorities. She wants to do the best job she can for her daughter, when the H insists that she live with him during the week, she reluctantly gets her good friend to care for her child and makes the H promise to let her have weekends off.

She really needs the book to be a success, her boss has made that conditional to her getting future commissions. The problem is that the H is very attracted to her, thinks she is a scared virgin and he spends weeks trying to seduce her, only to be put off. She even invents a boyfriend and that doesn't stop him. There are plenty of seduction attempts and we also get a nice tour of the Cape area of South Africa and the H's life story.

He was originally going to be a fisherman, until he inadvertently caused his sister's death when he took her out to sea and a big storm came up and she was lost overboard. He had been painting since six, when he stole a box paints to do a picture to win a bicycle, he did not win the bike but he kept up the painting over the years, even when he was fishing for a living. After his sister's death, he roamed the world and painted. Then he made it big, but he still likes to fish. 

The h finds herself fascinated by his life and him, but steadfastly refuses to believe it is love. Even when her BFF tells her it is. Finally, after the h is stung by the jealousy bee at the H's exhibition opening and he is flirting with OW, they go skinny dipping and wind up having sex. The h is thrilled with the lurving but still has to go home at the weekend and the H is furious. 

She leaves, he seekritly follows and then is outraged when he finds that she is a single mum. He is pretty nasty and the h leaves him, turns in the partially completed book and looks forward to her next assignment. Then the H wants her back and she reluctantly goes, the book has to be completed and the H admits he loves her madly and proposes.

She explains about her daughter and how she came to be and then rejects the marriage idear. The h wants an affair, but the H is playing hard to get and says marriage or nothing. The book gets written, and the h isn't very good at seduction when the coin is flipped, the H keeps turning her down and so they part. 

The h starts her next assignment and it takes her to England where she sees the H has been badly injured in a car wreck. The h rushes back to his side and avows true love forever. The H takes it as a yes to the marriage proposal and it is a big HEA.

This book isn't bad, it just isn't notable. Well except for the h wanting an affair and not marriage and leaving the H when she did not get it. I was initially a bit disconcerted that the H's seduction is described as being really gentle and persuasive, no punishing kisses here, but the H thought the h had a male companion and tried it on anyway. 

Then I figured what manly HP H was going to miss an opportunity when there is theoretical virginal seduction on the agenda - that is the bedrock legacy of all HPLandia and the H wouldn't be an H if he didn't at least make the attempt. 

Overall this is a peaceful read, but there is a lot, lot, LOT of seduction attempts not described in detail and 9 chapters of low key sexual tension with the h fighting her feelings. When the big lurve scene finally happens, it was more like "Finally she will quit dithering over this" rather than an explosion of relieved tension I think it was meant to be. 

I don't know if other people will like this or not cause nothing really happens, but the couple was mostly nice and I did believe the HEA - I just did not really care all that much by the end and that is probably not the best way to leave HPlandia. Still, it is a relaxing read and that can't be discounted in the turbulence that is the usual in this line.