Rating: 3/5

The plot was too slow for me and too scattered but I managed to turn the page, hoping that things got back on track. Personally, I felt that it didn't so be warned that this review has spoilers and is polluted with a toxic amount of sarcasm.
Basically the plot revolves around Val, a war photojournalist who was devastated after the death of her boyfriend, Tony when he was shot down during the fighting in Kosovo. Tony is an idiot who likes to run into open spaces where there is gun fire and Val follows because they're shagging. They also have their bff Jake, who follows them around and stares at Val longingly.
After Tony dies, Val and Jake were in grief but that quickly turned to resentment after finding out Tony was not the divorcee he claimed to be. In fact, nothing he claimed turned out to be true. His ex-wife who he claimed was the spawn of satan was actually a kind-hearted woman who was still married to him and was therefore his widow. Never mind that she knew about his numerous mistresses and didn't lift a finger to help any of those he had fooled. She was also cheating on him with some other guy friend.
In addition to issues with the now dead Tony, Val's estranged mother and brother make an appearance, desperate to contact her over her mother's failing health. Val's already disowned them both because her mother is an unemotional mentally unstable woman and her brother is spoilt. The novel and Val kept reminding readers repeatedly about her mother's evilness through the whole plot just in case we forget the true villains here. She was raised by her loving, good-hearted grand-parents who cursed out their son and their daughter-in-law to their graves.
Things happen, Jake and Val stay at Jake's rich friend's palace and meet the elderly caretakers. The caretaker's daughter arrived because her cop husband was abusive and murderous. Val stepped in to hide her when her husband started to search for her. This story line, which was the most interesting out of the 3 or 4 other ones intertwined in here, faded in and out of the plot like an afterthought.(As you can see..plot=scattered)
Jake confessed that his love for Val was not just platonic and even though Tony was barely under the ground for over a week, Val was convinced she had forgotten Tony and his treacherous ways. In fact, Jake was truly the one  and they consummated their love with a passion that is beyond this Earth.
More things happened and Val finally agreed to meet her evil mother after some begging from her brother and Jake.
Val's mother offered her the family's million dollar business as successor but Val refused this because her mother was evil. Her brother obviously wanted the business for himself but couldn't inherit it over an unwritten superstitious tradition that only women can own the business.
More things happened, Val and Jake get separated after he went to cover a war. Val chose another assignment about an artist who liked orgies with his ex-wives because polygamy was illegal. He tried to add her to his collection but she suddenly remembered that she loved Jake and rushes off to see him.
At the end of the day Tony's widow marries the man she was having an affair with all throughout her marriage.The abusive french cop conveniently dies, leaving his widow to marry the man she stayed with for barely 2 months. Val found out she wasted money on airfare because Jake was about to fly out to see her. Val's brother married his girlfriend who was mentioned at least twice in the book. Everyone lived happily ever after except for Val's evil mother. I never found out the real reason why her mother was so emotionally detached except for a bogus story she made up and the fact that was mentally unstable.