Rating: 3/5

Collected from 1990-published stories, Best New SF 5 - I've long given-up trying to square the UK editions title with its US equivalent - is another example of how far the genre has fallen. Even the 'duffers' in this collection - and there were a few - are way better than the thin gruel us older readers have to suffer these days.

There are, as mentioned, some duffers. Quite a few 'routine' stories, and three that are just tremendous and worth the admission price alone.

Probably the most significant story is that from the first appearance of Ted Chiang, with his Tower of Babylon first published in Omni. It's quite a few years before Arrival though Tower of Babylon is reprinted in the aforementioned anthology. Early-on though, Chiang was demonstrating his huge potential.

The first story, James Patrick Kelly's Mr. Boy is one about genetic manipulation run rampant. The resolution is a little weak, summed up as he's leaving home.

Le Guin's The Shobies Story is one I'd read before, and delves a little deeper into the nature of field research and family solidity. 

Greg Egan features twice, with the first story The Caress going well, right up to the end, whereupon the story is fumbled and a little rushed.

A Braver Thing by Charles Sheffield, is one of the collections highlights. A wonderful story.

Bruce Sterling's We See Things Differently though has aged horribly. Like his Dori Bangs we are once again in rock-and-roll world, but this time, not successfully.

Kate Wilhelm's And The Angels Sing just ends rapidly, as if the story was an extract from a planned bigger work.

Ian R. MacLeod's Past Magic is just pure Interzone and very, very British.

Terry Bisson's Bears Discover Fire is harmless fun. It doesn't really belong in this collection, and its probably the second weakest story.

The All-Consuming from Lucius Shepard and Robert Frazier is pretty much typical Shepard, with jungles-and-stuff. Cinematic at the end, but horribly predictable.

Molly Gloss' personal silence is probably the best example of an American writer writing in the style of, well, Ian R. MacLeod, or any other Interzone contributor. It hints at a bigger story, but never rightly follows-down that route.

John Kessel's Invaders has too many ideas to fit in a short space.

The next major highlight is Michael Moorcock's The Cairene Purse. Moorcock's strangely charming world belies the underlying threat and hidden violence with it. A bit of a nod to T.E Lawrence and you have a story that really stands-out.

Dafydd aB Hugh's The Coon Rolled Down and Ruptured his Larinks, a Squeezed Novel by Mr. Skunk unfortunately reminded me of the movie Over The Hedge so I really was unable to appreciate it.

Chiang's superb Tower of Babylon follows. 

Alexander Jablokov;'s The Death Artist is another weaker effort, of its time. Jablokov was a better editor than writer, I reckon.

The sadly missed John Brunner's The First Since Ancient Persia follows, and is another highlight. Brunner passed away in 1995, but this story, first published in 1990 in Amazing demonstrates that he was still going strong 5 years before.

Nancy Kress, who was one of the key writers in the genre in the 1990s had Inertia featured next. Not one of the top tier in this collection, but certainly top of the next level.

Greg Egan's second featured story Learning to Be Me has a great premise, but lost me a little near the end. 

Connie Willis, another writer who ranged across the 1990s and beyond, has Cibola next. I'd read it before, didn't like it, and my opinion remains the same.

Jonathan Lethem's Walking The Moon is just a little ditty, one that you'd expect to find in Analog or  as 'filler'.

Ian McDonald's Rainmaker should have been spectacular. It has a bit of an echo of Mark Helprin to it, but kinda lacks any substantial plot.

Hot Sky from Robert Silverberg is a little dated too, when concerns about Global Warming abounded. Not one of his best. Likewise Lewis Shiners' White City. And likewise Pat Murphy's Love and Sex Among the Invertebrates.

Leading to the big finish. Joe Haldeman's The Hemingway Hoax. First published in IASF and deservedly winning the Hugo Award and a Nebula Award for Best Novella in 1991. Together with Moorcock and Brunner's stories, The Hemingway Hoax is a great way to finish this volume.

Since first reading The Hemingway Hoax I'd read a bit of Hemingway, and Mary V. Dearborn's biography Ernest Hemingway (2017) which helped, a lot.

And The Hemingway Hoax, with Haldeman's utterly convincing Hemingway-style passages from never-published stories hasn't aged. For someone who could have risked being stuck with The Forever War as his major work of significance, Haldeman managed to avoid being typecast and wrote a story that is both brilliant, and a wonderful contribution to the genre.