Rating: 3/5

This was my fifth Grand Tour novel and I think it'll be the hardest review to write out of the quintet. I generally like these books (especially the exploration ones), and even though Powersat (some sort of prequel to this book, but I read it years ago) was my least favorite, I thought this one worthy of a try. And I was right, but it only barely squeaks past Powersat (a 6) in terms of quality. I think I'll spend most of this review talking about the plot, because that's basically what this book is, although characters and the like factor into it too.

This books was written in the throes of the Cold War, and it shows. This future - which may or may not have been retconned by Bova's other Grand Tour books, as this was the first one written - shows the USSR controlling the UN and politically stoppinh the United States from pursuing space travel. Space is left to the third world countries, like Venezuela, where our American-born Elon Musk-esque hero Dan Randolph now operates as director of space... stuffs. 

The story starts strangely, with a scene that won't happen for two-thirds of the book. Then there's another weird scene or two before the true narrative begins with Dan at Venezuela, meeting the Minsiter of Tech's daughter and the Evil-Russian-Space-Commander and the like... I don't like how this book started. It confused me and destabilized me a little, and while the least Bova could've done was add some timestamps, it still wouldn't have been a great start anyways.

The books proceeds to show Dan take on the Russians through a bizarre asteroid mining scheme that's so crazy it might just work. This doesn't pop up for 40/50 percent of the book, and I wish the back of the book didn't mention that... gives this book a little Invisible Man syndrome. To help in his battle, Dan enlists an old Japanese buddy of his and his son to help the mission and take space back from the Russians.

But wait, the Japanese guy's son is attracted to the Venezuelan Minister's daughter just like Dan (Japanese guy's son's new boss) is, but they're both thwarted by the Evil-Russian-Space-Commander, who the Minister promised his daughter's hand in marriage to. And if you thought that was confusing,  the reason the US won't help Dan's plot is because the President is a woman who ran as VP with her husband, Dan's old business partner, and Dan and her were having an affair when her husband/president of the US died and she blames Dan for his death and.... wait, did the world go to Hell in just four years? Okay, ignoring that for a second... the personal politics in this book are complicated for this style of fiction, but make this web of kinda cardboard characters with some dated gender roles a lot more entertaining than it should be.

But all this crap where the Russians disarmed the Americans happened in the last four years? I don't buy the timeline that some of this crap went down on, but other than that, I liked the future world and the general plot. It was of its time and reeks of a certain flavor, but it's one I somewhat enjoy. Not as much as Mars or Saturn, but it still felt better to read than a lot of similarly minded stuff, and that's what reading is about, right? The enjoyment?

Doesn't mean I can overlook the cardboard characters and dialogue and cheesy ending (in relation to the Minister of tech's daughter), or the off-handed rape scene that made me really appreciate Larry McMurtry's Zeke and Ned. This book wasn't even particularly well-written form a prose standpoint (for some reason, I always want to compare Bova to Arthur C Clarke), but it was still decently compelling. I'd recommend it to fans of these backwards-looking-80s-sci-fi stories, although if you're looking to read through the Grand Tour, this may not be essential reading...

Overall, it earns a 6.5 out of 10. I enjoyed it, I feel decent calling the book good, but not much more than that. It sure hasn't shut me down from reading the Grand Tour, but they'll be a much bigger gap than there was between Mars and this. Bova is an author who doesn't seem to get much appreciation around these parts, and while it's easy to see why... what can I say, I still like his stuff. Remember, with a book like this: Your mileage may vary. We'll see if I have to say that about the other books in the series... we'll see, my friends. We'll see sooner or later.