Rating: 3/5

I had not heard of Carly Fiorina until she ran for president this year. So, I thought I'd read this book about her career as background - would have been nice if it had covered her firing from HP two years after it went to press, but I got the idea ...

When she walks away, she walks away. Told her first husband, "We will never speak again" the last time she moved stuff out of their house where he was living; he remained shocked as it wasn't acrimonious, just really really cold. Curiously, she moved her way up through the break-up phase at AT&amp;T, with a nice title at Lucent's sales division. However, almost immediately she had her office transferred to the east coast to distance herself from the team she was supposedly heading. She had luck most of us couldn't even fantasize about it seems, as Lucent pretty much went belly up right after she was hired as HP CEO. She wouldn't have gotten the HP job at all had they waited much longer; moreover, their selection process was so problematic that she was essentially the best of a bad lot for them. Later in the book, we learn that she received a WHOPPING HP bonus to compensate her for her "unvested shares" in Lucent, based on the price when she left that job, rather than the $1/share they would have been worth had she not been hired by HP at that time.

Her problem was that she was all sales hype, where target goals can be met with sleight-of-hand tricks, or explained away when needed. However, a CEO really can't do that for a whole company. At one point at HP, she was gung ho about buying out a company for quite a lot; that fell through, and a competitor got it for 1/3 of what Fiorina was pushing the HP board to shell out. Much is made of how she "charms" people, though I'm left confused as her debate persona seems pretty damned harsh to me! Much has been made of layoffs, but the author made it clear that HP had a fair number of "dead wood" employees, all-but-retired on the job with full salaries, kept in place by inertia and goodwill.

I agree with other reviewers who've felt the story got a bit bogged down on the corporate internals at time, but I'm still glad I read it. I feel the author tried to present a balanced view, quoting folks with favorable things to say about her. On the whole, I'm left as puzzled as a quoted associate: "I never really knew where enthusiasm for the company ended and enthusiasm for 'Team Carly' picked up with her."