Rating: 4/5

What better way to trace the explorations of Captain Cook than to stow away on H.M.S Endeavor herself, just before an illustrious three-year voyage of discovery?

A boy named Nicholas Young appears to have done just this. Since the historical account of his presence aboard is rather scant, beginning in the ship’s log abruptly some months into the journey, author Karen Hesse fleshes out the life and times of a typical boy growing up in the late 1700’s in England. Son of an angry father, and apprenticed slave-like to an abusive butcher, Nicholas chooses to take his chances on the high sea, to get as far from the despair and hopelessness of home as possible. By paying off several of the ship’s crew (with money stolen from his employer), he secures a front-row seat to the action by stowing away in a covered dinghy on deck, sharing sleeping quarters with the livestock.

Seasickness, deprivation, loneliness, are soon displaced by wonder at the novelties of ocean life. Nick observes the ship’s scientists at work as they discover and document all manner of never-before-seen marine plants, animals, and land. Soon, he fears he will never be discovered himself, and languish away hidden and unlamented by anyone in the world. 

When finally caught, he is accepted into ship society—barely. Like any Darwinian creature from the depths, he must prove himself strong to those around him in order to survive the lowest rungs on the hierarchical ladder. He works diligently with rare manners and intellect among the rough crew, winning favor with those in authority, as well as contempt from peers he might supplant. Having fled danger at home, he finds it waiting on board in the form of a bullying ship mate. Ultimately, he decides that “The best way to banish the darkest mood is to lose myself in a useful pursuit.”

Rumors of revolution, undiscovered continents, rough weather and elements, wild animals and cannibals, disease and death, new friends and astonishing beauty, give this voyage a wonderful sense of suspense and awe. Also dreadful are the effects the Europeans have on the pristine environments and aboriginal peoples they encounter. Nicholas fears “these people not so much because of what they might do to us, but because of what we are led so quickly to do to them.” Whether by unnatural or natural selection, no one knows which few will live to return home, or even if the ship herself will survive. This is the harsh reality of the sea.

This adventure of discovery no doubt changed young Nick himself as much as it added new lines to the extant maps of the world. In Hesse’s capable imagination, the vivid and unforgettable sights, smells, and events of this nautical journey transform the friendless street urchin into a respectable young man with scientific prospects beyond anything he could have imagined for himself, and gives us a valuable glimpse into the perils and victories of Cook and his Endeavor.