Rating: 5/5

this must be the 5th...6th...or 7th from leonard for me...stories.

contents
the extras
sparks
hanging out at the buena vista
chickasaw charlie hoke
when the women come out to dance
fire in the hole
karen makes out
hurrah for capt. early
the tonto woman
tenkiller

then it has an "about the author"..."also by elmore leonard"...credits...copyright...about the publisher...that i'm tempted to look at now...my curiosity is aroused...could be some racy details there...nah

the extras
i dunno...on this kindle i'm reading this, right, and as i push to advance to the next page, i find myself on "sparks"...so i go back, scroll down to "the extras" until the white pointy-glove appears...sheesh, i dunno, has lists of crime novels, westerns...click on one of those and i'm at 73%

well, okay, so the extras has four parts..."all by elmore: the crime novels: the westerns"..."selected filmography"..."if it sounds like writing, rewrite it"...

i'm off to the races...that one is at the 92%-mark. this looks good..."these are rules i've picked up along the way to help me remain invisible when i'm writing a book...: 1. never open a book with weather. 2. avoid prologues. 3....well, i won't list them all...this was "first published july 16, 2001 as "easy on the adverbs, exclamation points, and especially hooptedoodle" in the "writers on writing" recurring feature in the new york times.

i believe it is also a separate book called elmore leonard's ten rules for writers...something like that. i read it...some of it is a hoot.

and then item...heh!...and this makes sense: item 5....three listed above, then we have #5! "martin amis interviews 'the dickens of detroit'"...this too, is at the back of the kindle book, at 95%...so, i may as well read the stories, hey?

sparks
begins:
they sat close to each other on the sofa, canavan aware of mrs. harris' scent and her dark hair, parted to one side, she would hold away from her face to look at the map spread open on the coffee table.

i dunno, strunk &amp; white, in their little book, say to always use apostrophe ess, even after ess...what do i know? i'm a carpenter. onward and upward. (i believe they also say to never split your infinitives.)

1st story is all right...joseph canavan...you can call him joe, is an insurance investigator looking at a suspicious fire, talking to the former robin marino, robin harris now, although her husband had some kind of fancy heart attack, one of those thrombosis-thingies, a moneyed heart-attack, and robin throws the make on joe...this robin has a lot of spunk--she bought a twenty-gauge remington to even the coyote/cat score--puddin and mr piper in the loss column but a neighbor with binoculars put the keebosh on that.

hanging out at the buena vista
they lived in a retirement village of cottages among palm trees and bougainvillea, maids driving golf carts. the woman, natalie, wore silk scarves to cover what was left of her hair, a lavender scarf the afternoon vincent appeared at her door. he told her through the screen door he thought it was time they met.

onward &amp; upward.

there's some that give koontz a hard time for using that word, bougainvillea...or maybe it's just me. i'd google it...or bing it, see if i can get a picture...okay, so i do and it's a plant w/mainly red/pink flowers...sounds like some kind of cheese, is what i'm saying. palm trees and cheese. that or a foreign sports car, one of those high-powered lawn mowers, usually a bald guy driving, sunglasses, gold chains.

vincent and natalie..both up there in years, vincent is 80, natalie will be 82 next month, and they're doing the dance. it's a wonderful thing...there's hope. sounds like they'll move in together, vincent gathering his pills and setting up in the bathroom.

chickasaw charlie hoke
this time vernice started in on charlie while he was making their toddies, what he did every evening vernice worked days. charlie said, "take a load off your tootsies, honey, and let me wait on you."

well, they get into it, or vernice does...charlie the slacker...she gives him a week to straighten up and so forth...so he's this big-time pitcher...detroit, in '84, right? thing is, he gets the host job he was pitching (literally) for. some baseball lore included.

when the women come out to dance
title story: lourdes became mrs. mahmood's personal maid when her friend viviana  (isn't there a lot of stories w/women w/"v-names?) quit to go to l.a. with her husband. lourdes and viviana were both from cali in columbia and had come to south florida as mail-order brides. lourdes'  (there it is again...no ess after the apostrophe...must be new english) husband, mr. zimmer, worked for a paving contractor until his death, two years from the time they were married.

and...away we go!

yeah and so this lourdes gets a job working for mrs. mahmood and during the interview, the mrs. asks lourdes about her ex-husband, gone now, as the 1st paragraph explains...buried in concrete. heh! the mrs. is interested...and so it goes.

they dance.

fire in the hole
on this one now...a raylan givens story...and leonard has several stories about raylan...one called...i think, raylan...a u.s. marshal, wears a .45 six-shooter, uses it. we need to bring back those days...sheriff tells the hoodlums to get out of town by dark, or else. the hell with this wrist-slapping. sumbitches don't need to be coddled, slap em down a peg or two...fogg that noise about some meathead busting in a citizen's door, tying up folk, beating em, killing em...the perps w/a sheet as long as your arm...and they're not locked up...the law too busy w/a war on some drugs.

anyway...this one starts out:

they had dug coal together as young men and they lost touch over the years. now it looked like they'd be meeting again, this time as lawman and felon, raylan givens and boyd crowder.

this one has more than a bit of the absurd to it...the church of the jesus meek and mild or some such title, weed outlet...raylan and his partner (a character there for dialogue, but who's paying attention?)...are going to land a black man in this house that boyd hasn't paid taxes on...has said he will blow it if anyone moves in...so it's been vacant. heh!

and away we go!

raylan gets his man...hoo-rah...

karen makes out
they danced until karen said she had to be up early tomorrow. no argument, he walked with her through the crowd outside monaco, then along ocean drive in the dark to her car. he said, "lady, you wore me out."

imagine jodie foster in the role of karen...works for the marshal's service...the one el marshal...her father has a marshall investigations and that's where she got her start and when trouble brews, she looks to her old man for advice...she makes out.

hurrah for capt. early
the second banner said hero of san juan hill. both were tied to the upstairs balcony of the congress hotel and looked down on la salle street in sweetmary, a town named for a copper mine. the banners read across the building as a single statement. the day that captain early was expected home from the war in cuba, over now these two months, was october 10, 1898.

this one must be one of the westerns...and away we go!

yeah, okay, sure...western...or the right time period...see above...some black guy who has been in the military all most his life wanders into town for a sit down w/capt early...some cowpokes take a dim view to his blackness, etc. and then when it comes to the showdown, leonard does not show us that...he brings us to that...and then the man is sitting down w/capt early who takes up the man's saber. 

the crowd...without benefit of an establishment media...hurrahs.

the tonto woman
a time would come, within a few years, when ruben vega would go to the church in benson, kneel in the confessional, and say to the priest, "bless me, father, for i have sinned. it has been thirty-seven years since my last confession...since then i have fornicated with many women, maybe eight hundred. no, not that many, considering my work. maybe six hundred only." 

this is an interesting tale...'tonto woman'...some lady who was hauled off by the pawnee...or some group of peaceful spiritual indians, one that likely posed for a national stamp or something...anyway, she is branded on her face...although leonard never once uses the word "branded".

but she'd been someone's woman and that someone is a rich man now, etc.
she's used goods...and leonard never once uses that expression, "used goods"...and then this other watches her, etc. they parlay. etc.

tenkiller
at kim's funeral--people coming up to ben with their solemn faces--he couldn't help thinking of what his grandad carl had said to him fifteen years ago, that he hoped ben would have better luck with women."

"we seem to have 'em around for a year or so," the old man said, "and they take off or die on us."

good story...tenkiller...the name of some indian chief who carved ten notches in his arrow, or teepee...or something...and had a name laked after him, so that's the name of our hero...ben tenkiller...not really, webster i think it was. but he used tenkiller on a movie, or to get a bit part, getting shot off a horse or something...and it stuck

so, he's back home in oklahoma...'you're the reason god made oklahoma'...never really considered what those words mean...until it got me to thinking about how they apply...and they fit...oklahoma is flat, isn't it? heh!

anyway, this last is a good story...denise is a great character, no-nonsense kind of woman who keeps a sig in her purse...and warns the other to leave so on and so forth.

onward and upward