Rating: 4/5

As I've said many times before, reading the Nero Wolfe series by Rex Stout is so much fun. Always narrated in the first person by Archie Goodwin, we know only what Archie knows. But he knows his boss and is almost as smart. That said, Archie pretends - pretends! - to belittle himself in Wolfe's shadow and draws the contrast.

Here we have a woman showing up at Wolfe's door when her husband has been kidnapped. The kidnappers are demanding a ransom of $500,000 in used bills, none larger than $100. She is heading to the bank to get it. She wants to make sure her husband is returned alive and expects Wolfe to pull a rabbit out of a hat to ensure it. Oh yes, Wolfe's genius is legendary.

If you, too, are a fan of this series, the following probably won't do anything to add to your fandom. I do like to get out for a bit of exercise, but I can't hold a candle to Archie. Still, this is the sort of characterization while pursuing a crime that I like. I like to walk. I liked to walk in woods and pastures when I was a kid in Ohio, and now I like to walk even more on Manhattan sidewalks. If you don't walk much you wouldn't know, but the angle you get on people and things when you're walking is absolutely different from the one you get when you're in a car or in anything else that does the moving for you. So after washing and shaving and dressing and eating breakfast and reading about Dinah Utley in the Times, nothing I didn't already know, I buzzed the plant rooms on the house phone to tell Wolfe I was going out on a personal errand and would be back by noon, and went.OK, so that's almost nothing to do with solving a murder, but it's not filler either. The walk got him somewhere that *did* have to do with murder. 

I don't know that this is the best of the series, but it was a very enjoyable few hours. I'll color in a 4th star, though it just barely makes it. Maybe I was just ready for Archie and Wolfe.

By the way, I read this and the others in Three Aces: A Nero Wolfe Omnibus, which is the edition my library had.