Rating: 1/5

I know I shouldn’t feel so strongly about a children’s book character from two centuries ago but PINOCCHIO IS LITERALLY ABOUT TO CATCH THESE HANDS. I was prepared for a tale full of nostalgia and heart-warming moments, instead I got this clusterfuck of a children’s tale. I totally forgot that Pinocchio was such a stupid ass hoe (or maybe his portrayal in the Disney movie is just much more favorable…), and thus I was more annoyed than anything whilst reading about him making the same mistakes over and over again.

Like, for real, Pinocchio was such a selfish and dumb little fucker, his father Gepetto truly deserved better. I am aware of the fact that Pinocchio (the book, that is) was meant as a tale of morale and reform for children to learn from. You can literally see the accusatory finger of Collodi pointing at children and warning them of the perils of disobedience and hedonism. Nicki Minaj and Cardi B (who are both pushing the message to their young audience to stay the fuck in school) are modern day Collodis, just saying. ;) 

Nonetheless, Pinocchio and his unfaltering ways were a pain in the ass to read about: He literally gets Gepetto into prison, then sells Gepetto’s only coat to attend a fucking puppet show (talk about questionable life choices), he believes two strangers who tell him of a Field of Miracles where you can bury your gold and overnight it will multiply (guess what happens, Pinocchio buries his last gold only to find it gone the next day… who would’ve thought?) and then he just continues to disrespect every elderly person who wants to give him a piece of advice. 

Pinocchio deserved every bad thing that came for him. Even though I was somewhat surprised by the brutality of this children’s tale, I was rooting for Pinocchio to die throughout. And let me tell you, there was plenty of opportunity for that: at the beginning he sleeps on the stove and burns off his feet, unluckily, Gepetto makes him new ones. Damn it. Later, the Cat and the Fox hang him in a tree. Unfortunately, the Fairy rescues him. Ugh. Then Pinocchio has the audacity to refuse the medication she got for him and gets a mortal fever—which he, you guessed it, again survives. Why tho? Wanna teach kids to take their fucking medicine without complaining? Let the Burattino die, you don’t get a message more clearer than that. ;) He is caught in a weasel trap, he is kneaded into dough by a weird fisherman, he is turned into a donkey and literally swallowed by a whale (Jonah is quaking in his seat)—and he gets out of all of these traps unscathed. I was so mad. (Still am, not gonna lie.) 

I know this review hasn’t been super serious but I justify my low rating, above all, by the fact that I wouldn’t read this story to any children. The tone is way too preachy (don’t lie, stay in school, be nice to your parents, work hard, bla bla bla), Pinocchio way too annoying, there’s too much senseless violence in the story and in the end, the final message that is pushed (when Pinocchio after being reformed turns into a proper boy) just pisses me off. In my humble opinion, he should’ve stayed a Burattino (as the world of Pinocchio is inhabited by speaking animals, fairies and other magical stuff), he didn’t need to become human to get the point across, but maybe that’s just me. Children literally shouldn’t have to change who they are (what makes them unique), they should change their actions if they're disrespectful but that’s it.