Rating: 3/5

A Foreign Affair
Review of the Penguin Modern Classics paperback &amp; Kindle eBook (2011) of the original Heinemann hardcover (1968).

  Bonn isn’t pre-war, or war, or even post-war. It’s just a small town in Germany.

A Small Town in Germany does not feature the author's spymaster George Smiley &amp; the Circus, his invented name for Britain's Secret Intelligence Service. It does take place in the Smileyverse as veteran Circus recruiter Steed-Asprey is briefly mentioned. It does involve a molehunter though. Alan Turner is with the Foreign Office and is sent to the British Embassy in Bonn, Germany (then the capital of West Germany) to investigate the disappearance of a minor embassy official. Meanwhile there is a groundswell of German Nationalist and anti-Western feeling embodied in the rise of a political figure.

Leo Harting had made himself quietly indispensable to the embassy staff by taking on tasks which others were reluctant to do. When he disappears it is discovered that various embassy files are gone with him. The suspicion is that he has defected to the Eastern Bloc. Curiously, various office items such as a lamp, tea kettle, file trolley etc. have gone missing over the past weeks as well. Turner meets with a certain amount of obstruction from embassy staff who are reluctant to think the worst of Harting. 

Cover of the original 1968 Heinemann hardcover. Image sourced from Wikipedia.

Turner eventually uncovers the real reason for Harting's disappearance and events turn more dramatic for the final 20% or so of the book. I wasn't quite as taken with Turner as I have been with Smiley, so the preceding series of interviews with embassy staff were more a chore to get through. The overall cynical atmosphere of failed intelligence operations still carries over from the Circus novels.

I read A Small Town in Germany as part of my current ongoing Carré binge which began with seeing the biographical film The Pigeon Tunnel (2023) at the recent Toronto International Film Festival. It is one of his early books which I had never read previously.

Trivia and Link
Read an appreciation (NOTE: includes SPOILERS) of A Small Town in Germany at SpyWrite.com by Jeff, May 11, 2017.