Rating: 2/5

While this book wasn't quite as entertaining as I thought it would be, it also wasn't as openly unreasonable or vitriolic as I thought it might be either. The entire premise remains silly, but at least it is earnest and does it's best to be reasonable in its suggestions (which basically boils down to "CONSTANT VIGILANCE!" on the part of the parents as to what their kids are reading and discussing it with them in relation to the Bible.) 

This is an older book, as when it was published the fourth Harry Potter novel had just come out. To my surprise, it actually does a good job of fairly summarizing the various Harry Potter books before deconstructing them, rather than focusing in too much on objectionable content. "Harry Potter and the Bible" doesn't accuse J.K. Rowling of outright trying to teach children occultism and "magick" (a.k.a. "real" vs. stage "magic"), but rather that reading the Harry Potter novels may act as a kind of gateway of curiosity that children may decide to explore. It actually focuses far more on divination than I was expecting, I guess because things like fortune-telling, astrology, and so on are easier to fake than actual transfiguration and other more flashy spells, and therefore more plausibly exist in the real world. (I did giggle every time I saw the phrase, "...the dangers of real occultism.") However, the author seems to miss the fact that most of the time spent in Divination class is ridiculing Professor Trelawney and basically saying how pretty much all of it is silly and useless. 

The book also focuses on the lack of clear morality and the dangers relativism, which I think makes the characters more relatable and realistic (because what person doesn't lie at some point?) but could understand the frustration at how Harry breaks so many rules and yet rarely gets punished for it. Of course, i would argue that plenty of books that lack magic in them follow a similar format because those are the kinds of stories children (who are relatively powerless in the world compared to the adults) like to see. So I can understand that objection to the books, as it doesn't relate to the existence of magic, but rather the standards upon which we teach kids right from wrong. There's room for debate, but the argument (until we get into basing morality on the Bible) at least has a leg to stand on.

What did surprise me was the relatively light focus on the violence in the Harry Potter books (and oh, boy, the author would have had a field day with Books 5-7!) Which, focusing on divination and Wicca rather than violence as a reason for objecting to the books may have been wise, because I would have to point out that the Bible is just as bad, if not worse, than Harry Potter in terms of violence. (Ever hear of that guy nailed to a cross and left to die a slow, horrible, and very public death? Or God charging the Israelites to rip open the stomachs of pregnant women? Or to dash babies to death on stones? Yeah...)

It does bring up the comparison of Harry Potter to Lord of the Rings and Narnia and how Harry Potter isn't like them at all (contrary to what some supporters say.) I would argue that, yes, Harry Potter can't really be compared to LOTR or Narnia, but it isn't really meant to be. It has a different purpose from those other two. The style, language, and time period are also very different and their magic styles are different as well. Just because it's more vague doesn't make it any less magical... but there's all comes from a God figure whereas apparently Harry Potter magic doesn't...? Yeah, things get kind of wishy-washy, but the point is that I always find it hilarious when those comparisons and refutations are being made because aside from being epic fantasy, those three works are quite different. (I do wonder what the Christian reaction to Narnia would be if it WASN'T written by an obviously Christian author... would it still have the same Christian allegory applied to it? Somehow I think not...)

Anyway, a mildly interesting read that you may want to check out if you're interested in these kinds of literary criticism.