Rating: 5/5

The Sleeping Dragon had been one of my favourite fantasy novels as a kid. It's portal fantasy in the classic sense, with a small group of role playing gamers in our world suddenly finding themselves in a strange land that mirrors that of their game.

When it comes to fantasy novels, rereading one's early favourites tends to bring about mixed feelings: the nostalgia of revisiting beloved characters offset by a sense of the writing feeling dated. That wasn't the case with The Sleeping Dragon, at least not in terms of questioning the writing.

Joel Rosenberg had a wonderfully fluid style that ages incredibly well. I never felt as if his prose was over-the-top or out-of-date. Were he alive today, I imagine he could deliver some great Grimdark novels. He was also a writer who was unabashedly willing to put theme at the centre of his books. The Sleeping Dragon is about freedom, and that nebulous concept is made concrete in many different ways, from exposing how most traditional fantasy worlds involve slavery – sometimes slavery that's hidden beneath euphemistic language and concepts – to the idea that being free isn't the same thing as never having to make lifelong choices.

I think this is what I loved best about the novel: Rosenberg made every character and every scene into an exploration of conflicting notions of freedom, and he does this without ever breaking the flow of a fast-paced and entertaining fantasy novel.

Now, onto the aspect that gives me mixed feelings, or at least, needs consideration. Sexual violence and gender roles feature prominently in the book, and Rosenberg presents these in a way that is simultaneously self-conscious and yet I suspect will truly frustrate many modern readers. In one scene he'll show us the hypocrisy of the way in which one of his male characters views the woman he desires as if she's some challenge to be met or reward to be won. Rosenberg hits this point really hard and I still remember how, as a kid, it made me think twice about the way I and my friends talked about girls we were attracted to.

However Rosenberg writes unquestionably through the gaze of his male characters, viewing rape as deplorable towards women, yet something that his male heroes are the ones to deal with, giving them the moral obligation to address by finding and killing the perpetrators. It's not an uncommon or even a negative sentiment, but never are we let into the viewpoint of the female characters nor are they given agency on this or other issues.

There's a hypocrisy in me bringing this up, since my own Greatcoats series is told entirely from the viewpoint of one male character, and so this same phenomenon carries through in my own books. I think, however, that I owe Rosenberg a debt, because it was my memories of reading The Sleeping Dragon long before I ever started writing that showed me the importance of problematizing that distinctly androcentric viewpoint and to expose through other characters that the protagonist's view is both incomplete and distorted.

I hesitate to even mention these things because, well, I simply lack the knowledge to give full and appropriate context to these problems. However I thought just ignoring them wouldn't be right either.

I'll leave it this way: The Sleeping Dragon is one of my favourite books from the 1980's, one that had far more thematic resonance for me than most fantasy novels, and one whose author was willing to address gender issues within the genre even if the book itself still contained many of those problems.