Rating: 4/5

A nice, tight indictment of the many mistakes America makes when it comes to relations with other countries. It's all the more depressing considering that we still make all these mistakes today. One would think that the position of an ambassador to a foreign country would go to somebody that is best qualified to represent our interests at a location. This is why you are not in politics.

Instead of sending people with any sort of discernible skill for the task being assigned to them, we send lackeys, lapdogs of the party in power, or wealthy people with connections whom seek someplace "exotic" to hold parties. Even asking that they take some courses to at least get a working knowledge of the local dialect before they get shipped off is too much to ask for. To them, working in the foreign service is simply a way of padding a resume or going on vacation on the government's dime. They don't even hold an interest in the country they go to as far as these people are concerned, the nation stops once they reach the outskirts of the capital city (or the "green zone"). One can argue about safety concerns but the fact of the matter is that we can't sit in our ivory towers and yell down at all the "peons" that mill around below us and expect to bring about any effective change.

Another criticism the book gives is that our foreign policy for the most part consists of simply throwing money at a problem. We spend our time and energy on gigantic projects that are great for the central government but mean little for the regular people that make up 99.9999% of the rest of the nation. What good is a highway to people that don't own a car? What need do you have for an airport if you can't even find a reliable source of clean water? It's the continuous application of small improvements that lead to real change in a country. But lots of little things don't make great headlines in newspapers and websites, so nobody bothers.

This book may have been written during the Cold War, but it still completely relevant today as we fight an enemy with an ideology wholly incompatible with the American ideal. We can't win with tanks and money. The message of the book is that we must do everything that we can to live up to our ideal, and to always show other countries just what our best and brightest are capable of doing. I can only hope that fifty years after it was originally written, we are slowly dragging ourselves in the direction that the authors state that we should be going.