Rating: 4/5

The combination of scholarship and imagination continues the story begun in Renault's earlier novel, The King Must Die. Once again she brings a rich vitality to the ancient Greece we thought we knew from age-weathered works of art and myths reinterpreted by later tellings. 

This was an age when a man was old by 40 and to live beyond 70 was almost unthinkable. No wonder the few octogenarians were considered sages, both blessed and cursed. Familiar figures, an aged Jason and blind Oedipus, cross Theseus' path. An ancient crone, said to have served King Kekrops the founder of Athens, forewarns cryptically of a bull from the sea. A carefree Achilles presages the war to come and attests to Theseus' grim comment:  “Man born of woman cannot outrun fate.” (p.236)

Theseus has brought his bull-dancers home to Athens, but no one lives happily ever after. They miss the adrenaline rush of the ring, the camaraderie of their team, the display of their hard-won skill, and the celebrity bestowed by the crowd. It is this abrupt lack of purpose that attests to the adage “you can't go home again.” 

Not for the first time, Theseus is forced to contemplate the riddle of mortality as he buries his father Aigeus.  “What is it like there, in the fields of Hades where sun does not rise or set, nor seasons alter? Nor do men change; for where change is life is, and these, who are only shadows of lives past, must keep forever the shape of their earthly selves, whatever they made of them when they walked in daylight. Need the gods judge us further? Surely that is sentence enough, to live with ourselves, and to remember.” (p.11) From our modern vantage point, we might view ancient Greece as static; to the people who lived, there was constant change: from the unfathomable hands of contentious gods, from the constant pull between fate and will, from the restless longing for purpose. 

All of these forces play out in Theseus' life. A marriage to Phaedra is the necessary consequence of the unification of Attica; his need for the bright flame of adventure brings him to shores of the Amazons and a pure bond, both sensual and psychological, with Hippolyta. These events are wrapped in the veil of Mystery. Theseus' mother, a priestess of Artemus, foresees his fate. Hippolyta, alone, divines meaning from the augury of Apollo. Phaedra is tainted, like her sister Ariadne. There is a sadness when we recall the innocent she was as a child, shedding tears when she thought Theseus had died in the bull ring. There is grim justice in the Greek idea of consent:  “I will not offer my death to strangers, like Oedipus of Thebes. Let Father Poseidon have it, to keep against my people's need. There will be a time, as my dream foretold. In the dream they had no king with them, maybe he would not make the offering. They knew me, and cried my name. Some harper had brought it down to them. While the bard sings and the child remembers, I shall not perish from off the Rock.” (p.238)

I must admit that I enjoyed The King Must Die more than this book, and readers should definitely read that book first. It lays down an emotional foundation that the mere recap of events cannot capture. I also found the love passages between Theseus and Hippolyta overly drawn out. For these reasons alone, I have given the book four stars instead of five.