Rating: 4/5

The Feminine Mystique is often credited for starting the second wave of feminism in the USA. The historical importance of this book is undeniable and this played a huge role in my decision to round up the 3.5 stars. 

The history of feminism in USA and the world might have been quite different if Betty Friedan did not pick up her pen. To understand and research the 'feminine mystique' as she calls it which kept apparently 'happy' housewives unfulfilled throughout their lives was a major feat indeed. Even today it is not easy to speak up about an unpopular truth, especially if it is about any discrimination against a perceived privileged group. I can only imagine how difficult it might have been then. The research in this book is thorough. Friedan conducted interviews with housewives, college students, psychologists, educators, and many more to back up her theories and observations. She also mentioned many of the eminent psychologists' theories and statistical data in detail to explain the social phenomena. The very topic of this book is quite astounding. After the first generation of feminists fought for and achieved rights to vote, higher education, and jobs and proved their capabilities during the WWII when a large number of men left for war, it is hard to comprehend why they would willingly give up those opportunities to go back to being only housewives. But the way Friedan explained it with the social push towards 'feminine fulfillment' at the cost of having any career not only makes sense but is also infuriating. Multiple times throughout the book I stopped to think how this could be the social mindset in America of all places. Her examples of how it affected the physical and mental health of entire generations of women and their children are also very effective. Friedan makes strong points in favor of women needing to find some occupation outside of home not only for their own fulfillment but also for the greater benefit of family and society. I quite liked the last chapter where after discussing the social problems and reasons behind them, she tried to provide some solutions all the while accepting that it's a difficult task. Her own country might have significant progress in this tough journey in the last 50 years, but a large section of the world has a very long way to go when it comes to treating women as humans and equal to men.

Much like many other great works, this book is not without its limitations. Actually, there are quite a few. The writing became repetitive after the first few chapters and that made it hard to keep reading. Her idea about homosexuality is horribly outdated and inexcusable. The entire focus of the book was on the middle to upper-class white women, while a large section of the community is not even mentioned in the book. We don't get to know if or how the 'feminine mystique' affected the less privileged women for whom working was not a choice but a necessity, who might have been happy enough to leave that job and stay at home. While I completely agree with the idea that everyone should be given the opportunity to have a career of their choice, I do not believe a career is everyone's answer to fulfillment. Throughout the book, Friedan's mention of career has been limited to science, art, social work, etc which understandably provides a person with a sense of identity and purpose. But what about jobs that does not bring any joy to a person other than the paycheck at the end of the month? We all know they exist everywhere in abundance. What I found to be largely missing in her arguments for women being in the workforce is the financial freedom that comes with it. Reading this book might make one think that unless a career gives a woman a strong purpose in itself, it's not worth pursuing. If just getting paid is not good enough, then women who might not have the chance to do something meaningful, but a husband to earn enough shouldn't bother with getting a job. The effects of potential financial freedom are thoroughly missing from this text, and it has been shown time and again that financial insecurities are often the reason for housewives to stay in abusive or unhappy marriages. Also, in her quest of interviewing women who were not happy with their lives, her writing remained biased against the women who might truly be happy with being a housewife. Now that we are trying to normalize being a househusband as a valid choice, the idea that each and every housewife in the 60s were miserable doesn't sound plausible.

But flaws aside, this book should be read for its historical importance. And to understand how swiftly any progress on the front of equal rights can get reversed if not handled with care. In a time and day when women still face the question of career vs family, we just need to remember:

  In actual fact, it is not as difficult as the feminine mystique implies, to combine marriage and motherhood and even the kind of lifelong personal purpose that once was called "career." It merely takes a new life plan - in terms of one's whole life as a woman.