Rating: 4/5

Because I would rather read books than write Goodread reviews, I have a stack of books on the floor beside my table--books I have read bur not yet commented on. Despite that, I picked up a new (actually old, with half the pages stained a light crimson from some long ago liquid) book yesterday to look at during breakfast and now I have to comment on it before the wonder leaves. Lashner has written two previous books about the same main character, a Jewish lawyer in Philadelphia who has some rigid ideas about lawyering but is quite willing to bend the rules when he can. If that seems contradictory, it is because Atty. Victor Carl is a very contradictory character.

BSIL has complained repeatedly that my reviews tell the whole story; I do not agree with that, as I think I am very careful not so spoil any plot, but I find in this case that the plot is so complex and convoluted (which I love) that I can hardly say anything about it without saying too much. Basically, the book begins when Atty. Carl gets a late-night call from an old college friend, also an attorney, and then dashes over to find his friend sitting on the front stoop of the house in the rain, naked, with a gun lying on the ground in front of him, and his mistress dead on a mattress on the second floor. One thing leads to another, as they say … and in this case leads to Los Vegas and West Virginia as Victor searches for the truth with an unlikely companion.

Lashner’s style is so excellent (in accordance with my tastes) that I hated to get to the end of these 563 pages, and now I have to go find the two preceding books. I am intrigued by his violation of punctuation rules, such as a series of independent clauses separated by commas to show the rapidity of his characters’ thoughts, together with such things as having various chapters told entirely as first-person accounts from the pint of view of another character so as to get the facts presented to the reader directly and immediately, without getting into a lot of conversational dialog. The thing that really appeals to me, however, is the convoluted twisting of the plot, revealing more and more about the characters involved as time goes on.