Rating: 5/5

I have said, with support from a couple of my senior Shakespeareans at SAA (like Ralph Berry), that Henry V is the comedy Shakespeare promised at the end of 2 Henry 4, epilog: "to continue the story, with Sir John [Falstaff] in it. " But after the actor who played Falstaff disappeared (Will Kemp--probably to tour Germany), Shakespeare created a very different kind of comedy, a reconciliation of conflicting nationalities in the usual comic resolution, however preposterous: marriage. And in a thoroughly modern (even modernist) touch, the spirit of comic reconciliation pervades the play through its linguistic playfulness. This is Shakespeare's only play using national accents: French, Welsh, Scottish, Irish and of course English.

 I would speculate that the "Great Britain" only enshrined around a century later (1705?) was initiated under James I, and here in Shakespeare's Henry the Fifth, previewed. The comic interlude of Fluellen and Jamy, and of Gower and Macmorris, features the strong Scottish and Welsh accent, where for instance Fluellen says, "Alexander the Pig." He is corrected, "Don't you mean Alexander the Great?" F, "The great, or the pig, are all one reckonings..." (Welsh "b" unvoiced, "p.")
 Later in the play, the King "claims kin" with Fluellen's despised Welsh minority; "For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman" (4.7.105). And Fluellen may speak English "funny," but he is an excellent soldier, and very knowledgeable about the history of warfare, especially Roman.
 By the way, a neighbor of mine went to a British prep/"public" school in the 60's, where the English kids would not even sit at lunch with the still-despised Welsh kids. (I may be just the opposite, where my favorite freshman teacher, besides Armour Craig, was Rolfe Humphries, trans. of the Aeneid every colege used back then; moreover, when my own translation of G Bruno's comedy, Candelaio, was staged at the Bridewell Theatre, London, half of the eight actors/tresses were Welsh, great with various vocal accents and inflections--Yorkshire, Cornwall, West Country, Cockney. (Youtube, "Candelaio Final Edit" for 14 min, a couple scenes.)

 My article HV: see Fran Teague, "Acting Funny in Shakespeare," which I heartily recommend with self-interest. She ran the Philadelphia seminar at the Shakespeare Association national convention there (1990), where I recall seeing Mets outfielder Daryl Strawberry (in town to play the Phillies?) in the Society Hill hotel--looking thinner than I imagined from TV.
 My article in her book got quoted in Maley's books on Shakespeare and Wales, and Scotland, and another scholar's books on International Shakespeare.