Rating: 4/5

Christ in Concrete
 presents the often harrowing story of an Italian immigrant family in New York City in the 1920s. 12 year old Paul is forced into construction work to support his mother and 7 younger siblings after the death of his father Geremio in the collapse of a shoddily constructed building. The book alternates passages of Faulknerian stream-of-consciousness – the narrative often becomes expressionistically inarticulate in scenes where the characters experience extreme stress - with semi-objective third person point of view passages. The more straightforward descriptive passages are among the best in the book: the sounds of the lower East Side by day and night, a visit to a tenement medium, and the novel’s big set piece, a wedding celebration among Italian-American construction workers and their wives. Di Donato writes dialogue in a kind of Italianized English meant to indicate when the characters are speaking in their native tongue: For pleasure, do not laugh. … The boy is man-child of master mason and born in the mortar tub. I beg you, this is not moment for comedy: the little one is son of Italian and paesano who left his blood under Job. That last word, “Job”, almost always capitalized and without a preceding article, is the way in which work and employment is referred to by the characters both in speech and thought throughout the book, unconsciously worshipped and feared as a kind of Moloch, a rival God to their orthodox Catholic pantheon. 

The novel presents its criticisms of society – the greedy and bigoted bosses, the indifferent bureaucracy, the ineffective and self-seeking Catholic clergy – by showing, not telling, no direct attacks against these institutions are made, either by the author or characters. The only hints of larger economic and historic movements come from Paul’s conversations with his friend Louis, a Russian Jew his own age, an atheist scholar who reads Thorstein Veblen, and recounts the successive cruelty of the Tsarist and Bolshevist regimes. The last section of the novel takes place in the early years of the Great Depression, but even this society shattering event is overshadowed by the personal relationships of the characters and the crisis of faith Paul undergoes, symbolically presented over several pages in a dream vision which serves as the novel’s climax and which, like most such efforts, I found heavy-handed and unsatisfying.

The first chapter describes Geremio’s last days of life and ends with his death on Good Friday, which, especially given the book’s title, struck me as overly heavy-handed symbolism. I found in the introduction that this chapter was published first, as a separate story titled “Christ in Concrete”, also that the Good Friday death was based on the death of di Donato’s own father. The chapter is not quite integrated into what follows: the metaphor of Geremio as the “Christ in Concrete” doesn’t sustain itself and the Paul described here doesn’t join seamlessly to the character that carries most of the novel’s subsequent narrative – for instance, we hear nothing more of the crystal radio set built by Paul of which his father thinks with great pride.