Rating: 4/5

This is the start of a series about an aristocratic family, the Beverleys, who are obsessed with wealth, status and most of all, with their stately mansion called Mannerling. Sir William and Lady Beverley have 6 beautiful daughters and the heroine Isabella is the oldest. I disliked Isabella and all of the snobbish and mean Beverley relatives when the story started. They're like a regency version of the family from that old cancelled tv series called "Dirty Sexy Money". They're all full of themselves, they treat their servants with disdain and expect all their minor gentry neighbours to worship them. At the beginning of the novel, the Beverleys are still rich and living at their showpiece mansion Mannerling. Their only problem is due to the fact that Isabella has, in spite of her famed beauty and wealth, failed to get a single marriage proposal during her recent debut season in London. They're all stumped and can find no explanation for it, especially when Isabella started the season as the most popular and beautiful debutante. But it's their very vanity that makes them oblivious to the reasons why prospective suitors had been turned off of the heroine. Isabella, like her parents and sisters, is so vain and obsessed with her self importance that she made little effort to get to know any of the men she met. She would often fail to ask these men about themselves or to show any interest in the things they liked; instead, she would only boast about the magnificence of her home Mannerling.All the men found her beautiful but didn't want to marry a woman who was absolutely full of herself. This is Isabella:

The plot kicks off when Sir William gambles and loses Mannerling, most of his wealth and even his wife's and daughters' jewellery. It was fun to see this family get kicked down a notch. Their servants had no loyalty or respect for them and their neighbours were all happy and ecstatic to see the vain Beverley family have to leave their mansion and go to live in a smaller home they were just barely able to afford. It was only after they lost their money and their mansion, that Isabella became more likable. She soon started to spend time with the hero; he was an Irish nobleman who was new to the area. His name was Viscount Fitzpatrick and he'd just bought the adjacent Perival estate. Any other family that was logical would've wanted to encourage a courtship between a rich handsome viscount and Isabella, but the Beverley family was too obsessed with Mannerling to be sensible. Their solution to their problems was for Isabella to marry the man who had won Mannerling from Sir William. That guy was Mr. Judd and he was a sly, evil and sleazy man. Isabella didn't like Mr. Judd but she was so fixated on her dream to get back the family mansion that she was willing to allow him to court her. Mannerling reminded me of that evil haunted house in Stephen King's eponymous novel 
  Rose Red
:

It soon became apparent that Mannerling was a house with its own evil kind of energy, just like the house in King's 
  Rose Red
; it soon started to wield its power over Mr. Judd and his fixation with the mansion escalated. The hero was bemused by all of this because he didn't find Mannerling to be a warm and happy type of home; he couldn't see why all these people were so caught up in its trap. Viscount Fitzpatrick was a wonderful hero; in fact, I think he was too good, kind, chivalrous and sweet for Isabella. This is Viscount Fitzpatrick:

The H was attracted to Isabella and soon started to court her. Isabella's feelings for him were strong but her family managed to bully her into accepting Mr. Judd's courtship. This was unbelievable to me because Mr. Judd is not even a member of the Ton and he has no other assets or long term means of making money aside from gambling. It was ridiculous that this family would embarrass themselves and their daughter by denying her the chance to marry a handsome and rich viscount. I would've hated this novel if Isabella hadn't started to change from the middle part of the story. She became friends with the H's widowed aunt Mrs. Kennedy and this lady began to teach the heroine that there were more important things in life than Mannerling. The best part of this story was the gradual humbling of the heroine. She only became likable after all of her pride and vanity were ground into the dust. She'd made a horrible mistake by refusing the H's offer of marriage because her family wanted her to marry Mr. Judd. The H was able to see her get her comeuppance when Mr. Judd, who knew that the Beverley family only wanted to use him to get back Mannerling, decided to propose to the vicar's daughter Mary. This was done at a ball where everyone in the neighbourhood thought that Mr. Judd would be proposing to Isabella. The ironic thing about this is that the heroine only felt relief and happiness, rather than embarrassment. By this time in the story, she was already in love with the H and regretted turning down his marriage proposal. 

The author salvages the heroine's character by making her suffer for quite a bit of time after this and I found this to be very fair to the hero. Eventually, Isabella grew to realize that Mannerling was just a house and the evil mansion soon lost its hold on her. Mr. Judd, however, wasn't that lucky. He ended up hanging himself from the main chandelier in the mansion. In the subsequent novels in the series, the chandelier itself will become a haunted motif. Mr. Judd's new wife was forced to return to live at the vicarage with her father and I didn't feel sorry for her because she was a mean, social climbing attention whore. The H and Isabella were reconciled when the heroine assured him that she didn't want him to use his wealth to purchase Mannerling back for her family. That's when I decided that Isabella ought to be forgiven for having been such a vain little twit earlier in the story. Her sisters, especially the bitchy Jessica, were appalled because they felt that she should've used her new husband as a means to recoup the old family home. Lady Beverley was also a bit peeved since her son in law was Irish but the heroine didn't care what her relatives thought because she was in love with the H and wanted to be with him. 

There are still 5 more novels in this series with each of the remaining Beverley sisters. Mannerling will continue to be at the center of each novel because the sisters will all try to marry men who own the mansion. The novel ends on a happy note for the viscount and Isabella but there's a hint that the Beverley family are already plotting a new scheme to regain ownership of Mannerling:

  Isabella alighted at Perival with a glad feeling of coming home. The viscount came out to meet her. ‘Come in here,’ he said, pulling her into a small morning room. He took off her bonnet and threw it on a chair and then fell to kissing her breathless. 

‘Oh, dear,’ she said when she could. ‘My dreadful family. You will never guess what they are plotting next.’ 

‘The Devers have a son, a marriageable son, am I right?’ 

‘Are they so transparent then?’ 

‘Very.’

‘What should I do?’ 

‘Kiss me again.’ After a long time, he said huskily, ‘Let your family learn by their mistakes, as learn they must. At least one brand has been saved from the burning.’

M. C. Beaton. Banishment (Daughters of Mannerling 1) (Kindle Location 2159-2166). Canvas. Kindle Edition.