Rating: 4/5

The story follows Bronwyn, a Harper and antiquities shop owner in Waterdeep, whose past is marked by tragedy: her family was slaughtered by the Zhentarim, and she was sold into slavery. Unbeknownst to her, her brother Brandon survived and, now known as Dag Zoreth, became a fanatic servant of the mad god Cyric.

Their father, Hronrulf Caradoon, master of Thornhold Keep, had been away during the attack and believed all his children perished. Hronrulf’s bloodline also serves as guardian of the Three Rings of Samular—powerful relics long coveted by the Zhentarim and by the Archmage Khelben Arunsun, a prominent leader of the Harpers in Waterdeep.

Years later, Dag—now a disciple of the Zhentarim priest Malichor—sets out to claim the Three Rings of Samular and seize control of Thornhold Keep. Dag acquires one of the rings and entrusts it to his daughter, Cara, who was raised by foster parents and unaware of her true heritage. Cara is captured by Algorind, a Tyr recruit acting on the orders of Sir Gareth Cormaeril—a fallen paladin under Dag’s influence.

Brownwyn reunites briefly with her father at Thorhold, but is forced to flee with one of the remaining Rings as Dag seizes Thornhold. In her escape, she allies with Ebenezer Stoneshaft—a fierce and vengeful dwarf whose clan was recently massacred by Dag’s warband during their assault on Thornhold.

Bronwyn agrees to help Ebenezer search for any surviving members of the Stoneshaft clan. Their journey takes them through the infamous Yawning Portal and into the undercity of Skullport. . From there, they board a vessel captained by the refined and surprisingly intelligent ogre, Captain Orwig. Together, they intercept a fleeing slave ship, freeing the captured Stoneshaft dwarves—and unexpectedly, discovering Cara among the prisoners.

Bronwyn, returns to Waterdeep with dozens of Ebenezer’s kin. During this time, Khelben Arunsun visits and reveals that Cara is Brownwyn’s niece. Bronwyn confesses she now possesses two of the Rings of Samular—one of which is worn by Cara.
Bronwyn decides to travel to Summit Hall, the Knights of Samular’s training monastery, and meet with Laharin Goldbeard. Brownwyn greets Goldbeard cordially but soon discovers that the third ring is with the lich Renwick Snowcloak Caradoon, who resides in the old tower at Summit Hall. Renwick willingly gives her the ring, revealing the rings activate a powerful artifact called Fenrisban, now awaiting her in Gladestone.

Meanwhile, in response to the sack of Thornhold, the Paladins of Tyr rally at Waterdeep’s Hall of Justice. Their leader, First Lord Sir Piergeiron, prepares his forces for a counterattack. He gathers intelligence from Sir Gareth and Algorind about Thornhold’s connection to Bronwyn. Seeking counsel, he meets with his old friend, Archmage Khelben Arunsun—only to be rebuffed by the Harper leader. 

At Gladestone, Brownwyn, Ebenezer, and Cara discover the village in ruins, sacked by orcs. They coordinate with the elves of Gladestone to raid the orc caves, recover Fenrisbane, and drive out the remaining orcs. They find Fenrisbane—a toy siege tower with the magical ability to grow several stories tall and conceal forces within.

With their mission complete, Brownwyn and Ebenezer depart for Waterdeep. There, Brownwyn learns from Danilo Thann that Cara was handed over to the Paladins of Tyr by Khelben Arunsun. However, Sir Gareth Cormaeril later informs her that the escorting paladins were ambushed and killed—and Cara has gone missing.

All signs point back to Thornhold. Brownwyn and Ebenezer devise a new plan, this time reluctantly joined by Algorind, who is sworn to recover Cara for the Paladins. Brownwyn deceives Dag into allowing her and Algorind entry, demonstrating the power of the Three Rings of Samular and the Fenrisbane grows to a towering size, unleashing Ebenezer and the remaining members of the Stoneshaft dwarf clan.

During the ensuing battle, Algorind defeats Dag but is stopped by Brownwyn from delivering a fatal blow. Cara chooses to leave with her father Dag rather than stay with Brownwyn. 

With Dag’s army defeated, Brownwyn gifts Thornhold to the Stoneshaft clan until Cara comes of age, the Three Rings of Samular are distributed to the Paladins of Tyr, the harpers and one is kept by Brownwyn. Outraged by the outcome, First Lord Piergeiron and his paladins voice their fury to Khelben Arunsun, sewing the mistrust between the Harpers and the Paladins.

Overall: Great read but what a coincidence to find Dag's daughter Cara, on the same ship as the dwarves. Also, no one seems to be held accountable for their actions i.e. Dag leaving with Cara, the Paladins not holding their own accountable for their kidnapping, nor the Harper leader for sending Cara off to the Paladins. It is also odd that Brownwyn lets Dag walk after he killed their father.