Rating: 1/5

Benedict’s opening sentence is: “Anthropology is the study of human beings as creatures of society. “ This seems hive-mindish to me. 

Furthermore, we can in no way be objective when looking at people and events in the world: “No man ever looks at the world with pristine eyes. He sees it edited by a definite set of customs and institutions and ways of thinking. From the moment of his birth, the customs into which he is born shape his experience and behavior. By the time he can talk, he is the little creature of his culture, and by the time he is grown and able to take part in its activities, its habits are his habits, it’s beliefs, his beliefs…”

So, we are the subjects of cultural conditioning which we can not get around. This means our actions are culturally determined.

She makes this comment about culture: Culture is not a biologically transmitted complex.“ It is also not psychologically or environmentally transmitted.

The bulk of this book looks at three primitive cultures: the Zuni Pueblo, the Doba and the Kwatkiutl of the Pacific Northwest. Each has some shocking practices, some seeming pathological and impractical, some seeming murderous.

“ What really binds men together is their culture, – the ideas and the standards they have in common.“

“if we are interested in human behavior, we need first of all to understand the institution that are provided in any society. For human behavior will take the forms those institutions suggest, even to extremes of which the observer, deep died in the culture of which he is a part, can have no intimation.” P. 207

“There is however, one difficult exercise to which we may a custom ourselves as we become increasingly culture conscious. We may train ourselves to pass judgment upon the dominant traits of our own civilization. “

The purpose of anthropology is not to judge these cultures as we cannot get past our own blinders. We must be tolerant of them. “Social thinking at the present time has no more important task before it than that of taking adequate account of cultural relativity.

Her position is not serious. It is childish. What is a culture for? Primarily to pass on the knowledge and skills and ideas to the next generation. It is also assumed that the culture has been constructed on the basis of its adequacy to the task of protecting the people of that culture from the vicissitudes of life. She looks at culture as if it is a piece of furniture. She never looks at these cultures as to whether the peoples live adequate lives. Surely, anthropology at least can do that?