Rating: 3/5

Susanna Harte at six and twenty was the sole heir to the Harte Fortune until her father Sir Frederick Harte arrived home with a young new bride almost half his age, he had taken the whole family by surprise. Leo Drayton, Susanna's cousin had lived with them for the last five years and done very little for his keep. Viola could not be more than five and thirty and Sir Frederick was well into his sixties. He is a member of parliament, a kindly man, essentially a country gentleman, what had possessed him to marry after a whirlwind courtship such a dashing wife - and even more puzzling, what had brought such a beautiful and fashionable woman to marry him. The new Lady Harte liked parties and routs and cards and little dinners. All through the summer the house had been filled with her friends, some of them of very rakish appearance and conversation. They descended on the Hall, stayed up all night and almost drank the cellar dry and half of them departed with unpaid bills in local taverns, eating-houses or merchants. Sir Frederick had presented Viola as her wedding present the remarkable diamond necklace which he had originally had made for his first wife. He had always declared it would be Susanna's some day - but he seemed to have forgotten his promise. The new Lady Harte had accepted the gift without the slightest hesitation or appearance of embarrassment and Susanna supposed she could not be blamed. The Harte necklace "was not to be sneezed at" - to quote Leo. I suppose it is what Papa wants and it pleases him to see Viola wear it. 
It is New Year's Eve precisely midnight when the butler appeared "I beg your pardon, sir, but there is a gentleman here." The butler stood back and as they all waited a complete stranger strode into the room. For a moment they all stared at him in stunned silence. He wore a heavy military riding cape, his top-boots were mud-splashed and he gave the appearance of someone who had journeyed considerable distance. Susanna felt a slow anger because it seemed that just when she thought they had seen the last of Viola's disreputable friends here was one who had the effrontery to turn up unannounced. "Good heavens" breathed Leo, Sir Frederick was more blunt "Who the devil is this?" The unknown gentleman advanced on their huddled group. "Sir Frederick Harte? I beg your pardon sir for intruding at his hour, You had my letter sir?" "To my knowledge, sir, I have never had any kind of communication from you in my life! Do tell me who you are and why you have seen fit to invade my house." "I can answer that, "Freddie" Viola spoke up. She sounded like a frightened child. "This is Major Hugh Russell. He--he is my nephew." They all remained frozen as if in some tableau. Sir Frederick stepped forward, extended his hand and said, "I fear your letter has gone astray, Major. But you are more than welcome as a relative of my wife." He looks a perfect rascal! thought Susanna grimly, studying the arrival's windswept and travel stained appearance. If he is her nephew, I'm the Empress of Russia!