Rating: 5/5

The fantastic thing about this book is that not only does it humorously discuss the Pooh stories and the philosophers in a deeply knowledgeable and self-mocking, abstract yet lucid manner; but also actually critiques the philosophies and gives opinions about them. This is no mere "Plato and a Platypus Walk Into a Bar" "let's introduce concepts with fun stuff" book. THIS, my fellow readers, is a Scholar Fucking Around. 

I actually learned a fair bit and was inspired as well, because the lessons were incidental to Williams' silly and suspiciously well-substantiated thesis. This kind of learning is much more natural and therefore effective; so unlike cramming information from a textbook that lists in a dry tone the philosophers' basic beliefs. Life ought to involve MUCH MORE PLAYING! He uses the most wonderfully thorough one-sided logic (pg. 144 was probably the most nonsensical, which means I liked it best). It was a toss-up whether to categorize this under "philosophyreligion" or "comedy", a sort of confusion I wish I felt more often.

"Tigger's search for a food that he really likes and Pooh Bear's eating the honey before giving the Useful--but now empty--Pot to Eeyore are a vivid critique of the main problem of Kantian ethics. The best-known version of Kant's basic moral principal, the Categorical Imperative, runs as follows: "Act only on that maxim which you can at the same time will to become a universal law." At once we face the problem: How can we fulfill Kant's criterion while choosing a suitable food or gift for a particular person? Anyone who made it a maxim to give everyone honey would have dissatisfied the recipient (Eeyore) in the given example. But if we make a separate choice for each recipient, we are not willing each choice to become a universal law.

It may be answered that this is a quite unreal problem and that the obvious solution is to act on the maxim that we should give the sort of gifts the recipients will enjoy. Or--as that formula would allow us to give a case of whisky to an alcoholic or a gun to a psychopath--we could say we should give gifts which were appropriate to the recipient. But that merely means we ought to give what we ought to give. True but not very helpful. In other words, Winnie-the-Pooh has exposed what Alasdair MacIntyre called "the logical emptiness of the test of the categorical imperative" (A Short History of Ethics, p. 198).

Obviously Kant needed Winnie-the-Pooh to clarify his own obscure prose. And we have just seen the Great Bear expose the unreality of Kant's ethical foundation."