Rating: 2/5

I was hoping to find a really great quick reference book here, but unfortunately, this edition is so old that there is some vital information that is grossly out of date. This lady disclaims at the beginning that she is not any type of therapist and the extent of her credentials is that she's married to a guy who was apparently well known for aromatherapy and that she uses essential oils herself. Yeah, that's not really good enough in my opinion for her to be handing out what is essentially medical advice. In most areas, she completely ignores the medical physicians, asserting that you can cure yourself at home from any ailment, from dry skin to yeast infections to reviving coma patients with peppermint! maybe things were different 25 years ago, but I feel a little suspicious of anyone who claims "depression" that was cured with a 30 min. bath and a nap. And speaking of baths, I'm beginning to suspect that this lady spends half of her life in the tub, since her cure for many ailments is a bath with (fill in the blank) essential oils added.
Lastly, anyone who claims that all essential oils are entirely safe and have no negative side effects, is either VERY ignorant or wants you to give them money. It's true they tend to be safer than most perscription drugs and are powerful and can be equally effective. Side effects are much less common and generally less severe. But that kind of power deserves respect. If misused, many essential oils are capable of being harmful. A person should take care to gain a working knowledge of the properties and contraindications of any oil before using it. 

On a positive note, she seems to have a few favorite oils that I don't have much experience with. I plan to learn more about these oils and their properties and hopefully have a couple new additions for my collection. She also includes some useful recipes in the back, which I'd like to try. With the advanced knowledge we have of the human body and of the essential oils' effects on the body, this edition is rendered less useful than it probably was 25 years ago. I would like to find a similar type of book with more up to date information.