Rating: 4/5

My summer of Agatha Christie mysteries continues. I have long read mysteries in between denser reads or after a weekend letdown as palette cleansers so that I do not fall into the proverbial reading slump. I have realized that I also read mysteries because I enjoy fitting clues together like a puzzle in my attempt to solve the case before the detective. I do have my preferred series and favorite detectives that I return to again and again, and Hercule Poirot is one of them. I have come to appreciate the Belgian sleuth as one would a doting older relative albeit one who happens to be the most famous detective in the world. On the heels of solving the mystery of the blue train, Poirot heads for a seaside vacation at St. Loo. As usual, murder seems to find him. 

Absent from the Blue Train mystery, Captain Hastings is back as Poirot’s sidekick, and many would say foil. He narrates this case and functions as Poirot’s sounding board and an extra set of eyes and ears, although his brain is not always adept at solving mysteries. Poirot confides to Hastings that he wishes he had been there for the previous case because, whereas Georges, his valet, provided quality companionship, he was not adept at solving crimes. Hastings has returned from his sojourn in Argentina in time to join Poirot on his holiday. They book rooms at the aptly named Majestic Hotel and float ideas off of each other just like in old times when Poirot solved cases with regularity. This time, the pair lunches with an enchanting young lady named Nick Buckley. While eating, a bullet grazes Buckley’s hat, but the would be assassin made the mistake of doing so in the presence of Hercule Poirot. Poirot gets Nick to confide to him that this was the fourth “accident” that has befallen her in recent days. Living in her family’s spooky End House, adjacent to the hotel, Nick has survived three other accidents, and Poirot, although on vacation, although “retired”, has it on his conscience to investigate the peril at this End House. 

Readers are introduced to Buckley’s unlikeable set. It is during the post first war years, and the modern, young generation appear to live without regard to themselves or others. Poirot is taken in with Nick and her companion Frederica Rice, both charming women in their own ways. At End House, he finds out that Nick almost had a painting crash on her head, her car had been tampered with, and a boulder nearly ran her over while bathing. Then the bullet. Who would want her dead? The End House is mortgaged and the servants think it’s spooky. Even Hastings got a bad vibe from the property; however, it is the Buckley family home, passed to Nick from her eccentric grandfather Nicholas Buckley. Her given name is Magdala, a Buckley family name, but Nick got her name from her grandfather, who she adored. Poirot convinces Nick that a female companion other than Madame Rice should stay with her in her room just in case. Nick thinks of her cousin Maggie Buckley, who see convinces to arrive the next day in time for a party. Then the would be murderer strikes again, right under Poirot’s nose, only Maggie is killed by a bullet intended for Nick. Poirot is determined not to fail again or he would not be Hercule Poirot. 

Poirot’s methodology involves writing out a list of suspects A to J along with their motives. Christie employs this detecting many times in her books, most notably in Murder on the Orient Express. The events at End House came first, and it is obvious to all that Poirot will leave no stone unturned. Safely tucking Nick in a nursing home, Poirot and Hastings head to London to investigate and to meet up with Scotland Yard Inspector Japp, a recurring character throughout the series. The three reminisce over supper, and readers find out that Poirot had been solving cases as early as the 1890s, his heyday. Christie had always intended for his character to be that of a retired detective albeit the world’s best, and then she wrote over forty books starring Poirot, each time having him come out of retirement to use his grey cells to solve a case that baffles local police. Japp taps into Scotland Yard to find information, but Hastings never seems to use his grey cells in the right way, Poirot chastises. He always seems to be right about the wrong person and vice versa. Poirot’s grey cells are superior to others’ and in his thinking unravels the case. As usual, clues are omitted, and readers have to wait until the end to know whodunit. 

With Poirot, even if I begin to suspect a person or think someone has an alias, I know I will be wrong in the end. That is what keeps me reading these cases to see what information Christie withholds from her readers. Poirot has a superior mind to others and always knows what others do not, and these are the clues that do not appear until the end, when Poirot explains the case to the book’s cast of characters. This time around, I did wonder about the name Magdala as it is uncommon and in this case a Buckley family name. I had a hunch, but, as usual, Poirot was three steps ahead of me and everyone one else involved. At this point, Poirot is no longer a palette cleanser for me; there are other detectives I enjoy for that. If I keep reading all of Christie’s cases through to the end perhaps one day my grey cells will put me on Poirot’s level. With over forty cases and twenty five or so left to read, I ought to get there eventually, or not. This is what sets the Queen of Crime apart from other mystery writers and makes Hercule Poirot the best detective in the world. He just knows, and I should not be disappointed that I do not. He is Hercule Poirot after all. 

4 enjoyable🕵️‍♂️ 🇧🇪 stars