Rating: 4/5

The second volume in the series continues to delight. Rowan, our Steerswoman, is something like a druid-- she must answer all questions honestly to anyone, with the expectation that this will be reciprocated. Those that refuse to answer her questions become banned' and she no longer answers their queries. In the first volume, Rowan discovers that Slado, the 'king wizard' has basically put a death warrant on her due to her inquiries into strange jewels (which are something akin to solar power generators). Here, she sets off with her outskirter friend Bel to find the site of a crashed satellite far in the outskirter region. 

It is becoming increasingly apparent that wizards basically use electricity and other modern tech for their 'spells', but the population at large does not know this. The mysteries go deeper with Rowan's journey into the outskirter region after meeting with more outskirter 'tribes'. The tribes are actually quite well versed in some aspects, even though they no longer read/write. The knowledge is passed down Homer like via long poems/songs. A fun world that seems to be rapidly turning into the realm of scifi.

Via the various clues parsimoniously given out over these two volumes, we know that Rowan's world is actually a human colony 'adrift' for 1000 years or so. The planet is slowly being terraformed in a rather unique way. First, various satellites (deemed 'guidestars' by the population) use microwaves to kill the native flora/fauna. The first plant species to grow back is 'red grass' and is found in the outskirts. Outskirters are basically tribes of goat herders whose goats eat the red grass and their poo serves to kill it as well. Eventually, 'normal' flora and fauna take over the depleted red grass areas, causing the Outskirts to 'move' gradually East. 

Something, however, has changed in the Outskirts. For generations, every twenty years strange weather happened in the Outskirts and induced the various tribes to gather peacefully-- a great rendezvous. We gradually learn that the strange weather is due to the guidestars nuking the edges of the Outskirts. With the falling of a guidestar, the pattern has been disrupted. In fact, the 'face' people (tribes that roam the very edges of the red grass areas) are starving as the terraforming process seems to have been halted. Why? Who is the Slado and what does he want? Kirstein teases us here will drips and drabs of the big picture as Rowan slowly unravels what is going on. 

Kirstein has fewer pacing issues with this volume in the series and it seems a little more polished as well. Despite the character driven feel of the story (especially in volume one), this is really turning out to be something of a hard science fiction epic. Looking forward to moving on to the next installment!

This was a buddy read with Carol, Nataliya and Anna-- thanks!!