Rating: 4/5

It is easier to say what this novel is not then what it is - it is not a historical novel about the last days of Nicholas II and his family, it is not a historical novel about an attempt to save them, though there are elements of both of these stories in the novel. It is a fantasy, but of a far deeper sort then the usual sort of counterfactual historical novel - and when you look at the date it was first published - 1989 and country, Italy, you should begin to guess at its strengths.

The year 1989 was before the collapse of the Soviet Union and the return to history of the last Tsar and his family or their canonisation by the Orthodox Church in Russia* and Italy was not as absorbed in the sentimental cult of the dead Tsar and his family engendered by Robert Massie's biography and the film made from it as countries like the USA or UK.

In the novel Prince Ypsilanti and the Praeobrazhenski regiment he commands set out to rescue the Tsar in Tobolsk across a Russia which owes more to the Tartar Steppe of Dino Buzzati** then any real place. The journey is a mythological one, just like the narrative of the life of Tsar and his family at Ipatiev house in Yekaterinburg. In the end Prince Ypsilanti and his soldiers are as much in need of saving as their Imperial master. They are out of time, and time is out of joint, and Ypsilanti knows he was on a fool's errand to the wrong place attempting to recapture a dream which was as much about his past as Russia's, or the Tsar's, present.

I have seen the author and this novel compared to Italo Calvino, I would need to reread Calvino before agreeing, but I don't think it is impossible - this is a novel were truth is hidden in metaphor, myth and fable. What I do like is that there are no cardboard saints and everyone from Ypsilanti to the Tsar his wife and children are real in how much they love and hate each other, are trapped and annoyed with each other and, the case of the children, know and understand more than their parents.

There are a couple more Pazzi novels available in English and I intend to acquire and read them as well. This is a much better novel than I ever imagined it would be.

*This is no place to go into the various dates on which the various Romanovs were canonised, if you need to know Wikipedia has some fairly accurate articles. Please note that the Romanovs were canonised as 'passion bearers' not martyrs - no matter how often you see them referred to as martyrs they aren't.
**Dino Buzzati 'The Tartar Steppe' is a marvellous, Italian, novel in print constantly since 1939 in many languages including English.