Rating: 3/5

Nancy and Plum are orphaned sisters forced to live with the cruel Mrs. Monday at her boarding house by an indifferent uncle who knows or cares nothing about children and is fooled by Mrs. Monday's black-hearted lies! The situation would be unbearable if not for Nancy's imagination, Plum's pluck and a librarian who loans them classics about orphans in situations worse than theirs. After a Christmas spent in a barn, no matter how enjoyable the adventure, the girls realize the true depths of Mrs. Monday's perfidy and are determined to confront her. Life goes from bad to worse as Mrs. Monday tries to punish the sisters for their insolence. As soon as summer rolls around, Plum decides they're going to leave and find Uncle John and make him realize the truth. Running from Mrs. Monday won't be easy and it's up to the girls to figure out how to avoid returning to the boarding house and make a new life for themselves.

This is a cute, vintage classic orphan story. It's less fantastical than Roald Dahl or Lemony Snicket or Harry Potter but along the same lines. It's more of a A Little Princess orphan tale based on the fantastic stories young Betty MacDonald told her sister when they were girls. The story is a little slow to start but the adventure picks up late in the story and I couldn't put it down. I mostly wanted to know if the awful Mrs. Monday would be punished. I was apalled when the adults decide on behalf of the children not to prosecute her! The story is charming in a vintage way, very innocent and light in spite of the child abuse. It had a predictable ending and is very heartwarming. This e-book version features illustrations by Mary GrandPré of Harry Potter fame and a forward by Jeanne Birdsall author of The Penderwicks series. 

The two sisters are as different as can be. Plum is the more appealing sister by modern standards. She's brave, plucky, bold and resourceful. A tomboy, Plum thinks of ways to escape and things to do to make money. Plum's way of speaking her thoughts is so funny, even if it does get her into trouble. Plum's naive way of speaking also gets her out of trouble at times as it endears her to adults and tugs at their heartstrings. Nancy, I'm sad to say, is a bit of a wet blanket. She's older so less uninhibited than Plum. She's timid and more ladylike than her sister too but I really liked when she discovered her inner Plum and learned to have the courage to stand up for herself. The other children are pitiable. Poor Eunice is unloved even by her blood relative but at least she has a home to go to on vacations and it's the thought that counts. The way they attacked her doll was so rude and uncalled for. Laugh and gently make fun of the aunt's poor sewing skills but at least she tried. Nancy and Plum don't even get that much. Charlie Wentil's situation is heartbreaking for a young child but understandable I suppose. His father would just say envy is a sin. At least Tommy gets a checkerboard and they can use buttons or pebbles or something to play and David and Mary have recieved practical, if awful, gifts. Mary's is worse. Marybelle is also to be pitied. The other kids are HORRID bullies to her. She may be spoiled and bratty but they shouldn't attack her looks. Sure she's probably overweight from eating the good food paid for by the boarders while the others starve but making fun of her for it is not acceptable. I would probably lose my temper with Marybelle too. Kids aren't fully capable of rationalizing that her aunt treats her better than anyone else and spoils her and if Marybelle ever were to stand up for the other children, she would end up like them. Marybelle is a little more sympathatic than Dudley Dursley but rather a similar character. Some of Plum's behavior deserves to be punished though. 

The adults are a mixed bag. Mrs. Monday is evil. She's greedy, stupid and mean. She has no kindness in her heart, no empathy, only selfishness. She lies, cheats, steals and does anything to trick adults into leaving their children - and money-with her. She feeds the children lumpy oatmeal and prunes while dining on waffles with her niece- at the expense of her boarders. She never spends a cent on clothes, shoes or other necessities and is severe in her punishments. Mrs. Monday is just smart enough to know how to effectively torture the children. She needs to be punished for her despicable behavior. Uncle John is also a horrid adult in a different way. He's a selfish old bachelor who can't and won't give up his own comfort for the sake of two orphaned nieces. He doesn't even bother to meet them, just sends them away. If he had met them, I'm sure he would have preferred Nancy and sent Plum away and the sisters would have been miserable anyway. He believes Mrs. Monday's lies even though the evidence is right there that she's lying. He only sees and hears what is beneficial to himself. Even at the end, his response is just to throw money at the situation. Katie the cook doesn't appear on page but she's aware of the situation and does nothing to help. Miss Gronk, the Sunday School teacher, is awful but I feel sorry for her. She is unaware of the situation at Miss Monday's and would probably side with the boarding house owner anyway

Old Tom is kind and helpful to Nancy and Plum. He tries to help them in ways he can within his domain of the barn and grounds but he doesn't go any farther than that. He's a sweet, kind man who doesn't have a lot of gumption.At first I was angry but later he explains his situation and I felt more sympathetic. Miss Waverly, the girls' teacher, is lovely. She helps the girls with kindness and her sewing skills but she doesn't go the extra mile to report the situation to the authorities. Mrs. Appleby, the librarian, at least tries to help make Nancy and Plum feel better by giving them stories about orphans in situations that will make their lives seem a little less awful but like Miss Waverly, she doesn't interfere. The Campbells are the best adults of all. Shining examples of exemplary human behavior, they're the only ones actively trying to help. Mr. Campbell is anyway. Mrs. Campbell is more likely to kill everyone with heart disease from her rich cooking. Mr. C and Plum at least will be working off the calories on the farm. She cooks from the heart and that's what matters in this story.

The second and last chapters take place at Chistmastime but I wouldn't label this a Christmas story but it is a good one to read at Christmas because of the reminders that other children aren't as fortunate, to have kindness in your heart, compassion for others and give what you can to help those less fortunate. I can see from the multiple editions this book is still popular but I'm not sure that's not from the nostalgia factor for the adults who read with them. I'd be hard pressed to get my nieces and nephews to read anything this saccharine. I would have liked it more when I was a girl reading all those classic orphan tales but probably also found it a bit too sweet and heavy-handed for my extreme enjoyment.