Rating: 2/5

**spoilers galore, I suppose.**

The central and overriding conceit of Victor LaValle's debut novel is that the the first-person narrator and protagonist, Anthony James, is schizophrenic or some variety or another of psychosis. That's a condition that, of course, makes Anthony a powerhouse unreliable narrator. This sets the stage for the teasing question of whether what he relates in the unfolding of the novel is actually happening, is a mightily warped distortion of what's happening or are complete hallucinations that are not happening at all, except in Anthony's head. 

And early on in the book, LaValle wrote several finely crafted turns of scenes where Anthony's distorted or completely hallucinatory versions of events seem to match with what I could almost detect, from context, were likely actual events. I didn't bother to specifically note these passages, but I remember reading them and found them intriguing. A delicate dovetailing of reality-based occurrences and the chaos of a psychotic mind. 

But then I kept reading. And the delicately crafted moments where the question of what is reality and what are the products of Anthony's ill mind went from teasing to nagging to tedious and, finally, to irrelevant. 

In a fictional world where all events are possible because even the most odd or improbable of them can be chalked up to schizophrenia, what obligation does the author have to make his protagonist's adventures be compelling or interesting to a reader? The concept at the heart of the novel frees the story from an obligation to be comprehensible. And, for me, much of it was not. That doesn't mean it read as gibberish. But it left me cold and with very little sense that I got any lasting value for the time I put into reading it. 

I believe the copy I own is the first published edition. And, good gravy, do other authors fawn and rave about Lavalle's work on the blurbs of the jacket of this hardcover (which, I realize, is what blurbs are all about). I'm glad I read the whole thing only because I've learned an object lesson, admittedly for me and me alone, of how badly a novel can fail.