Rating: 4/5

”The train, it is as dangerous as a sea voyage!”

So, this was my first Agatha Christie book and considering how much fun I had while I read it, it definitely won’t be my last. ;-) 

Yes, you read correctly and your mind didn’t play tricks on you:

I had 
  F.U.N!!!

I actually enjoyed reading this so much I constantly found myself giggling with delight! *lol* I swear there’s nothing better than a mystery or a puzzle you need to solve and I guess in this particular case it might have even been both! ;-P
There were so many hints and inconsistencies that my head was literally spinning but being the curious person I am, I still tried my very best to be perceptive and to collect all those little treats. XD 
By the end of the book I felt like a squirrel, gathering all the pieces until I was finally able to make sense of them! *lol* And somehow, I don’t even know how, I actually did it!!! ;-P

Maybe to watch eight seasons of “Castle” and all the Sherlock Holmes series and movies eventually paid off? Who knows!? *LOL* 

All I know is that I solved the mystery and I’m so damn happy I’m still grinning and laughing like crazy!!!
24 hours after finishing the book! XD

”Bughouse – that’s what this business is – bughouse!”

Yes, I couldn’t agree more and since I don’t want to spoil anyone who still wants to read the book, I’ll write down my thoughts in this nice and tiny spoiler section! *lol* 
Detectives you’ve been warned! ;-P

The solution and ending:
”If so and so is lying, on what point are they lying and what is the reason for the lie?”

I don’t even know how often I asked myself this question throughout the entire book, it must have been pretty often though! *lol* I was always certain that it was more than one person who killed Ratchett and at some point I suspected everyone to be the murderer. XD 
Even the doctor and the conductor! Haha! 

And I think it was exactly that moment when I finally realised that I was right, because as soon as I thought it, I instantly latched onto the conductors testimony and from there on everything fell into place. ;-) 

I knew he must have lied and therefore been involved in the crime and then I thought about all those little hints I collected so carefully. The weapon in the spongebag, the mention of the actress, the door that was open, the incriminating pipe cleaner, the familiarity between Colonel Arbuthnot and Mary Debenham, the number of wounds on the victim and especially the remarkable difference of those mentioned stab wounds, … the list could go on and on! *lol* 

Once I made the connection with the Princess, it wasn’t all too hard to figure who the Countess was and after analysing every character that was on the train I came to the same conclusion as Poirot! ;-) Sure, there were some clues and hints I didn’t get, but in the end it seems like I was able to find the most important ones. XD 

I think the only thing I didn’t like was the ending. &gt;_&lt; 
It was rather abrupt and the righteous woman in me wasn’t okay with the way things were handled. I mean yes, it seems like Ratchett was a monster and they all had a very good reason to end his life. (Some more than others…) I don’t like the idea that they were let off the hook so easily though. I mean it was murder after all! There should have been a consequence. If everyone would take the law into their hands our society would fall into pieces! There’s a reason we have laws and courts. 
Well, that’s just my subjective opinion though. I know some people will say it’s just a book and that’s okay with me! ;-) I just felt a need to point it out because it really left a bad taste in my mouth. XD Guess that’s the superhero in me speaking. *lol*

All things considered I really enjoyed “Murder on the Orient Express” and I can easily recommend it to everyone who loves to get their mind into a knot! *lol* This book most certainly will keep you on your toes! Be careful not to slip! ;-P