Rating: 5/5

“Fallen trees were everywhere and we had to avoid the branches, which was powerful hard to do. Besides, it was quite dusky among the trees long before night, but it was all so grand and awe-inspiring. Occasionally there was an opening through which we could see the snowy peaks, seemingly just beyond us, toward which we were headed.But when you get among such grandeur you get to feel how little you are and how foolish is human endeavor, except that which reunites us with the mighty force called god. I was plumb uncomfortable, because all my own efforts have always been just to make the best of everything and to take things as they come.” 

One of my friends sent me her worn out copy of this book as a loaner, because she believed it was such a great book. When it arrived it was so worn out from so many hands reading it. I loved it, so I suggested it for our book group and read it again.

What makes this story so good? First, it is a true story written in the very early 1900s by a woman who had lost her husband and had then taken on a job as a housekeeper for a rancher in Wyoming. Along with the job, she had purchased land next to her new boss, intending to homestead it. She then began writing eloquent letters to her former boss, letters that were filled with adventure, as well as her life on the ranch.

What makes this story so good is the fact that she didn’t talk about mundane things, instead she had adventures, but a few things are mundane, like talking about the food they are eating, no so mundane to me. I knew that I would have had to develop a taste for venision, for example, but some of the meals were really good.

Then there is a story of her taking her young daughter on a camping trip when she knew that it could snow. They spent the night 30 miles from home, sleeping under a tree whose branches came to the ground. The idea was squeeze between the branches, blocking out access to wild animals like bears or cougars. Good luck, especially since she had built a campfire and was cooking their dinner, which could have attracted bears. When they woke up the next morning snow had covered the ground. This is when I began questioning her common sense, but then people have questioned my own over the years when I was on my own adventures. So now they had to find their way home. A 30 mile rope connected to her home would have been a good idea. Ha. Books like this remind me of The Long Winter by Laura Ingalls Wilder or Thirty Six Hours of Hell by E.N. Coones. And right now I am thinking of the -100 degree windchill factor in New Hampshire and wondering how people and their livestock are surviving, and then wondering how they would keep their homes warm.

 Other stories in this book were just not fascinating but caring as well. Taking food to a starving family, and then on Christmas taking food to the sheepherders in the area, which would make this a good Christmas book. 

So, if you get a chance check this book out as well as the other two that I have mentioned.