Rating: 5/5

Once again I have finished Five Smooth Stones. It is at least the 20th reading since my first when I was 19 years old. You would think I could recite it by now. Again, though I can't. Every time I read this loved, treasured and important novel, I sit. I wonder "how can people treat another person, other people, with so much hate?". And that is what it is. Every reading leads me to a new awareness, and sadly, of the weaknesses of humanity. Now in light of the atrocities such as the killing of Michael Brown in Furguson, the death of Eric Garner in New York and shooting of Walter Scott in the back in South Carolina to only site a few, I wonder how far this country has really progressed in ensuring the civil rights of every living soul. Yes we have an African American President, legislation exists to prohibit segregation and "ensure equal rights", (though voting rights are again being stomped on in some states), how would, protagonist, David Champlin, feel about the struggle he and so many people fought in the 60's. Has there been REAL change? As always I come away from reading this book with a new thought and feeling. The practice of the presence of God, whomever and what ever that God may be. God is the force which moves within us to understand and behave with grace. It is this presence (which is personal and individualized) in which we should define how we live, how we treat one another and most importantly, how we raise our children. I will reiterate what other reviewers have stated, this novel should be required reading beginning at least in the 7th or 8th grade when young minds begin to sort out and understand right from wrong, begin to establish individual sense of these concepts and can begin to act on individual concepts of human understanding and appreciation of the differences that enable humanity to feel love, laughter and fulfillment in this life. 
 This is Grace
“This—this thing of the spirit you call God—and I thoroughly understand your differentiation between the exterior entity some people worship and the interior presence—cannot occupy the human soul at the same time that it is occupied by hatred. A simple matter of what might be called spiritual physics.”

Excerpt From: Fairbairn, Ann. “Five Smooth Stones.” Chicago Review Press, 1966. iBooks. 
This material may be protected by copyright.

Check out this book on the iBooks Store: https://itun.es/us/jGc3x.l