Rating: 5/5

“Did Oswald do it? If one’s answer is to come out of anything larger than an opinion, it is necessary to contend with questions of evidence. In that direction, however, one encounters a jungle of conflicting expert estimates as to whether Oswald could fire the shots in time, was a good enough marksman, was the only gunman in Dealey Plaza, and on one can go, trying to explore every last reach of possibility, only to encounter a disheartening truth: Evidence, by itself, will never provide the answer to a mystery. For it is in the nature of evidence to produce, sooner or later, a counterinterpretation to itself in the form of a contending expert in a court of law. It will be obvious to the reader that one does not (and should not) respect evidence with the religious intensity that others bring to it…”
-	Norman Mailer, Oswald’s Tale: An American Mystery

There’s an old saying: the shortest distance between two points is a line; the longest distance between two points is Norman Mailer. 

Okay, I made that saying up. But I stand by the truth. Norman Mailer does not do things the easy way. He does them the Norman Mailer way. 

Case in point, when you open up the cover to Oswald’s Tale, Mailer’s nearly 800-page deep-dive into the tangled lives of Lee Harvey Oswald, you are greeted by these lines: “When Valya was three years old, she fell on a hot stove and burned her face…” 

Who is Valya? Well, eventually, after about seventeen pages – spent learning about her upbringing, her loves, her life – we discover that she is the aunt of Marina Nikolayevna Prusakova, the woman we now recognize as Marina Oswald. It is pretty extensive background for a minor character in the casting call of Oswald’s life. Not long afterwards, Valya pretty much disappears from the story, and is seldom heard from again. 

That is Oswald’s Tale in a nutshell. 

It is not a book that takes a lot of diversions and digressions; rather, the meandering diversions and digressions are central to the book’s structure. It is actually how Oswald’s Tale is constructed. 

***

Now, I should make clear that this is an an absolute marvel. 

I mean that. 

Oswald's Tale is a frustrating, exasperating, compelling, mesmerizing reading experience. It defies easy description. So, what kind of book is it? It’s hard to explain, so I’ll let Mailer explain it himself, even though Capote already beat him to this particular punch: 

Let me propose, then, that a mystery of the immense dimensions of Oswald’s case will, in the writing, create a form of its own somewhere between fiction and non-fiction. Technically, this book fits into the latter category – it is most certainly not fiction. The author did his best to make up no dialogue himself and attribute no private motives to his real characters unless he was careful to label all such as speculation. Still, it is a peculiar form of non-fiction, since not only interviews, documents, newspaper accounts, intelligence files, recorded dialogues, and letters are employed, but speculations as well. The author’s musings become some of the operative instruments…The result can be seen, therefore, as a special species of non-fiction that can be put under the rubric of mystery. That is because all means of inquiry have to be available when one is steering one’s way through a cloud… 

There is a lot of unpack in that description, a lot of pomposity to wade through. The most interesting thing about that passage, though, is that Mailer delivers it roughly 350 pages into his narrative. That’s what I mean about structure. It’s as though Mailer wrote his entire book and then threw it in the air, allowing the currents of the wind to do his editing. 

***

As noted, Mailer starts in Russia, with his long introduction to Valya, finally pivoting to the arrival of the young American Lee Harvey Oswald, a former Marine intent on giving up his American citizenship. The research here is enormous. Mailer and his investigators appear to have talked to everyone who ever came across Oswald’s path. Instead of simply relating what they had to say – which is what a normal author would do in a normal book – Mailer provides thumbnail sketches of each one of these participants. They all get the Valya treatment, so that long before you know the simplest thing about Oswald – such as his date of birth – you have learned about dozens of Soviet citizens. 

The portrait of Oswald that emerges from this technique is vague and pointillist. Indeed, it stresses one’s patience, and the only thing that kept me going was the fascinating picture of Soviet life that it formed. 

***

In due course, Mailer starts to tighten his narrative grip. He hones in on Marina and Lee’s troubled marriage, making extensive use of Soviet wiretaps to give us a long glimpse at the sheer domestic drudgery of their marital existence. If nothing else, Mailer proves, without having to underline the point, that Oswald did not work for Soviet intelligence (because they had enough intelligence to steer clear of the man, whose only real ability was his absolute inability to understand his limitations). 

At the midpoint, Mailer does his transition thing (partly excerpted above) where he talks about how his creation is sui generis and meditates upon the search for truth. (As an aside: this quest for verity includes Mailer quoting from his CIA novel Harlot’s Ghost. I have nothing but respect for an author with the temerity to quote from his own awful fiction in a book purporting to define reality). It is only after this point that we circle back entirely to learn about Lee Oswald’s early life. 

***

It is in these pages that we meet Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, an incredible character who manages to stand out, even in a crowded field of colorful, egotistical, slightly-off-balance self-myth-makers. She is a good example of one of the major strengths of Oswald's Tale: Mailer's fine eye for people. He has a real sensitivity for the complexities of humanity (which he took too far in glorifying the two-bit killer Gary Gilmore in The Executioner's Song), and he clearly enjoys this haughty, conceited woman who went to her grave fiercely believing that the world owed her much more than she ever received. 

As he warned, Mailer uses a great deal of speculation, though he does a good job of making you aware of that. This is especially true during Oswald’s Marine Corps time, when he continually accuses Oswald of being a spy, while following every accusation with an admission that there is no evidence. Along with guesswork, Mailer utilizes wiretap transcriptions, book excerpts (especially Priscilla MacMillan’s Marina and Lee), and testimony from the Warren Commission (which he criticizes constantly while quoting from liberally). 

***

This is not a book directed at conspiracy buffs. Mailer does not run down every single theory. Indeed, I don’t even recall him mentioning the grassy knoll. He follows Oswald, after all, and Oswald was in the Texas School Book Depository (what he was doing there is an ongoing debate). Discussions about possible conspiracies involving others are beyond the ken of Oswald’s Tale. The only time Mailer gets into the weeds of doubt, to hint that it took more than Oswald to kill John Kennedy, is during the chapter on Jack Ruby. Unfortunately, any attempts to link Ruby to Oswald, and Oswald to a broader conspiracy, fail at the same stress point: What conspiracy would use a bum such as Oswald as an assassin, and then use a bigger bum like Ruby to tie off loose ends? 

This is – I must add – a rhetorical question. I don’t actually want to debate this on the internet. 

***

Ultimately, Mailer grudgingly accepts a couple things. First, that Oswald was the killer. Second, that he killed alone. He has to come to this conclusion. After all, at the end of all his interviews, his digging, all his sniffing the ground like a bloodhound, that’s where the evidence – even if Mailer does not necessarily trust evidence – leads. 

The did-he or didn't-he debate, however, is not really the point of Oswald’s Tale. This may be a mystery, but solving the mystery does not rate high on Mailer’s list of priorities. Or maybe he’s after a different mystery altogether. Because the thing that interests Mailer, that animates him on this epic sleuthing expedition, is to understand this man, this Oswald, with his scrawny body and smug face, his modest abilities but enormous ambitions, his confused political philosophy and inscrutable aims. 

The match between author and subject, between Mailer and Oswald, is uncannily perfect. Both have towering senses of self worth, both aimed extremely high, both – unfortunately, in the case of Oswald – hit their mark. 

Oswald’s Tale is a remarkable work, a demi-classic where Mailer’s artistic achievement nearly attains the same height as his literary ego, which is saying something.