Rating: 4/5

More of a journal; less of a legal document. I add my own personal thoughts and observations. There are many of my opinions and thoughts mixed in with the events. As I said, it is a personal history, and sometimes almost embarrassingly egotistical. 

‘The Singing Sword’ is the second half of a story that was probably too long to be published in a single volume. It’s a safe bet that those readers who appreciated the first volume will not be disappointed in the second one, and those who didn’t should start the journey there, with ‘The Skystone’.

My opening quote is from Publius Varrus, the main narrator of the book, a professional Roman soldier who is also a very talented blacksmith, and describes his decision to keep a journal about the progress of the Colony.
This Colony is a special project established and nurtured by the best friend and mentor of Publius Varrus, the Senator Caius Britannicus. This visionary has recognized the portents of the imminent collapse of the Roman Empire at the end of the fourth century A.D. and organized the farmers around his estate in southern Britain into a self-supporting, armed colony that will be capable of surviving the retreat of the Roman legions and the increasing attacks from Saxons, Franks, Picts and other assorted barbarians. Publius and Varrus ally themselves with the local Celtic king, whose family name of Pendragon should ring some bells for people familiar with a certain legendary hero.

This second book is dealing mostly with the development of the Colony: repelling marauders coming in war bands over the Channel, re-building the ancient fort on a hill about the main estate, procuring iron that would soon be more precious than gold, flying under the radar of the Roman administrators who would treat the colonists as outlaws, training their paramilitary forces and organizing an independent governing and legislative structure  including the use of a Round Table in Council  that will keep the impending chaos at bay.

All these details of day to day living and organizing might sound boring on paper, but the author manages to make it interesting and to spice things up either with more of the gratuitous sex scenes I remarked on in my first review and by raising the profile of the arch-enemy of Publius Varrus: a vicious, corrupt Roman Senator named Caesarius Claudius Seneca. Believed dead at the end of the first episode, this over-the-top villain returns hell bent on vengeance here and is responsible for a good portion of the actual military action in the book.

What I said in the review for the first book about the perceived strengths and shortcomings of the novel still holds true for my second visit: Jack Whyte is a great researcher and a very good storyteller. His interest in the historical accuracy is laudable, given how few reliable sources of information about 4th and 5th century Britain are available. He may not be a stylist when it comes to memorable quotes, but he is well versed in how to pen a page-turner.

Some of Mr. Whyte’s historical pet theories on weaponry, tactics and politics are open to criticism, but at least he made me curious enough to extend my research and look up things like the increase use of the longbow, the different methods of tempering iron, the use of stirrups, the importance of cavalry versus infantry (the Battle of Adrianople in 376 is mentioned as a turning point in history, although wikipedia places it in 378 and puts the stress on infantry, not on cavalry like Whyte). In a similar manner, I enjoyed the invitation to comment on early Christianity’s moral dilemmas and doctrine debates.

 As a Christian, I would be doing murder by killing them. But if I spared them, I would be condoning murder, for they would kill others as surely as they breathed.  (about the killing of prisoners taken in battle)

The soon to be declared sacrilegious commentary by Pelagius on Augustine dogma about the role of free will, original sin and grace is for me still relevant for a modern discussion on religion.

The last chapters of the novel are the most captivating, not so much for the fate of individual characters that the reader has grown attached to over the course of several decades, but for the finally clear references to Arthurian myth: the fabulous sword from the title is forged, named and baptized in blood. Its singing has a physical explanation, not only a mythical one (like many other references that Whyte makes here); The Pendragon, Varrus and Britannicus families become united in blood and heirs, forging a new people with a new Briton identity; the fort on the hill is also finished and named, a name that would resonate through the ages.

All of these late developments are surely tempting me to plunge right into the next book in the series, but I’m a bit afraid of becoming too critical of the style of presentation and of some aspects of the characterization, so I will put it on hold while I start on a six book fantasy epic that I waited several years to be finished.