Rating: 5/5

Elizabeth George wrote an introduction to this novel upon its reissue in 2003 and I found it very moving. She talks about Dorothy L. Sayers’ willingness to explore so many different and interesting areas of life – from bell ringing to unusual uses of arsenic to architecture, cryptology, vinology, and so many others that we either never hear about any more or hear about only rarely. Then she goes on to say, ”What continues to be remarkable about Sayers’ work, however, is her willingness to explore the human condition.”

And that, my friends is what draws me back again and again to reading her novels.

In addition, despite the fact that women in novels were (at the time) popularly showcased as sweet, innocent, somewhat dim-witted domestic goddesses, Dorothy L. Sayers was brave enough to write against the stream. The women in her books are strong, smart, independent and very capable on many levels. In other words, they are very real people rather than fantasies.

This novel is the first one where Harriet Vane plays a major role. First, she finds the body, then she takes actions that are brilliant and time-saving. By the time Lord Peter gets there, all there is left for him to do is form a partnership with Harriet to try and figure out who did the deed and why. Well, that – and his daily proposals of marriage to Harriet. Two novels after they meet and he is still convinced she must marry him and she is just as determined not to. Their relationship adds a lot of spice and interest to an already fascinating murder case.

While I will leave you to discover it for yourself, I will say that it is one of Dorothy L. Sayers’ most complex plots yet. Lord Peter and Harriet Vane are up against a very intelligent adversary and there is even a chapter devoted to a specific code used in a certain communication to the victim. As the chapter moves on, we follow Lord Peter and Harriet on their quest to crack the code. There are even diagrams showing how they eventually deduced the solution, and it is brilliant.

This is one of the best novels I have read in this series. It has all the ingredients one could wish for in a great mystery story. And just when I thought we had it all figured out, the whole mixture gets shaken up again and we all put our thinking caps back on for more effort. By “we”, I am of course talking about Lord Peter, Harriet, and myself. I have no idea how she did it, but Dorothy L. Sayers had me involved as if I were somewhere right in the middle of the sleuthing process.

This was an excellent read and would be particularly enjoyable for all fans of Dorothy L. Sayers’ writing – and particularly her Lord Peter Wimsey series.