Rating: 5/5

My mom sent me this book and two supplements (5-HTP and L-Tyrosine) after I had admitted to her that I was using alcohol to self-medicate my depression and anxiety. She told me to start taking the 5-HTP immediately, even before I read the book.

I've read the book and it really does make a lot of sense. I've stopped drinking for a week. The cravings are still there, but right now I only have the two supplements my mom sent, the others are in the mail.

The 5-HTP makes me feel better within about 15 minutes and I take it twice daily. I'm looking forward to getting my supplements to really put this book to the test.

It's easy to read, since you kind of skip around looking at the portions that pertain to you. Every thing she says is cited and the studies are clearly listed in the back - a huge plus!!

I also like that even though it is a supplement and semi-diet based program (mainly to cut out sugar and wheat), she talks about cutting back on the supplements once your body is back up to snuff and can make the things it's currently not able to. It's like the supplements are a booster. There are some that you are expected to keep taking, which is fine, since many of the chemicals your body needs are hard to get from food.

With just how much better I feel from one supplement this book was worth reading. I'm hoping with the other supplements I will be able to climb out of my funk and start exercising and socializing again. It gives me hope. Hope, mainly because she explains the "why it works" behind everything and I even looked up a few of the studies that seemed too miraculous to me. My husband has a neuroscience hobby and I read to him excerpts and he found even more detail in some of his books that back her up with even more recent research.

Sure the supplements can be expensive, but so can going to a weekly therapy session and taking prescription drugs when you have no insurance or your insurance doesn't cover enough. For me, it's at least worth a shot!!