Rating: 5/5

Here, Theroux is writing about the journey. He does not suddenly teleport to Patagonia from Medford, Massachusetts. He can do this because he is going to travel by train and not plane. Although, the Irish comedian, Ed Byrne, once said; ‘People who say travel is half the fun, must be having really bad holidays’. Theroux is not on holiday mind and does not always have fun.

He is going to talk to people and the first person that he writes about talking to before he even leaves the US is a woman on the train who objects to his pipe smoke and calls herself a ‘raw-foodist-non-dairy vegetarian’. A great conversation it is to. Made me laugh out loud. Sets it up nicely for all the other conversations he has. For this trip he has learned Spanish so he can talk to people or just listen in to conversations.

Theroux tells it how it is and he certainly has his opinions. Doing this by train he does get to see the countries he is travelling through. He provides the reader with the current state of each country and mixes that with historical facts. His observations are so clear and once he hits Guatemala there is a real shift. This is 1978 and Central America was a bit of a basket case. 

He winds his way down meeting some interesting characters on the way. ‘I had been in Latin America long enough by now to know that there was a class stigma attached to the trains. Only the semi-destitute, the limpers, the barefoot ones, the Indians, and the half-cracked yokels took the trains, or knew anything about them. For this reason, it was a good introduction to the social miseries and scenic splendours of the continent.’

Theroux’s writing is not going to be to everyone’s taste but I get immersed in it. For the first couple of books of his this was not the case but once I got to know his character and writing style it just makes these travel books all the better and I am still happy that I have some more to read. His travels do not make me want me to jump up, pack my bag and head off. I am glad he did them and shared.

As always I had to have the dictionary handy with words like; monologuist, rubious, turves, hawser, meretricious and so on. 😊