Rating: 4/5

Birth Your Way is a valuable resource for anyone considering giving birth outside of a hospital. It provides good information while dispelling home birth myths, which allow the reader to decide whether or not home birth is for her.

Chapter 2 "What's Wrong with Hospitals?" details all the reason why giving birth in a hospital can be bad/dangerous, which are all the reason for choosing a home birth or birth in a birth center. 

Chapter 3 describes the risks associated with home birth. It also discusses and debunks the myths.

Chapter 4 explains how to arrange an out of hospital birth either at home or at a birth center. It includes Q &amp; A's.

Chapter 5 is about midwives, their role at births, and their skills and training.

Chapter 6 describes preparations emphasizing prenatal care, diet, and exercise.

Chapter 7 discusses the role of the birth partner. For more a more detailed birth partner guide, read The Birth Partner.

Chapter 8 talks about various support systems for the mother and her family.

Chapter 9 details complications and emergencies and describes how they will be handled either at home or with a hospital transfer.

Chapter 10 is about the Babymoon period following the birth and also includes information about breastfeeding.

The single most crucial piece of information that this books provides is that Pitocin can actually cause shoulder dystocia because it can cause the baby to descend too quicky, forcing the baby into a bad position and/or again tissues that have not had time to fully dialte, thin, and expand. This is something valuable for women planning hospital births to be aware of.
The majority of women of my acquaintance who have had babies within the past decade were induced because their doctors played "the big baby card" and had them terrified that their baby would be too big to deliver and would have shoulder dystocia or other complications if they attempted a delivery nearer to their assigned due date. None of them were told that being induced could actually cause a complication that they were seeking to avoid. Of course, one of the reasons to seek an out of hospital birth is the lack of informed consent and the fact that once the mother signs the blanket waiver upon admission, the medical staff are not required to divugle any risks that would cause her to be resistant to the form of treatment they deem "best."