Rating: 2/5

Much like "Getting to Maybe," this book is good for what it attempts to accomplish, and what it attempts to accomplish is lame and very far removed from anything a well-rounded human being would care about. This book will walk you through the process of "succeeding" at law school, from prior to studying for the LSAT until your first job. Why the scare quotes around "succeeding?" Because I'm using the term as traditionally understood: doing well on exams, being prepared for class, getting on Law Review or some other journal, and preparing for interviews and clerkships. Cool. If that's what you want, and you're gung-ho about doing the whole law school thing, then this is probably worth your time. 

If you're so-so about it, as I was, then I'll give you the only piece of advice that I actually used from this book. It is a highlighter color scheme for information from cases. The scheme is:

Green = facts
Yellow = critical legal reasoning (arguments)
Pink = procedural posture (case history, prior rulings, final ruling or holding)
Orange = dissent
Blue = precedential cases cited

I've since learned that case history, prior rulings, and dissents don't matter for exams. So, if you're willing to risk potentially looking foolish during class, you can save yourself a lot of time by skipping these parts of cases. Focus on the holdings. Nonetheless, Scalia's dissents are beautifully entertaining, and you may wish to read them for your own pleasure and understanding of how the law should be.

Taking time to write this angers me, and it angers me that I read these books because law school angers me. It's a big game that is not fun to play. People try to make a big deal out of it, but the substance is not difficult. Engineering and medical programs must be substantially more difficult than law school, and at least you have something to show for it in the end like the ability to add or save people's lives. My advice is to not go to law school at all because it will sap the life out of you, prevent you from being able to make even the most simple statements with confidence, and leave you jaded--with six figures worth of debt.