Rating: 3/5

3.3/5

So there are two stories in this; the majority of this book is the titular Jungle by David Drake, written in the same universe that was created by Henry Kuttner in his novella, Clash By Night, which takes up the final 80 or so pages of this edition.

Drake's Jungle is all over the place, dedicating half of each and every chapter to the present goings-on of a group of mercenaries whose war-damaged flitterboat crashes on the shores of a Venus jungle; and the other half of each chapter to one of the mercenaries' past exploits before (and maybe after?) the incident. For this reason, it's a bit hard to follow at times. They'll be battling a giant grasshopper that's fleeing from a Venus scorpion for four pages and then suddenly the higher commanding officers will be in a debriefing room or something, talking about who fucked up badly enough for all of this to happen, and who acted well in the line of duty. It's a poor structure to follow for a whole 200 pages, as eventually it begins to get a little exhausting.

The main adventure itself is a fine, pulpy get-out-of-the-living-jungle-that-has-evolved-to-kill-every-living-thing-ever kind of adventure, impeded with constant flashbacks that ultimately do nothing in service of the main story--they're just filler.

Kuttner's Clash by Night is thankfully a lot more straightforward, detailing the adventures of Captain Brian Scott as he prepares for an impending battle with a rival mercenary outfit that has been commissioned to destroy the underwater colony he's tasked with helping protect with the help of an immature commander and a 'cinc'. The characters really don't matter. Death is as common an occurrence in this world as litter in the streets is to us. Life outside of the military is dull and uneventful; may as well be a prolonged, agonizingly slow death. At least with the military, you're bound to die a lot faster, with at least some semblance of a reason worth dying for.

I thought Kuttner's writing was better here because it went straight to the point without a single flashback to slow things down, and he manages to write a climactic battle sequence that is interesting without blowing it up to fifty or sixty pages on its own, limiting descriptions to operators telling us who died or what happened to whatever vessels or subs under the constant salvos of death raining down on both sides. It was neat.

All in all, this was a decent read, but probably not a good introduction to Drake's work, since he's written plenty of stories that have looked interesting to me. Unless of course he incorporates the half-n'-half storytelling format in all of his books... in which case, I may have to clean out a number of books on my Kindle bookshelf. I'm hoping it doesn't come to that.