Rating: 4/5

What is interesting about Conrad is that he is a writer with one foot in the Victorian age (as in the manner of his storytelling) and one in the modern age (as in his characters and themes). The book’s sensibility is reflective of this disconcerting dualism.

For me, the main theme that emerges is that of detachment and isolationism and their consequences. For various reasons, Heyst removes himself from the world, wanting no part of it. But the world will not be ignored and eventually comes to find him. (In some ways, it’s a variation on the theme explored in his earlier book, Lord Jim.)

The result is tragedy – or perhaps it’s better described as comic tragedy due to the incompetence of the three envoys of the outside world. (You’ll have to read the book to understand what I mean.)

Axel Heyst is the main character but another key character is that of Lena, the young woman he rescues and falls in love with. This is the one part of the novel where I have some difficulty with Conrad (though not so much as to dislike the book). When it comes to describing her and scenes involving her (particularly those with Heyst) the prose is overwrought and melodramatic. In some cases, as when it relates to what Heyst thinks and feels about her, or in the way he speaks to her, it could be a reflection of the character’s idealization of her.

Overall, however, I think it is primarily a result of the era’s view of women and men and their places in the world. Appealing though it may have been to the audience of the time, it sounds an off-key note to a more contemporary audience. Curiously, however, the female characters generally prove to be stronger and smarter (and more long-suffering) than the male characters, particularly main characters (like Heyst) in Conrad’s stories. Yet he cannot seem to write about them in that way. Once again, it’s that strange dualism of being part Victorian and part modern.

In the end, this is a very good story — particularly if you like adventure stories with characters rather than caricatures. It’s a wonderful read but it is a novel that wants to breathe – it won’t be rushed. Conrad’s a wordy bugger.

But if you allow it room to breathe you’ll definitely be rewarded.