Rating: 4/5

Fascinating world building and aliens populate The Pride of Chanur, the first book a series Cherryh started back in the early 80s. Cherryh has a knack for aliens, convincingly making them, well, alien. Here, she introduces the world of the 'Compact', a region of space containing seven sentient species operating under a loose code of behavior/trade known as the Compact. Three of the species are methane breathers and rather mysterious to say the least. The other four are oxygen breathers-- the Kif, the Mane, the Stsho and the Han. 

The titular Pride of Chanur is a space freighter run by the Chanur clan of Han. The Han are relatively new to the space age, being introduced by the Mane to it largely to counter the Kif, who seem to lack ethics, are active slavers and pirates. Han are a lion-like bipedal species with occasional hot tempers, especially the males; hence, all Han ships are crewed by females of the species. The tale begins at 'Meetpoint', a neutral space station run by the stsho where all the races can trade freely. The Pride, captained by our main protagonist Pyanfar are doing their deals there when a strange creature basically crashes their ship. What is this thing? Pyanfar recognizes that it is sentient, but she has never seen anything like it. 

Well, long story short, the ship crasher is a human named Tully, and the Kif essentially pirated his ship and he is the only human left alive; he made a break for it on the docks at Meetpoint and ended up on The Pride. Why did he pick a Han ship? "Because your crewmates laugh." Problem is, the Kif know where he went and they want him back. It seems the Kif are just dying to find a new region of space to exploit and only Tully can tell them where the human sphere is. Han, and Pynafar in particular, have no love for the Kif, and are not intimidated by them either, so begins a cat and mouse chase through the Compact space...

The strengths of this reside in the alien sociology and psychology Cherryh develops; in a novel populated entirely by aliens, this will either work or not. Tully, the sole human, works great as the alien in the story! Neat inversion of scifi tropes for sure. The Pride also features Cherryh's frenetic pacing and stylistic prose. I still felt a little rough around the edges and the entire Han politics part was a little thin, but overall, I really enjoyed this and looking forward to the rest of the series. 3.5 stars, rounding up!