Rating: 5/5

This book has 416 pages, and it was published by Berkley Books. I decided to read this book because it is heavily based on aircraft, which I appreciate because my father, who was a sergeant in the Air Force, recommended this book to me. This work was a New York Times Bestseller.
	The main character of this book is Captain Patrick McLanahan, a B-52 navigator; however, General Elliot of the Dreamland projects can be classified as the other main character. Both men work together on the critical mission of the story.
	Plenty of other characters work with McLanahan and General Elliot. Wendy works aboard the B-52 as, mainly, a tracker of other aircraft and missiles. Colonel Ormack is General Elliot’s copilot. Angie is the main controller of the B-52’s arsenal of weapons, primarily missiles. Dave Luger works alongside Patrick McLanahan as a general systems operator. All the relevant characters of this story work for the United States Air Force.
	This book’s type could be classified as fiction, war and aircraft. The setting of this book is in the United States, the Pacific Ocean, and Russia. The time period is set in the modern day (1980s-1990s). Other important locations include Dreamland, which is located in a desert in the United States. What was rather notable in this book was the third-person omnipotent view which gave the reader detailed descriptions of actions, people or places. The book was aerial combat-based and emphasized the details of the operations of the aircraft. In the story, the main character is trying to bomb a secret technology facility in Russia. With the help of an unrealistically modified B-52 bomber plane and the United States’ greatest aviators and aircraft engineers, the main character and his helpers save the United States from the greatest threat the world has never known. Their mission was a covert-op, and publication of the mission to the public could result in catastrophic events, such as punishment dealt by the United Nations and all-out war with Russia. The outcome is the death of one of his friends and significant injuries to all the B-52’s crew; however, their mission is a success.
	To conclude, Flight of the Old Dog was a grandly intriguing book; however, too much detail was given about the operations of the aircraft. I enjoyed the book for its intense action scenes and how the Old Dog’s crew socialized and worked together. The only characteristic of the story that I disliked is that the detail about how aircraft operate is too great. The strongest point of the book was the intensity of the combat scenes. Every combat scene was incredibly suspenseful, clearly described, and full of color. The weakest point of the work is how chaotically and unpredictably each character is introduced. I struggled to keep track of all the relevant characters, as they were each introduced at odd times, without rhyme or reason. This book taught me that, against any odds, there will always be a chance to reach your goal. There is no excuse for failure. I felt that this book was cut too short. This book is superbly written with colorful, however casual, language, and I would highly recommend this book to anyone who finds interest in action, war, technology or aircraft.