Rating: 5/5

The best book I’ve read in many many years. Depicts life in a retirement home in Florida, a special retirement home in which most of the residents are highly intelligent professional people. Main character is Andy, a medical doctor who has left the profession due to some litigious events that soured him on the profession, who is hired to manage The Palm. What makes this book so rewarding to me is (1) I am in that age group, many of whom who have taken up residence in retirement homes. Though I myself have not, I know the possibility is a strong one that my life will end in such a place. (2) These people, due to age and background differences, collectively have experienced almost everything there is to experience in life. Almost every major issue in life, politics, religion, medicine, morals, etc is touched upon in such a skillful and provocative way by Michener. Aging, feminism, cancer, healthcare, euthanasia on both end of the age spectrum; genetic engineering, Alzheimers, AIDS, living wills, death with dignity, and the reality of mean-spirited children who want to “inherit” and try to control their parents finances in order to “get more” at the end. 

Michener was 87 years old when he wrote this book. It’s a serious of vignettes connected by the daily interactions of these different people all of whom seek meaning and purpose in their “autumnal” years. 

I read that Michener himself suffered from kidney disease and had to do daily dialysis. After doing so for 4 years, he decide to end treatment, just as Art Buchwald did when he faced those same circumstances. He stopped treatment and let nature take its course. He said he had done everything he wanted to do in life and accomplished all he wanted to accomplish. He died at age 90.

Everything in the book rings true to my own experiences with dying, AIDS, Alzheimers, and the many life experiences of the elderly, in my family and in my church, and the neighborhood. 

I was sorry it had to end. I will read it again. 

 It’s not an “uplifting” book, but it can be inspirational if you read it wearing that set of eyeglasses that celebrates life at all stages. Sobering, yet inspirational. I highly recommend it to anyone over the age of 50.