Rating: 5/5

Why did it take so long for Doris Lessing to get the Nobel Prize?

I kept asking myself that as I continued through the 710 pages that make up the concluding Volume 5 of the "Children of Violence" series: The Four-Gated City. Although the publisher claims that the five books can be read as stand-alone novels—and it is true that they can—the observant, thoughtful reader will find a greater reward in absorbing them in sequence. Together they make up (as the author wrote in her end-note) a Bildungsroman. And more than that—forty-five years after publication, the text can be read as a renewed journey through momentous events treated as more than incidents. History is written and deliberated on a personal level.

One needs the first four books, the Martha Quest books set in fictional Zambesia, in part because characters already introduced return--as foils or in passing--to fully understand the fifth, set in post-war four-gated London, swinging London. How did we get from WW II to here—here being the age of Wikileaks, Edward Snowden, chemical warfare in Syria, internet surveillance and collection of information from private persons by corporations for handing over to governments. 

It helps understanding of The Four-Gated City if the reader has lived through the described world events that give fodder to Martha's thought, can follow along in her mental processes, in her pursuit of trying to make sense of the world she lives in. It helps if one remembers, or is at least intellectually informed about (on a higher level than a quick Wiki-look): the rebuilding of postwar England and the disintegration of the Empire, the Tories and Labour, the Aldermaston Marches, the Cambridge Five, the Mau Mau, mental health reforms and fiascoes, the stockpiling of weapons of mass destruction on both sides of the Cold War lineup.

She gives us sobering perspectives and evaluations. I will always hereafter compare the number of marchers in any protest with the seating capacity of sports stadiums. I will always hereafter—when I hear someone say "Obamacare is socialism/communism"—remember this passage:

Martha and other had warned us not to let them use the word 'Communism'. In the seventies the word was as loaded as it had been in the fifties, but loaded vaguely. In the fifties it had meant, quite simply, the Soviet Union, and had associations of treachery and espionage. Twenty years later it meant anything that wasn't good—a kind of portmanteau word of unpleasant and frightening associations that were never defined. Well, after that, we were stuck with the word.

It isn't that Doris Lessing gives answers—she gives questions, more correctly, she suggests a way of looking at the world around us in terms of our individual and personal lives. The attentive reader of today will be attuned to the worldwide imbalance of money, global pollution (another word that has lost its alarming meaning), mental hospitals and pharmaceuticals, corporate gathering of information on citizens and its sharing with governments, the role of the media and its minions, public awareness (or lack of it), the absence of bees, personal sexuality and the sex industry, and much more. She sees all of these and foresees their coming escalation. Different readers will find different points of interest.

Of course, I say to myself, of course, she did not want to be pigeonholed (or claimed as) a feminist. Her works transcend that compartmentalizing. Some will be put off by her experiments with (drug-free) mental excursions into her inner space, but I couldn't help recalling the men and women of various eras and religions given sainthood (or its equivalent), for similar explorations, including cave artists, shamans and priests; also Aldous Huxley comes to mind, but he (and others) traveled inward with the help of mind-altering drugs whereas she grapples with herself.

It is also notable that the series, not least The Four-gated City is a return to all the books she previously wrote and contains seeds to all she would write thereafter: the African stories, the science fiction novels, dystopias, memoir and semiautobiography, the societal roles and presence of children, the explorations of inner space, mental space.

Strangely, The Four-Gated City is never found on the lists of her "best".

Having finished the book and closed it, I couldn't help mentally replaying the indelible scene when she was notified of the Nobel Prize. Remember? Her getting out of the taxi, besieged by journalists waiting at her home: a cadre for she had little or no respect and none of whom likely had read any of her work but saw only the news value of an old lady suddenly catapulted to millionaire status. No wonder she looked annoyed and said simply: Oh, Christ!