Rating: 4/5

A Whole New Life by Reynolds Price is the amazing tale of his intense four year struggle with a spinal cancer that left him paraplegic and subjected him to excruciating pain that he eventually learned to banish to the periphery of his consciousness through a mixture of hypnosis and biofeedback, not through the disorienting medications prescribed for him by chemically-oriented physicians.

Surgeries and radiation therapies undoubtedly saved Price's life but they rendered it all but intolerable. A renowned novelist, essayist and playwright who also taught English literature and writing at Duke, Price had a rich life to lose in his early 50s, and that's just about what happened. 

Attended by friends and caregivers below the level of M.D., he struggled mightily as his lower half ceased functioning and his upper spine scorched him like scorpion's tail. This account is gruesome but its horror is mitigated to some extent by Price's faith in his dream life and the obvious fact that what he describes is something he survived--otherwise he could not have written such a book.

One especially valuable aspect of this medical tale is that it isn't told by a doctor. That makes it easier for mere mortals to identify with, and it also generates some well-deserved criticisms of doctors who were cold, clinical, and insensitive toward Price. He had a surgeon who gradually revealed how much he cared, but he also an oncologist who, like a number of doctors, fled from his failure to meet Price's needs.

As Price's legs and excretory functions spun out of control and the pain exceeded 10 on a scale that should have stopped at 10, he spent long months under the ineffective spell of drugs like methadone, dangerous in itself. When his feet and legs swelled to the point of being squishy he was given diuretics that didn't work well either. What he needed was a pair of pressurized leggings that would push the fluids up out of his legs so that they could be eliminated.

Somehow, at the halfway point in this journey (and he didn't know he was halfway home, he thought he might never reach home), Price managed to take up writing and then teaching again. And then he was bumped out of traditional Western medical care into the hands of the aforementioned hypnotist and biofeedback specialist. They, in company with unfailingly helpful nurses, orderlies and personal aides, focused on the mind element of the mind-body duality, and that's what gave Price control over his life, if not his lower half, again. He lived on to write not only this book but many others.

I should think almost anyone would find this book fascinating. It's richly written, inherently dramatic, and emotionally compelling. A few doctors, perhaps many doctors, might argue that with their caseloads they simply can't be fully available to every patient--their job is to prescribe, cut, radiate, and so forth. But this is a lame excuse. We've all known compassionate doctors who recognize the anxiety we feel when confronted with the mysteries of our own bodies. The point is to listen; being cut loose by the doctor who abandons us and moves on to the next case is the unkindest cut of all.