Rating: 2/5

Children's books often deal with the adult world in a dark way, with our heroes at the mercy of bad guardians. Usually we have the comfort of knowing that authors don't allow children to suffer indefinitely, and there will be a happy ending. This is usually within the book itself, or possibly at the end of a book cycle. (You didn't really believe those rumours that J K Rowling was going to kill off Harry Potter, did you?)

The Lemony Snicket books offer two unusual twists on this established plot device. Firstly, they constantly promise us no happy ending - just more suffering for our poor orphans. Secondly, the sufferings are entirely undeserved. The Baudelaire children are intelligent, brave, resourceful and loving, but utterly at the mercy of events beyond their control.

This certainly adds an interesting wrinkle, but then again there is a good reason why this convention is not usually subverted. Firstly, people don't on the whole want to see children suffer without cessation. We can cope with unhappy endings for adults, but it's a less easy trick to pull off with children.

Secondly, what miserablist writers forget is that their plots are often just as formulaic as those of the 'happy ending' writers. By the end of the third book, we pretty much know what we're going to get. The children will be put in the care of a guardian who will prove to be bad for them, or who will be killed. Count Olaf will launch a fiendish plot to get his hands on their money, but be thwarted. Mr Poe will be well-meaning, but will fail them and they will be forced to rely on their own initiative to survive.

This last aspect is one of the interesting parts of the book. The adult world is a constant threat to the Baudelaires. The children will be threatened by evil adults, and when they meet good adults, those adults will be weak, ineffectual and selfish, refusing to listen to the children until it is too late or nearly too late.

Overall, the books have some interesting little plot developments and a good variety of settings, even if I felt that the potential of these could be used more. Just what is the eye tattoo on Olaf's ankle. Is he in a secret organisation? Also, we have a room full of poisonous reptiles, and none of them escapes.

Of course, I only read 3 books and there are plenty more to come. I believe that Lemony Snicket seeks to break out of the established formula in some of the later books and there is a possible happy ending too.

All in all, the books are diverting enough, allowing for some repetitive stylistic flourishes, and easy to read, even if I didn't get overly enthusiastic about them.