Rating: 2/5

I'm putting my finger on what I dislike this series. I really don't like the main character, Matthew Hope. Considering the swath of characters throughout the 87th Precinct series, is Hope the real McBain hiding in the 87th crowd? 

I know my initial dislike of McBain's tourist view of Florida. That screams through this second book. McBain's attempts narratives of various settings through Florida, but misses every time. He didn't understand natural settings intertwined with the commercial, typical of the out-of-stater using a state for a setting, though he was supposedly living here. 

At one point in this book, McBain nails his problem. A singer is criticized for singing songs out of her league. McBain was out of his league writing of Florida. He more than understood, lived and could incredibly grasp in writing his version of New York City. He loved the place. He did not love, maybe even hated, Florida.

It seems McBain also didn't care for Southerners. Though, he makes an exception of New Orleans in this book. He writes Southerners with accents and not his main character with a Chicago accent, as it is overtly pointed out at length the character came from more than once.

That length of his Chicago connections is also a part of the problem with this book. Another is many. many pages of a side character's sexual issues, then more pages of other nonsense that seems McBain must've been forced to add to page length. He doesn't go to such wasted lengths in the 87th series. What's with the main character's and others drug use? Did McBain think this appealed to readers around 1980? Florida's 1980s drug nightmare was barely beginning at that time. The worse was yet to come.

The crime is rather simple and straight forward. The solving, as resolved in the end, should've taken a couple hours by a good detective, instead of the drawn out stuff of this book.

I was going to read the rest of the series, but think my first conclusion many years ago was correct and I'll stop here.

Bottom line: I don't recommend this book. 3 out of ten points.