Rating: 2/5

I read this book many years ago, and since I could not remember a thing about it, I decided to re-read it. But alas, I found out why it was not worth remembering. While the plot here is paper-thin, the narrator is so unreliable that most of the story remains completely opaque and surreal. Once more, Banville gives us the solipsistic musings of a middle-aged man in rapture, tangled up in an affair with a woman decidedly not of his age group. 

To understand the plot a bit better, it helps to know that Morrow, the narrator, formerly known as Freddie Montgomery, was the main character of the first and second book in what is actually a trilogy, namely "The Book of Evidence" and "Ghosts", which I haven't read, but this time I did some research. (Banville likes to publish his books in the form of a triptych.) So, the narrator is an art expert and a thief, who in the first instalment felt compelled to kill a house maid in the country estate he broke in to steal a painting. Apparently he has served his prison term and now makes a shady living with commissional work. 

Concerning the plot, there is a labyrinthine house wherein Morrow is accommodated, where he evaluates art and becomes utterly captivated by an inscrutable young woman. His perception of his surroundings is, however, completely out of sync, and his narration and its chronology cannot be trusted. There is an obscure employer, his fiendish sidekick and a formidable black dog. Outside of the boundary of the abandoned house, there is a whimsical old lady who is dying - who might be Morrow's aunt or not - it's difficult to tell as each character has adopted a shadow identity. Also, there is a serial killer on the loose, and a cop pesters Morrow with questions about his past and his current work. In the end, the woman mysteriously disappears, as do the paintings and his commissioner. Morrow is left behind, bewildered and bereft. 

It is unclear what the purpose of this story is. It's not a murder mystery, it is not a crime novel, it is not a tragic love story. For me, it is yet another Banville book: lots of erudite vocabulary, allusions to Greek mythology, impressive intellectual treatises (all those art reviews), sexual obsessions with occasional lewd explicitness, claustrophobic notions inside the head of a confused pundit - in short, a glimpse into the intellectual maze of an obsessive mind BUT no plot to speak of. 
It's not that there isn't any actual plot, but Banville doesn't explore it. He is too caught up in the internal, poetic and self-absorbed voice of his unreliable narrator. Which makes it a tiresome and perplexing read. 

By the way. The commissioner's name is Max Morden. Here, he seems to be an art forger. He will reappear as the central character of "The Sea", without a hint of a criminal past, at least as far as I recall. 

All this is just too pretentious and too artificially structured to win me over. I just don't buy it.