Rating: 4/5

It all starts with the gods playing another game. Because Fate always wins - at least if the other players adhere to the rules. Which his new opponent doesn't. Resulting in a very interesting butterfly effect. ;)

In this 17th Discworld novel Rincewind is returned to Unseen University and makes a deal with Ridcully to go to Discworld's oldest Empire to help them with their current revolution in exchange for being allowed to come back for good and being called a wizzard wizard. Due to the fact that the old Emperor is about to die, the struggle to determine his successor was about to begin, but there were also workers uniting after reading What I did on My Holidays. 

This was a marvellous way of coming full circle with the first two ever novels in this series. In fact, it was so nicely done I almost cried. 
As those following my reviews know, I'm not too big a fan of the wizzard and still think he needs a strong supporting cast in order for books with him to be compelling. Fortunately, he had just that in this novel in form of good old Conan the Barbarian and his barbarian horde.

Conan, Teach and the other barbarians were marvellous. From the way the horde was trying to have another gloriously volatile and blood-spattering adventure (almost guaranteed considering that the Empire has ninjas and samurai!) to them wanting to learn to be "civilized" in order to adapt to the "modern times" (which is where Teach came in), not to mention Teach's origin story and why he thought he'd fit in nicely with Conan and his bunch (I happen to agree that being a teacher often prepares you for the most gruesome warfare *lol*) - it was all hilarious and wonderful. 
Just like all their raunchy jokes.

In this volume, therefore, we get an Asian empire (part Chinese, part Japanese, which was quite a surprise since there was a certain way I had always pictured Twoflower - probably because of the movie), themes such as oppression, slavery even, revolutions and sacrifices, diplomacy and "civilized ways". As mentioned in this book's blurb, "There are many who say that the art of diplomacy is an intricate and complex dance. There are others who maintain that it's merely a matter of who carries the biggest stick."

Whenever I read a Discworld novel, it is like putting on my favourite piece of clothing. I feel cozy, warm and at home at once no matter where the respective volume takes us (not least also because of Nigel Planer always narrating the stories greatly and him being a constant by now). 
Pratchett's distinct way of combining dark humour, unique characters, sharp social commentary / criticism with a fast-moving adventurous plot is simply marvellous. So while this will never be one of my favourite volumes, I enjoyed every minute of it.
One example: The concept of walls and things we accept as given and "normal". To most people, like the barbarians, walls are solid so you have doors to enter and exit rooms. But suddenly they are in a place where the walls are made of paper. At least one of them struggles with the concept of simply walking through walls because "one doesn't do that". Interesting spin on human psychology and thinking outside the box (or, rather, inside it). 

P.S.: Is it possible that Gaiman took the name of one of the Empire's families for one of his characters in American Gods???

P.P.S.: The funniest expression here: "homeopathic warfare": BWAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA!

P.P.P.S.: More Luggage(s)!