Rating: 2/5

Missing the "rest of the story"

I like Ann Rule. I usually like her books. However, I did not find this one to be a satisfying read. It seemed to leave out a good bit of the most pertinent part of the story -- making it one-sided/unbalanced/incomplete. The facts of this case, like in most of Ann's true crime stories, are beyond sad and horrifying; But it also provides an opportunity for a riveting study of a brilliant mind gone bad-- begging the question WHY! However, this retelling of the case where a Kansas City doctor ended up poisoning her husband and starting a fire that caused the death of two of her children seems incomplete, unbalanced and one-sided. It was unsettling to me that Ann seemed perfectly willing to take the husband's (as well as his mistress's) account of how things played out in the relationship as gospel, giving unnecessary, flimsy excuses for his bad behavior in the marriage while excoriating the wife as an evil shrew when it seems so evident that this woman was in the grips of extreme distress and obvious mental impairment. What a really unsatisfactory loss of opportunity to explore the truly urgent side of this case -- mental illness and it's effect on the entire family. The disintegration of Dr. Green's marriage her husband's affair with another woman seemed to be the catalyst that catapulted an already mentally ill wife down a tragic path of alcohol abuse and unspeakably reckless behavior that led to this horrific end. Dr.Greene's actions were horrendous and doubtless she'll spend the rest of her life grieving over how she killed her children in a nightmarish act of selfish revenge. But there's no doubt that she had descended into a type of madness that manifested in her wilful, intemperate, "destructive child" behavior. She is rightfully serving time for the consequences of her actions. But is very hard for me to see Dr. Farrar in the role Ann Rule paints him. To her he is the g and some, wonderful model of patience and virtue at the mercy of f his maniacal wife. Dr. Green may have been manical but I just have a sneaky feeling that Dr.Farrar's behavior contributed to his wife's deteriorating mental health. Children are much more perceptive than Ann Rule gives them credit for being. There was most likely more to their obstinate behavior toward their father than just what Mommy told them. By the age of the two oldest, most children have the ability to size up a situation for themselves. But that is not the greater issue here. The greater issue to me is the fact that Dr. Farrar, the neighbors, their medical colleagues, their families, and any number of professionals witnessed this woman's decline over a period of many years and did nothing to help her until it was much too late. It should not have taken a tragedy of this proportion to get Dr.Green the help she needed. It also bothered me that Ann R. went to great lengths to explain the callous behavior of Dr.Farrar and his mistress' toward her husband's suicide -- even downplaying it -- when the truth is that their behavior in the wake of that tragedy makes me wonder about their mental health. That goes double for Dr.Farrar getting the heck out of Dodge when he starts to realize that his wife might be poisoning him but LEAVES the children behind. Come on, if she is capable of harming him, then that should be a red flag that her deteriorating mental health is a danger to his children, too. There were THREE selfish adults in this tragedy tale. ONE we know was suffering from mental illness. The other two were blinded by their own sexual desires. Dr. Green's mental state and alcohol abuse does not excuse her from culpability for her crimes. But geez, Ann Rule, then please don't make frivolous excuses for the other bad-behaving adults in this tragic story. To truly have a chance of understanding what went so horribly wrong in this family, we need the complete story, not just one side of it.