Rating: 4/5

"All things should be taken in small doses, except friendship and love."

I’ve been chumming around with Ross and Demelza Poldark for about three years now. I’ve shared some of their greatest joys in life and their deepest sorrows. I’ve laughed with them, cried with them, and occasionally shouted at them (Ross more so than Demelza!) I guess you could say they are two of my best friends. As are Caroline and Dwight Enys. Anyone that’s never picked up a book and fallen in love with the people within will think I’ve lost my marbles. My friends here will know exactly what I’m talking about and will understand that though I may be a tad bit touched, I make perfect sense. 

The Loving Cup is the tenth book in the Poldark series. Yes, I’ve read ten books so far and I’ve always said I’m not a series reader. So there’s that. It’s a personal record. Although I will admit to being slightly more smitten with the earlier books (I gave 5 stars to all but one of the first seven), I still adore the later installments. I just don’t get to spend as much time as I’d like to with my old pals as I do with their offspring. Clowance, Jeremy, Valentine and Geoffrey Charles are still very engaging characters and I’m enjoying following their personal adventures – heartaches, obsessions, and love. Plenty of mistakes are made, sound advice given (some taken and some not), and lots of mischief and confusion follow. They are as human as their parents. Most of what the now-grown children go through in The Loving Cup are the uncertainties, disappointments and questions surrounding their love affairs. Always messy stuff and fun to read about.

"Is there only one such person born into the world to satisfy and electrify one other person? Or are there a number such, floating about like particles of dust in the sunshine and it is all a matter of luck – good or ill – which you meet?"

"There may be five – or fifty – which will create the spark in you – the electric spark – but twould not be quite the same spark in each case, never altogether the same. Yet… You may go through life only seeing and feeling that electric charge in one man. Or at the most two."

 What I further appreciate in Winston Graham’s novels is that he doesn’t forget about the history of the times in his writing. Nor does he overly expound on the political and historical details. They are there as a reminder of what people just like these would have been going through and thinking about during those times. In this case, the plight of the working class in England, the Napoleonic Wars, and the War of 1812. Surrounding this there are plenty of other adventures and tensions as the characters get tangled up in various mishaps. 

I’m not going to say more about the plot, it’s difficult without giving away the juicy bits from earlier books in the series. I will say that if you adore character-driven novels, solid and absorbing plots, and are a fan of period pieces, then this series is for you!

"Life is like a gaming table, isn’t it. One has so many pieces on the board. With them one gains a little, loses a little."