Rating: 4/5

Time marches on for the Poldarks and all of their neighbours. This story begins 11 years after the ending of the previous novel. Elizabeth Warleggan’s eldest son, Charles Geoffrey, is a soldier in the Peninsular war – another long-term confrontation between the aggression of Napoleon’s empire in his attempts to take control of all of Europe, and the defense of the English and Irish - in this case, to aid Portugal in their struggle to maintain control of the Iberian Peninsula.

Ross Poldark, in his role as a Member of Parliament, is sent to observe the fighting and when he returns, his report has an influence that ripples outward and agitates the surface of several different areas.

George Warleggan makes an uncharacteristically faulty business move that puts him in a vulnerable position. Will Ross Poldark finally have an opportunity for revenge on his lifelong enemy?

Demelza Poldark’s heart is torn between the desire to protect her children and the knowledge that they must be allowed to follow their own hearts . . . even if they might be broken. Son Jeremy falls in love – with a young woman, but also with high-pressure steam and what it could mean for the future. Daughter Clowance has emerged as a great beauty who is pursued by several young men – and coveted by some who are much older.

Ross is able to regain some property he lost many years before. Will it prove to be a success this second time around?

As always, Winston Graham’s writing breathes life and energy and reality into the locales and personalities within this novel. It is now the beginning of the 1800’s, and although advances and setbacks in politics, invention, and social constructs continue their macabre dance, there is hope that the advances will eventually emerge victorious.

Once again I am eager to begin the next novel in this series – to continue following the ebb and flow of the tides of history in conjunction with the fortunes and misfortunes of the families Winston Graham has created.