Rating: 4/5

The edition I'm reading has a lovely tribute to Josephine Tey under the guise of an introduction written by Robert Barnard. He writes that she is "not only a first-rate storyteller but one who is not content with a formula. Tey, in her best books, seeks to tell different sorts of story, in different ways."

This is a lovely literary detective story that unravels slowly. Some of my favorite parts were where Inspector Alan Grant carries on an internal dialogue musing a mysterious death on the train he was riding from London to Scotland. He arrives in Scotland to rest and recuperate, however he cannot get the dead man's face or poetry out of his thoughts.

Grant muses on the meaning of the poetry that the man had written:
"The beasts that talk,
The streams that stand,
The stones that walk,
The singing sand,
.............................
.............................
That guard the way 
To Paradise"

This is a book to savor rather than rush and there is not a lot of action for a long while. Rather, I enjoyed the character studies. For example, the description of Murdo Gallagher aka Yoghourt, a sleeping-car attendant on the train was most entertaining. Then, around page 130 or so, I felt a jolt of excitement when new facts are introduced and the story seems to broaden its scope and geography. 

This is book 6 in the series and I look forward to reading further volumes.

Some favorite lines:

"Bad-tempered eyebrows, supercilious eyebrows, calm eyebrows, worried eyebrows - it was the eyebrows that gave a face its keynote."

"Was it real, or "was it just a country of the mind?"

The term "counter-rapper" conjured up something very different in my mind, I was thinking of rap music until I read the entire sentence: "I was tired of counter-rappers. You know, the kind of chap who can't wait a minute. Out here [in the Scottish countryside] no one ever thinks of rapping on a counter."

I learned that "sleeshacks were mashed potatoes fried in slices."

"It's fantastic. But at the heart of all the whirling absurdity there is a small cove of stillness."

"There is one small clear space on which one can stand while taking one's bearings."

"His voice died away. The conversation became suddenly broken-backed."

"He, Alan Grant, had a household just as bare of human warmth; but his life was so full of people that to come back to his empty flat was a luxury, a spiritual delight."