Rating: 4/5

"Nothing seems really to matter, that's the charm of it. Whether you get away, or whether you don't; whether you arrive at your destination or whether you reach somewhere else, or whether you never get anywhere at all, you're always busy, and you never do anything in particular; and when you've done it there's always something else to do, and you can do it if you like, but you'd much better not."

Reading children's classics/books which I have missed out during my childhood when I'm an adult is quite a learning experience. To me, they're much more than just books meant for children. I, as an adult, who do not know everything about how children feel (especially for these fast changing times) and as someone who could only remember what I used to feel as a child, these books provide me with so much life and experience that they are teaching me lessons about different lives, letting me dive into emotions which I thought didn't exist and most importantly, they are filling up the void which I left behind with all my innocent curiosity and doubts. 

This particular book is much more than a children's book. If I had read this book as a child, I might have seen it as just a story of the animal characters going through their daily lives and having some kind of adventure.

There are times in the story which would have been difficult for me to understand as a kid but made more sense to me as an adult. Like when the characters are having a breakdown and how the other characters deal with it; the Mole making a scene remembering his home; the novelty of being together until the end even when things get uncomfortable, strange and bizarre; the pretentious showoffs; handling difficult people in your circle; families and socializing; laws and prison; identity and belonging; mental health and mental state; and yes, that pride goes before the fall. Toad. Hope you do not dislike him that much. I could see the images of so many in his character. As well as in the characters of the humble Mole, the respectable Badger and the practical Rat. I am simply blown away by how these characters have been shaped and discussed throughout the adventurous story. 

But now when I read it as an adult, the lines have so much more to deliver. The story is more meaningful and it gave me lots of things to think about. 

*Some favourite lines:

"It's my world, and I don't want any other. What it hasn't got is not worth having, and what it doesn't know is not worth knowing "

"Why can't fellows be allowed to do what they like when they like and as they like, instead of other fellows sitting on banks and watching them all the time and making remarks and poetry and things about them? What nonsense it all is!"