Rating: 2/5

stoneybrook middle school continues its impressive run as world's worst middle school by introducing the teachers of tomorrow program. in exchange for extra credit, interested students can apply to be student teachers for a week. they will have to go to two days of training, submit lesson plans, &amp; carry on with the curricula already being taught by the teachers for whom they are covering. so it's not COMPLETELY illegal. some lip service is given to the fact that public school curricula is in fact something that is overseen by a department of education. kristy is of course boiling over with enthusiasm for the idea. you know how she loves to boss people around. she wants to be the school principal, in fact, but is informed that she'll have to settle for a teaching gig like everyone else.

some members of the babysitters club are excited about the project. mary anne is interested, as is stacey, assuming that she can teach a math class. abby could use the extra credit, but isn't interested in taking on the extra work. jessi doesn't think she has time with a new ballet class she's taking. claudia, of course, has zero interest. mallory is beyond pumped. she is hoping to get assigned to an english class.

the interested students are asked to suggest classes they might be interested in teaching on their applications. because kristy can't be the principal, she suggests something in the athletic department because she likes sports. she has always gotten along well with the seventh grade girls' gym teacher, ms. walden. but then ms. walden yells at her for running in the hallway. kristy starts thinking about how ms. walden is kind of mean to the less athletic kids, which doesn't do much to build up their interest in sports. kristy thinks that she'll swoop in &amp; show ms. walden that everyone can learn to love gym class if their teacher is encouraging &amp; displays a positive attitude.

kristy also decides that lesson plans are a great idea...but not for gym class. there's so much moving around &amp; unpredictability in gym, lesson plans will just get in the way. she briefly contemplates forcing the other members of the babysitters club to develop babysitting plans for each of their sitting jobs. i bet that would go over like a lead balloon. luckily, she recognizes that little kids are too unpredictable for babysitting lessons plans to be feasible.

kristy is totally bummed to learn that ms. walden's gym class is being combined with mr. deyoung's boys' gym class, which will also be led by a student teacher. that student is cary retlin. yay, cary! as we know, kristy &amp; cary don't really get along that well, mostly because cary is always taking the piss out of kristy. kristy decides to basically ignore cary, do her own thing, &amp; hope he falls in line.

ps--stacey got the math class she wanted. mary anne is teaching social studies (though you'd think mary anne would shy away from teaching because it involves being the center of attention). mallory was assigned to an english class--an EIGHTH GRADE english class. she is panicked over the possibility that she won't be able to get older kids to take her seriously.

kristy comes up with an alternative warm-up routine for the kids, complete with music. she starts walking the kids through it, but cary diverts everyone by starting a conga line. kristy almost has an aneurysm trying to get everyone back in line &amp; following her directions, but she runs out of time &amp; has to start the soccer game. once again, cary clowns around, running away with the ball. the kids run after him &amp; don't listen to kristy. kristy is pissed. she thinks she could have taught a truly revolutionary gym class if cary hadn't undermined her.

ms. walden asks to see kristy the next day. ms. walden points out that class didn't go well &amp; she asks to see kristy's lesson plan. kristy admits she didn't make a lesson plan; she didn't think she had to for a gym class. ms. walden says she most certainly expects kristy to start making lesson plans &amp; coordinating the classes with cary. she tells kristy that she can't get extra credit without the lesson plans.

so kristy puts together a detailed lesson plan. she meets up with cary the next day in school &amp; shows it to him. he points out that her lesson plan is unrealistic &amp; that she'd be working the students like they're robots. his lesson plan is a lot more casual--kristy considers it sloppy. she again decides to do her own thing &amp; ignore cary.

during warm-ups, kristy gets upset because cary is doing the exercises off rhythm &amp; confusing the class. she hands out soccer assignments, breaking the kids into two teams, but the kids rebel &amp; insist on forming their own teams. kristy permits this &amp; then selects the tougher, more athletic-looking team for herseal, leaving the smaller, skinnier kids for cary. what she didn't count on is that the smaller kids all wanted to be on a team together because they take karate classes in stamford together. they start pulling karate moves on kristy's team &amp; eventually a full-blown knock-down drag-out fight ensues. one girl gets a black eye, a boy loses a tooth, &amp; another girl breaks her arm. it's a complete disaster. ms. walden &amp; mr. deyoung tear cary &amp; kristy some new assholes &amp; tell them they have one more chance to prove they can work together or they are out of the program for good. kristy protests that she &amp; cary don't get along &amp; ms walden says, "so what? do you think teachers like each other all the time? they don't, but they have to work together anyway." kristy's mind is blown. 

kristy comes up with the idea of a passathon for the next class: the kids have to pass the soccer ball to other kids, &amp; if a kid misses, the person who passed to them is out. she hopes this will encourage cooperation. &amp; she allows cary to lead the warm-ups. everything goes swimmingly. kristy &amp; cary call a truce &amp; that's pretty much that. i guess kristy learns that teaching isn't as easy as it looks.

as does mallory, who is so nervous teaching eighth graders that she just constantly embarrasses herself, dropping papers &amp; breaking chalk &amp; freezing in the face of smart aleck remarks. soon the kids are calling her "spaz girl," &amp; before long, the nickname is all over the school. there's even a scene in which mallory answers to it. i don't know if that was intentional on the part of the ghostwriter or what. this sets the stage for mallory's transfer to boarding school in a couple of books.

in the B-plot, vanessa pike has caught teacher fever &amp; has started her own poetry school. her students are margo, nicky, &amp; claire. unfortunately, she's a real bossy britches &amp; the kids don't want to go to her school. she won't let them quit though. she blackmails them with inside info she has on their various misdeeds, threatening to tattle on them to mr. &amp; mrs. pike if they don't sit through her classes. the kids finally fight back, tricking her into trying on some play handcuffs, &amp; then cuffing her, gagging her, &amp; stuffing her behind an armchair. abby rescues her &amp; asks her who her favorite teacher was &amp; why. vanessa reports that her favorite teacher instilled a love of learning in her because she was always nice &amp; encouraging. abby asks vanessa to teach her about poetry using the methods of her favorite teacher. nicky, margo, &amp; claire overhear the new &amp; improved vanessa pike teaching method &amp; decide to rejoin her poetry school. crisis averted. the best thing about this subplot is when claudia is babysitting &amp; vanessa gives a big speech about how spelling is overrated because poetry is about how words sound, &amp; claudia is like, "yeah! finally someone feels me on this!" claudia gets way into vanessa's poetry school because vanessa doesn't care about spelling.