Rating: 3/5

Flawed, but definitely interesting. My copy is the 1980 hardcover reprint by St. Martin's Press which lacks the gory cover art of the paperback original, instead opting for a plain black dust jacket with only the title lavishly scrolled across the front like some kinky bondage romance. So I didn't know what to expect going in. 

Essentially this is a gothic family drama. If you like V.C. Andrews, you'll probably find this right up your alley. For me, I don't have much taste for stories about incest, domestic abuse, and animal cruelty. So if these are triggers for you, this may not be the book for you to read. 

That being said, there are some incredibly effective moments of horror here. Though it definitely goes totally off-the-charts insane toward the end, the majority is like peeling the layers of an onion, slowly revealing the pungency beneath the papery façade. The tension is very real. 

For example, have you ever had a spouse or significant other who was the sweetest and most loving person in the world, but when they got around their family, they became a stranger to you? Ignoring you at parties and family get-togethers, making you feel like you're not part of the club let alone the family? Treating you with disdain for a few days after hanging out with their siblings and parents? And you ask, where does this come from? Does the family not approve of me and is filling my loved one with bad ideas about me? What did I do wrong?

Well, that's this book in a nutshell. Without spoiling much, I can share that one of the most effective scenes is when a wife dresses in a sexy negligé and fixes her husband ice cold martinis in preparation for a night of TLC. Now, I don't know about you, but that sounds like my idea of a good time! But the husband's reaction is completely unexpected. He tells her she isn't getting any more sex out of him, that he sees right through her, calling her a spoiled child, and even threatens violence. He then crawls into bed next to her, back turned away, and suddenly in the tense silence she realizes she's alone with a stranger. How humiliating, how tragic, and how scary! 

The book also does a good job depicting the traumas of war and the loss of family members. Vietnam is mentioned quite frequently, and almost everyone in this story has had someone dear to them die violently. It does get a bit much, and this book can really be a downer, especially since author Doris Shannon delivers the entire story in a dry, distant voice devoid of any humor, wit, or irony. 

As impactful as this book could be, unfortunately contemporary logic isn't always this book's friend. There are some things that happen that bugger belief, dating the book somewhat. I can't go into many details without spoilers, so I will give an example that is inconsequential. A practical stranger calls a psychiatrist and asks for personal mental health and social history on a girl he knows. There is no real reason for doing this, considering the context. But like an insecure high school coquette drunk on prom night, the doctor gives it away without much resistance. If that's how things went down in 1978, no wonder we have HIPAA. Simpler times, I guess. 

So here's the bad: This book hasn't aged entirely well, though this lends a certain charm appreciated by junkies of old mass market horrors. And aside from a somewhat abrupt and violent prologue, the book takes a LONG time to get going. It takes you a while to get to know the characters, who do grow on you after a while, but until then you really don't like anyone. It wasn't until about page 140 that I started to appreciate where the author was going with certain characters, but by then I was checking out. A piece of unsolicited advice to you budding writers out there--you simply HAVE to make your characters likeable or you have no readership. They don't have to be good-looking. They don't have to be heroic. They don't have to be relatable. They don't even have to be nice. But the reader has to enjoy the characters on some level. It wasn't until over halfway through this book that the characters showed any individual charisma of their own to differentiate between them--and there were A LOT of them. With so many people with relatively bland names and personalities milling about drinking cocktails, the reader gets as confused as when reading "War and Peace." And Doris Shannon ain't no Tolstoy.

The good: A truly unsettling novel that gets under your skin. If you are a horror or thriller fan and it's been a while since a book made you feel something other than sleepy, you could do worse.