Rating: 3/5

For the first 300 pages of this 550 page brick, the book was fine. 3 stars kind of fine.
Was I bored and annoyed? Only a few times.
Did I love it? Also only a few times.

I was very excited to see how everyone was faring after Nicholas was ousted from his own bank at the end of book 6. Nicholas doing god knows what with Pauel Benecke and Gelis visiting the three remaining parts (Bruges, Venice and the mercenaries) were some of the things that I liked the most.
The majority of the book takes place in two entire separate plots. Gelis, Jodi and the entire business occupy themselves with the various wars. Meanwhile Nicholas goes East with two travel companions I did not care much for. Neither Ludovico or Anna warmed to me much and while I loved the descriptions of the Mongol influenced people, whatever scheme Nicholas was concocting didn’t grab me.
I liked the life updates on Jodi and Kathi, and the interactions between Gelis and the bank far more. I did not have a Gelis and John le Grant friendship on my bingo card but I am here for it.
I guess that after 6 books, I’ve a much clearer image of the Burgundy-France-Italy side of the story and a much greater attachment to all the characters and stakes on that side of Europe. Everyone I know and care about is there, except Nicholas and Julius.

While a few loose ends were cleared up, I felt like those 300 pages were mostly set up. (The Ochoa-Benecke-Crackbene connection was nice though)
The first 60% has no mention of Henry’s parentage, which is a sword of Damocles bound to fall at this point. I was checking my watch, wondering when the Riberac-St Pols would appear with yet another assassination plot. Time’s ticking guys! You only have one book left to meet your ends.
And what happened to the Vatachino? Gelis didn’t fully bankrupt them so they’re still around. And when will the Scottish king find out how Nicholas played him? Find out next time, I suppose.

As for the other 250 pages, I read those in one day with an excitement I missed since the first few books. 4 stars for sure.
Gelis was getting the band back together and Nicholas got some much needed growth! There was finally some backstory to Nicholas, and some insight into what made him the guy he is. After 7 books, my man deserved it.
And he made up with Gelis. I might actually believe that they’ll happily grow old together, certainly there’s no one better suited for Nicholas OR Gelis around. I am glad that their personal character arcs went the way they did. The fact that it took nearly three sometimes arduous books for them to reach this point gave their reconciliation some weighted pathos. And I’m not immune, in fact it made me glad I stuck with this series through book 5 and 6. I will be thinking about them for 2-5 business days. Good for Jodi too.
I also think they can plot world domination together if they set their minds to it, hopefully that’s gonna happen in the finale.

While reading this series I've read a lot of reviews going Lymond this, Lymond that. It seems more Scottish courtly politics than scheming adventures and I didn't feel like picking up another long series of medieval melodrama since I started book 3, but after reading this one I feel 5% more inclined to do so because the length of the stories does pay off.