Rating: 4/5

I picked this one up from the library because I’d read the name somewhere and heard good things about it, and I’m glad I did. It’s an extremely enjoyable genre piece, full of strong writing that’s breezy and fun, but also atmospheric and even gently philosophical. Eric Ambler was a very well regarded author of thrillers and spy novels, and it’s interesting that while he seems to have slipped quietly out of the mass market readership he has been adopted and reprinted by Penguin Modern Classics in a line of editions seemingly targeted at the more literary end of the noir-ish market. Ambler’s seen as important now not only for the quality of his writing, but for the influence he had on writers like Ian Fleming, Graham Greene, and (a bit later on) John Le Carré. 

The story of this book is set in 1940, in the early days of the Second World War. The protagonist is Graham, a British ballistics engineer on the way home from Turkey where he’s been doing important and secret work regarding the preparedness of the Turkish navy. After a late night in Istanbul, he returns to his hotel where he narrowly avoids an assassination attempt; later, having been persuaded that going straight to the police would be a bad idea, he places his trust in a scheme concocted by the Turkish secret services to get him home. And so it is that Graham winds up steaming slowly through the Mediterranean on a dilapidated little ferry where most of the plot occurs. Naturally, at first he believes he’s safe, but he very suddenly comes to realise that his other passengers might not entirely be all they seem.

Graham is no spy, and this isn’t exactly a mystery novel either — unlike in Le Carré, the reader is given pretty much full access to our hero’s complete thoughts, and there’s rarely much that is obscured about the plot. Graham is an everyman figure who acts as a kind of reader-surrogate; he’s never less than sympathetic, never especially objectionable; the archetypal plucky Brit surrounded by Johnny Foreigner. In fact he is really quite dull in many ways. But you forgive the author everything because the writing is so good it keeps you wanting more from every page. And at least he's not James bloody Bond.

It also makes interesting reading as a cultural document of an intriguing point in history: WWII has clearly begun, and there’s a great deal made of it in the book, but at the time it was written the author could still suggest the protagonist stopping off for a romantic jolly in Paris on the way home. The war had started, but the terms on which it was to be fought were still distinctly unclear, especially for the British. All of this very much stands out today, and I’m sure by the time it was read in the ‘40s much of it must have seemed idyllic to contemporary readers. 

That’s not the only thing that stands out. The stereotypes of the different European ethnicities are uncomfortable, but perhaps not badly intentioned. And there is a very sudden and very peculiar twist at the end regarding one of the female characters which makes for extremely peculiar reading by modern standards. I should perhaps have been frustrated by its latent misogyny, but instead I mostly found it bizarre. It seemed to me that the author had sacrificed something true and humane in pursuit of maintaining a sense of decency and propriety about his hero. I'd really like to know more about how and why that part was written, but I doubt I'll ever get to find out.