Rating: 5/5

As always, Winston Graham has crafted a completely absorbing addition to the Poldark family saga, and in this one he took me along back into the 1700’s of Cornwall and France – a willing and eager passenger.

Ross Poldark’s old flame and his deceased cousin’s wife, now married to Ross’ worst enemy George Warleggan, gives birth to a son exactly at the time of ‘the black moon’, and George names him Valentine. Elizabeth hires her young cousin as governess for Geoffrey Charles, her 11 year old son with Francis, Ross’ deceased cousin.

 Demelza’s second-oldest brother, Sam, and her youngest brother, Drake, come to Ross and Demelza’s home to ask for jobs. Sam is a devout Methodist and Drake is of the same faith but still young in his devotions. Drake meets Geoffrey Charles and his attractive governess, Morwenna, and a lovely friendship is cemented between the three. It is a friendship fated to be a major source of further conflict between the Warleggan and Poldark families. Demelza and Ross have a baby girl and name her Clowance.

Although the revolution in France has now extended to a war over the Netherlands, there seem to be more than enough Republicans to fight on several fronts. Ross selects 7 friends to go with him to France in an attempt to free a close friend of the family from the horrid prison that has been his home for the last year. Their plan is a good one: to coat-tail their landing in France on the Royalists’ attempt to take back control of their homeland. However, it turns into an incredibly harrowing experience for almost all of them.

There are more disturbing experiences and sad times on the home front. George Warleggan, for all that he wants to gain the trust and admiration of everyone in the county – and beyond, if he can – makes some bitter enemies as he wrong-foots his way on his imaginary ladder to success. In the end, an ancient woman defies him by whispering some seeds of doubt and trouble that almost immediately begin to sprout in George’s stubborn, yet fragile psyche.

When I start one of these novels, it is a challenge to do anything else but read and become tangled up in these family’s lives. Winston Graham is a master story-teller, and I love the feeling of mining the historical details that he slips into the story and weaves through it like shimmering threads, both informing and confirming.

I am once again looking forward to the next novel in this remarkable series which I will read next month.