Rating: 4/5

Love had seemed so final, and so dull—love was what ruined our parents. Love had delivered them to a life of mortgage payments and household repairs; to unglamorous jobs and the fluorescent aisles of a supermarket at two in the afternoon. We'd hoped for love of a different kind, love that knew and forgave our human frailty but did not miniaturize our grander ideas of ourselves.

Wow. Michael Cunningham seems to understand marriage between a man and a woman and the mother-child bond better than almost any modern writer, with perhaps the exception of John Updike.

But, given Mr. Updike's advantage, both in having been married to a woman (twice) and having been a father to four, I can't help but grant Mr. Cunningham the greater ability to imagine these relationships, having not participated in them himself.

Good reminders here: you don't need to be a man to write a man; you don't need to be a woman to write a woman. You don't need to be any ethnicity, gender, sexuality or religion to write a character of one different from your own.

You simply need to pay attention to everything around you, write every day, vomit up your own bile, and sometimes go broke, as Mr. Cunningham did, writing this novel for six years, in order to write something that others truly want to read. 

And I did want to read this. I have, in fact, been disappointed that I hadn't read something else by Michael Cunningham since I read his Pulitzer winner, The Hours.

The Hours is, for me, an almost perfect novel, one I think about often, and I had nothing but excitement, starting this one. I decorated the first 200 pages with my signature purple post-it notes. . . 

But, a couple of things bothered me in this early work of Mr. Cunningham's. I found myself incapable of separating the Voices of the three primary characters: Bobby, Jonathan, and Clare. They all sounded identical to me (not in their dialogue, in their Voice, their perspective). Only Alice, the mother, stood alone in having a tone I distinguished from the others.

Next issue: the ages of everyone. Every person's age in this is off, either too young or too old, for what their character represented. The math was off, too. The characters aged prematurely before they were actually old. A 56-year-old father described as “an elderly man in a polyester sport shirt” and a 39-year-old described as an “older woman in sunglasses” were frequent irritants to me. Even when I was a 17-year-old, I would not have described a 39-year-old as an “older woman,” unless it was in the context of another 17-year-old dating “an older woman,” meaning, in comparison with a much younger person. 

Strangely enough, I can make another connection here between Mr. Cunningham and Mr. Updike. A reader needs to be reminded, throughout Updike's work, that his characters are in their 30s and 40s and not their 70s and 80s. I'm not sure what this is. A fear of death seeping through? A warped perception about aging? I'm not sure, but it was damn annoying. 

But, then I'd come across a line like this: We had protected ourselves with silence because our only other choice was to howl at one another, to scratch and bite and shriek.

Damn. He gets it. He gets the complicated finesse between people, whether they're lovers, married partners, or a parent-child combo.

And here we are, back to the parent-child piece. 

Mr. Cunningham's work has inspired a new shelf for me: Mommie Dearest. A place to put stories where the mother-child role is explored and is significant, regardless of whether it's a healthy or an unhealthy relationship.

If you have any books to nominate for my new shelf, could you please do so in the comments?