Rating: 4/5

During the Great Depression millions of Americans were forced to do without. Many of them lost their jobs or worked for less pay, had their homes and farms foreclosed, shuttered their businesses, skipped meals, or made do with clothing so worn out that it barely held together. Yet the one thing they refused to sacrifice was the distraction provided by movies. During the early 1930s, between 60 and 75 million people a week scrounged and saved enough to afford the finite escapism that the silver screen offered. For them, as many noted at the time, going to the movies was not a luxury, but a means of coping with their daily miseries.

Though suffering from economic difficulties of their own, Hollywood responded with a diverse range of entertainments. It is this variety of films, and the messages they conveyed, which are the focus of Andrew Bergman’s book. Treating the movies of the era as part of the nation’s material culture, he analyzes them to discern the issues represented in them and what they reveal about the attitudes of their era. In the process, he identifies in them a number of consistent themes: a continuing belief in individual success albeit under different guises, a search for scapegoats for the nation’s persistent social ills, and a growing belief in the role a benevolent federal government could play in addressing the country’s problems.

Among the most fascinating aspects of Bergman’s study is his description as to how these themes unfolded over the course of the decade. At the start the challenge many filmmakers faced was in maintaining the relevancy of American values in an environment in which faith in them was suffering from sustained economic blows. This they did by making films about the one area of American life where success stories were still believable: crime. The early 1930s was the heyday of the gangster film, and, as Bergman demonstrates, the rise to the top enjoyed by the gangsters played so memorably by Edward G. Robinson and James Cagney mirrored the steps for success outlined by Andrew Carnegie and Horatio Alger in stories and essays with which many viewers were familiar. Such films also demonstrated the paralysis of the law perceived during this era, as the police and municipal officials in them proved too corrupt or inept to respond to the challenges posed by these crooks.

Gangster films were not the only ones that took systemic corruption as their theme, as the exploits of shyster lawyers and cynical newspapermen underscored the belief common during the early 1930s that there was something seriously wrong in America. For most Americans, however, this was the news of their everyday lives: what they wanted was not an expose, but relief. This came initially in the form of the anarchic comedies and musicals of the era, whose fantastic displays and nihilist humor proved popular with audiences. But what Americans wanted most was hope, and by the middle of the decade this cohered into films involving a search for authority. The most memorable creation of this era was the “G-man,” who personified the growing role played by the federal government during the New Deal. Bergman finds parallels here with the resurgence of cowboy films during the mid-1930s, in which he finds similar themes of civilizing the frontier through the use of benevolently-applied force.

Social consciousness was another key theme that Bergman identifies in the cinema of the era. In addition to the problems identified in the movies about organized crime, he describes as well both the “topical” films produced by Warner Brothers that addressed a variety of contemporary issues, and the “juvenile delinquents” genre which highlighted concerns about raising families in overcrowded urban environments with their attendant problems. Yet the author sees the screwball genre as the one most effectively encapsulating both the concerns of the times and how they could be overcome. Best represented in the works of Frank Capra, these movies provided idealized portrayals of how the finest aspects of America – love, unity, and decency – could emerge triumphant over the evils of greed and corruption. That Bergman devotes an entire chapter to analyzing Capra’s output during the period is a testament to how, by the end of the decade, his movies came to influence the public’s self-image of their country, helping to define what they would envision as the values for which the United States was fighting when it entered the Second World War.

Bergman’s book is a sharp little study that does an excellent job of showing how the films of the 1930s serve as a mirror to their age. Though far from comprehensive, the films he selects illustrate well his points and make a persuasive argument for how they shaped the attitudes of their audience. While anyone seeking a more encyclopedic overview of American cinema during the decade would be better served turning instead to Tino Balio’s Grand Design: Hollywood as a Modern Business Enterprise, 1930-1939, for those looking for an analysis of Depression-era movies that is concise, insightful, and enjoyable to read Bergman’s book is an excellent choice.