Rating: 4/5

A collection of twelve short stories that Simon and I enjoyed listening to together. Stephen Fry’s introduction is engaging, and his love of Sherlock Holmes is evident. He concludes: 

“The figure of authority that is benign, rational, soothing, omniscient, capable, and insightful in a world and in daily life so patently devoid of almost all those marvelous qualities how welcome that is and how grateful we are for its presence in our lives, so grateful that we won’t really accept that Sherlock Holmes could ever be classed as make believe, between fact and fiction is a space where legend dwells. It is where Holmes and Watson will always live.” 

Stephen Fry reads these stories with aplomb. Here they are in order with quotes:

1. The Adventure of the Mazerin Stone – “Holmes seldom laughed but he got as near it as his old friend Watson could remember.”

2. The Problem of Thor Bridge - "We saw in the house the neurotic Mr Bates who had called upon us in the morning. He showed us with a sinister relish the formidable array of firearms of various shapes and sizes, which his employer had accumulated in the course of an adventurous life."

3. The Adventure of the Creeping Man - "From branch to branch he sprang, sure of foot and firm of grasp, climbing apparently in mere joy at his own powers with no definite object in view. With his dressing gown flapping on each side of him he looked like some huge bat glued against the side of his own house, a great square dark patch upon the moonlit wall."

4. The Adventure of the Sussex Vampire - This was my absolute favourite and I listened spellbound.

5. The Adventure of the Three Garridebs - "I fear I am non the wiser" - Watson's response to Holmes' explanation. Holmes adds, "Ah, it is not part of your profession to carry about a portable Newgate [Gaol] calendar in your memory."

6. The Adventure of the Illustrious Client - "His features were regular and pleasing save only his straight thin lipped mouth. If ever I saw a murderer's mouth it was there a cruel, hard gash in the face, compressed, inexorable and terrible."

7. The Adventure of the Three Gables - "Holmes raised his hand for silence, then he strode across the room, flung open the door and dragged in a great gaunt woman whom he had seized by the shoulder. She entered by the ungainly struggle like some huge awkward chicken."

8. The Adventure of the Blanched Soldier - This story is authored by Holmes rather than Watson. I loved the description of Tuxbury Old Hall - a "great wandering house" - a mishmash of "all sorts of ages and styles starting on a half-timbered Elizabethan foundation and ending with a Victorian portico. Inside it was all panelling and tapestry and half effaced old pictures - a house of shadows and mystery. There was a butler, old Ralph, who seemed about the same age as the house and there was his wife who might have been older."

9. The Adventure of the Lion’s Mane - The second of the two stories authored by Holmes rather than Watson. He describes himself thus: "I am an omnivorous reader with a strangely retentive memory for trifles."

10. The Adventure of the Retired Colourman - "Let us escape from this weary work a day world by the side door of music."

11. The Adventure of the Veiled Lodger - "Reading is the only pleasure which fate has left me and I miss little which passes in the world."

12. The Adventure of Shoscombe Old Place – “Sir Robert is a man of honorable stock, but you do occasionally find a carrion crow among the eagles.”