Rating: 5/5

The 40th Anniversary Edition includes bonus content that includes a short one page Note to Readers from Chelsea Clinton explaining the meaning of the story to her and its importance in her life. Next, is a two page article by Francesca Segal called 
  Stand Up To Dragons. 
 In this two page article, Francesca Segal proves the timelessness of the story and its relevance today.  She includes examples such as the #MeToo movement, misogyny, and cronyism. In the end of the book, there is a two page bonus from Ann Munsch with Robert Munsch entitled 
  40 Years of the Paper Bag Princess
 in which they recollect how the story came to be created.

  Book summary:
 Elizabeth and Ronald are preparing to marry, but a dragon comes and takes Ronald away. Leaving everything burnt and destroyed but a paper bag, Elizabeth transforms the paper bag into a dress and goes to rescue Prince Ronald.
  
She gets to the dragons lair, and persuades him to come out to see her. She outsmarts the dragon and tires him out which allows her to rescue Ronald. 
Upon seeing Elizabeth's ashy and dirty state, Ronald points out that she looks mess and tells her, 
  "Come back when you are dressed like a real princess." 
 
 
Elizabeth doesn't stand for this and responds by telling him that he is pretty and a prince, but a 
  "bum"
. It then ends with an illustration of Elizabeth running off into the sunset with glee since they did not get married after that. 

The Paper Bag Princess explores gender roles; instead of the prince rescuing the princess, the princess is rescuing the prince. Rather than the prince defeating the dragon, the princess not only defeats the dragon, but she does so by outsmarting him. It also shows kids that it is okay to stand up for yourself.  And, in the end, it reveals that beauty is more than skin deep and that we do not need someone else to be happy or valuable.

I received an advanced copy from Netgalley. Opinions are my own.

More on this:
Paper Bag Princess read by Robert Munsch (4 min 10 sec)

Robert Munsch

Stand Up to Dragons Re-reading the Paper Bag Princess, Francesca Segal 

The Story Behind the Classic by Huffington Post