The popularity of this play, already in antiquity, naturally has everything to do with that provocative idea of a sex strike, through which women force their warmongering husbands to make peace. This lends itself to an avalanche of lewd, ambiguous, and—in Aristophanes’ case -, obviously vulgar puns and references, which are entertainment in themselves.

Moreover, this play is also formally more successful than the others I have read by him: the composition is quite homogeneous (the theme is sustained until the very end), and the opening scene, for example, feels very modern with a sharp dialogue in which the characters’ half-sentences tumble over one another.

A few relevant observations. Naturally, it is primarily the men who are ridiculed by Aristophanes, on the one hand with their drooling and on the other with their pathetic complaining about the behavior of the women. But the women are also put in their place, with their endless chatter and bickering, with their sometimes stupid reactions, and especially with their own sexual weakness (after a while, they too feel like having sex again).

Two. The sex strike seems to be the women's most effective weapon, but if you read the text closely, it turns out that the men's weak spot is not sex, but the fact that the women have confiscated the city's treasury (which is kept in the Acropolis). Aristophanes demonstrates a very modern insight here: it is money and economic power that are the deciding factors.

I am left with a reservation, however, that I expressed earlier: how on earth can you do justice to the many puns, implicit and explicit references, in a translation? Translators can be very creative, but it seems to me that a great deal is always lost regardless. 

About the historical aspects of this piece, see my History account on Goodreads: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show....

Disclaimer: I'm reading and reviewing classic ancient Greek plays, more or less in chronological order. But I'm not giving a rating. How could I, given their age? I'll make an exception only when a play is exceptional and still strikes an emotional and/or intellectual chord.