Rating: 5/5

There is a moment when the day’s axis turns, when time begins to slide away toward night again. The exact moment is imperceptible, though if a watcher is careful, he might perceive the signs. He might see how light and air conspire to make a stillness, to soften the sharp edges of the world. He might note how sounds no longer ring so brightly, and how shadows creep into places still warm from the sun. Shadows, the first sure tendrils of night, reach into fence corners and woods and up the eastern face of houses, and with the shadows come the birds again, hurrying against the night, and timid feeders move quivering over the grass, who know the hawks have folded themselves away, and the owls not yet awakened.

Howard Bahr is at his best beautiful prose once again in the second of his US Civil War novels. The war has just ended and the year is 1865. Gawain Harper, a confederate soldier, has been serving for 3 years and has walked home to Mississippi a changed man, a man that he may not recognize once he gets there. He served out of duty to the father of the woman he loves, the woman who has been on his mind for 3 long years. In his prewar life he was a teacher of English at the local girl’s academy. As he treks toward home thinking about what his new life might entail, he crosses paths with another soldier named Harry Stribling, a thinker and philosopher. But when they reach their destination, they find the town is controlled by Union troops and life as they knew it will be much more difficult to get back to than they expected. What is a normal life now? Who are they after experiencing the dregs of war? Can they be that person they were before? How do they start anew and begin fresh after so much death? 

Gawain finds that some people just can’t let go and move on. Bahr gives readers a gritty experience of what life after the war, the reconstruction era, could have been like. It is an unforgettable story that he weaves and with some interesting grotesque characters that will not leave you. 

The writing is just superb and I can never get enough of Bahr’s beautiful turns of phrases. He incorporates nature and its elements as much as possible. I wish I had made a list and counted all of the different birds that made a showing throughout the novel. I imagine the songs of the birds were covered up by the sounds of war so being able to listen and hear a simple bird call must have been music to a soldier’s ears. The other symbol that makes its way throughout is the concept of Time. Time is fleeting and ever moving, leading the soldiers toward their fates and their destinies. However, ghosts pervade their minds and their dreams, haunting their consciences. 

If I could recommend a Civil War trilogy, it would be this one, The Black Flower, The Year of Jubilo, and The Judas Field. I still have book 3 to look forward to next month and am expecting another fantastic read.