Rating: 4/5

When I first went to university, I developed quite a crush on the Ancient Greeks. Soon, I was studying classical history, mythology, even learning the Ancient Greek language and translating it. So I really appreciate Mary Renault’s version of the Theseus myth. She really had a feel for their mindset. My edition had an introduction by classicist David Mendelsohn. Of her writing, he says the following: “She went as far as to reproduce, in her prose, the syntax of Classical Greek, which is heavy with participles…Such minute attention to stylistic detail gives the novel the impression of having been translated from some lost Greek original.”

He captured my feelings exactly. Having done some translation back in my salad days, I'm familiar with the patterns of their literature and Renault captures it. She also seems to represent their religious beliefs with verisimilitude. Theseus communes with Poseidon without self consciousness and acts on what he perceives. The mysteries of various deities are displayed without critique. Plus Renault finds ways to make mythological elements fit more comfortably into her tale. For example, the centaurs are hirsute men on furry ponies seemingly melding together.

I thought her inspiration to make Theseus a small man was right on the money. He had things to prove as a ruler, making taller men listen to him and considering his people’s well being. The Theseus of myth did a remarkable number of things, had remarkable friendships, and significant relationships with prominent women. Renault manages to fit it all in without it feeling unbelievable. 

But the Greeks believed that a man's life couldn't be fully evaluated until his death. An ignominious death could jeopardize an otherwise illustrious life. I was struck by the parallels between the deaths of Theseus and Oedipus, who we see early in the novel. Oedipus goes to his death by the will of Poseidon and demonstrates the proper attitude. Theseus takes a page out of his book and is dignified to the end.