Rating: 4/5

Cheekily dismissed by its author as merely the novelization of "a fine movie screenplay," 24-Hour Party People is of course much more than that. If the movie of the same name depicts the life of Factory Records impresario Tony Wilson on the big screen, then Wilson's own account of that same time period is even more valuable. It's a funny, vexing, warts-and-all retelling of (roughly) the years 1977-1993, when Wilson brought us a boatload of great music, but most importantly Joy Division, New Order, and Happy Mondays.

Look: I'm predisposed to love this book, so you may have to take my review with a grain of salt. The years 1988-1992 are probably my favorite in the history of popular music, with 1977-1984 coming quickly on their heels. Joy Division was one of those bands that changed my life in a seismic way, and the music industry insider knowledge that Wilson peppers throughout the book gets my nerdy little heart a-thumping. Even a halfway-decent book would get a glowing review.

And I need to say this for the uninitiated, just to make it clear: for a non-musician, Tony Wilson is a pivotal figure in 20th Century popular music. Indie music as we know it owes virtually everything to Factory Records, the label he founded. It goes beyond the bands he shepherded. It was the label's entire ethos that influenced a generation of like-minded individuals. A lot of what passes for independent, forward-thinking 21st Century music doesn't happen without Tony Wilson.

So is 24-Hour Party People a halfway-decent book? Yes, but with this caution: you've got to want to know about the inner workings of the British music scene, and it doesn't hurt to have more than a passing interest in Manchester, England as a whole. The book does trace a similar outline to the movie: from Wilson's stint on Manchester's tiny Granada TV station to the pivotal moment he saw The Sex Pistols play through the founding and demise of Joy Division. The rebirth of that band as New Order. Meeting producer Martin Hannett. The trials and travails of Factory Records. The Hacienda nightclub. The discovery of Happy Mondays, more than one bold claim that their frontman Shaun Ryder is the best poet since W.B. Yeats, and quite a few tales of that band's herculean drug intake.

If that doesn't sound exciting to you, you'd probably best stay away. But if you, like me, are a music fan and especially a fan of British indie music, dive in. Wilson is a sarcastic, subversive narrator, constantly undercutting himself and – to his credit – pointing out all the missteps he made in a decade and a half as England's premier musical tastemaker. But it's not all postmodern irony. Importantly, the suicide of Joy Division singer Ian Curtis is shot through with remorse and regret (how could they not have seen his imminent demise in Curtis' bleak song lyrics? why did they allow the epileptic singer to so work himself into a frenzy that he suffered a seizure at the end of nearly every gig?), and Wilson is clearly still grappling with his own culpability as one of the few who was close to Curtis.

Maybe the most fascinating thing about the book is the way Wilson seems to have viewed the death of Factory Records as a foregone conclusion. The label famously never signed contracts with the bands it released, a fact that Wilson had to know – his apparent altruism toward musicians notwithstanding – would ultimately cause more problems than it solved. There are multiple references to Icarus, and that's how Wilson seems to view himself: a doomed figure who flew too close to the sun. But while he was on the ascent? Few people did more for the music that truly mattered.