Rating: 2/5

A lot of people have given this book one star and decried the author for his crazed prose, clearly influenced and degraded by the use of hallucinogenic drugs. I think these people are wrong, on both counts.

Firstly, this is not a one star book or I would not have been able to finish it. I still have faith that Piers Anthony can write. It is just in this instance he seems to used what talent he has to produce a pretty shitty work of science fiction. Two stars.

On the issue of hallucinogens, I feel that the problem is not that Anthony took drugs at all while writing this book but rather that he didn't take enough. If only he'd started riding that train earlier and with greater vigor, perhaps he could have saved Ghost from becoming the meek and bland trip it ended up as.

The problem with this book is that it is boring, inconsistent, and obsessed with sex. The problems with this book, I mean...

Very little actually happens. None of the characters learn anything, save the protagonist perhaps but that is highly doubtful. A supposed adherence the the principals of "hard" science fiction in the opening stages of the book gives way to fantasy dream-sequence without even giving up a fight. Everyone is boring and two-dimensional, and the numerous plot holes are puttied up with unappealing sex.

Sex is everywhere in this book. It honestly reads like the fantasy of a dirty old man. Even the amazing future jigsaw puzzle (which has an image on both sides) has a naked woman's front and back on each side. And, of course, society's various social norms and mores relating to sex have all advanced to such a point in the book that it's now totally cool for someone to be involved in a vehicular near-miss then bang a bunch of tweens in public at the scene of the accident.

I first heard about Piers Anthony from a podcast, and have wanted to read his books ever since. My understanding is that he melds sci-fi and fantasy, such that I can read about a spaceman crashing on a moon somewhere and fighting orcs. I'm still hanging out for that so am willing to give him another go. For anyone else out there similarly interested in this author's work, I say: do not read Ghost. It's just not worth it. Piers Anthony was so prolific that surely there are other works by him much more deserving of your time and consideration than this.