The One with the Blackface. (Formerly more famous as the first full-length Jeeves &amp; Wooster novel, and - along with The Code of the Woosters - being on lists like 1001 and the Guardian 1000, the 1930s J&amp;W books being considered the most classic, 'Wodehouse at the height of his powers' etc etc.)

There is a pretty comprehensive summary of the blackface aspect of the novel and contemporary criticisms in this Bookriot article. It's a shame it is there to get in the way of what is otherwise a superbly elegant Midsummer Night's Dream style plot - in which the temporarily sundered couples stumbling about over a few summer nights in the countryside are not only romantic, but also include a business partnership between two middle-aged men - and Jeeves &amp; Wooster themselves. (For readers who don't spot that of their own accord, Bertie even refers to one rendez-vous with Jeeves as a tryst.) There are also some particularly funny lines and word choices here - wittier than the short stories as I remember them - beginning with a list of Bertie's disgruntled neighbours in London, who include a Col. J.J. Bustard. (On top of the two more obvious references in that name, there is the Great Bustard, which was hunted to extinction in Britain in the 19th century - and is now being reintroduced.) It may have been the delivery in this audio, but I hadn't noticed before how indebted Blackadder scripts were to Wodehouse. 

It seems like there would be a market for a version with the offensive elements rewritten, alongside the original, given the increasing disappointment of progressive contemporary readers who expect comfort reading from Wodehouse. Once the book is in the public domain I daresay that will happen. (Due to some vagaries of publication history, the next in the series, Right Ho, Jeeves already is in the public domain, but not yet this one.) 

I always used to wonder what the catch was with Wodehouse. (At that point I'd read two books of J&amp;W short stories and wasn't as keen on the characters as 99% of other people who read them and three or four Blandings books, which I preferred.) They were written and set in the early twentieth century but never seemed to feature the sort of prejudice that was in any other literature from this period that wasn't by authors very obviously in favour of social reform (and even then...) The casts were all white, which would be part of the reason - there's usually a limit to how rude a novel can be about people who are not part of the plot - but there weren't metaphors in the narrative using stereotypes or slurs. When there are generalisations about men and women in Wodehouse, they are often the opposite of typical ones, with both author and protagonists accustomed to formidable women, especially aunts. I thought that, due to the books' popularity in Britain, perhaps they'd been edited slightly to remove offensive vocab, though as I've never been a serious fan, I hadn't really looked into it.

It looks like most of the problematic content was inadvertently dumped in one book. (At least I've never noticed anything like the criticisms of Thank You, Jeeves levelled at the other novels.) 
Because a) I automatically assume there will be slurs in books of this age, and that it's instead a matter to remark on if there *isn't* prejudice by 21st century standards, and b) I didn't already love the characters to the extent a lot of readers do, and c) I'd already heard about this issue before starting the book, it wasn't shocking, per se, though it is still jarring for Bertie &amp; chums to repeatedly refer to "the n___ minstrels" as casually as they might say "the Italian opera company" or something (the word isn't directed at any particular character as an insult). The phrase in 1930s Britain apparently meant white performers in blackface, not actual Black entertainers (see Wikipedia, which references two academic history texts on the subject, Pickering 2016; Springhall 2008). For the first half of the book, that's all it is, occasional references to a band / show. 

But later, blackface becomes rather integral to a plot, and whilst it would be possible to rewrite this element, nothing else would encompass all the elements quite as well unless you shifted the setting to a different time period. Bertie has got into playing the banjolele and, early in the story, is keen to make the acquaintance of minstrels so he can learn from them. Later, in order to escape from a sticky situation, he disguises himself as one. Other characters' reactions to him are predicated on his appearing in blackface at night - the most extreme reactions being from a man who's violently drunk and thinks he's seen a devil, and a woman who's just been messing about with a Ouija board. Another character, separately, has also blacked up to try and do a musical show at home and becomes a further element in the caper. (I was surprised to find, given what articles and reviews say - the reactions from characters who don't swiftly realise who Bertie is happen because they think he's a supernatural entity - they don't seem to be mistaking a white man with boot polish on his face for an actual Black person. The assumption is that people will think he is a member of the band, i.e. a white man in blackface. It also all happens in the middle of the night.) 

So to reconstruct it, you need the connection with a new hobby of Bertie's (though that is the most dispensible element, as he never gets round to having a conversation with the band in the narrative or seeing their show; there isn't even a band name), a band or other small entertainment group who might plausibly perform at a rich kid's party, and who have a look that allows Bertie to disguise himself, and and which will lead to alarmed reactions from other characters, and something which is very fashionable at the time the scene is set. One late-90s radio adaptation (thanks to Wiki again) used American hillbillies, which allows for stick-on beards - and looking scruffy and old fashioned, so characters such as policeman and stately home servants can be suspicious of him, and he could look like a ghost to someone predisposed to thinking that. (You could also add a legend of a local ghost earlier in the story to augment that element.) But hillbilly bands weren't a craze in Britain in the 1930s - though it could work, given O Brother Where Art Thou as a reference point, and readers who would prefer a rewrite would surely be happy to sacrifice a little accuracy. (It would work even better in a setting transposed to late 1960s - hippies - or the late 00s to early 2010s - hipsters with beards and early 20th century-style workwear, who would even be playing banjos too - though those would be retellings not edits.)

(Unbelievably, an early 90s episode of the Jeeves &amp; Wooster TV series actually *added* a blackface plot to another story which didn't contain anything of the sort in the original.)

Whilst Bertie says he "never realised before what an important part one's complexion plays in life … Bertram Wooster with merely a pretty tan calling at the back door of Chuffnell Hall would have been received with respect and deference," it doesn't become the lesson on racial privilege that plenty of 21st century readers would like, and it wasn't set up to give much opportunity for that. Firstly, the police had been giving Bertie quite a hard time already, when they knew who he was, because he has already been getting up to his usual eccentric capers, and his new neighbours are rural policemen (with otherwise little to do), who are zealous, and who believe the police have been "shackled" for too long. (One even quotes some statistics dated 1930 - unusual in Wodehouse's work which often steers away from being very situated in time.) And secondly, as mentioned, the most pivotal reactions of fright are based on superstition and its being the middle of the night, not racial prejudice. 

Where Wodehouse's vocab isn't noticeably dated, it always surprises me in how modern it can be - I always forget how much they say "bloke", which I always think of as a recent word, from the 60s or later (because of its increased popularity in the 90s). There are abbreviations I use in note-making which turn out to be in Bertie's normal vocab, like "circs". And words which have re-emerged with slightly different meanings now; here a girl is a "simp". Probably the very fact of some words being in Wodehouse has helped keep them current, as readers then use them in either jocular or incidental fashion, depending how dated they sound. 

Some trends he refers to are gone - like the minstrels themselves, or, more harmless and fun, "a sound not unlike the last utterance of one of those toy ducks you inflate and then let the air out of". (I want to know what those were like!) But others, you could forget how very much of-their-time they were, because they have lasted just as Wodehouse has: countless male narrators still refer to American noir PIs, whether in real books or made up ones like Bertie's Drexdale Yates.

More than other occasions I'd read Wodehouse, the conflicts here made it starkly obvious that this is a world in transition between the Victorian marriage market and the sexual revolution. It's very strongly implied that getting engaged means some sort of sexual activity (so this is why characters are often so keen to get engaged!). But being in the same small house overnight with an eligible person of the opposite sex means that people will assume you have had sex and should be married off pronto - especially, but not only, in the eyes of the older generation. I like some characters' assumption (especially Pauline and Bertie) that former partners (fiancés) should, by default, be good friends, or rather like siblings. The world needs more of that and not defaulting to the assumption that they ought to be on bad terms/should not associate.

There's quite an emphasis here on the point that being upper class doesn't necessarily mean wealth any more. Chuffy is more grown-up than Bertie, being a JP and owner of a stately home and estate, but it's already getting to the point where, Bertie says, [to paraphrase] chaps who own land have little disposable income and would love to sell up, but who wants to buy a house that size these days? (American millionaires, that's who. The reactions to the word 'millionaire' make it closer to 'billionaire' these days.) Bertie doesn't actually seem to be all that wealthy in his own right, as he was renting a flat in London, a posh area of course, but prices not as disproportionate as today of today, and then goes to pay mates rates at a cottage with neither a bathroom nor electric light in the bedroom. (Interesting he never complains about this - perhaps something to do with the way public schools used to get boys used to spartan conditions?) Presumably he's forever waiting for inheritances, has little capital but income from a trust (a high % must go on Jeeves' wages), all no doubt covered in books I've either not read or have forgotten the details of. This is no doubt why he falls back on medieval references from time to time, ancestors who did rather well at the Battle of Crécy, or 'the feudal spirit' - on some level he knows he's a type on the way out, but he probably doesn't care that much, as he is essentially a hedonist who lives in the moment. As in at least one earlier Wodehouse book I've read, socialist protest and activism, a big deal in early 20th century Britain, makes it into this book tangentially, though the narrative here is more obviously anti than the other one (where it was more like scenery). Bertie assumes - it's never clear why - that his new valet is some sort of Bolshevik, though all that's clear from what happens is that the man goes on epic drinking binges. (All's well that ends well for many of the characters, as per Wodehouse form, but presumably not for Brinkley - I'd love to know what happens next to him, and more about this oddly intriguing cove.)

"It can be argued, though, that Jeeves’ contentment with being employed by such a nitwit is itself reassuring. Their relationship suggests that even the most talented and renowned of the working classes won’t rise up against the wealthy classes that have done nothing to earn or maintain that wealth," says the Bookriot article linked above. I have a theory about Jeeves that he finds the work entertaining and that it is a path of least resistance for him; becoming a valet, he didn't have to try and possibly fail to get into a more class-restricted profession that a handful of brilliant working-class men might have managed to get into, such as academia or the civil service, soimewhere he would have to compete with a lot of people of similar intelligence levels to an extent he'd never had to before. And/or perhaps he knows he prefers practical problem-solving over pen-pushing (or commerce) and that in something like the civil service there would have been too much of the latter before getting to the rank doing the former. (This contains a certain amount of projection from my experiences as the brightest kid in my year at a small, deliberately unacademic school, and the habits that engendered, and things I've heard over the years from very clever friends with working class backgrounds.)

It may have taken this old audio to make me understand more about what people see in J&amp;W as characters. (The most famous audios, read by Jonathan Cecil, go too fast for me to follow properly. It's interesting how similar Spencer's Jeeves is to Fry, yet recorded years before the famous ITV adaptations.) But it could also have been that I prefer novels to short stories, and/or that the two of them were apart for most of the story. I've always found Jeeves rather unsettling and controlling, and here he had a lot more distance from Bertie and was assisting a number of people at the same time.

(January 2021)