Rating: 2/5

After the extinction of humanity, aliens visiting a galactic library study three tales from humanity's history. 

This is a fix-up novel, that is, short stories wrapped up by a framing device to turn it into a novel. The stories are all set in the same universe, and sometimes reference the same locations and aliens, but the time is different enough that the same technological rules don't apply (although they're always at a spacefaring level).

Tiptree herself (James Tiptree Jr. being a pseudonym for Alice Sheldon) has been an author I've enjoyed several short stories of in the past, but at the same time, I felt like I haven't read enough. Moreover, she had quite a fascinating life. And, since we were coming up on what would have been her 100th birthday, when I saw this collection in a used book bin, I figured I'd give it a try. 

It's not her best work, unfortunately. It showcases some of the same characteristics she's known for, explorations of gender and sexuality, power, and death, but none have the power of the few classic works, and, to a degree, they seem more like average pulp stories with, occasionally, a little extra.

Since there's only three, it's easy enough to discuss them individually, and then I'll discuss some of the things that apply to all of them.

In "The Only Neat Thing To Do" a teenage girl who wants nothing more to explore space is given a spacecraft by her parents, for local use, and promptly runs away to uncharted territories. There she encounters an alien being unknown to her and uncovers a potential threat to local humanity. This was the best story of the bunch, all told. The alien, although maybe requiring a bit of suspension of disbelief, was a lot of fun to imagine, and the growing horror of what might potentially happen was well-played, as well as the tragedy surrounding the whole situation, that it's not because of any particular maliciousness, but that like physics, biology can also be unforgiving.

"Good Night, Sweet Hearts," tells the story of a man who is out of time due to a large amount of traveling under cryogenic suspension. As part of a series of coincidences, he encounters the great lost love of his college years, now much older and changed in many ways beyond that... and later, encounters the descendant of a clone of hers that's the age that he knew her. Also, there are space pirates. The weakest of the bunch, I get the idea that the author was playing with (a choice between a second chance with a person you have history with that you still hold a torch for, but isn't how you remember her, or one who looks virtually the same but doesn't remember you), and I like how it was eventually dealt with, but too much about it seemed like a false choice and, perhaps oddly, it didn't seem to give enough agency or respect to the women themselves. The fact that the clone was rescued from being a slave (and endured some horrific things) kind of makes her not much like the woman he left behind, except in looks, which makes him shallow for even considering it. And, all in all, the story just didn't have a lot of what I was interested in, it ran more along the lines of a pulp style adventure. 

The third story, "Collision", ranks somewhere in between. The alien race was actually quite well-conceived, with an interesting life cycle involving three genders, and the conflict between them and the humans made sense and was resolved more or less in a satisfying way... but there was just a bizarre subplot (involving people of any race, in certain regions of space, thinking that they should look like the primary inhabitants of that area) that was just... frankly, too silly for me. The worst part was, it had only the smallest consequences on the plot and could easily have been removed. It felt like an interesting idea the author wanted to explore, but didn't have a proper story, so she just shoved it into this one, and made it much worse in the process. But, I still have to give her credit for the alien race itself. 

As for the framing story, it's not substantial enough to really enjoy, but there is one quality that takes it from being a neutral factor in the book to being a minor negative: too often, the author uses the alien's reactions to comment on her own writing, in a way that feels smarmy (even were she criticizing them, but there's some praise too). 

Overall, there are some trends, mostly, unfortunately, to the negative. Not in a "I hate this book" sense, but simply that I might have enjoyed it more if they were improved. Some, you can't really blame Tiptree for... that is, the technology in these seems very dated. Particularly, storage capacities and the fact that tapes are regularly referred to, not as archaic language but as physical things that need to get respooled, threaded, and such, giving the impression that in the far future humanity has spread throughout the galaxy and discovered faster-than-light travel but still uses magnetic tape based cassettes. Of course, any fiction of a certain time period is going to have big gaps like this, and you sort of have to forgive them, but they can still have their effect on your enjoyment. Somewhat more distancing is some occasional language abnormalities. I'm not sure if these are meant to indicate linguistic drift, were particular dialogue quirks of the era or location Tiptree wrote, or some combination (her use of the word "minim" to denote a specific but undefined time period certainly seems to be some element of world-building, but it felt out of place), but it often felt not quite right, not quite natural. Some of the dialogue had the clipped rhythm you sometimes hear in military or pilot speak, where words that are not strictly necessary, but make your sentences feel more natural, get omitted. It's not a huge problem, but it made it harder to get into than I'd hoped. 

I didn't dislike it, I just thought it was okay. Despite the weak review, it's not turning me off Alice Sheldon's work in general, it just might not be the best place for someone to get a deeper exposure to her.