Rating: 3/5

How does an otherwise very good book manage to torpedo itself with a two-page preface? This is a detailed, informative, generally objective history of the Andersonville prisoner of war camp notorious for its abysmal conditions that led to the deaths of thousands of Union soldiers. 

But the brief preface reads like a brazen apologia, suggesting that the camp’s commander, Henry Wirz, was innocent of any culpability and conditions weren’t so bad there anyway. “Almost without exception,” Marvel declares, “those who wrote about Andersonville appear to have exaggerated their tribulations at that place,” cynically suggesting that they did so “because accounts of prison misery sold well in the postwar North.” 

He goes on to solicit sympathy for Wirz by describing him as a “frail Swiss immigrant” and implicitly blames “Northern stubbornness” for their own citizens’ suffering. The Confederacy’s refusal to treat captured Black Union soldiers as true prisoners of war eligible for exchange brought prisoner swaps to a halt and caused the populations of prison camps on both sides to swell. This “breakdown of prisoner exchange was responsible” for the overwhelming overcrowding at Andersonville, Marvel writes, pointedly noting that “it was the Federal government that suspended the exchange cartel.” After the war, “it behooved the victors to establish that enemy malevolence had caused it all” instead of “the victims’ own government.”

The pronouncements in this brief preface fatally tarnish anything that comes after. Which is a shame, because the rest of the book is almost entirely lacking this strident tone. It’s generally a straightforward telling of how the Andersonville camp was created, how it quickly became overcrowded, and how conditions spiraled out of control. Marvel does not shy away from describing the illnesses, the malnutrition, the unsanitary conditions and the harsh discipline doled out to prisoners who violated the rules - including those who were shot on sight for straying beyond the “dead line,” the interior boundary situated several yards back from the camp’s exterior walls.

Even so, Marvel can let the opinions expressed in the preface seep into his narrative in subtle ways. And they might not be as noticeable had he not spelled out his point of view up front. It was on Wirz’s orders that prisoners were shot for purposely or even mistakenly crossing the dead line. But in one of the most notorious examples of such an incident, Marvel describes how Wirz himself pointed one of his pistols at a prisoner who crossed the line, but claims both of his pistols were “defective” so he couldn’t possibly have meant to actually shoot. This is presumably meant to refute allegations made at his later military trial that Wirz himself was responsible for killing prisoners. But is pointing a “defective” pistol at a prisoner really meant to absolve him of any blame, as though ordering underlings to shoot to kill when he wouldn’t do so himself was any better or more noble?

At one point, Marvel also describes how Black prisoners were often forced to work alongside slaves and whipped if they didn't. But given these Black Union soldiers’ survival rate in Andersonville, which exceeded that of their white counterparts, “the opportunity for exercise and extra rations… seemed to redound to the blacks’ benefit.” Sure, forced labor is a fine means of “exercise”!

After the war, when Wirz was arrested and put on trial, Marvel suggests he was railroaded by a vindictive North, but only spends a few pages describing the trial and making his case. While it is true the trial may not have been completely fair and its outcome seemed preordained, that some witnesses’ testimony may not have been completely accurate, that Wirz may not have acted out of malice in purposely allowing the camp’s condition to deteriorate and causing prisoners to suffer and die, and that Confederate leadership and indifference toward prisoners of war put Wirz in an impossible position, Marvel discounts any evidence to the contrary. He’s dismissive of survivors’ accounts, and only testimony that absolved Wirz is deemed credible. He makes “but they did it too” arguments about the Union’s treatment of its prisoners of war, even though Andersonville was far and away the most deplorable and deadly prison camp on either side. And he laments that Wirz was scapegoated, without acknowledging that he was complicit in a rebellious cause, and that the real question is not why Wirz was the only Confederate put to death for war crimes, but that so many others were not.

Two other easily-overlooked quotes in the book stand out. The title page includes an oft-cited, out-of-context quote from Garry Wills with no elaboration: “Only the winners decide what were war crimes,” which suggests what Marvel thinks of how Wirz’s trial turned out. And an author’s note at the very end contains the curious lament that “my Andersonville research has been attended by a greater number of unfulfilled promises, unreciprocated favors, and refusals to share sources than I have experienced in all my other historical efforts combined,” which seems to suggest some kind of conspiracy of silence around the “true story” of Andersonville, but is it possible it might have more to do with other researchers’ reluctance to cooperate with a self-professed “revisionist” historian seeking to tell what he claims is the “true story” of Andersonville?

Even though I’m emphasizing my complaints here, I’ll again underscore that most of the book is not like this. The unfortunate preface set the tone and raised my antennae to look for subtle biases as highlighted above, but the book is otherwise an informative history of the camp and the conditions that its prisoners endured. Lop off the introduction, and the book could stand on its own as the definitive, factual, authoritative history of the camp. But the average of a five-star narrative and a one-star preface is a three-star review, which is the best I can offer for a book whose point of view disappointingly detracts from its promise.