Rating: 5/5

What a tremendous book! Five stars for it and Michener! And five stars for me (LOL!), the plodding reader, for finishing this in five weeks. I've always had to break up books over 600-700 pages and read something in between because my interest flags, but not with this one. I was already in an Alaskan obsession, so this one just snowballed it. More thoughts later when I can get to it.

A couple of quotes I want to keep and access later:

"When one looks at the glorious mountains of Alaska he sees proof of the power of the Pacific Plate as it noses its way north and east, and if today he visits Yakutat, he can observe the plate pushing into Alaska at the steady rate of two inches a year. As we shall see later, this produces large earthquakes in the area, and nearby Mount St. Elias, 18,008 feet, grows taller year by year."

"Because of the profusion of volcanic activity along the Aleutians -- a bubbling cauldron, really -- Alaska holds an honored place, perhaps the preeminent place in the Rim of Fire, that unbroken chain of volcanoes which circles the Pacific Ocean wherever the Pacific Plate comes into violent contact with other plates."

"Nowhere else could the subtle relationships of nature be so intimately observed. Ice high, oceans low. Bridge open, passageway closed. The ponderous mastodon lumbering toward North America, the delicate horse moving toward Asia. Mastodon lurching toward inescapable extinction. The horse galloping to an enlarged life in France and Arabia. Alaska, its extremities girt in ice, served as a way station for all the travelers, regardless of the direction in which they headed. Its broad valleys free of ice and its invigorating climate provided a hospitable resting place. It really was an ice castle, and life within its frozen walls could be pleasant though demanding."

https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-vdNO3nQFbY...

"I was scared," the boy said. "Not in the canyon, You keep to the middle where the water bulges up, you make it. And it's all so swift. All you need there is courage. But in those rapids, there you have to know something. I couldn't have done that."

(This edition has 1124 pages rather than the 868 pages Goodreads lists.)