Rating: 4/5

This is a must read book. Sure it was written in 1995 but 19 years later its theory shows to have been correct. Hopefully the authors are thinking about a 20th Anniversary edition in order to update with new supporting research.

The author likens bra constriction to castrating a calf, "The band constricts the blood flow and starves the constricted tissue, which eventually shrivels up and withers away." I love this analogy! How does this not make sense to some people; as a 34 year old who has worn a bra for I'd say 20 years now, this is exactly what happens. Sure they won't turn blue and fall of in a week or anything but slow strangulation can have numerous effect on a person. I would say that I have always fallen into the 12 hours a day or less category, but after my research lately that amount has already dropped to only when leaving the house basis, and I am a stay at home mom. I only breast fed our two daughters for their 1st month of life but I hope it gave me some extra protection toward development. I had just bought our eldest daughter her 1st bra a couple months ago, a light, cotton shelf bra . I will definitely now make sure that both girls are encouraged to go bra free during their development and only wear constricting ones when needed.

What gets me is how women can do this to one another. We have all walked into Voluptuous Secret and been "fitted" with smiles that say "Don't worry how tight it is, just look how lacy it is, and think of all the adoring looks you will now get looking like a puffed up/stuffed turkey." My guess is their bras are cutting off circulation to their brains and they can't feel the pain it is causing anymore because they have gone numb. 

For those that discredit this book because they "only skimmed it" must have missed this part:

"Are we saying that all cancers could be caused by clothing? Of course not! Tight clothing may simply serve as a handicap to our immune system because of its effect on the lymphatic system. In combination with......toxins, stress, poor diet, and so forth, the constriction of our bodies by clothing can set up a protracted process of degeneration, possibly leading to cancer." 

Nearly 20 years later we all know cancers can be caused by a combination of factors. We all know that toxins from smoking, chemicals, processed food, and pesticide exposure are no longer doubted. It is well known that the body knows how to clean itself. So "The connection of bras to breast cancer, however, could be more than a correlation. Given the lymphatic mechanism we described, the relationship could be causal." Cut off your cleaning mechanisms and you are asking for trouble, ask anyone with liver or kidney failure. Overburden your immune system with toxins or exhaust it with stress ans it will not be able to do its job. No one questions the fact that the blood and lymph fluid cleanses the body and that you much have circulation for this to work; tight shoes or neckties get tossed without a 2nd thought by people all the time saying I feel like they are strangling me so why do you expect bras not to fit the category? 

The myth that bras keep breasts from sagging is not covered with much depth in this book but you can read a great page on it at http://www.breastnotes.com/aware/awar...

Dr Mercola even has articles on his website:
http://articles.mercola.com/sites/art...
http://articles.mercola.com/sites/art...

Also check out The Breast Cancer Link to Bras on the Natural News website (read the comments from all the women going without bras)
http://www.naturalnews.com/045366_bre...

Saying this study wasn't scientific enough or whatever garbage reason some people give is just that. N=1 people! Pay attention to your body,
; red marks, breast pain and lumps (I have been there too) are not good signs. You don't ignore your foot when it starts to tingle because you are sitting on it or have tight elastic socks on.