Rating: 3/5

I have come back to this book years later for reasons that I’m not sure I can explain other than I hated not being able to understand what the point was of this book years ago. I found that the book which was originally written in Chinese in 1988 had been translated and created in audible and e-book in about 2008. Audible books make just about anything doable for me.

The fact that this book was written in the year before the demonstrations and violence in Tiananmen Square cannot be a coincidence since the story is about the uprising of Chinese villagers who predominantly grow garlic against their village administration Who represent the communist party locally. It is sad that this book was banned in China and the fact that it portrays life rather negatively can be simply seen as anti-Chinese propaganda. Thus the book is alive and well in the US where such propaganda is welcomed. However it is also clear that things are often not well in China in real life.

This book is so predominantly about the effort of common people to survive under some onerous circumstances. They raise garlic because that is what they are required to do by the government and then they cannot sell it quite often because of a confluence of events. Eventually some of them storm the local administrative offices. This is interesting in the light of the fact of the January 6 riot that encompass the US Capitol. Some of the leaders are arrested and put in jail and some of the book takes place in that venue. So we have the story of people who struggle in life, rise up against the government, are jailed. There is also the sub text of a love affair set against arranged marriages and births where sons are preferred. These are all actual issues in China of course which have been undergoing some change. The book recognizes that formal governmental change in policy regarding these and other issues does not mean immediate acceptance of the change at the level of the common people. This is an interesting situation where the people feel oppressed by the government while at the same time the government is attempting to reform basic policies progressively. Life is complicated!

But the amazing thing is that I have now finished this book. But it would be hard to say that this book is not quite brutal from beginning to end.

—————————-
I am not going to finish this book because the violence and inhumanity seems never ending. I have read the first sixty pages filled with brutality. Then I randomly skipped to pages further into the book to see if there was any abatement of the grossness and found that there seemed not to be. Then I went to read some reviews by other GR people.
 
Here are several review segments:
 
(one star) This book wasn't for me. I can usually slog through, but really had a hard time. Other reviews seem to indicate that it is worth reading, so not necessarily discouraging others, but at times it seemed jerky and at others a bit too vivid - in a way that I found actually distracted and detracted from the storyline. One could argue that this is his style and is actually integral to the story but regardless, it didn't work for me here. 
. . .
(three stars) While I do not doubt Mo's portrayal of the brutality and corruption of government officials, I found the extreme violence and inhumanity within and between peasant families (severe beatings and torture) a bit hard to believe. Instead, I got the sense that many incidents in the novel were exaggerated primarily for their shock value. 
. . .
(five stars) Stark story of life under a corrupt Communist government. Well written right to the end. I understand why the Chinese banned it after Tiananmen Square. Some powerful imagery and strong political messages here in the middle of a love story. Oh, and it won the 2012 Nobel Peace Prize.
. . .
(five stars) The Garlic Ballads is my first encounter with the work of Mo Yan, laureate of the 2012 Nobel Prize for Literature. My first reactions are that he is an extraordinary writer and that this novel is an impressive piece of politicized art. Banned in China after the massacre in Tiananmen, The Garlic Ballads exposes the injustice and indignity of the communist state while also confronting the dogged misguidance of traditionalist belief systems regarding arranged marriages. The narrative focuses primarily on the struggles of two families, those of garlic farmers Gao Yang and Fang Yunqui. The tragedies that befall them interweave back and forth across the duration of several events from the harvesting of the garlic crops to the storming of a government compound. Mo Yan skillfully unravels his story in bits and pieces that show each family’s degree of suffering, misfortune, and infighting. 
. . .
(five stars) I just finished, and I think I will need to do some pondering, but my initial impressions of this book centers on a conflict between my understanding of China and the picture I got from this book. If Mr. Mo isn't considered a dissident by the Chinese government, then my understanding of what constitutes a "repressive" regime is way off base. This book is not at all flattering to government officials as it tells of corruption, oppression of peasants and the poorest of the poor, official injustice and personal mercy, petty disputes, greed and families in turmoil. 

I give these quotes in some length because this book and author have received considerable acclaim. It is clearly controversial as it presents life in communist China in the mid 1980s. As a person who is often a social critic from a progressive/left point of view, I do not believe my dislike of the presentation resulted from a negative evaluation of the accuracy of the presentation. It simply seemed grim to the extreme, beyond what I required to make the social and political points. I expected to like the book and to generally agree with it. Instead, I found it distasteful on my first attempt to read. I will put this book back on my shelf and can imagine looking at it again in the future.