Rating: 5/5

I am almost eight months pregnant and as my husband and I begin to develop our birth plan, I feel like I read this book in just the nick of time. I finished it in two days and not a moment too soon....

I have read a pile of books about pregnancy and motherhood and this is definitely one of the most important and useful ones. I found it an incredible relief...as soon as I started reading the 'truths' about pregnancy and found myself all over her pages, the ugly realities that other books don't want to write about. I finally felt "normal." The section on childbirth and the hospital/childbirth myths was incredibly informative. It was hard to read, but also has helped me immeasurably to make decisions about my child's birth and medical interventions. If you think an epidural is, as "they" say over and over, just a way to deal with pain..."why have pain when you can have this drug and have it taken away?" READ THIS BOOK! 

Although parts of what she says are scary, it's also so empowering...I have a much better idea of my options, of how to manage the medical establishment, and of what to be wary of. The section on post-partum life, relationships, marriage, career, was also terrifying...but I feel much more prepared to deal with it now. As Wolf says in the section on childbirth and pain, most women have no idea of just how painful it will be...but knowing about the pain, at least intellectually, prepares us to take an attitude of "we are entering a battle," and that she says, is how women are more successful at dealing with the pain. I cannot recommend this book highly enough. 

There are serious feminist issues, women's issues, family issues and government issues revealed here and it really solidified all the suspicions I had, from the rising rate of C-sections to the increasing number of families I meet who want "alternative" births. It is graphic and traumatic and honest. 

From the Introduction: "Being pregnant and giving birth are like crossing a narrow bridge. People can accompany you to the bridge. They can greet you on the other side. But you walk that bridge alone." - African Proverb