Rating: 3/5

A fantasy set in a divided land where the religion is used as a way to justify a rigid society based on sexual repression. The sun god repudiated his wife, the evening star, when she wouldn't obey him, and took a new wife, the earth. The evening star then became an evil hag and sent creatures called the Unseen, non human and prone to tearing human beings to pieces. These creatures took over the central part of the country and now the sun god worshippers live in the other two areas, separated by the area controlled by the evil goddess's minions. Evil thoughts can lay people open to her influence. The earth herself had to be rescued from the goddess by a hero prophet created by the sun god, who founded the religion.

At least, that is the official version. The story opens with a prologue where an aristocratic woman and her escort are travelling across the Unseen Land, from the part of the country where the king rules, to the other, more impoverished area where his younger son governs. She is supposed to marry the prince, but she and all but a few of her escort are massacred a couple of hours ride from the border. With chapter one, we switch to the viewpoint of sixteen year old Iolithe, daughter of a village ruler, en route with her parents to attend the marriage. This wasn't obvious at first as I had been left with the impression that the prologue referred to events years before. Iolithe briefly meets the prince, whom she likes, and is astounded the next day to learn that, with the death of his intended, the prince plans to marry her instead.

Iolithe soon learns that the prince is suffering from an extreme form of obsessive compulsive disorder. To begin with, he is functioning in public, but behind the bedroom door, he embarks on hours of ritual purification that he believes is necessary to ward off the goddess's influence. Iolithe tries to discuss it with him, but the need to fulfill his married duties makes him rapidly worse and he starts retaliating, eventually hitting her. When she turns to the head of the religion for help, she is told there is nothing wrong with the prince and is accused of being a disloyal wife. Even her parents, although they at least appear to believe her, wash their hands of the whole business. Iolithe then escapes to the Unseen Land, intending to cross it somehow and appeal to the prince's parents for help, but is soon caught up in a rather bewildering turn of events where time travel and shape shifting are some of the less weird things that happen to her.

I found this story rather random in the way it veers from one thing to another and is mostly unexplained apart from some vague mysticism. As might be expected, there turns out to be a different version of the central myth, where the sun god is a tyrant, the earth was their child which the goddess was protecting from him, and the prophet hero is a nasty piece of work who appears to still be around and to have been menacing Iolithe. Iolithe is all right as a character - she is independent and foolhardy, she has the best interests of the prince and their country at heart - but she does have to rely on some very convenient magic that only works for her at certain key points. Another problem I found is that many of the characters have practically unpronounceable names that continually caused me to stumble mentally while reading.