Rating: 3/5

TWs and CWs for: alcohol and substance abuse, sexual assault, implied domestic violence/abuse, rich people's entitled attitudes + subsequent manipulative behaviour, suicide (and death/homicide, but this is a suspense thriller after all). A strong moralising anti-drug thread throughout. (There are also some insensitive comments regarding children/(in)fertility and body image, but I don't note them in this review except for here.)

--

My first thought: Too confusing due to a cast of indistinct characters (character soup?), felt like I was introduced to all of them too fast, but it could also be that I really wasn't given any reason to care about any of them. There were so many times I was tempted to turn back to the front of the book and reacquaint myself with all these indistinguishable shapes of people. Come to think of it, the only person I felt was drawn in "screaming colour", as Taylor Swift would put it, was the Head Bitch, Kimberley. The narrator talks about her so much that I felt we were back in Mean Girls - you hate her, and you hate to love her, but you just can't deny that she's absolutely gorgeous (physically, of course.) - yup, I felt the MC was transfixed by Kimberley's perfection to an extreme. (I mean. It's such an extreme that this is one of my sharpest memories of this damn book.)

The final reveal: I would only let myself feel a small twinge of satisfaction, the product of feeling so completely left in the dark that finally getting answers was a relief. And how, because this book started SO. SLOW. I never felt like much was happening or anything was being discovered, except for the assault scene, which only cemented my dislike of a character that was meant to be dislikable. Maybe I like my mysteries too obvious? But this was a pain and a chore to read. No one was really confiding in Mia or telling her anything useful that would let her investigate anything until the final hour; a lot of it was petty, peevish bullying directed towards our MC because... she is doing her job??? And people around her resent that???? (cue suspense of disbelief klaxon) Oh, well, THAT'S the nature of adult female friendships, right?! So much insecurity, so much transference (to use a psych term lol) - it really felt like Mia is this outsider intruder that they can all suddenly take it out on in lieu of Sarah. Also, I know this is the type of book where everyone is some kind of unlikable, but I really wish Mia had had some actual emotional support, because the raw callousness and self-interest of her home base (esp. her boss) towards her really had me doubting MYSELF. Damn. If she were a real person I would be making sure she was going to extensive therapy after this as well as building up her circle of support. 

Stylistically: you can expect that style of pithy wordplay that seems to be so popular now in AF (I have quoted some of my favourites in the progress updates), as well as the hallmark suspense technique of questioning questions (haha) trailing after practically every utterance, trying to depict Mia's mental state of... mostly doubt, and trying to foreshadow some End of Days every time a section came to an end, when, spoiler alert, it was just her fiance wanting to end the relationship and her best friend almost ODing on a pharma cocktail. (Oh, yeah, and the moralising anti-hard drugs thread throughout? Hard to miss, did not sit well with me.) Were these disasters really that *mysterious*?? They seemed pretty foregone to me, not climactic in the slightest. (Oh, man, this particular aspect makes me so angry and I don't know why...)

Summary: If you know me, you know I'm only driven to write about something if I HATE it... or, okay, if it evokes strong feelings about how it could have been improved, which this book has certainly done. You can read it if you want, but if you are anything like me, who likes my fiction to go down smoothly - which is to say that I can enjoy the story coming together in front of me because I don't have to solve the puzzle myself, much less get frustrated at the dearth of evidence and its pacing in getting to me - this is not that. You're gonna choke on how dry it is, actually. Should I be done with the awkward alcohol metaphor yet? I suggest if you want to give it a go, stay away from any and all intoxicating substances, because: 1) There's already enough booze and coke in here to do that for you, and 2) You're gonna need your wits as sharp as you can possibly get 'em. It's not your standard thriller by any means. Good luck! 🤞