Rating: 5/5

I was taken by it, and I applaud it, for many a reason. It shall sit next to, the FEW other choice thrillers on my shelf.
A young man who can sail a fair bit - I'll stop there, and ask: is there a sailor-person (we must do that gender neutral thing, I'm told) out there who's read this and can explain the sailing bits to me as I was lost for most of it? - goes off on a delayed, late in the season, sailing adventure around the sandy shoreline of Germany: these are the sands that pose the riddle.
He's not the sharpest knife in the drawer, but certainly not dull. He's never gonna make it as a Milk-Tray-Man, but he's worth an inspection from behind your cocktail glass. He knows little, if anything, about being a yesteryear James Bond (this story is set just prior to the outbreak of WW1).
By happenstance, he happens to 'fall-over', more than deduce some dubious goings-on, hidden just back from the sandy coastline.
He doesn't do a twirl and magically appear with his underpants outside of his trousers. He 'tries', and the emphasis is on 'tries', to do the right, and, patriotic thing (he's British). Once you come to realise this is a spy-thriller where the protagonist DOES were his underpants UNDER his trousers, you realise that things hardly ever go according to the plan you wrote on the back of a fag-packet whilst you were getting dry from your early morning shower and before your first coffee.
Struggling to figure the riddle and deal with what, seems to me, can happen when gauging rip currents along the sandy coast of Germany (I know nothing about sailing - ask me a question about horses), he gets tangled up with a few folk who are not all they pretend to be.

No; he is not a super-spy, he doesn't bed every female that comes within fifty-metres of him. He tries to help out, because he figures he can. He's an ordinary-joe with a decent, honourable outlook on life.

Sorry, I forgot to tell: he's not too sure of how the tide is running, so he calls (sends a telegram) to his mate, who can also sail a bit, and asks he would mind coming aboard.
Things don't go well, but, with a bit of canny rigging of the sheets, slicing of the lanyard, spinning of the boat's wheel and, I must add, a firm hold on the rudder, they find the truth behind a nefarious plan to catch the British with their pants down. The question is: do they escape?

I'm not telling: you have to read the book. HaHaHa. 

I'm not clever enough to tell you if the writing deserves a pulitzer: I don't care. This is a first-rate thriller that could without doubt have happened. The plot stands tall and says, 'This is as real as it gets.'
I have in my past had a sweet-eye for a few 'boy's-in-books': young Sam Mitchell is my current favourite. But, I'll have to be honest girls; if I went overboard and was fighting to keep my head above water, this is the boy I'd want to sling me a 'floating-doughnut'.