Rating: 4/5

3.75/5
I listened to this as a free public-domain ebook on YouTube (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C4W34...). And that is a good way to experience this collection, because Colum uses a very “bardic” style – for example, repeating epithets like “Odin, the father of the gods”. 

Mythology compilations are always a form of “re-telling”, especially in cases such as Norse mythology, where a considerable amount of scholarship and speculation has to go into trying to recreate what these stories were like pre-Christianization. Such efforts also often have the effect of making the myths and the timelines and relationships involved seem more cohesive than they really were. Just something to keep in mind when assessing which version “does it best”! In this case, Colum tries to arrange the myths into a relatively linear narrative, but there are places where that goes a bit wobbly – such as when it appears that Thor fishes up the World Serpent before Loki fathers it!

Speaking of Loki…this shape-shifting trickster is always the best part of any Norse myth collection! I particularly enjoyed the account of Thor and Loki’s “frenemies road trip”. This includes an incident when Thor’s hammer gets stolen, which results in big, muscly, heavily-bearded Thor dressing in drag as Freya to try and get it back, while Loki (the actual shapeshifter) goes along as “bridesmaid” – no doubt partly for the LOLs, but also to cover for Thor completely failing to act “ladylike”. 
For more on Loki’s confusing origins and role, I highly recommend this video (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZDwQ3...). As Red points out, it is even hard to tell what Loki was really the god OF: “Lies and trickery were his personality, not his deific domain. Thor wasn’t the god of getting drunk and hitting stuff.”

This book was published in 1920, so perhaps it is unsurprising that Colum kind of glosses over both Loki’s more gender-fluid shenanigans as well as anything too directly to do with sex. But what IS surprising is the way he tees up that stuff before jumping over it! For instance, instead of just saying Loki turned into a mare to “distract” the horse of the giant building the wall around Asgard, we get some extensive horse flirting dialog…and then at some later point Odin just has an 8-legged steed, skipping over the bit where Loki gave birth to it! Likewise, when it comes to Freya getting the necklace of brisingamen, we get a whole scene where a bunch of dwarves promise to tell her where the giantesses who make special gold jewelry are if she spends the night with them, and wanting to kiss her…and then when she gets back to Asgard her husband is gone and refuses to be found. Call me crazy, but I think “my wife agreed to a dwarf gang-bang to get a necklace” is a much more relatable reason for that dramatic response than “dang it, I told you I don’t want shiny stuff in my house” which the narrative seems to be trying to pretend is the reason! Maybe you’re meant to read between the lines, but it felt like a slightly odd way of making one do that.

There’s more stories of human heroes than you normally get in collections of Norse god stories, particularly that of Sigurd. This is one part that clearly influenced Tolkien – as we see Sigurd claim a grey horse that is the best in the world, have his ancestor’s broken sword reforged, slay a dragon that was creating a “desolation” in the countryside around…and the return of a cursed ring from its horde. But it also links to other tales the reader may know! That broken sword was pulled by Sigurd’s ancestor from a tree (instead of a stone). Then there is Brunhilde, a Valkyrie who first falls into the role of “animal bride” - sort of. The warrior who steals her swan cloak appears not to be romantically interested in her (though…disclaimers given prior paragraph) but for her to act as his personal Valkyrie and help him win battles. She gets demoted to human for this, and requests to become Sleeping Beauty, so that she might get only the most badass husband. It is Sigurd who crosses Odin’s wall of flame to find her…but, perhaps due to that cursed ring, this story does not get a happy ending!

The book ends, as it begins, with “Ragnarok, the twilight of the gods”. IDK, there’s something anti-climactic about how that part is told. It is likely that Ragnarok wasn’t AS important in pre-Christian Scandinavia as it became afterward when it served to go “and all that’s in the past!” But if you set it up as your beginning and end for your retelling, it feels weird to rush through it!