Rating: 4/5

This book would be great for foundation stage and early key stage 1 when they are learning about different seasons. Ridiculous! is set in the winter and talks about how different animals adapt during this season and about hibernation. The story follows a tortoise named Shelley.

Shelley, is a young tortoise who doesn’t wish to hibernate like her parents. Instead she wants to go out on an adventure outside of the small shed they are staying in and have a look at what winter is like. “Ridiculous!’ Shelley’s parents cry, ‘whoever heard of a tortoise outside in winter?’. When Shelley’s parents are happily snoring Shelley doesn’t listen to her parents and instead leaves ‘her warm bed of leaves’ and goes out through a small hole in the shed to explore winter for herself.

There is snow and ice everywhere and soon Shelley meets a whole host of animals such as a duck who tells her that Shelley can’t break through ice with her beak to get food, and a dog who tells her she can’t run as fast as he can to keep warm, and a bird who tells her she can’t fly home and snuggle up with her family. Shelley comes to a realisation that she can’t do all these things, and throughout whenever these animals meet her they all say ‘A tortoise out in winter?...Ridiculous!’ On each page this is repeated, which makes it great for the children to get involved in when the book is read out to the class. 

Shelley on realising that she can’t do any of these things feels cold and miserable, she remembers the shed and how warm it is and how ‘A tortoise out in winter is ridiculous!’ With that she slips and falls over backwards sliding down the hill getting faster and faster, faster than a dog, a cat, until she hits a bump and is flying like a bird and then lands on the icy duck pond. She then tucks her head into her shell and smashes through the ice that blocked up the hole to the shed waking up her parents. ‘You haven’t been outside, have you, Shelley?’ They ask and all Shelley says is ‘Outside?’ before falling fast asleep.

This a good book to show why certain animals hibernate during winter, because they are not adapted to the season as well as other animals. The book is informative in that it gives small facts to why tortoises hibernate for example, ‘because it’s cold outside and there is no food’ and of course Shelley learns herself why tortoises aren’t suited for the winter.

As an extension task children could try and think of any other animals that hibernate in winter and have a think about why they do. This book teaches about adventure and exploration, but also they fact that you should listen to your parent’s, because most of the time they know best!

Children will love the humour, pictures and finding out about the word ‘ridiculous’, as well as meeting all the different kinds of animals.