Rating: 4/5

The Source and Journey by Katherine Anne Porter

Another version of this note and thoughts on other books are available at:

- https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list... and http://realini.blogspot.ro/`

These are two exquisite short stories from The Old Order.
They seem to have been included in other collections and they certainly help make the case for The Pulitzer Prize.

And the praise heaped by scholars and critics.
Penn Warren said that the stories of Katherine Anne Porter are

-"at the top level"

Indeed, the writing is enchanting, the plot is vibrant, the characters complex and mesmerizing and the themes powerful and thought provoking.

In these two I am thinking of slavery, equality, women's rights and fabulous grit and power, courage and more.

Sophia Jane and her African American servant, friend and slave to begin with- Nannie- are the protagonists of these two accounts.

Sophia Jane is a grandmother now, albeit the narrative will change perspective.
Miranda, the heroine from Pale Horse, Pale Rider is not yet born or relevant in these tales.

But as they say in E-notes on the net, in a Freudian manner, in the coming stories we will explore the childhood and evolution of that little girl.

Sophia Jane is the epitome of the strong woman, even if, because of the moeurs of the age, she gives in, first to her husband and then their sons.

They nearly ruin their businesses and it takes the grit, skills, hard work and special abilities of this extraordinary woman to avoid complete destitution and even famine.
Two of her sons run away, age ten, because they were hungry, basically.

Sophia Jane had to let her spouse venture into all kinds of risky, failed ultimately enterprises.
It was inconceivable for the age to have a woman manage businesses.

Nevertheless, with the death of her husband, she had to take the reins.
Her evaluation of this partner is accurate.

He was a man that would start a project only to abandon it, had the feeling that all around are there only to please him, a small version of The Donald perhaps.

As a young woman, Sophia Jane receives as a sort of gift, the property of two slaves, Nannie and her husband.
From there on, there lives would be intertwined.

She would not act as a slave owner, even when her attitude provoked outrage among the racist community of that time.
They were shocked to see the African American listed in the family bible as a relative.

When old, the two women share the same conviction that the young are acting badly.
They are worthless, Nannie says.

But both women have had a lot of children, eleven and thirteen respectively.
In the first place, it was the African American mother who took care of both her babies and the white offspring.

She gave precedence to the white ones.
But when she became very sick, Sophia Jane was kind enough to treat the African American boy who would become her favorite on the same footing with her own child.

With this occasion she discovered the immense joy of motherhood and she declared:

From now on, I will take care of my own children and you will care for yours.

A great pleasure to read.