Rating: 5/5

Definitely one of the best books on relationships that I read. There are plenty of books that go into excellent depth about the "whys" of relationship conflicts and patterns (i.e. Getting the Love You Want, How to Be an Adult in Relationships… etc.), but this book has immediately implementable solutions. It has clear and realistic strategies for creating a more loving relationship, and the best part is that you don't have to finish the whole book to do them.

Wachtel advises readers to start with the first chapter "The Four Basic Truths About What Makes Love Last," but after that, you can skip around to whichever chapter you feel like you need to read at that moment. Her chapter on how to de-escalate arguments is fantastic and has terrific (and, again, realistic) ideas for what to do in the heat of an argument. 

I read the chapters that were most pertinent to me first, but then I read through the others also. They all have excellent advice. Some relationship books are a little too touchy-feely and require some sort of getting-in-touch-with-your-soul yadda-yadda stuff before the relationship can get better. Wachtel's book, however, is a straight shooter. She gives honest, clear advice for how to actually relate with this other human being that you've fallen in love with. 

What I also appreciated about her book was that she emphasizes that, no matter how madly in love two people are, they are still two DIFFERENT people, and those differences will inevitably butt heads at some point. There's no fairyland where couples magically never have conflict. How we cushion that butting of heads and how we nurture our relationship to withstand any reasonable amount of head-butting is what really matters. It was refreshing to read about other couples who have almost verbatim the same fights that my partner and I have and to realize that … we're not the only ones, and, even better, that the fights we have can be worked through for the better.

It's an easy read -- not intimidating or overwhelming in the least -- and it's a book that I plan on keeping forever.