Rating: 4/5

This book demonstrates clearly why this series is so popular and respected. Ravenel chose 2 stories from each of the annual collections. These collections are edited by Ravenel, an editor at Houghton Mifflin, and a guest editor. The guest editors were mostly big literary names - I was not sure that I trusted each one of them. Well, not to worry, there were a couple of disappointments, but for the most part this was a terrific collection which introduced me to some wonderful writers. There were a couple of familiar names with fine stories that I had not seen before: Joyce Carol Oates's "Nairobi": a tale of emotional prostitution among the well-to-do; Bowles's "In the Red Room": a typically cool and disturbing piece; and my hero Russell Banks's "Sarah Cole: A Type of Love Story": a twistedly amusing account of a romance between a handsome young gentleman and an unattractive lower class woman. There were a couple of stories that I have read before and enjoyed revisiting: Carver's "Cathedral" and Robert Stone's powerful "Helping". A few disappointments were encountered as well, such as Mavis Gallant's boring story, and Cynthia Ozick's predictable holocaust tale.

Alice Munro's "Meneseteung" was fabulous, one of the best things I have read in a long time. She is a marvelous writer, capable of vividly imagining a setting and creating full characters, not to mention a master's grasp of the language. Peter Taylor's long story "The Old Forest" was almost a genteel piece, written with a stately pace and feeling, about a young man's encounter with and unintentional participation in the troubles that can come up when class divisions and sexual attraction come into contact. Robert Coover and Donald Barthelme contributed interesting surreal pieces. Charles Johnson's "Exchange Value" was an intense and bizarrely humorous story from the ghetto. Wright Morris's "Fellow Creatures" is thoroughly charming, the account of a crusty old gent's growing appreciation for the members of the animal kingdom - this should be a favorite of vegetarians everywhere. Susan Sontag's "The Way We Live Now" is a fine look at how a group of NYC aesthetes deals with the AIDS crisis when it comes home to one of their number. Charles Baxter's "Gryphon" is an enigmatic but amusing piece about a schoolteacher who is, well, a little off. Tim O'Brien is well known as a writer that deals with the Vietnam War very effectively in his fiction, and I have wanted for some time to read something by him. "The Things They Carried" does not disappoint; it starts out itemizing a list of what US soldiers carried through the jungles and naturally develops into a depiction of the pain and misery of that experience. All in all, an excellent book.