Rating: 4/5

I want to reveal all to you, the good and the bad, worldly matters and private sorrows, things that I cannot really go on discussing in this letter. But, even though one may be thinking about and describing someone objectionable, should one really go on like this, I wonder? But you must find life irksome at times. I know you do, as you can see. Write to me with your own thoughts — no matter if you have less to say than all my useless prattle, I would love to hear from you.
The problem with a text like this is, unless you come at it with a whole host of previous experience with related materials and interests, it's not going to do much. Sure, you could marvel at the depth of psychological analysis present in a text written half a century before the Norman Conquest occurred on the opposite ends of the earth, but even my eyes started glazing over near the end of the last trailing description of aesthetic arrangements, and I've already read and loved The Tale of Genji. I'm not suggesting you tackle TToG first, or that you commit to an academic career path centered around Heian Japan (unless you're not white, there's enough neo-Orientalism floating around), but just that if you're in the habit of skipping both forewords and afterwords in your textual engagement, you're not going to have much of a worthwhile time. Admittedly, the afterword is tedious with its almost complete excision of inner reflection and the foreword is abhorrently Christocentric (Japan's belief system was not evolving on the trajectory towards a Jesus cult), but they still give much needed orientation for a person reading a millennium after the text's composition.

The best parts of this text for me were any time The Tale of Genji was mentioned. If one knew only the general prescriptions of women not being educated or encouraged to write in the dominant language (Chinese) of their day, one would probably imagine a stereotypical Dickinson situation (even this assumption doesn't adhere to the facts of the Transcendentalist poet's life in conjunction with publication), wherein the text was unearthed after death and brought to public view against the creator's misguided wishes. This was not the case with Murasaki (the evidence for the name also shows up in this text), as her position in court was much affected, although the details of the positives and the negatives are hazy, by the revealing of her composition and her having composed it well within her lifetime. On a less academic note, I also got a kick out of her scathing remarks on Sei Shonagon; I had known of them previously, but encountering them firsthand (as firsthand as translation of ancient Japanese into English can get) will make my reading of The Pillow Book all the richer. It's also not difficult to be drawn into Murasaki's meditations, mournful as they are, as they are truly are, in the lazily overused sense of the word, "modern" in their equivocating nostalgia and social analysis. I'll never be able to read the original in the language it was written in, but I wouldn't mind reading other engagements with this short text, should they ever cross my way.

Throughout my self-imposed, if wandering and dabbling, completionist attempts, I've remained aware that certain authors will never rise up the ranks through sheer number, and not just due to the limits of my personal interest. Murasaki Shikibu is such a one, which is why I saved her microtome until I felt like revisiting my memories of her writing. Unlike most with limited bibliography, though, she benefits from a grand reception in the halls of text and textual analysis, well- earned by her display of literary skill so early in the echelons of history. I can only hope interest in her, both biographical and metafictional, remain alive in these art-killing times.
  So you see — I still fret over what others think of me, and, if I had to sum up my position, I would have to admit that I still retain a deep sense of attachment to this world. But what can I do about it?