Rating: 3/5

Lady Frances Cresswell has been in charge of the estates since their father's death two years earlier and her younger siblings since their mother's death 10 years ago. Frances is smart and strong-willed and easily able to cope with estate matters and the rambunctious twins. She has even devised her own educational system to make learning fun. When her younger friend Kitty Mainwaring is summoned to London for the Season by her uncle, Frances offers to join the nervous Kitty in London for the Season, despite unpleasant memories of her own first Season. When Frances first meets Kitty's uncle, Lord Julian Mainwaring, The Marquess of Camberly, they argue over estate matters and he instantly labels her a bluestocking and a prude. Subsequent meetings between Frances and Julian prove Frances to be intelligent but not overbearing and Julian is surprised to discover that he enjoys the company of Frances and the younger children very much. Julian and Frances provide each other with the intellectually stimulating conversation they both crave and soon Julian finds that the time he spends with Frances is far more agreeable than spending time with his mistress. However, the romance moves slowly and may never evolve into more than friendship so those closest to the pair intervene to give Frances confidence in herself and Julian a little push! 

Frances is an unusual heroine and one I could strongly identify with. I quite agree with her opinion of the ton and her unorthodox teaching methods would have made school a lot easier. I loved all the little period details which were woven into the plot. I usually don't like children in my Regency novels but Cassie and Freddie are amusing as are their animal companions. However, there were a few things I didn't like about this novel, namely Julian is a bit of a boring hero. We are told a lot of what he does but never get much of the action. The story is told from an omniscient point of view, so we know what everyone is thinking, even the pets, which is a little jarring at times. There are a few grammatical errors in some of the sentences which are a little confusing. Overall, this is a good read, especially if you love novels set during the Season and historical details. Skip this one if all you want is romance.