Rating: 5/5

One can't help but fall in love with the man, respect the soldier as a leader of men and admire the general as a great tactician and strategist throughout this narrative. After getting to know the man better, it makes the tragedy of his presidency, in retrospect, even more poignant.

Grant was a good man. As president he was exploited by the poisonous repercussions of Reconstruction; of cynical politicians who preyed on the political opportunism a divided nation provided to make some rich and powerful at the expense of national healing and prosperity. He left the presidency in disgrace and soon after, in pending poverty. There were no presidential pensions or other perks in his times. His "friends" and business associates plundered what money he had in bad investments and outright graft. And when he was diagnosed with throat cancer, he feared the failure of leaving his family with nothing more than debts and further disgrace. Perhaps the one bit of fortune he had late in life was his friendship with Mark Twain, who considered him to be an icon of American history. Twain used his connections to get Grant an astounding advance to write his memoirs.

Grant sat on the porch of his New York City home, swaddled in blankets, quietly and deliberately, with pen in hand, writing page after page of his memories, beginning with the his early life, his service in the Mexican War and through the Civil War, meticulously recalling key battles. People who learned of his impending death would line up and slowly walk past in silence, so as not to disturb his work, paying tribute to the man whose unlikely military leadership won the Civil War. He finished the manuscript five days before his death. He fulfilled his last duty to financially support his family.

What he produced is rightly considered one of the great works of American literature. It ends with the Civil War, the messiness of his political career was left to others to assess. But what he left us is worth revisiting every now and then. I often think of an anecdote from James MacPherson's Battle Cry of Freedom. He commanded the victory of the Battle of Vicksburg, which happened almost simultaneously as the Battle of Gettysburg. Both turned the war in the favor of the North, although victory was still uncertain and far into the future. Lincoln had to endure a slew of commanding generals who never quite knew how to turn the overwhelming advantages the Union forces had to defeat the so-called confederacy. 

After Grant's victory at Vicksburg, Lincoln summoned him to come to Washington, DC. Grant and his young son made the uncomfortable journey and made it to the Willard Hotel, just two blocks from the White House, arriving dirty and unkempt. The Willard housed the military elite and was packed with soldiers when Grant arrived, the desk attendant perturbed by the disheveled man in the grimy uniform with his son in tow. He was abruptly informed some cots might be made available in the attic of the hotel as he turned the guest book for the Grant to sign. Upon seeing the signature, the desk worker gulped and Grant was informed that the presidential suite would be available immediately. Lincoln had the aura, Grant was the real deal. This memoir explains why appearances, when it came to Grant, were deceptive. His service to the nation at its time of greatest crisis was indispensable. His writing about that time is essential for any American to consider, especially now as the nation will likely soon veer toward irreparable fascism, killing all that he led the fight to achieve.