Rating: 5/5

Frog Went A-Courtin’ by John Langstaff and illustrated by Feodor Rojankovsky is a Caldecott Award winner. This book is a depiction of a classic, popular folksong. Langstaff added an ending that would please young readers more than the original, catastrophic ending. Instead of a gray cat swallowing the mouse, and white duck swallowing the frog, the frog and the mouse went to France. I think this is a much better way to end the story for children. I think it is a really good fit for young children. Young children love songs and animals, so it could not be more perfect. I would definitely use this book in my class to teach my children about the animals in the book. A lot of times, children do not necessarily learn much about animals like moths, bugs, raccoons, fleas, ants, and flies. I think this is a great book to introduce these types of animals to young children, but in a funny way. I am sure that all young children will really enjoy this book. The first thing I noticed in the illustrations was the incredible focus on texture. I really feel like I could pet the cat, and feel the bumblebee. I believe the illustrator uses pen and ink because the detail is so fine. The bright colors are very enjoyable, but I am not sure why the illustrator goes back and forth between pages from bright colors, to just grays and greens. The lines are so distinct that I feel like I could pull each animal off of the page they seem so real. I believe the illustrations follow a Surrealism style of art because they are definitely beyond the real and imaginative. The double page spreads throughout the book are fascinating. I feel like I can see the artwork come to life as I scan across the page. The single page spreads are also used very nicely. I enjoy the fact that each illustration goes exactly with the words, and whichever animal the children are reading about. This allows the children to really focus on what they are looking at and hearing. They are not trying to listen to a long passage as well as a lot going on in the illustration. Instead, if the children are hearing how the raccoon is waving a silver spoon, they are looking at a bright, colorful drawing of a raccoon waving a silver spoon. This makes it a lot easier on the children who are first being introduced to books as well as those who have a long history with them.