Rating: 2/5

Pop quiz! This book is about:

A. The exhumation of a French nun;
B. Murders that were followed by arson;
C. The disappearance of a college student;
D. The disappearance of the sister of the protagonist;
E. Drug-related murders on an island sanctuary;
F. A sinister cult;
G. It's not about anything. It is just a device for Kathy Reichs to insert her research on entomology, forensic science and cults;
H. All of the above.

If you chose (H) you pass! 

I am not through with this book, and surprisingly, I am enjoying it somewhat. However, even people who enjoy the book would have to acknowledge it is a complete mess.

Deja Dead, the first book in the series, was a pretty good plot buried beneath a lot of inane prose: http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/...

Death Du Jour looks like it had an editor, it is shorter, and had the potential for a good plot. However, Reichs had about five too many components, and most of the sub-plots are tacked on to the main plot in a completely unbelievable way. Tempe meets a college student -- voila! She is involved. Tempe goes to an island - voila! Bodies. Tempe's sister comes to visit - voila! She is involved. Her sister's name is Gabby....whoops, that was Tempe's friend in Deja Dead who disappeared. This is her sister, Hari, who disappears. Sound familiar? This is only Kathy Reichs' second book and she is already re-hashing. But the main problem is that the number of coincidences involve strain credulity beyond the breaking point. She should have picked the house burning plot and stuck with that.

In addition, there are two "characters" who are really just mouthpieces for research about cults and forensics. They talk with Tempe and launch into lectures on their subject. Personally, I was interested in the material, but in terms of art, the research material is handled in a very ham-handed way.

What works? Reichs has a nice writing style, and she develops the relationship with Detective Ryan further from Deja Dead. I am not burdened by having watched "Bones" so I didn't have expectations. I thought that she handled their relationship nicely. I liked the science and the experience that Reichs conveys on what it is like to be an active forensic anthropologist. 

At this point I have 3 discs to go on the audiobook and plan to finish. But regardless of how it all ends up there are waaaaaay too many different plot lines to make the novel work. Like an episode of "Murder She Wrote", whereever Tempe goes, the bodies just pile up for her to investigate. Or, a close friend disappears. No one reads fiction for absolute rock-solidly realistic stories. But a little contact with reality would have simplified and helped this book a lot.

Update: the result of the convoluted structure of the book, and having too many characters was predictable: when the culprit was revealed I didn't really care. Also, the "nun" thread turned out to be pretty lame for this day and age. 

In this book, Reichs has solved some of her problems, namely over-writing. Or, she at least has found an editor with some backbone. The plot here was not a bad idea, but even Tempe acknowledges that there are a number of coincidences in three locations. It strains even the willing suspension of disbelief. Still, I found the research portions interesting, despite the clumsy insertion into the narrative. Also, the developing relationship between Tempe and Ryan is something to watch. In book no. 2 of this series Kathy Reichs is getting there, but hasn't quite arrived.