Rating: 5/5

“’[…] Perhaps it is that I am old, but I find it extremely difficult to identify men with their ideas. I can dislike, even hate an idea, but the man who has it seems to be still a man.’”

Let’s keep this interesting statement in mind for a few seconds while pausing to ask ourselves the question as to what to think of a man or a woman who have no particular ideas of what life is or ought to be about. Who go through life without concerning themselves too much about the various conceptions there are of liberty, of responsibility, of justice, and of what our future might look like and who are instead satisfied with a well-ordered existence, their own creature comforts and sensibilities. Are such people more offensive or less so than those who believe in ideas we happen to disagree with?

Such a person can be seen in the protagonist of Eric Ambler’s brilliant novel Journey into Fear, which was written and is set in the period referred to as the Phoney War when England and France had declared war on Germany after the Nazis’ invasion of Poland but when there were actually no war operations going on in the west. Mr. Graham is a British engineer who was sent to Turkey in order to help prepare the Turkish Navy for a potential strike against the Germans and who is now on his way back to England, his head full of knowledge which the Germans do not wish to see arrive in his native country. Only within a hair’s breadth did he escape assassination in Istanbul, and now he finds himself on board a small Italian ship going to Genoa whence he is supposed to take a train to Paris. Among his fellow passengers are the Mathises, a French couple who constantly bicker, Dr. Haller, a German archaeologist, and his ailing wife, Mr. Kuvetli, a seemingly harmless trader in tobacco, a sultry Hungarian dancer named Josette and her cynical husband José, and, to Graham’s dismay, the man in the crumpled suit whom he suspects to have made an attempt on his life. Regarding himself as a mere engineer, an expert in armament, but not as a man experienced in politics or in espionage, and unwilling to risk his skin for a game he never intended to play in the first place, Graham feels like the proverbial fish in the barrel somebody tries to have a shot at, and he does not know whom to trust in his pursuit of saving his life.

Ambler himself was a man with strong political convictions, and as a staunch antifascist, his sympathies lay with the Soviet Union – until 1939, the year that saw the German-Soviet Pact – but still, he managed to present the inner conflict of his unpolitical protagonist in a fair and empathetic light. What Graham faces on board the ship, amidst a handful of strangers, some of whom want to see him dead, is nothing less but a taste of true life, something he has been spared (or denied) up to now in his petty bourgeois existence with a wife he rather likes than loves, and his liaison with the nightclub singer Josette, offering a furlough from his boring life, is but the mirror image of the greater threats that lie between himself and his former harmless life. When Dr. Haller, who is not the real archaeologist but a German spymaster, offers him the opportunity to take a six-week holiday instead of dying for his country and for the advantage of the Allied side, he actually seriously considers this for a while, thinking that it is all very well for people to say that they would go to any length to serve their convictions as long as they are not faced with the immediate choice between risking their own lives and taking an easy way out.

As usual, Ambler not only entertains his readers with a first-class spy story enriched by his undoubted talent of pacing and nuanced characterization but he also invites them to deal with ideas such as why wars are really fought and populations are rallied behind certain ideologies. His left-leaning Mr. Mathis proclaims, for example:

“’You are right. It is not for us to ask questions. And why? Because the only people who can give us the answers are the bankers and the politicians at the top, the boys with the shares in the big factories which make war materials. They will not give us answers. Why? Because they know that if the soldiers of France and England knew those answers they would not fight. […] No, it is not good for those who fight to know too much. Speeches, yes! The truth, no!’”

This, of course, need not be exclusively true in regard to wars but also other “projects” and “threats” governments choose to sell to their populations. Another interesting impulse to be derived from this novel is the question – as exemplified by the fate of the Italian lady’s husband who survived an earthquake but then got shot as a looter because he carried water in a silver jug he found in the debris of a house – whether death by an act of God is more dignified than death at the hand of a group of soldiers who misjudge your actions, or whether death can dignify a life at all. The climax of dramatic irony is reached, however, when we look at the statement by Dr. Haller with which this review is introduced. We later learn that the real Dr. Haller never boarded the ship but that the spymaster Moeller used his identity to spin his web around Graham and that in impersonating the archaeologist, he mainly drew from what he read in a book written by the real Dr. Haller. In other words, most of the ideas voiced by Moeller were actually Dr. Haller’s ideas, with the probable exception of the statement quoted above – a statement that seems to ring true at first sight and yet comes from a scheming Nazi. This leaves us with an unsettling conundrum: Can we really draw a line between a person and their ideas? And are there not also ideas that, if put into practice, would cause avoidable sufferings to thousands of people – and is not the person who holds this idea responsible for it in a certain way? I think it a very clever move of Ambler’s to put these seemingly appealing words into the mouth of a Nazi murderer, who also says quite reasonable things like this:

“‘[…] One must understand a person thoroughly before one can insult him effectively. The French lady, for example, called me a filthy Bosche. I am unmoved. I bathed this morning and I have no unpleasant habits.’”

All in all, Journey into Fear is actually a journey into some of the elementary questions popping up in our lives from time to time – if only we stopped to consider now and then.