Rating: 4/5

.

North to the Rails

 • by Louis L'Amour
(First pub. 1971, under 300 pages)

OVERVIEW:
When Tom Chantry comes west to buy cattle, he quickly runs into trouble. (At the saloon a hostile drunk named)...Dutch Akin challenges Chantry to a gunfight. Leaving town rather than face Akin, Chantry is quickly branded a coward.

Later, when hiring men to take his herd to the railroad, Chantry faces a dilemma: No one wants to make the long, dangerous ride with a leader of questionable courage. So when French Williams, a shrewd and ruthless cattleman, makes Chantry an offer, Tom reluctantly accepts his unusual terms: Tom must remain with the drive from start to finish. If he fails to do so, the entire herd will belong to French.

Tom quickly learns that life is not going to be made easy for him. The first man French hires is Dutch Akin.

•

Dutch turns out to be the least of his troubles. When sober he's reasonable and friendly and acknowledges Tom's decision kept them both alive. When Tom was still a lad his father (Borden Chantry) served as town marshal for six years, until he was ambushed and murdered by the outlaw Frank Ruff and his two cohorts. Since then Tom has taken his mom's warning to heart (live by the gun and you'll die by the gun). He's now a pacifist, doesn't carry a gun, avoids violence and believes "...a lot more can be done by reason then by guns." 

The story discusses unarmed pacifism, versus the reality of armed criminals acting with impunity and the responsibility to be armed for self defense and the defense of others.

In his civilized East Coast city living peacefully without firearms was easy for Tom. Now he has entered the gun-carrying wild west where he's expected to deal in cattle to keep Earnshaw and Company solvent. Doris Earnshaw is his fiance and her father Robert Earnshaw needs the money a quick cattle transaction would generate. With the assistance of cattlemen French Williams and his team of drovers, Tom soon has 2200 head of cattle headed towards the nearest railroad / railhead, about a month-long journey. 

Tom eventually proves he's not a coward: he can shoot; hunt and defend himself as a skilled boxer, putting surly cowpunchers in their place; he's Western born, is a horseman and a tracker. He just doesn't want to carry a gun and has no desire to kill anyone or to be killed--a desire that becomes increasingly difficult to maintain. In addition to wild Indians and rustlers, French's homicidal niece Sarah is in the area. Sarah has hired a band of outlaws to steal the herd and kill Tom. 

It's not clear how Sarah found out about the small fortune to be made selling a herd of over 2,000 cattle or if her uncle French put her up to it. She's determined to get this money for herself and head to New York, then Paris--living out her life in style.

While out scouting Tom is shot, robbed and left for dead. After that he starts carrying a gun, which he's forced to use a few times against would-be killers set on doing him in. As they get nearer the railroad, Tom wakes one night to a mystery: French and his men have left, leaving Tom alone with the whole herd. I don't believe the story clarified why this happened, but soon rustlers move in. The nearby Kiowa tribe, originally befriended by Tom's dad, now helps gather the herd and drive them on to the railroad town. 

At the railhead, Mr Earnshaw and Doris are there in a private train car and the cattle are sold for bags of gold. Sarah is there as well, she's given up on the herd and now plots to take the gold and soon does just that. Her gang steals the train and the car holding the Earnshaw's and the gold. Tom and his allies (Bone, Mobile and others) give chase. They end up at the Chantry's old ranch house, where French shows up as well. Mr. Sparrow is there. He's been helping Tom and hired a man to watch over him. It turns out Sparrow, in his reckless youth, was one of the men that helped gun down Tom's father (marshal Borden Chantry) and he sorely regrets his crime.

Sparrow, French, Bone and others have a shootout with Sarah's gang: the Ruffs, Hank and Bud Talrim, etc leaving some dead and some wounded. Sarah slipped away on horseback during the gunfight, leading a packhorse loaded with the gold. Five days later they locate the the packhorse with the gold, but no Sarah. Being unfamiliar with the area, carrying no water and missjudging the distances involved on her crude map, she's soon lost in the vast, dry prairie.

With all the gun-toting and violence when Tom first arrived in the west, he couldn't wait to go home. Now he's learned to survive and even made friends with the dangerous Kiowas. He can make good money as a cattleman, there's land to be had and Doris agrees to move west with him.

•

Mostly well done and intriguing. 
However, some questions seemed to be left unanswered: did French bring in Sarah; why did French and his men quit the herd and seem to go into hiding; what happened to Tom's trusted scout, the Pawnee named Sun Chief; where did Tom live back east and what exactly did he do for a living?

I'm not sure of the time period. The railroad is still being built and they're laying track westward at a rate of a mile a day--probably during the second half of the 19th century.

.

.

The Chantry Book Series in Chronological Order

Fair Blows the Wind (1978)
Borden Chantry (1977)
 ● 
  North to the Rails
 (1971)
Over on the Dry Side (1975)
The Ferguson Rifle (1971)

..