Rating: 3/5

It's a little hard to follow just exactly what is going on in Patrick McCabe's 2001 novel, Emerald Germs of Ireland. But that's as it's meant to be (I eventually cottoned on), as we delve inside the addled mind of Irish lad, Pat McNab.

Pat is something of a no-hoper, living on a farm with his mother (his soldiering brute of a father is dead). Pat likes a drink (or many) at the local pub, Sullivans, and his head is just not quite right. It's not completely clear whether he is somewhat nutty because he drinks so much, or whether he drinks so much because he is somewhat nutty.

But all sorts of weird and fantastical thoughts gallivant their way through the scrambled brain of Pat McNab.

His relationship with his mother is fraught - he seems to love her dearly, and seeks her goodwill, and she alternately nurtures and berates him.

But when she nags him or belittles him, his thoughts turn nasty and vindictive.

Whether he actually killed his mother and buried her body in the garden is open to conjecture. He tells others that she has gone to England on business, which is a very implausible yarn.

The book is structured such that each chapter begins with the lyrics of a song, a pop song or an Irish folk song, and the chapter evolves around a theme suggested by the lyrics.

Someone (or more than one) seems to die in each chapter, someone who has managed to find themselves on the wrong side of Pat McNab's fevered imagination, and subject to his (imaginary?) acts of vengeance.

The tone, for such a dark topic and murder and mutilation, is comic and tongue in cheek, for we are dealing with the mind of a simple and confused young man.

The writing style is articulate and cleverly crafted, but the plot - song/murder, song/murder - becomes a little predictable and implausible.

But, we are never quite sure just exactly what is going on. Some of the scenarios are so wacky as to be obvious dreams or drunken imaginings, others are perhaps more plausible.

So, just how many, if any, bodies are buried in Pat McNab's garden is really open to interpretation.

I've given this 3 stars - I just couldn't quite make it to 4, despite the quality of the writing.