Rating: 4/5

Much better than the first book of this trilogy. This text is worth reading solely for the style Sartre uses to move between character's who are all experiencing the moments leading up to Hitler's "reclaiming" the Sudeten Germans from Czechoslovakia and the signing of the Munich Agreement on September 30, 1938. It's Europe right before it all went sour. Of course, all the readers know where the lives of Sartre's characters are leading, but the characters don't; and while you might think this makes all their machinations trite, Sartre deftly weaves together the story of many human lives revealing a fascinating picture of the European mind before WWII. If you could imagine reading this book not knowing anything about history you might believe that Sartre ended the book on a happy note, but of course the entire play (for this trilogy really is more like a play) is a monograph on absurdity. The inevitability of the horror that is coming to Europe sits in the reader's mind the entire trilogy and Sartre plays with this knowledge that he knows the reader to possess. When France's Daladier returns home from the Munich meeting at the end of the book, he sees the cheering Parisian crowds who believe war has been averted and says: "Ah, les cons!" (Ah, the fools! - historically I believe he actually did say this). Here is what Winston Churchill actually said about the Munich Agreement, which I think sums up the book rather well: 
"We have suffered a total and unmitigated defeat...you will find that in a period of time which may be measured by years, but may be measured by months, Czechoslovakia will be engulfed in the Nazi régime. We are in the presence of a disaster of the first magnitude...we have sustained a defeat without a war, the consequences of which will travel far with us along our road...we have passed an awful milestone in our history, when the whole equilibrium of Europe has been deranged, and that the terrible words have for the time being been pronounced against the Western democracies: "Thou art weighed in the balance and found wanting". And do not suppose that this is the end. This is only the beginning of the reckoning. This is only the first sip, the first foretaste of a bitter cup which will be proffered to us year by year unless by a supreme recovery of moral health and martial vigour, we arise again and take our stand for freedom as in the olden time." 
Perhaps it is my American upbringing and my study of history, but it seems that Sartre's characters are almost comically self interested and confused, given the severity of the situation they faced. Perhaps Sartre was intentionally pushing his readership's buttons, as it were. At the time the book takes place they could not know what would happen, but Sartre's readers did know and they were sitting in Cafe's in Paris just after the war reading the stories of these foolish people. I can't imagine the sick feeling that must have crept into their stomachs at the turn of each page.