Rating: 1/5

I wanted to love this book. I honestly did. The premise is entirely original in the historical romance world, following a Texas Ranger's travels during the Mexican Cession as he falls in love with a Mexican girl. Adam is driven by a desire to avenge his brother and wife's death, he is in Mexico solely because he wants to fight. Anita makes no qualms about joining up with a Texan because she is hoping to aid in the destruction of Mexico's president, Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna (another personal vendetta).

The book is, ultimately, a chore to read for several reasons, the first being the constant, incessant killing of Mexicans. Well, obviously, right? However, the first 400 hundred pages consists of the hero and his friend gleefully touting their bloodlust for the deaths of "dirty Mexicans" and "greasers." At one point, the Mexican heroine pardons a character using the phrase "greaser" in front of her because "he really doesn't mean it." There's a major problem occurring when people become so desensitized to slurs they readily allow others to use them as commonplace names.

Adam is heavily focused on and his point of view overtakes the majority of the story. Therefore the only Mexican character we get to know is Anita. The rest are faceless and nameless, their deaths a mere recounting. The book's saving grace happens at its climax when the hero comes to the sudden epiphany that his need for vengeance is an excuse and he and his comrades are fueled by bigotry and barbarism. FINALLY. It’s a really risky turn to take, having Adam acknowledge his own prejudice and darkness in such a manner. Kudos to a lead that is meant to be a violent bigot who manages to overcome his own prejudice. Sadly, it comes very late in the story and we don’t get a chance to really explore his growth or torment over his sudden realization.

The novel is also extremely light on romance and features too many "info dumps." The chapters are bogged down with retellings of every general, regime and battle that occurred. Well researched, yes. Tedious to read, yes. The majority of the novel features bland exposition between soldier characters as they reminisce on battles fought and won. Characters often sound as if they are reading to each other from history textbooks. Not just light on romance, but plot as well.

A positive aspect of Wilde's research is that when the story does focus on the plot, we get an amazing picture of Mexico. I really enjoyed the scenes that featured the main characters traveling through Mexico, struggling through sand storms, trudging through snowy mountain routes and viewing some of the beautiful architecture. If the book had a strong editor who could have eliminated a few hundred pages of exposition from this 477 page novel, it could have really been a keeper. More focus on using research to create a sense of the setting, the trials and tribulations, can immerse readers in that world, rather than using expository dialogue to merely tell of the time period without really showing.

As I mentioned earlier, the romance also suffers from the constant dumping of information. Adam has an interesting reaction to Anita that works to build towards the beginning of nice un-PC romance. He is immediately smitten with her, but his affections are bound to be left frustrated when Anita only feels disgust in his presence. He reacts with a forced hatred that reeks of desperation and is jealous of any man she is cordial to because he really desires her reciprocated affection. If only Anita would give him a little smile (seriously, he longs for it)! 

It gets to the point where Anita falls in love with Adam, but he cannot bring himself to actually show her some affection (leading me to wonder how she fell for him in the first place) because of his desperate, frustrated love. He doesn't want to make that move and get shot down. Their relationship stays in this state of limbo, with very little progress or change, because Adam refuses to budge for around 300, or so, pages while the book is too occupied with exposition. Their relationship is abruptly mended nearing the end of the book in a most unsatisfactory manner.