Rating: 3/5

I loved this book as a child. I'm not sure how old I was but it really captured my imagination. Now that I've reread it I can see why: first of all the themes and setting are amazing. Wolves in Transylvania, wild forests and mountains, snow and ice. A prophecy, a young white she-wolf with the Sight. Awesome! 

And the author definitely has a gift for creating stunning, awe-inspiring imagery. It really fires up the imagination. The deserted citadel, the black wolf and the white wolf, the wheeling eagle... The prophecy feels tangible and inescapable as well all through the book, as I read I was hooked on finding out how it would unfold and come to pass. The worldbuilding and mythology are complex and clearly the author put a lot of thought into them.

So before I get to my criticisms I do want to make it clear that this book does get some things right, and for those reasons alone it's already an interesting, worthwhile read. But I feel I need to point out where it fails for me, because these things could also bother other people. So this will probably sound really negative, even though in reality I'm of two minds over this book. I really enjoyed some aspects, it's just that others were problematic for me.

First of all, a couple minor details: the characterisation isn't very layered. There is a large cast of characters but most are very one-dimensional, making it hard to feel attached to any of them. This book takes an even more extreme approach to character safety than A Song of Ice and Fire, yet I didn't feel as sad as I should have because I just didn't identify with many characters.
I would say the only ones I really liked and had an emotional connection with were Larka, who is a lovely character, brave when it counts but flawed and likeable, and Kar, who is just a darling. 
One character we were supposed to like, Huttser, was even actively unlikeable to me. He was a macho jerk throwing his weight around.

The dialogue wasn't the best. At times it felt stilted and unnatural, or was really too obviously a way to get some exposition in. The characters kept telling each other stories, and while I get that the author was trying to build a mythology for his world, some of them were rather unnecessary and felt overindulgent.

There is a lot of head-hopping. I am probably more patient than most about this, but even to me it got a little jarring sometimes. But mostly I could get over it. However one thing that annoyed me, I don't know why, is when in the midst of the head hopping some really clumsy foreshadowing would happen. Let me give an example : say two characters have just had an emotionally charged conversation, they turn tail and leave. The narration will then say something like "But even as they left, they didn't know eyes were glinting from behind the leaves, watching them". This happens all. the. damn. time and it got irritating. If you want to use foreshadowing, find a way of weaving it naturally into the story. Don't keep pointing out what your characters don't know, it makes them seem stupid and doesn't help us feel connected to them.

Lastly there was clearly an attempt to weave human history in the region, and even human history in general, into the story. I don't feel like the author quite pulled this off. As he was trying to write in the wolf worldview, he would try to simplify all of this into concepts that wolves could maybe understand, except that was a failure and only succeeded in making this history seem dumbed down, sometimes overly general and sometimes weirdly overly specific, as well as oriented and heavy handed about his message. You could tell he was trying to make this into timeless wisdom and... it just didn't work for me.

Now let's get to the major problems, for me. First, my pet peeve, animal behaviour. While some of the mistakes could be attributed to out-of-date references, this book is just far too inaccurate about wolf behaviour and pack dynamics. Writing anthropomorphic fantasy must be really difficult and I am willing to allow for minor inaccuracies, as long as the spirit of the animal, the fundamental differences from human worldview, are respected. I didn't really feel that was the case here. Wolves gathering in packs of male fighters, or gathering in a huge army-like pack and training for war... No. That's just impossible to imagine when you know anything about this species' behaviour. The composition of the pack of heroes we are introduced to was also all wrong, as far as my understanding of wolves go. There were also some huge mistakes that had me scratching my head. Wolves don't sweat until their fur is soaked. They don't cry tears. Etc. A lot of this could have been corrected with a little research. I don't feel there was enough of an effort to enter into the potential mindset of a wolf. There was good, imaginative worldbuilding. There just wasn't enough effort to make it match up with reality.

Next, and perhaps most egregious of all to me: the sexism. Funny how I hadn't noticed any of this as a child, but during this reread I had to check the publication date at one stage because I just couldn't believe a modern book could be this bad. 2001. I felt like it could have been 40 years older. It's doubly disappointing to me because none of this actually exists in the wild between wolves. There really wasn't any need for any of it. This is 100% the author inserting his worldview and his prejudice about males and females into the story. The author thinks the alpha male is the ultimate leader of the pack, and when it comes down to it, his mate must obey him. (This stupid idea is a large part of why Huttser comes across as such an ass. I don't even think the author realises how much of a jerk he's made poor Huttser, in order to conform to his idea of an alpha male). It's his right to take the cubs on their first hunt, as his mate reminds him when she cedes the role to him. Males will hunt for the pack while all 3 females stay behind to look after a measly 2 cubs. Because those are their roles. Anyone with a little knowledge about wolves will know how absurd this is. Both baddies in the story are females, and in both cases became big baddies because of a perversion, a wrongness, in their performance of motherhood, the ultimate feminine role. Morgra is sterile. It is repeatedly thrown in her face that she cannot experience a mother's love for her cubs. She is bitter and filled with hate. Slavka preferred to kill her own cubs than to let human hunters and their dogs kill them. This has turned her "hard" and now she pursues an unnatural militaristic idea of survival. There are no true male baddies, somehow. Lastly, even as a child I was a little bothered that Larka, who has had a more powerful and active role than other good females are allowed in the story, has to die at the end. Only the males who have shared her extraordinary fate are also allowed to continue on with a normal life. She cannot have both power and knowledge, and also live to become a mother and raise cubs. She must die, a virgin sacrifice. Somehow doesn't sit well with me.
Anyway, I'm not good at articulating exactly how and why but some very antiquated attitudes permeate the story and kind of ruin it for me. I can sometimes enjoy some works despite some sexism in them. But I think in this case it's particularly jarring because it really is human projection and not something that actually exists among wolves.

Lastly, this story is so unrelentingly dark and hopeless. It pays lip service to love and hope but we really don't get to see much of those. It's a lot of death, of sadness and fear. (GRRM stares at this book's death toll in envy!) Somehow I was more ok with this as a kid. Maybe because now I've seen how hard life can be, I don't really want more of that in my stories and I prefer to read books where there is more balance between pain and joy. I can read dark things, but there needs to be a bit of humour and happiness too to keep me going. The end is... unsatisfying. It feels meaningless. I don't understand WHY this had to happen, why it was inevitable, why the price had to be paid. It won't have made any difference.

The sexism and the bleak, dark tone are two main reasons I wouldn't recommend this for a kid. However if you are passionate about wolves, or like atmospheric stories about dark prophecies, it's worth a read.