Reading De Sade is a deed of masochism in itself. A month ago I tried Les 120 journées de Sodome, and that was a real ordeal: the accumulation of gruesome scenes of sex and violence is unbearable. Moreover, the purely literary level of that unfinished work by the Marquis de Sade (1785) is clearly below par. That is somewhat different with this 'Justine', a novel that de Sade wrote and rewrote in various stages, spread between 1787 and 1797. It starts as a sentimental, moralistic story, about two sisters who grow up in a protected environment, but because of the dead of their parents end up on the street. The older sister, the cynical Juliette, manages to work her way up by using her feminine charms and committing numerous crimes. But the pious and virtuous Justine ends up really bad. In this novel she tells her story, following the conventions of the picaresque genre, in a succession of precarious situations in which she found herself.

If you have read the “120 days”, then this book initially seems to be not too bad: Justine uses strikingly veiled and disguised terms to describe what happens to her. But after the first third of the book, the events become increasingly perverse and sadistic. It is never as coarse and gross as in “120 days”, but you also have a strong stomach to read this book. Fortunately, the literary level and Justine's naive character somewhat make up for that. What also helps is that in this novel, much more than in “120 days”, the libertine protagonists 'philosophically' explain their perverse behavior with great rhetorical talent. These are sometimes passages of several pages that are beautifully developed in terms of literature. 

The recurring mantra is the philosophy of nature that also recurs in de Sade's other works: in the state of nature it is everyone for himself; as with animals, only one's own pleasure counts; and nature takes no account of what is good or is bad. And above all: if we have a perverse taste, it is only because nature allows it: “If nature were offended by these tastes, she would not inspire them in us; it is impossible that we can receive from her a feeling designed to outrage her, and in this extreme certainty, we can give ourselves over to our passions of whatever kind, whatever violence they may be, well certain that all the inconveniences that their shock entails are only designs of nature of which we are the involuntary organs.» Clear, no?

Quite a bit has been written in the last half century about the misogynistic nature of de Sade's books. And indeed, the protagonists who indulge in the most unthinkable acts of violence and perversion are almost all men; and the victims are mainly women (and girls). That was certainly the case in “120 days”, and that is also the case in this Justine. In the 'philosophical' passages, the perpetrators regularly stress the absolute inferiority of the female species, to legitimize their evil deeds: “a puny creature, always inferior to man, infinitely less beautiful than him, less ingenious, less wise, made in a disgusting manner, entirely opposed to what can please man, to what should delight him.» So no discussion about the misogynistic character of de Sade's novels. Nevertheless, there is a very small nuance: in 'Justine', for example, older sister Juliette and the female leader of a gang of robbers show that they also like ‘the perverse stuff’, and in a single passage de Sade seems to hint that Justine herself very briefly began to see the attractive side of sadomasochistic play. Of course, this does not alter the fact that with de Sade this 'game' is always one-way, the total and arbitrary domination of one person by the other.

Reading 'Justine' was a slightly more pleasant experience than '120 days', although pleasant is certainly a misplaced word here. I think that by now I've seen enough of de Sade's world and I'm going to leave it at that. It's definitely not my world. But isn't that perhaps part of the reason why many readers venture into reading these kinds of things: to get to know other worlds, other lives, other views on life? Even though this is – in this case – a masochistic experience? And isn't such a confrontation with the repulsive always a bit of an enrichment? Or am I sweet-talking what cannot be sweet-talked? Mmm… De Sade certainly won't leave you unmoved.