Written in 1990 by Betty Neels, 20th century queen of the classic British medical romance, may she rest in peace. Born in 1909, a career nurse through wwii and beyond, her books are liberally embellished with details on medical treatments, architecture, clothing, menus and cordon bleu recipes. She married a Dutchman, and many of her heroes are also Dutch.

This is a modern Cinderella story featuring Radolf (no typo) and Sarah. A British receptionist at a hospital clinic, Sarah is 28 years old. She’s hard-working, gentle, patient — but not a doormat. A Cinderella, her loving father died five years ago, after which her wicked stepmother couldn’t wait to show her the door. To all intents and purposes, she’s an orphan, living in a gloomy London flatlet with her cat, Charles.  Small, a little too thin, pleasant-faced without being pretty, beautiful pansy eyes, a thin, delicate nose, a wide mouth and a crown of hair which took her some considerable time to put up each morning. Dutch Doctor Radolf Nauta, age 36. His unfaithful fiancée tossed him for a rich millionaire a decade ago and he’s still keeping a tight guard on his heart. His mother suggests that Sarah would be acceptable to his tartar of a grandmother, who is dying, and needs someone at her side. So Sarah gets extra pay to live in Holland for a while. Actually, ‘In the north, miss, just south of Leeuwarden—that is in Friesland.’ 

When she got back to her London job she was immediately fired by Miss Payne, a bitter old maid. The doctor found out, and gave her frozen hell.It wasn’t until lunchtime, his clinic over, that the Professor had gone to Miss Payne’s office. He had been there for ten minutes or so and Miss Payne, very much shaken, had had to be buoyed up with cups of strong tea after he had gone. 
Then he had to search for Sarah. Cuz he felt guilty that she got fired. Or so he told himself.  The need to find her became an obsession but only, he reminded himself, because he felt responsible for her misfortune.
LOL. I had to laugh at this type of thing, which went on for some time:  The very least she could have done would have been to let him know that she had left St Cyprian’s. Was she aware that he had spent a good deal of his leisure looking for her? By the end of the performance he was in a towering rage, all the worse for having to conceal it. He sat through supper at the fashionable restaurant Lady Wesley had chosen, his bland good manners masking his feelings.
Just funny to watch him deal with the plain little nobody he cannot forget. Then, when he finds her, she’s a house servant, and he cannot stand that either. Haha!  She was crossing the hall with a loaded tray when the Professor came out of the drawing-room and saw her. Without a word he took the tray from her, carried it down to the kitchen where he dumped it on the table, and walked away again, all the while silent. Sarah found it unnerving. 
So, Neels did it again. Oh, and as with most of her books, this one comes with a few adventures, beginning with a mugging in the park, wherein Sarah jumps into the fray to save an elderly man from a gang of punks, and the Prof jumps into the fray to save them both. Hehe. And let’s not forget the cat’s confrontation with a rabbit snare.