Rating: 1/5

This book should be listed under 'Jan' Morris not James Morris, if you don't know why then I suggest you Google Jan Morris. Listing her work as that of man is transphobic in the extreme. Please note that Jan Morris even when she was called James Morris has nothing to do with the author James Morris described here.

This book, and its two companion volumes, is described by its author as an attempt to capture the feel of the British empire, the view it held of itself, written by a former imperial subject who lived through its final years and witnessed its ultimate collapse. Why that or its florid, and very readable prose, should excuse the grotesquely one-sided presentation of a historical period is hard to understand. What would we think of a history of Nazi Germany's empire building told as a history of the foibles and eccentricities of those madcap National Socialists! That funny little man with his silly mustache at the top of a pyramid of striving officials and soldiers! All those funny encounters between those cultured, educated German administrators attempting to create order in the vast, uncivilized reaches of their empire confronting recalcitrant Slavs, Poles, Ukrainians and who knows what others, those, 'new-caught sullen peoples, Half devil and half child', that German nation had sent out their best young men 'To serve your captives' need; To wait in heavy harness, On fluttered folk and wild' and what thanks do they get? None, all they receive and 'reap his old reward, The blame of those ye better, The hate of those ye guard' and after fighting 'The savage wars of peace' they find some Irish, Black, Indian, Pakistan, Pinko, Poufter, Leftie who, when 'your goal is nearest' come along and with 'Sloth and heathen Folly, Bring all your hopes to nought.'

That Britain, just as much as the Nazis, or other empire builder:

'ubi solitudinem faciunt pacem appellant' (created a desert and called it peace, a quote from Tacitus)

is what makes this compulsively readable book an offense because it is apologia for a system that ground a quarter of the world under the heels of some incredibly mediocre people. It was about power and millions not having it and a very, very few white Englishmen from a miniscule part of that nation's population having it. Of course there were a few women involved, there were Irish, Scottish and Welsh men who took part and behaved as abominably as their English counterparts, there were even men from poor and working class backgrounds enthusiastically taking part in the rapine and plunder; but the agenda was set and lead by that minority of over breed and unthinking products of England's upper middle and gentry classes.

I try to find a reason to excuse this, and the other volumes in the Pax Britannica trilogy, almost pathological racism. That Jan Morris was an outsider in many ways as well as a liberal, possibly free thinking, individual makes it worse, though is a salutary lesson on far attitudes have changed in the past half century, thank goodness. The Pax Britannica trilogy are only worth reading as a demonstration of the delusions the British had and the lies they told about their empire. It is unbelievable how long it took for people in the UK to actually grasp the reality of their country's deeds abroad and how resistant they were to referring to, or viewing, the 1857 rebellion as anything but 'the Indian or Sepoy mutiny'.

All those noble Englishmen intent on doing good, all those funny, childlike foreigners stopping them, is it really that excessive to draw comparisons with Nazi empire building?

I come from England's oldest colony (Ireland) and despite how much I regard the actions of England over many hundreds of years as baleful but I do not believe that the Irish Famine of 1845-1852 was a deliberate policy of genocide. It was the result of viewing Ireland through the lens of what mattered for England. For longer than half a millennium Ireland was dealt with as an adjunct of England. It mattered only in so far as it impinged on England. That is the story of all England's imperial possessions, particularly India. Britain didn't allow the 1943 Bengal famine to happen through hatred of Indians (though Churchill's rampant and openly expressed disdain for Indians does suggest, as far as he was concerned, their deaths was not something for him to lose sleep over) but because India only existed to make Britain great and powerful. Irish peoples opinions or desires, exactly like those of the people of India, just did not matter. The English rulers of Ireland, India and elsewhere thought they knew better what was good for ordinary Irish or Indian people then the Irish or Indians who claimed to be their leaders.

It is more than military repression, economic exploitation and cultural debasement that left a legacy in former colonies, a quarter of the world ended up with Stockholm syndrome.

Books like the Pax Britannica trilogy need to be banished to Trotsky's capacious dustbin of history. You should only be reading them if you have read at least a few of the following in part:

'Barbed Wire Imperialism: British Empire of Camps (1876-1903)' by Aidan Forth 
'Legacy of Violence: A History of the British Empire' by Caroline Elkins
'Inglorious Empire, What the British Did in India, by Shashi Tharoor
'Return of a King: the Battle for Afghanistan' by William Dalrymple
'The Anarchy: the Relentless Rise of The East India Company' by William Dalrymple
'Imperial Twilight: the Opium War and the End of China's Last Golden Age' by Stephen R. Platt 'Paddy’s Lament: Ireland 1846-1847: Prelude to Hatred' by Thomas Gallagher
'The Scramble for Africa' by Thomas Pakenham

I could go on and on, there is a wealth of information available now that was undreamt of when Jan Morris wrote these books. Caroline Eakins has revealed, via long legal battles, has exposed how much of Britain's colonial history has been systematically suppressed, destroyed and hidden. This isn't about portraying Britain as bad it is about growing up and accepting that if for 500 years a quarter of the world was impoverished to make a few thousand Brits wealthy it is time to face up to that. If you one of the vast majority of British people whose ancestors never benefited from that wealth then perhaps it will make you look with a critical eye and those who did and their descendants who are still benefiting.