Rating: 3/5

Another Penguin Modern Classic! I read this as a sort of companion piece to Things Fall Apart. Two novellas about the men and women of the Third World. While Things Fall Apart was set in a time just before colonization, Nectar is set just after the departure of the colonizers, though colonization and independence are barely mentioned in this book. I wonder if some scholar has already written a thesis comparing and contrasting these two works, given the common ground they share. Nectar does not equal Things Fall Apart in its power and lyricism though its quiet power is felt best in its closing pages. 

While women barely played any role in TFA - the usual case with literature from most underdeveloped countries - Nectar gives a rare and refreshing insight into the lives of rural women in poor countries. Even now in 2020, when I think about Tamil (and, to an extent, Indian English) literature, it continues to be dominated by men. Male authors writing well-formed men and awfully clichéd women, never suspending the male gaze. Even when women write or when women are written about, it happens to be mostly about those from the cities, and rural women are virtually nowhere to be seen or heard. So when this little novel was published in 1954, it must have been groundbreaking. 

The rhythm and rituals of rural life are captured well, and all the subtle details seem to have been recorded with precision. I loved the flow of the story and the unwavering calm of the narrator's voice. It was especially refreshing to read the perspectives of a woman of her time. The geographies are not really mentioned in the story and I was wondering if the story took place in TN or Karnataka, though the states didn't exist when this book was written. This gave the book a sort of timeless placeless atmosphere that I liked. All the names were very Tamil, but in the end the characters seem to travel to Mysore (which is not named again, but Chamundi Hill is), and this has left me curious about pre-independence history of the southern states. 

Though I love the concept of this book and am glad that this book exists, I cannot admit to loving it wholeheartedly. In fact, I was indifferent while reading most of the book, and I only began to like it in the second part when I started warming up to the elderly couple. The story did not really engage me in the beginning, and I was holding on to it encouraged only by its length. The descriptions aren't exactly lyrical, and the whole book can be said to be very ordinary. Some of the characters are memorable despite there being too many of them. The novel verges on the edges of misery porn, and might as well have been titled A Series of Unfortunate Events. But I know that this was (and is) the stark reality of life in India and whatever is depicted is totally within the bounds of possibility. Though the nuances of everyday life don't escape Markandaya's observation, this book subscribes to the naive notion that village life is the very form of bliss and completely ignores the reality of castes in Indian villages. 

All these issues notwithstanding, Nectar manages to leave behind a touching, bittersweet aftertaste, thanks largely to its emotional warmth and affecting humanity.