Rating: 1/5

In a desperate effort to find an audience for John Updike’s terrible: Memories of the Ford Administration I have what might be two possibles.
1. Given that we are a society dedicated to discrediting and especially discrediting institutions, Memories of the Ford Administration can be used by those wish to prove that the Pulitzer Prize Committee are a bunch of political hacks. The Pro-Pulitzer folks can show that there are a scattering of finely written paragraphs, but they come with a curse. The rest of the book. Then again you need not read this book to down grade the Pulitzer Prize, you need only brandish the title.
2. If you automatically reject any book that gives more than a passing mention to the subject of sex, this is a book you can recommend to your less sensitive reader friends. Yes, it has lots of somewhat graphic sex, but it is so consistently guilt ridden and disgustingly described as to be, again deliberately repellent. The sensitive reader need not read it, merely recommend it. Making of it a punishment for not being sex adverse.

Alfred Clayton, our protagonist, and first person, highly unreliable narrator is a history professor in a small New England woman’s college called Wayward. To his credit he never once refers to the student body as the Wayward Girls. He sufficiently wayward as a compulsive, serial sexually active male. He has made the choice to leave his wife, nicked named The Queen of Disorder and his children in favor of another professor’s wife, whom he has nick named The Perfect Wife. He has moved out of his house and into a classic bachelor, mid divorce squalor apartment and he continues to shag almost every woman who shares a passing interest in rubbing parts. He is not a predator or even a seducer, merely unwilling to perform more than minimal control of his tumescence. He tells us he does not make himself available to the students, but seems to know a lot about things like the particular risks of sex with first year students. 

Just before the opening of the book he is asked by the Northern New England Association of American Historians or the NNEAAH to write a book to be called Memories of the Ford Administration. The NNEAAAH will become something of a joke and some readers may try to rationalize this mess as intended to be a joke. They may be right, or they may just be rationalizing. Anyway the rough format of the book, that is, the novel, not the one the NNEEAAH requested; is a draft of the copy he is sending to the editor complete with asides to that editor about where changes may be made or foot notes added. 

He tells us/his editor that he does not intend to write about the Ford administration except as a reference in time. For his topic he will indulge us/his NNEAAH sponsors in his self-indulgent wallowing in the mess he made of his life.
On the other had he will give us pages and pages of a biography of America’s last Pre-Civil War President James Buchanan. Updike had been something of a Buchanan Scholar so this part contains some interesting thoughts about that president. There is a highly detailed, almost hour for hour recounting of Buchanan’s activity in the last hours before the assault on Ft Sumpter. However. However, Alfred is unreliable and his historic style includes inventing discussions and presuming to knowledge of facts not in the record. At no time in any of the about 1/3 of the novel that maybe a biography of Buchanan can we be sure that anything in the Bio is legitimate history or presumptive history or made up for the purposes of the novel. 

The shifts from the novel’s time line to the presidential biography arrive unannounced and designedly so to be disruptive to the novel’s flow. While I am at it the asides to the editor are also intrusive. 

When writing about an unsympathetic protagonist authors have a few choices. Make us sympathize with an unlikable character Alfred Clayton is a self-indulgent, bad liar and ultimately not sympathetic. He can be made into such a large scale, heroic wind bag as to be admirable for his chutzpah, Think Falstaff. Alfred is not an over the top grandiose fake, he is justifiably guilt ridden. At least the author can have us thirsting for his ultimate comeuppance, enjoying the arrival of the Flaming Sword of Justice. What we get is something of a hohum denouement. But at least that denouement signals the end of bad novel.