Rating: 5/5

THE ‘RUNNING WITH ME JESUS’ PRIEST LOOKS BACK OVER HIS LIFE

Malcolm Boyd (1923-2015) was an American Episcopal Priest, author, and civil rights and gay activist. He was known in the '60s as "The Espresso Priest" for his religiously-themed poetry-reading sessions at the "Hungry i" nightclub in San Francisco (the period for which this 1965 book relates). In 1977 he came "out of the closet" (see his book, ' Gay Priest: An Inner Journey.')

He wrote in the Introduction to this 1984 book, “This has been in some ways a painful book to write, yes; but a liberating, affirming, and---finally---happy one…it means takin a lantern and casting bright light into what was a forbidden dungeon of my life… society and the church … taught me… Hide inside a dark closet, and never step outside unless you wear a socially acceptable mask that obscures your truth and is therefore a lie… now I know that I am a gay person—whole, healthy, blessed, happy, created in God’s image and free of the past horrors of human slavery.” (Pg. 2) He continues, “Why do I write this book? For the sake openness, honesty, sharing, and solidarity with other people. I have taken seriously being a Christian in worship, prayer, church reform, interfaith relations race, peace, ecumenism, women’s rights. THIS is now necessary for me as a born-again person. My life is in mid-course… I do not ASK for my right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness in what will inevitably be the final years of my life. This right belongs to me. I claim it.” (Pg. 7)

He recalls that in high school, “My gay sexuality remained submerged, by what power of the will I can now only wonder at, during this period of my maximum sexual intensity.” (Pg. 44) He continues, “After graduating from college, I went to Hollywood… I had to decide between the priorities of a career and personal, sexual ones. Like the majority of people, I chose at the expense of my sexuality.” (Pg. 50) Later, he adds, “During the years in the Berkeley seminary, I could consider my homosexuality my own special burden, a test, if you will, of my devotion to Christ and the teachings of His Church. It was something to be repressed, set aside, and overcome. ‘Burn me; burn away the dross!’” (Pg. 77)

But he wonders, “Could I not stand, alone before my God, and say, ‘This is who I am. I can be no other.’ Wasn’t this the essence of Christianity—a direct and personal relationship between a human being and God? ‘Listen... I am part of your creation. I have found a capacity to love. I do not believe that that is sin. I do not believe I should be cut off from your love because of it… I do not want your mercy for this. For other things I need your mercy… I am grateful that you permit me to work as a co-creator with you in evolving, changing, sacred life.’” (Pg. 78)

He observes, “If honesty was a Christian virtue, what was I to make of these massive deceptions and denials of selfhood? Earlier, I could think of myself as only an isolated deviant, and deception my special burden. But as my knowledge of church life grew to include not just the sanctuary, the rectory, and the classroom but also the bedroom, I began to wonder how much double-standard ethics an institution can tolerate and still maintain its integrity.” (Pg. 92)

He recounts, “At Colorado State I held religious ‘espresso meetings’ accompanied by bongo drums… I was soon to be known as ‘The beatnik priest.’ … Those alienated students were part of the world at Colorado State,.My job was in the world... Except that with me, that vocation had a special intensity, because I was part of a world, too---a hidden gay world…. But it didn’t show. I was a highly visible public figure… But I was an invisible man, who only revealed himself when he chose to in shadowed surroundings.” (Pg. 92-93) But later he adds, “I did not become an activist simply as a response to my sexual repression.” (Pg. 100)

He says of his book, ‘Are You Running With Me, Jesus?’ that “The impulse to write the book came from my increasing inability to pray. I had assumed that prayer was necessarily verbal. I forced myself to use archaic words, battling against my growing disillusionment and boredom… I virtually sopped praying, except for using the Lord’s Prayer.” (Pg./ 139)

In the last chapter, he summarizes, “I do not mean to idealize the gay world. It has its own pitfalls, nightmares, cruelties, hypocrites, and arrogance. It has cliques, difficult prima donnas, open warfare, and dreadful absences of compassion. In these respects it resembles the straight world. But don’t forget that is has its own code language, styles, rituals, threats posed against its existence, and fears. And it has its own strength.” (Pg. 160)

This book will be of keen interest to LGBT persons, and their supporters.