Rating: 5/5

A book that is as relevant today as it was when it was written in the 1850s. To my mind, De Tocqueville exposes the fact that, contrary to what is taught in many schools, the Revolution did not spring out of nowhere suddenly, but was prepared by policies tolerated by all levels of society for centuries. He also shows that the idea of "absolute monarchy" is a theory parroted by history teachers, not anything that had any basis in reality, and certainly not in France.

For those living in France and/or amidst the French, the book is chock-full of lightbulb moments, in which you see that a certain national tendency, or way of living and thinking, dates neither to the Revolution or the Ancien Regime, but to time immemorial: the French have been that way for a long time. Most painful to read, for someone like myself who prefers subsidiarity in all things, was the continuation by the Revolutionaries of the process of centralization which we know was given a huge push by Louis XIV, but which had been happening over centuries as France married its way into the shape it holds today. This idea of centralization, which has as its chief boast "efficiency" is proof that bad ideas can be repeated by both royalists and revolutionaries, particularly when they think about humans as economic ciphers rather than immortal souls.

To be deeply appreciated this book requires a very basic knowledge of French history from 1780-1830, the kind you might even get via a Wikipedia read. The more that you know about French history, both before and after the Revolution, the deeper de Tocqueville's insights will loom.

"The central objective of this work which I am placing before the public is to explain why this great revolution, which was stirring simultaneously throughout almost the whole continent of Europe, should explode in France rather than elsewhere, why it emerged, as it were spontaneously, from the very society it was to destroy and how the old monarchy could finally collapse in such a comprehensive and precipitous fashion." (p. 10)

"Democratic societies which lack freedom can still be wealthy, sophisticated, attractive, even impressive, deriving power from the influence of their like-minded citizens. In such societies we encounter private virtues, kindly fathers, honest businessmen, exemplary landowners and even good Christians whose home country is not of this world and the glory of whose faith fosters people like that in the midst of the deepest moral corruption and the most depraved governments. The Roman Empire, in the final days of its decline, had many such in its population." (p. 14)

"We can state with conviction, therefore, that a man's support for absolute government is in direct proportion to the contempt he feels for his country." (p. 15)

"Even in our own time we have seen men who believed that, by exhibiting their contempt for God, they could cover up their cowardice before the least significant government officials." (p. 21)

(regarding Catholicism in contrast to earlier religions) "I think I can say, without lacking respect towards this holy religion, that it owed its triumph in part to the fact that it had freed itself, more than had any other...from every special link with a single nation, government, social state, historical period or race." (p. 27)

(regarding the Revolution) "What can truly be stated is that it completely destroyed or is in the process of destroying...everything of the ancient society which derived from the aristocratic and feudal institutions, which was linked to them in any way at all and which bore the slightest impression of them in any way whatever." (p. 34)

"When the nobility possesses not only privileges but also powers, when it both governs and administers, its individual rights can be greater while being less obvious." (p. 43)

"Almost every ruler who has destroyed freedom sought at first to keep its outward form." (p. 56-57)

"For the intrusion of justice into administrative affairs harms only formal business, whereas the intrusion of the government into justice demoralizes men and tends to turn them into both revolutionaries and slaves." (p. 66)

"There we can see the Ancien Regime in a nutshell: strict rules, lax implementation; such was its essential nature." (p. 76)

"We often complain that the French have contempt for the law. Alas, when might they have learned to respect it?" (p. 76)

"No one imagined that an important matter could be brought to a successful conclusion without the involvement of the state." (p. 77)

"Since the government had usurped the place of Providence, it was natural for everyone to call upon the former for their personal needs." (p. 79)

"The men of '89 had overturned the building but its foundations had stayed in the very hearts of its destroyers and, upon these foundations, were they able to rebuild it, constructing it more stoutly than it had ever been before." (p. 80)

"'We are only a provincial town, we must see what they are going to do in Paris.'" (p. 83)

"Only government by one man has, in the long run, the unavoidable effect of making men similar to each other and mutually indifferent to each other's fate." (p. 89)

"In fact, as the government of the manor broke down, as the Estates-General finally met less frequently or eventually stopped meeting altogether, and as general freedoms in the end collapsed, ruining local liberties alongside them, the middle classes and the nobles ceased to have contact in public life. Never again did they feel any need to draw closer to each other or to cooperate; every day saw the rift between them widen and they became estranged from each other. In the eighteenth century this revolution was complete. These two classes of men met only by chance in private life and then not only as rivals but as enemies." (p. 93)

"The more this noble order ceased to be an aristocracy, the more it apparently became a caste." (p. 93)

"[Y]ou only have to dig to the root of this evil to find some financial short-term expedient which has grown into an institution." (p. 107)

(regarding the attitude of the French towards the King pre-1789) "They felt for him both the tenderness one feels for a father and the respect one owes only to God. By submitting to his most arbitrary commands, they were yielding less to constraint than to love; thus they often kept complete freedom of soul even in the most extreme state of dependence. They though the greatest evil of obedience was constraint; for us it is the least. For us, the worst evil stems from the slavish feeling which induces that obedience. Let us not despise our forefathers; we have not the right to do so. Would to God we could recover a little of their greatness along with their prejudices and failings!" (p. 123)

"In the eighteenth century, a village was a community all of whose inhabitants were poor, uneducated, and coarse." (p. 127)

(regarding the nobility) "As they went on marching at the front, they thought they were still governing and indeed they continued to retain around them some men whom, in legal documents, they called their subjects; other men they named as their vassals, tenants and farmers. In reality no one was following them; they stood alone. When eventually an attack came along to overthrow them, the nobles' only recourse was to flee." (p. 138)

"The nobles had forgotten so completely how general theories, once they have been accepted, inevitably become transformed into political passions and actions." (p. 144)

"Political language itself then adopted something of the language spoken by authors, packed with generalizations, abstract terms, pretentious vocabulary and literary turns of phrase." (p. 149)

"What is peculiar is that we have retained the habits derived from books while losing almost completely our former love of literature." (p. 149)

"In France the Christian religion was attacked with a sort of madness with no attempt even to put another in its stead. The passionate and unrelenting effort to rid people of the faith which had settled there left their souls empty." (p. 151)

(regarding the monarchy) "It is true they permitted no one to lay a finger on the Church but they allowed her to be pierced from afar with a thousand arrows." (p. 153)

"It was Bolingbroke who paved the way for Voltaire." (p. 154)

"The nobility of old, which was the most irreligious class before 1789, became the most devout after 1793 - the first to be infected was the first to be converted." (p. 155)

"When I seek to disentangle the different results caused by non-belief in the France of that time, I discover that it was the disorder in people's minds more than the degradation of their hearts or the corruption of their moral habits that brought men of that age to entertain such extraordinary excesses of behavior." (p. 156)

(critiquing a quote of Quesnay) "'Tyranny is impossible if the nation is educated'...With the help of this piffling literary rubbish, they intended to replace all political guarantees." (p. 160)

(quoting Voltaire, who was backing a policy of the King) "'As for me, I believe the king to be right and, since we must serve, I think it better to do so under a well-bred lion than two hundred rats of my own kind.'" (p. 165)

"[W]henever nations are poorly governed, they are very ready to entertain the desire for governing themselves." (p. 167)

"Only the thirty-seven years of constitutional monarchy, which were for us times of peace and rapid progress, can be compared in this respect with the reign of Louis XVI." (p. 172)

(quoting Necker) "'Most foreigners find it hard to have any idea how much authority is wielded in France by public opinion; they have difficulty in understanding the nature of this unseen power which even controls the royal palace. Yet that is how things are.'" (p. 173)

"[T]he Highways Department was besotted with the geometrical beauty of straight lines which we have seen since...rather than making a short detour it carved a way through a thousand inheritances." (p. 186)

"They judged and administered first in the name of the king, then in that of the republic and finally in the name of the emperor. Then, as fortune's wheel turned once again full circle, they began once more to administer and judge for the king, for the republic, and for the emperor, ever the same, ever in the same way. For what mattered the name of their master? Their business was less to be good citizens than good administrators and good judges. As soon as the first shock wave had passed by, it seemed as if nothing in the country had shifted." (p. 198)

"When I contemplate this nation in itself, I find it to be more extraordinary than any of the events in its history. Has there ever appeared on this earth a single nation so full of contrasts and so excessive in all its actions, guided ore by emotions, less by principles; always achieving consequently either less or more than was expected of it, sometimes below the common level of humanity, sometimes well above; a people so constant in its basic instincts that we can still recognize it from portraits drawn two or three thousand years ago; at the same time so nimble in its day-to-day thinking and its tastes that it ends up becoming a spectacle surprising to itself and often it remains as astonished as foreigners at the sight of what it has just enacted; the most stay-at-home and the most humdrum nation of all when left to itself yet, once uprooted involuntarily from its home and routines, ready to go to the ends of the earth and to risk all; unruly by temperament yet better suited to the arbitrary and even violent authority of a king than to the free and orderly government by leading citizens; today the declared enemy of all obedience, tomorrow devoting to servitude a kind of passion which nations best suited to slavery cannot manage; led by a thread as long as no resistance is offered; ungovernable as soon as an example of such resistance appears somewhere; thus always tricking its masters who fear it either too much or too little; never so free that one need despair of enslaving it nor so enslaved that it cannot still break its yoke; fitted for everything but excelling only in warfare; in love with chance, force, success, fame and rumour more than true reputation; more capable of the heroic than the virtuous, of genius than common sense; better suited to imagine vast plans than to complete great projects; the most brilliant and the most dangerous of European nations and the best shaped to become an object, by turns, of admiration, loathing, pity and terror but never of indifference?" (p. 206)

"One never quite appreciates the great energy feeble souls expend on hating anything which drives them to make an effort." (p. 215)