Rating: 5/5

I've owned this book since June of 2006 and have never seen fit to crack the spine.

It was given to me as a birthday gift by my best friend Stephen. He was a playwright as well, and a big fan of this writer. Stephen seemed to think that I would enjoy him, too. I put the book on a shelf with every intention of getting to it. But then. . .the October after I received this book. . .Stephen died in a horrific car accident. This novel, among others, went untouched. Perhaps I was too afraid of the nostalgia it would evoke.

Recently, my wife and I moved into a larger house. We haven’t unpacked the books yet, but I needed something new to read, so I opened the first box at random and just grabbed something out. This novel won the lottery. I held it in my hand for a long moment, contemplating if I really wanted to do this to myself, but, in the end, I decided that I was ready. 

Yes, it made me nostalgic. Not just for my departed friend, though. It made me nostalgic for another writer whose work I greatly admire, but who left us far too soon. I’m talking about David Foster Wallace, the author of Infinite Jest and The Girl With The Curious Hair. Lord of the Barnyard, in its phrasing and plotting and all-out absurd goofiness, could have been written by my old pal DFW.

Of course, once I finished the novel, and did some research on other works by this writer, I learned that Egolf himself departed the world too soon. 

So. . .I’m now stuck with the feelings evoked by my experience with one novel that had an immense impact on me because of its connection, for me, to three dead writers. With that said, if I am able to separate the melancholy of reading it and absorbing it from my experience of just, you know, reading it and enjoying it without all that other bullshit crowding in, I would still recommend this novel very highly. I can say, without, regret that I really enjoyed it. I actually wish I had read it when it was given to me. I would have enjoyed the conversation Stephen and I might have had.

If I have a complaint about this novel, it would be the numerous book reviewer’s jacket blurb insistence that this novel is a brilliant work of comedy. Brilliant, yes. Comedy, no. It’s sarcastic, to be sure. But not exceptionally funny. So be warned if this is why you’ve picked this novel up. 

No other complaints, though. It’s an otherwise fun and fast-paced bildungsroman that will remain on my shelf despite the feelings it evokes. It will share a spot next to DFW and Thomas Pynchon and William Gaddis and all those other writers who have made me think about a novel’s form more than its content.