Rating: 2/5

This is book 13 of the Mike Hammer series &amp; the last one that Spillane did before he died, I believe. (Max Allan Collins has finished up a few more from Spillane's notes.) Unfortunately, it sucked. Mind you, I don't expect a lot out of Mike Hammer novels. They're ego-fests, first person shoot 'em ups with everyone realizing just how tough, smart, &amp; wonderful Mike Hammer is. That's a pretty big anchor for any story to wear, but Spillane's brutal verbiage &amp; a huge suspension of belief on my part usually manage to make it a fairly enjoyable read. Not this time.

Spillane's plots have always relied on a lot of coincidence &amp; luck. They're also fairly predictable. This story wasn't any different in those respects, just the amount of holes Spillane left &amp; had to fill, especially at the end. Worse, the overall plot was one he’s done before &amp; much better in a short story. That the mob has a major money stash is OK. That one family would allow some trusted, smart retainer with sole guardianship is rough, but I can go along. That the 5 families gave it all to a handyman they didn’t really like or respect?! Who is in the employ of one Don?!!! 

Another big problem is that Spillane took Hammer out of the city into the country where he never should have gone. Suddenly he's learned all sorts of things in the Army, including how to operate a backhoe - which he tows with his Ford sedan &amp; no trailer brakes. Hell, not only is Mike Hammer tough, but so is his car! I used a 3/4 ton pickup for a small backhoe &amp; preferred a 1 ton. Always with trailer brakes. Of course, in my world, the more a gravel/dirt lane gets traveled, the bumpier it gets, but in Spillane's it gets smoother. Seriously, just a bit of editing could have fixed this &amp; helped the story immensely.

Hammer is aging &amp; this story, written in the mid 90's, is set in the mid to late 80's - sort of, maybe. Spillane had some major problems with time. References were all over the board with old bootleggers, Mafia families, &amp; war time (that just screamed WWII) buddies, although this was never said specifically. It doesn’t have to be. We KNOW which war Hammer was in &amp; we’re not told differently. Worse, Hammer is finally getting close to marrying Velda &amp; some people think they're young enough to be starting a family. Sorry, pal, but she's got to be well past menopause by now. 

Other references really played hob with the time. If this was mid to late 80’s, there were mobile phones, but they were satchel sized units for cars, so the pointed walkie talkie &amp; pay phone use was OK. In the 90’s we got the small cell phones, but no one had them most of the book &amp; then we get a whole sentences about them, but they’re never used. Yeah, I’m confused, too.

Hammer got shot badly &amp; almost died, but instead of going to a hospital, he got a fairy god doctor, who couldn't have saved him if he hadn't been so tough, of course. But he did &amp; this wound gives Hammer a lot of trouble all through the book until the end. Then he uses a pick &amp; shovel.  Honestly, I wouldn’t have minded if Hammer had just been in a private hospital. The whole point of the exercise seemed to be the splash he’d make by coming back from being presumed dead, but that was never leveraged.

Most of these issues could have easily been edited out &amp; made it a much better story. It's a shame they weren't. Who edited this book? You should be fired. You’re one of the reasons the Big 6 publishers are getting less of my business &amp; are losing my respect on an almost daily basis. I can almost hear you thinking, "This was one of the last Spillane novels, it'll sell, so who cares if it's polished or not? Those jerks will buy it. Let's just get it out the door with minimal effort &amp; rake in the loot." 

That’s OK, I borrowed it from the library &amp; fuck you very much, too.

Rather than ending on such a hostile note, I’ll put in the best thing about this audio book – the reader. Richard Ferrone did a great job. He kept Hammer’s narration without accent, so it was easy to listen to, &amp; did the voices of the major characters well, including the only female, Velda. (Yes, there was only one female in the entire book with a speaking part!) Just occasionally, he’d do a New York accent for one of the bad guys &amp; it worked beautifully. Kudos to you, Mr. Ferrone! You were the bright spot!