Rating: 4/5

One of his late books, this, and he reprises many of the elements his regular readers remember affectionately from previous stories: the continuing saga of the oft-purloined cow-creamer, for example, or the urge Bertie seems to have for pushing people in the lake, always for altruistic reasons, of course. The familiarity of the plot and even repetition of some of the jokes from earlier books gives the reader the feeling of sinking into a comfortable armchair at the end of a tiring day. The sun always shines in Bertie’s world, and never more so than in Brinkley Court, home of Aunt Dahlia and scene of many of Bertie’s most hair-raising adventures.

In short, Willy Cream may or may not be a kleptomaniac New York playboy, but he is definitely in love with Phyllis, who is Aunt Dahlia’s god-daughter and the stepdaughter of Aubrey Upjohn, once headmaster of the preparatory school attended (in his youth) by Bertie and his friend Reginald “Kipper” Herring, who is in love with Bobby Wickham, who has just announced her engagement to Bertie which came as a shock to him, though perhaps not as big a shock as discovering that eminent loony doctor Sir Roderick Glossop is impersonating a butler and going by the name of Swordfish. When Bobby falls out with Kipper because she caught him kissing Phyllis and the cow-creamer isn’t on top of the wardrobe and the dachshund Poppet ends up in the lake instead of Aubrey Upjohn, Bertie decides the matter must be put in the hands of a higher power, so summons Jeeves from his holiday in Herne Bay where he has been judging bathing beauties contests. All’s well that ends well!

I hope that clarifies the plot for you. I leave the last word to Bertie…

  She was, in short, melted by his distress, as so often happens with the female sex. Poets have frequently commented on this. You are probably familiar with the one who said, "Oh, woman in our hours of ease tum tumty tiddly something please, when something something something brow, a something something something thou.”

www.fictionfanblog.wordpress.com