Rating: 5/5

You might be forgiven for thinking that the most ‘fairy-tale’ like of Shakespeare’s plays is A Mid-Summer Night’s Dream. I mean, there are fairies and sprites and crazy things like that running about in it. But in some ways this play is even more like a fairy-tale. The play also starts off a bit like Othello – where jealousy inspires acts of vengeance, even though the cause of the jealousy is baseless and the product of a mind fevered by suspicion. The first half of the play ends pretty much were Othello ends, with a man realising he has destroyed his entire life by his willingness to believe and has killed all those who love him by his irrational revenges caused by his jealous rage. And, of course, a guy gets eaten by a bear and there is a ship wreck.

The fairy-tale elements really come to the fore in part two of this play – because this really is a play in two parts. The driving force of the second part is that the daughter of the king who was left to be exposed and die is, in fact, brought up by a simple farmer. This is another of those stories where nature triumphs over nurture. The unknown princess catches the eye of a prince who falls helplessly in love with her. This causes some problems with the prince’s father and so prince and farmer’s daughter (really a princess – you know the score) elope. 

The play ends with a curious retelling of Ovid’s Pygmalion story – with a statue literally coming back to life. This being a comedy everything works out in the end – you can generally tell the difference between one of Shakespeare’s comedies and tragedies by what happens to the characters at the end, if they all die, it was a tragedy, if they all get married, it was a comedy. Although the king had clearly repented his jealousy and forgiveness is next to holiness and all that – I’m not sure I could have as willingly forgiven him as is done at the end of this play. He had still been the cause of the death of a son and had separated mother and daughter for decades. But this is theatre, not life, I guess.

This is a bizarre little play in many ways, but also a bit of a favourite – it does feel a little ‘bitsy’ at times and a bit like three quite different plays slammed together, and it is also a little hard to suspend disbelief right at the end, but there are parts of this play that are jaw-droppingly good.