Rating: 5/5

I didn't read this all the way through, so marking it as read is cheating a TINY bit, but I read MOST of it - all the parts that currently apply to me, and I'll likely finish most of the rest before the end of the year, as my second kiddo gets older and the later infant chapters start applying to her sleep. 

As a new parent with my first kiddo, sleep was the one thing that made me feel out of control and lost. I didn't realize until after he was born that babies eventually stop just sleeping on their own without any help from you. It was hard, and I had months of feeling like I was doing everything wrong and going to ruin my kid's sleep for life. 

I wish I had read this book before he was born. I really like Weissbluth's writing style. It's a little dry, but he does a good job of presenting the information and guiding parents, and I found it very reassuring - like a kindly grandpa saying "you've got this". I liked all the the parent anecdotes he included. Most of his advice boils down to "PUT YOUR KID TO BED EARLIER," and he definitely repeats information a lot, but I found that helpful for making it stick in my head. 

I will almost certainly be referring to this in the future as my kids age.

(Also, I highlighted THE SHIT out of this book, so feel free to check out Amy's Key Points if you want a cliff's notes version.)

ETA: My new baby is now 7 weeks old (8 weeks gestational age), and after one really bad sleep week where they refused to nap anywhere but on me and never for longer than 30-60 minutes, this baby has spent the last two days going down to sleep with almost no crying and sleeping for more than an hour at a time. We start out putting a pacifier in their mouth, but they have been falling asleep whether or not it stays in. 

Since we came home from the hospital, I've been really strict about putting the baby down within 1-2 hours after they wake up. Up until now, we've had to get up and reinsert the pacifier when it fell out until, eventually, the baby fell asleep, but the past two days they've been able to put themselves to sleep fairly quickly and with very minimal intervention - once when we were busy with the toddler, the baby cried for about five minutes and then was asleep by the time I had a free hand to check on her. 

My experience with my first baby was NOT like this, so it really feels like a miracle to me, and I absolutely think having read this book and taken Dr. Weissbluth's advice to heart has made a huge difference. I am amazed at how good my kid is sleeping.