Rating: 5/5

Once again Hannah and her adorably loyal footman, Benjamin, steal the show.

This is the fifth book in a wonderfully entertaining, comedic Regency series. Its uncontested star is spinster and former housekeeper, 45-year-old Miss Hannah Pym. It is ideal to read all six of the books in this series sequentially, in order to experience the complete arc of Hannah's delightfully engaging adventures. In particular, the progression of her G-rated, “slow burn” romance with the sweet but stuffy aristocrat, Sir George, which stretches across all six books.

The main romantic plot in this book involves Lady Deborah Western, the 19-year-old daughter of an Earl. She and her twin brother, William, have been boon companions since birth. Deborah dresses in men’s clothing when she rides, hunts and shoots with William, and she frequently walks and talks like a cocky boy as well.

The handsome, athletically lean, and extremely elegant, 32-year-old Earl of Ashton has known the twins since they were 10 years old when he bought the estate that marches alongside theirs. He has been away in the army fighting in the Napoleonic Wars for many years and has recently sold out. He is determined to settle down and do his duty by marrying and producing an heir, but he certainly does not consider Deborah suitable to be his Countess. Yes, she is beautiful, and her aristocratic rank is exactly equal to his, but as far as he can see, she is the same little hoyden she was as a child. 

Miss Pym encounters the twins and Lord Ashton soon after she sets off on her latest trip on the stagecoach, heading to Dover, due to an astoundingly unexpected misadventure of her faithful footman, Benjamin. Miss Pym has warned him time and time again that his amazing luck at gambling is bound to run out at some point, and that disastrous moment has finally arrived. Benjamin has incurred a gambling debt so huge, he decides the only way he can possibly repay it is to challenge a brute of a boxer at least twice his size in a local prize fight which will award a huge purse to the winner. 

Deborah is at the fight with William, dressed as a boy, when Lord Ashton recognizes her in the carriage right next to his and thoughtlessly exposes her charade to the whole crowd of rowdy men when he angrily scolds her for daring to present herself in a crude, masculine crowd. The indomitable Miss Pym, who is also at the fight in order to save Benjamin from what she assumes will be his inevitable doom, comes to the rescue of the humiliated Deborah as well. 

And thus begins a string of comical adventures in which Miss Pym looks out for Benjamin’s welfare, acts as the “travelling matchmaker” for both Deborah and Lord Ashton and two other passengers on the Dover stagecoach, and meets up with Sir George several times, the man for whom she has, or so she believes, a hopeless “tendre.” 

This book, originally published in 1992, is one of the best Regency comedies that MC ever wrote. And, in my opinion, it's definitely the best novel of this six-book series. There are some absolutely hilarious moments, especially Benjamin’s boxing scenes. This novel consistently maintains the light, amusing tone that any book with pretensions to being labeled a comedy ideally has. Unfortunately, far too often in her Regency “comedies,” MC has a habit of sliding off into extremely dark, and often downright macabre, melodrama. In that regard, in this book, though we encounter again a recurring character who is an evil, female villain (a favorite trope with MC), who appears in several previous books in this series, when she is finally served her just deserts, it is achieved in an utterly whacky way that's very much in keeping with the riotous hijinks of the rest of this book.

In both the main romance and the secondary romance in this novel, as the “travelling matchmaker,” Hannah saves the day and acts as the deus ex machina, which is the overarching theme of this series, who works hard to bring together the two reluctant pairs of potential lovers.

In terms of Hannah’s own romance with Sir George, there is an unexpected and painful appearance of a woman of dubious character who seems to have succeeded in stealing away Sir George. In this case, it is Benjamin who does a fabulous job of acting as matchmaker in his own quirky way as he pulls out all the stops while protecting the romantic interests of his adored Miss Pym.

I experienced this novel as an audiobook. The narrator, Helen Lisanti, does a quite good job acting out all the parts, both male and female, young and old, and different regional accents.

I rate this book as follows:

Main Heroine (Miss Pym): 5 stars
Romantic Heroine (Deborah): 4 stars
Romantic Hero (Lord Ashton): 4 stars
Subcharacter (Benjamin): 5 stars
Subcharacters (Stagecoach passengers): 4 stars
Villains: 5 stars
Romance Plot 1 (Deborah and Ashton): 5 stars
Romance Plot 2 (Stagecoach couple): 5 stars
Romance Plot 3 (Hannah and Sir George): 5 stars
Benjamin’s Boxing Plot: 5 stars
Setting: 5 stars
Writing: 5 stars
Audiobook Narration: 4 stars
Overall: 5 stars

8/4/23 Reread: I enjoyed this novel just as much today as I have in the past.