Rating: 5/5

On a moonlit night in a 1940s Punjab torn by communal riots, a Muslim woman leads an elderly Sikh couple whom she's briefly sheltered to what may be safety. As they creep out of the village and along a dried riverbed, they see flames reaching up into the sky from a burning village on one bank of the river. Then, "पेड़ों के झुरमुट में पीर की सफ़ेद क़ब्र उन्हे नज़र आई। उस पर दीया नहीं जल रहा था। आज के रोज़ उस पर दीया जलाना लोग भूल गए थे।" ("In a copse of trees, they saw the white grave of a saint. No lamp was burning on it. On this night, people had forgotten to light a lamp here.") 

A poignant and ironic reflection on what was going on: people were too busy burning homes, too busy killing each other—and that too in the name of religion—to think of lighting a lamp at the otherwise revered grave of a saint. 

This is what makes Bisham Sahni's Tamas (Darkness) such an unforgettable story about the horror that was Partition. Sahni does weave together the touching, horrifying stories of various people—Hindu, Muslim, Sikh, even a British Deputy Commissioner and his bored, alcoholic wife—but more than that, he makes this a story of more than just violence and carnage. 

Tamas is about the man who, ignorant of why he's been asked to kill a pig, sparks off communal violence in a town and is then, when he realizes what he's caused, racked by guilt and fear. It is about people driven mad by terror and grief at the loss of their loved ones, their homes and their possessions. It is about people who lose everything and yet remain human; it is also about people who will give up all they have—their faith, their families, everything—just to stay alive. 

Here we see Ranvir, fifteen years old but already brainwashed by a communal rabble-rouser into murdering any vulnerable Muslim he can find. And Jasbeer, hanging on to her kirpaan while trying to think of a way to escape sure murder—or worse. Bakshiji and Devdutt and their ilk, politicians trying in their own way (and with their own motives) to halt the violence, to bring peace to the towns and villages. Richard, so interested in India, its culture and history, that he's filled his house with artefacts and even plans to write a book on this pet subject—but who, eventually, does not care enough to try and stop the violence that is erupting in his district. 

This is a brilliantly written, vivid and poignant story, of hatred and humanity. Of cold-blooded murder and sudden murderous rages that cause bloodshed. Of mankind gone berserk and men calculating enough to plan for profits from strife. Of bonds forged and bonds broken. Of bigotry and broad mindedness, of cowardice and bravery, of simple human emotion.

And the writing is impeccable: Sahni uses words sparingly, his dialogues are very believable (and he switches effortlessly between Hindi, Punjabi, Urdu and English, but always providing enough by way of translation to allow understanding). Plus, the way he steers clear of actually articulating philosophy was something that appealed to me. He never writes that this is good or that is bad: he speaks, instead, through his characters and their actions. 

Highly recommended.