Rating: 5/5

Someone in my church once asked me, “How did Christian pastors counsel people about [a given issue] across Christian history?” At the time I had to say, “I don’t know.” But Christians should be good readers of their own history, and this applies not merely to our doctrinal and exegetical history but also to the history of pastoral counsel. If we were asked to provide a description of family life in the late medieval era, most of us would paint a scene full of domineering and violent men, treating their wives like servants and their children like wallflowers. Absent actual data, we might resort to caricatures of general filth and callousness, extrapolated from Monty Python’s plague scene (“Bring out yer dead!”).

But Ozment, bringing the data, unveils a different picture. While not papering over the particular forms of wickedness common among early moderns (which, by the way, are not very different from our own), he demonstrates from primary sources that 16th- and 17th-century men were taught to lead their wives and their homes with compassion, companionship, reason, and understanding. Hundreds of excerpts from personal diaries, pamphlets, and sermons humanize our picture of courting, marriage, childbirth, and childrearing instead of leaning on caricatures. I found it easy to relate to these people who lived and loved each other, struggled to cope with death and suffering, and frequently (though certainly not always) expressed their inner thoughts with nuance.

One section lays out the different grounds for divorce acknowledged by one European city or another, a fascinating study in pastors and governments attempting to apply the guidelines of Scripture firmly and yet compassionately to the messy complications of people's choices. The chapter on pregnancy and childbirth, though it contains some common-sense advice, is mostly a parade of horrifying complications met with inadequate medical treatments alternating between the superstitious and the harmful. It’s so far off the mark that it’s emotionally difficult to read. On the other hand, the section on disciplining children is so surprisingly cautious and measured that it could have been pulled from any modern evangelical parenting book. And the woodcut listing table manners for children contains some hilarious commands I'm pretty sure I’ve issued to my own kids.

Throughout, it is clear that in any age a church’s exegesis and doctrine shapes people's thoughts, feelings, and decisions in the home. Today's counselors, teachers, and pastors should listen and take it to heart.