Rating: 4/5

First novel (1984) by this almost-forgotten writer, and it's a good one. Set around 8,000 years from now: after many wars, collapses, and rebirths of human civilization, humans had spread to extrasolar planets via coldsleep spaceships, when they were contacted by the alien Eljins, who gave humanity FTL starships. The humans spread to some 228 worlds. Some centuries later, the Eljins abruptly disappeared, and the FTL Darkjumpers started self-destructing....

A group of scholars have been sent to the world Belthannis, to evaluate the Kin: anatomically almost identical to humans, but apparently mindless. The Human Community is always on the lookout for new worlds to colonize. The leader of the evaluation group has concocted an unlikely scheme to protect the Kin from the colonizers. The Kin themselves have something uncanny about them....

This is by no means a perfect book. Should you decide to read it, you will need to be patient with first-novel rough spots, and some of the philosophizing makes for slow going. And it's a book of its time.
 
But it's a remarkable novel, exploring the ever-green topic of what it means to be human. The sentient AI the humans call the Hut -- it provides a posh field shelter and kitchen -- is particularly nicely done. The book comes to a satisfactory conclusion, and I plan to read the sequel. I was reminded of the style of MA Foster, another author from the same period who's a little better-known then Gravel. And you may catch a nod to Cordwainer Smith near the end: In the dark between the worlds, Something is eating the Darkjumpers....  It may take a second reading to sort out all that's going on here. Recommended: 3.6 stars.

Here's Eric Raymond's 1990 comment: "Geary Gravel's earlier novels The Alchemists and The Pathfinders were ambitious, spectacular, philosophically involved constructions displaying lyric gifts reminiscent of Cordwainer Smith." http://www.catb.org/~esr/sfreviews/RR... Plus a couple of good reviews at Amazon. I've had this one on the to-read shelf for years....

Read in 2020. Copy in storage. Never reprinted, sfaict.