Rating: 3/5

Title: The Big Store
Author: Donald Katz
Rating: ⭐️⭐️⭐️ 

It’s a chronicle of the mighty Sears, Roebuck and Company, an american retail giant with 19th-century roots as a mail-order business operating in rural America. Sears grew into one of the nation’s largest corporations, redefining the American shopping experience in the process. Its 130-year history embodies the rise and fall of American consumer culture and with it a host of business lessons.

While this one is a long and arduous read, it does have a few fruitful lessons which make it worthwhile for a manager who aims for business and culture growth in their company. Mentioned below are a few:

1. Decentralisation with a touch of centralised context, similar to what Netflix does today is what works best. Integral for company wide agenda alignment, ensuring micromanaging doesn’t become a habit, and a great place for helping people achieve their 100% potential.

2. Company culture is more important than bottom line- In a business so vast and old, slice of company culture is what makes a perfect cocktail. Brenon’s comeback to the a hint of old ways with this growth plan help Sears drink the Bloody Mary post 1980’s.

3. Consumer Needspace is the answer to growth hypothesis- Venturing into consumer credit, mortgages and stock trading was an answer to long term potential merged with consumer needs for horizontal expansion led growth.

4. Anger is an emotion one must keep out while doing negotiations- The story showcase a skilled negotiator Rod Hills who used his negotiating skills with logic and emotion excluding Anger, as ego is not the answer to getting the job done when it comes to a mutual beneficial decision.

5. Firing is not always the answer- if business needs it, but culture doesn’t allow it. Maybe there is a graceful way to make your long term employee happy with a minuscule dent on operating expenses. Eg ERIP 

#bookreview #bookstagram #booklover #businessbooks #bookrecommendations #learning #growthmindset #instareads #businessstrategy #companyculture #sears