Rating: 5/5

I have loved this book from start to finish. It has gotten me through a difficult time: I have changed to a new insulin pump and doing this has not been easy. Think no sleep and constant worry. This book has drawn me out of myself. A book that can do this, when you are stressed and worried, is worth its weight in gold. 

Why have I loved this book as much as I do? Its lines. Thoughts and ideas are well expressed. It’s amusing. It’s interesting. I am in total agreement with much that is said. The book is lengthy but never dry. Every single time I picked it up, it engaged me, it drew me in, my pump problems flew from my head. 

Agatha began writing this book when she was seventy-five. She had accompanied her second husband to Nimrud, Iraq, where he was working on an archaeological dig. The year was 1965. The book was first published posthumously by Collins in the UK. It is about her life. It is about those memories in her life that stand out. What comes through loud and clear is her personality. She admits, “I have remembered what I want to remember.” She states, the book is a “hymn to the joy of living.” She is a cheerful person, a curious person and loves life. She grabs what she can get from it. She is an introvert. I perceive her as a soul mate. 

Agatha‘s childhood, growing up in Devon, England, is covered thoroughly. Her earliest memories are from when she was three or four. It proceeds in chronological order with sidetracks thrown in when they are called for. It flows smoothly through both wars, two husbands, the birth of her child and her extensive travels. In closing the book, one is struck by how well the reader has come to know not only Agatha but also the other members of her family. We see Agatha’s mother, father, grandparents, her sister and brother, her husbands, her child and grandson through her eyes. What she sees and thinks of them reflects on her own personality and way of being. She is a positive person. This is refreshing. Her observations are straightforward and clear. When speaking of others whom she is critical of, she often refers to them simply as Miss S. or Mr. R. The book is not simply a recalling of life events; it is a book that reveals Agatha’s personality, how she thinks and feels and what she values in life. 

In this book there is so very much I personally relate to. Agatha’s philosophical views, how she has chosen to live her life and many small, insignificant details, they all speak to me. She wallpapers a ceiling. I have too. Like her, I appreciate a simple black dress; it doesn’t show dirt, is neat and can be worn on all occasions, anywhere. Agatha’s first argument with her husband bring back memories. It did for me. I am in sync with how this woman thinks and acts. 

The book is chockfull of curious stories. A chest bought in Damascus that makes grinding noises! What is discovered in it? We read about Sir Charles Leonard Woolley, a British archaeologist known for his excavations at Ur in Mesopotamia. We meet his archaeologist wife, Katharine. She is something else; wait till you see what she gets up to. One reads of a speedy car race to catch up with a missed train. Agatha recalls memories in her life that stand out for her. They vary from the sobering and sad to the interesting and amusing.

I want to emphasize one more time that Agatha’s lines speak to me. Here, sample a few:

“One can never go back to the place that exists in memory.”

“He was a good man. Perhaps that is what made him so dull.”
Do you see the humor in this?

“Ah well, deary, I’d say me-self, that you are going to have a girl. Sickness means girls. Boys, you go dizzy and faint.”
Strange, but this was true for me too! And you?

“The important thing, once you had been hurt, is not to remember the happy times. You can remember the sad times. That doesn’t matter. But something that reminds you of a happy day or happy thing, that’s the thing that almost breaks you in two.”

“I know well enough that I was a dog character; dogs will not go for a walk unless someone takes them. Perhaps I was always going to be like that.”
No, she was not a mere follower; off to Iraq she went, and she went alone. 

“You relapse into individuality as you age…..I have learned (to accept) that I am me.”

“The only person who can really hurt you in life is a husband. Nobody else is close enough.”

“The saddest thing in life and the hardest to live through is the knowledge that there is someone you love very much, whom you cannot save from suffering.”

Matthew, Agatha’s optimistic grandson said, “There is always hope.” And Agatha’s response? “One should adopt something like that as one’s motto in life.”

“To people like me, asking why is what makes life interesting.” 

Agatha’s mysteries do little for me; I am not a reader of either thrillers or detective novels. In my view, the writing here in this autobiography is much, much better. It absolutely sparkles. Even when Agatha discusses how her books came to be, books I have not even read, I was captivated. She supplies small, interesting, amusing details that often make you smile. You need not be a fan of Agatha’s mysteries to enjoy this book. 

Agatha has traveled all over the world. She speaks of the special things that stand out for her at each place. Where has she traveled? Glance at the GR shelves on which I have placed this book.

The audiobook is wonderfully narrated by Judith Boyd. She speaks different accents marvelously—English, American, and French. She intones equally well men, women and children, the young and the old, those of a high class and those of the working class. Her narration is fantastic, and I have given it a whopping five stars. 

I like this woman. I like her attitude toward life. Agatha Christie's personality comes through loud and clear. 

***************

*An Autobiography 5 stars
*Come, Tell Me How You Live 4 stars
*Murder at the Vicarage 1 star
*The Mysterious Affair at Styles 1 star