Rating: 2/5

Another Edwardian romance from Marion Chesney before she got sick of writing romances. As a matter of fact, going by publication and pseudonym usage, it seems like she wrote her Edwardian standalone books (before publishers regrouped them as "Edwardian Candlelight") before she started to write Regencies. She then briefly turned back to Edwardian times to write her Lady Rose Summer romance/mystery series before tossing it in altogether forever.

This one could be read in a few ways. If read from a non-romance-novel point of view, it was really rather funny. Everyone in the book was incredibly unlikable, even as you felt for the main character, Susie. The daughter of a respectable doctor, she was forced by her parents to marry a gross, pillaging earl who sprained his ankle and was propitiously laid up in the Burke's social-climbing house. She is thereby whisked away by the twice-over widower so that he can rid his venereal disease on her virginal body, but he fortuitously dies on their wedding night by falling out of their bedroom window. She instantly becomes an heiress and must put up with a cast of gloomy servants and her venomous mother-in-law. Susie, however, is a secret superhero with the power to rid the planet of anyone by saying that she wishes they would die. After her husband dies from this method, so too does her mother-in-law, and the Earl's heir, Sir Giles, becomes increasingly suspicious (and also attracted) by her. 

Being of a dreamy nature, she goes through seemingly endless rounds of imagining herself in love with a list of unsuitable men just from their favorable (to her) physical appearance and is always subsequently grossed out by their lecherous or otherwise behavior. I'm not sure why her interaction with Sir Giles would have NOT been labeled as another of these, but because he was the hero and the best looking one of the lot, he was labeled the "Love." 

As a romance, it fails completely. Other than a strong physical element between the two, they never have a decent conversation and Sir Giles never tries to get to know Susie. At one point, they even discuss this, but they have no time for such in-depth discussions because too many gothic things happen in the book -- she gets engaged to a couple more unsuitable men after she gets hauled up in court on assault charges, her childhood "beau" comes a-calling and wants to move in on the now independently wealthy heiress and also subsequently dies from her super power. Sir Giles is pretty useless and non-perceptive as a hero, thereby leading Susie to fall for YET ANOTHER unsuitable man. It seemed to me that it would be hard for these two to ever have any sort of a good marriage. 

This plotline seems mildly similar to a few of her other books that trampoline a middle-class girl into the midst of the aristocracy by inheritance, for example, Ginny, and Duke's Diamonds.