Rating: 3/5

"Do any writing in jail, Tommy? You know…" He went on before I could answer him. "I think you ought to try a novel some time. Maybe a crime story. Take this pipeline, for example. Wouldn't it make a hell of a background for a payroll robbery?"

The pipeline part felt autobiographical, and the robbery plot felt cinematic. So pretty good, even though it's not top tier Thompson. 

It's also very much about the New Deal, in a roundabout way. Thompson was a hobo and a roughneck
during the great depression, then caught a break as a writer working for the WPA, and he's quick to remind us that a lot of the human suffering in the novel – men working well past their prime in unsafe jobs they're not qualified for – was brought to an end with New Deal reforms like old age pensions. 

Highlights:
Four Trey and I went out together, helping ourselves to fruit. I remarked that the chow was up to standard, so maybe the line's backers wouldn't turn out to be so chinchy after all. Four Trey shrugged.
"They have to feel good. The men would be dragging-up right and left if they didn't."
"A lot of 'em will drag-up, anyway," I said. "Some will quit in the morning, as soon as they've scoffed, and there'll probably be fifty by the end of the week. I wonder why that is, Four Trey?"
"Do you?" he said.
"Well, yeah. Here they've finally made a job, and they need dough so bad it hurts. But they blow-up or drag-up over a bad cup of coffee or for no damned reason at all."
"Mmm, strange isn't it? Of course," Four Trey drawled, "I've never done anything like that myself, have you, Tommy? We're known far and wide as the old reliables of the oil fields."
I laughed sheepishly. "Well, all right," I said. "But it's sure going to be different this time."
"It can be, Tommy," he said softly. "It can be. We're just south of heaven, remember, and if you reach hard enough and high enough you're going to make it."
"I'm going to," I said. "You just watch and see. I'm going to stay on the job and keep out of trouble and I'll deal blackjack for you and…"