Rating: 4/5

“As they reached the street, the dawn was whitening the roofs. Wide-eyed and wakeful from lack of sleep, Harriet suggested they stroll up to the German Bureau and see what had been done to the map of France. When they reached the window, they saw the dot of Paris hidden by a swastika that squatted like a spider, black on the heart of the country. They stood staring at it a while. Soberly, Guy asked: ‘What do you think will happen here? What are our chances?’ 

David pursed his mouth, preparing to talk, then gave his snuffling laugh. ‘As Klein says, it will be very interesting! The Rumanians had hoped to do what they did last time – keep a foot in both camps. But the Germans have put the lid on that. What they’re organizing here is one gigantic fifth column. The King hoped to rally popular support for the defense of the country, but too late. He’s lost the trust of everyone. The regime cannot last.’ 

‘You think there’ll be a revolution?’

‘Something of the sort. But, worse than that, the country itself will fall apart. Rumania cannot preserve her great fortune…As for our chances…’ He laughed again. ‘They depend on knowing when to get away.’ 

Guy took Harriet’s arm. ‘We’ll be all right.’ 

She said: “We’ll get away because we must. The great fortune is life. We must preserve it.’ 

They turned from the map of France with the swastika at its center and walked home through empty streets…”

-	Olivia Manning, Fortunes of War: The Balkan Trilogy 

Olivia Manning’s Fortunes of War: The Balkan Trilogy is a big fat novel about the Second World War. This is not totally surprising, for there are a number of big fat novels about the Second World War, an event encompassing enough dramatic elements to satisfy a near-infinite number of big fat novels. But while the size of The Balkan Trilogy is typical of members of its class, its contents are not. 

In other words, The Balkan Trilogy is bit of an oddity. It is a seriocomic portrait of a marriage. It is a sketchbook filled with odd characters. It is about people living their lives at the margins of great events, not history makers themselves, but impacted by history’s convulsions. 

It is also really, really long, and I’m not sure quite what it means that after nine-hundred pages, I’m not really sure how to explain this thing, but I never considered stopping once I started. 

*** 

First, a bit of background. The Balkan Trilogy – as you have probably surmised – consists of three shorter books packaged together as one doorstopper: The Great Fortune; The Spoilt City; and Friends and Heroes. 

An omnibus edition makes perfect good sense because – quite frankly – I’m not sure the component parts are effective as standalones. Examined separately, none of the three really stands out. That is to say, if I had only the first volume in my hands upon finishing, I might never have reached the second. Taken altogether, though, they form an idiosyncratic whole. 

There is also – it should be said – a second threesome known as The Levant Trilogy. This is worth knowing, since at the end of 900 pages, we have not quite reached a resolution. 

*** 

Everything in The Balkan Trilogy turns on Harriet and Guy Pringle. When the curtain rises, they are newly married – after a very quick courtship – and on a train to Bucharest, Romania, where Guy has a teaching position funded by the British Council. 

The year is 1939, and things are about to get very interesting in Europe. 

Despite its heft – and fraught setting – there is not a lot of plot here. For long stretches, nothing much really happens. Oh, to be sure, the geopolitical situation is collapsing quickly, with the fall of Poland; the Russo-Finnish War; the German invasion of Denmark, Norway, and the Low Countries; and the Fall of France. But all of these things are happening off-page, with the characters learning about them via the newspaper, or by the triumphant map hung by the local German Bureau. 

Rather than thrusting us into the terrible-yet-visceral experience of combat, we’re mostly chilling with the Pringles, as well as the oddities in their orbit. There are a lot of conversations in bars, in restaurants, and in cafes. There are also conversations during walks on the streets of Bucharest. At certain moments, Manning pauses to give us wonderful snapshots of antebellum Bucharest. One lengthy sequence involves Guy staging an extremely serious production of Troilus and Cressida while large sections of humanity are plunged into chaos. 

There are a couple of well-executed set pieces, but these can be counted on one hand. Instead, Manning is mostly concerned with observing her characters. Thankfully, they are worth the look. 

*** 

The Balkan Trilogy is narrated in the third person, utilizing a roving but limited perspective. The majority of the time, we bear witness through Harriet’s eyes. Unfortunately, Harriet is a bit of a cipher. We learn very little about her. Even her physical description is sparse, making it hard to imagine her in the mind’s eye. She is also burdened by being the only sane person in her friend group. This makes her a perfect foil to the peculiarly British weirdos she encounters, yet detracts from her dimensionality. 

The rest of the players are more intriguing. Without listing them all, I’ll note a few. We can start with Guy, Harriet’s husband, who is strikingly dedicated to his profession, to the extent that he is a constant low-grade asshole toward his wife. Their friction-filled dynamic is not wholly pleasant, yet I certainly paid attention. Then there is Clarence, an incredibly bitter cynic – somewhat after my own heart – who loves Harriet in his bitter and cynical way. We also have the marvelous Professor Pinkrose, an arrogant and condescending academic who flies into Bucharest to give a lecture, right on the eve of the German arrival in force. 

Standing above them all is one of the great literary creations I’ve encountered. This is Prince Yakimov, or as he prefers to refer to himself in the third person: Yaki. Poor Yaki is an Englishman of mixed Russian and 	Irish descent. His father was a White Russian who served the Czar, and Yaki traffics on this faded glory as he mooches off the expatriate community. Manning outdid herself with Prince Yakimov, and his appearances are always welcome, brimming as they are with hilarity and pathos in equal measure. 

*** 

Both trilogies in Manning’s Fortunes of War are semiautobiographical, and she made a similar journey to those of her characters, fleeing across Europe with panzers and stormtroopers on her heels. This lived experience is present here, with Manning’s sharp eye for detail – both animate and inanimate – making everything quite tactile. 

*** 

Given its methodical pacing and prodigious size, The Balkan Trilogy is a bit of a hard sell. It’s not one of those books I’d ever recommend to anyone. It’s just too particular. Still, I liked it, for all the endurance it took to finish. 

For good reason, historical fiction usually puts its protagonists in the thick of the action or at the center of the storm. In The Balkan Trilogy, the characters are generally caught in a tense stasis. There are moments of terror, when their lives are truly at risk. But these are fleeting when compared to the time spent waiting for the wave to crest and break upon the shore. 

It makes for a fascinating twist on traditional wartime fiction. Instead of action, everyone is trying to avoid excitement; instead of shaping events, everyone is relegated to helpless bystander status. It is an extremely intimate examination on the overwhelming impersonality of war.