Rating: 4/5

Dr. Debra Green has everything. A genius IQ, three children, a huge upscale house in a upper-class neighborhood, a handsome husband, Mike Farrar, who is also a doctor, and no worries about money. However, beneath the surface is a very unhappy family. Debra is full of unexpected rages and vituperous viciousness when thwarted. She cannot keep a job for very long. While she can be witty and bitingly funny, she also has times of blank vacancy when she is emotionally disconnected and uncaring. Her drinking is heavy, and she is stealing patient's medications.

Despite their three children, Mike soon finds emotional connection with another man's wife, who is also unhappily married. Debra isn't aware there is another woman, but she does know Mike wants a divorce. She convinces him yet again to stay. Mike does not want to hurt his kids, and Debra has already turned them against him, but he hopes to repair his relationship with them by staying. However, he soon falls terribly ill after eating a dinner served by Debra. Hospitalized, he is misdiagnosed, but he recovers sufficiently to return home. On the road to recovery, he again becomes seriously ill after eating dinner served by his wife. And again. But he refuses to believe his wife is poisoning him, despite concerned suspicions by his friends. Finally, he moves out, planning on a divorce. Debra gets a lawyer and a psychiatrist.

Then, the two have a terrible conversation over the phone. Mike tells her he finally believes she poisoned him and he is going to take the kids. Oops.

The next phone call is a shock. His house burned down and two of his kids are dead. 

Soon there are more shocks. Toxicological tests show he WAS poisoned. After many surgeries, he is very sick and could die. And, drum roll please.........the police suspect Debra.

Gentle reader, the following is a rant. Proceed.

I can conceive of an otherwise normal family which may have a single family member who unreasonably twists reality into incredibly destructive fantasies, usually because of using  a lot  of alcohol or drugs (but not always), disrupts, argues and is a general drama queen day after day, which has the effect of controlling everyone around her through her unhappiness, rage, upset and nervousness. I CAN'T imagine that the other adult family members try very hard for years to accommodate and appease and generally treat the high maintenance individual as someone who has legitimate points to their emotional excesses. Yet, in several Ann Rule books, that is usually what occurs in these dysfunctional marriages or relationships over and over. Husbands, parents and children somehow understand the wild behaviors as normal because they unquestionably accept the troubled person's explanation, no matter how peculiar or impossible. Of course children will believe in a parent if the situation is what they've lived with their entire lives. However, adults who support or help or lie for the troubled person because they believe utterly in their insane dramas is another story. Whatever mental mechanism this is, though, obviously functions in a million ways - cults, for one, and the famous 'Stockholm Syndrome' for another.

However, it's not as if anyone has the legal tools to prevent the extremely obvious and recognized mentally-ill family member from tearing apart the lives of everyone around them - ask the parents of paranoid schizophrenics, who often explain to police after their son or daughter has tried to murder dozens of people how they called and called and called police and agencies to report violent or threatening behavior, and they couldn't even get a mental health referral, or insurance coverage for a psychiatric hospital, or an arrest and a jail cell for more than a night.

A friend once advised me that if you have power over a situation, you have responsibility. If you have no power, you can't possibly have any responsibility. No power, no responsibility - that means your obligation is to save yourself. However, misplaced guilt or loving affection often traps responsible people into attempting to make 'lemonade from lemons' when there is only more wreckage on the horizon. If such 'good' people continue to try to fix things even after trying everything and they get advice from almost everyone that there is nothing to be done, well, I've described such people as 'too stupid to live'. All of the pity, sorrow, sense of wastefulness and agony one may feel about another adult's choices has not a whit of hope to change the inevitable outcome and often drowns both parties, if married. 

Having said all of that, what the hell is a responsible person to do who sees the daily insanity but has made babies with the lunatic? Worse, the lunatic has good days when everything is blissful and happy with the kids? Or the lunatic has qualities which tug at your children's hearts? And the madman is is incredibly talented and amazing, or respected, and no one outside the family sees the insanity except for occasional eruptions? The problem here is often the kids are the innocent victims no matter what either of the adults do. Stay, and the family slowly self-destructs and suffers torture. Leave, and maybe save yourself, but suffer in watching your kids be destroyed. 

I guess it isn't helpful that saying statistically a certain number of dysfunctional families are doomed to destruction and maybe you are are in that fuzzy probability of doom. What I CAN say is be cautious with whom you make babies. Take the time to meet the other's direct family over a period of years. Study the behaviors of siblings, parents - do not simply accept the visible signs of affluence or success or sociability. A lot of obsessive-compulsives are extremely successful. Do not ignore obvious signs of emotional high-maintenance demands or imperious querulousness (someone who is ALWAYS finding things too slow, too hot, too cold, too hard, too soft, too dark, too bright, too loud, too noisy, too crowded, can't stand this or that, everything is intolerable or unbearable - and demands that it's all your fault and that everyone within the house has to fix it NOW). There is a clear distinction between occasional cranky tiredness and constant emotional abuse and complete lack of respect or affection. If you are stuck, then you are stuck. I'd try to find mitigating solutions. (I'm amazed by the people who  accept without question the abusive statements made and unfair treatment as truthfulness and fairness. But I'm digressing....) 

Don’t make babies with another person until you’ve met - and TAlKeD - to your adored one’s family members several times over a period of time, like two years. Take note of the adored one’s behavior over time and in many stressful situations. DO NOT INDULGE IN DENIAL OF WHAT YOU HAVE NOTICED OR YOUR FEELINGS OF LONELINESS AS AN EXCUSE TO PUT ASIDE ANY NIGGLING DOUBTS. Use your gd mind before your ‘loved one’ causes you to lose it, and maybe your life.