Rating: 4/5

"I am of a cautious temper, and unwilling to risk my happiness in a hurry."

This has to be the only Austen book I felt apprehensive of reading: there is a lot of controversy around this book, to make one re-think if diving in to this would be a good idea. It turns out, at least for me, the forebodings were for nothing. Despite several shortcomings of the characters, including the heroine - Fanny Price, and a hurried ending, I liked the overall story. But it does fall behind Persuasion and Pride &amp; Prejudice in many ways.

"How wonderful, how very wonderful the operations of time, and the changes of the human mind!”

"Good sense, like hers, will always act when really called upon;"

Before anything, I think I should first address what could make a reader uncomfortable with Mansfield Park. Had it not been for the way Fanny and Edmund were portrayed, and the nature of their relationship, I believe a lot of readers would have fallen in love with this book, just like with Austen's popular ones. Romance between cousins is always a delicate subject, and Fanny being Edmund's adopted sibling (kind of) does not help. It's understandable this could make a lot of readers uncomfortable. So, if you are to enjoy this book, you'll have to tolerate that aspect, which plays a central part of the story. Fanny's character traits are -though open to many interpretations- much more understandable, especially if you were to empathize with her and her situation in life. However, the two main antagonists, Mr. &amp; Miss Crawford, are way more interesting in my opinion. Though the book uses a third person narrative, the perspective of Fanny controls the nature of of it. All others are very closely judged by her, with her unwavering morals, and flawless conduct in everything. Though these characteristics do get a little tiring at times, I preferred it to the ones of Edmund's.

"He knew her to be clever, to have a quick apprehension as well as good sense, and a fondness for reading, which, properly directed, must be an education in itself."

"She gave advice, advice too sound to be resisted by a good understanding, and given so mildly and considerately as not to irritate an imperfect temper, and she had the happiness of observing its good effects not unfrequently."

IF a reader could overlook the above (of at least understand, this was written at a time when such things are not controversial), then you're in for a fascinating story. As usual, the plot is centered around marriage and 'marriage economics'. And, as always, she is quite successful at introducing a unique perspective to make things interesting, using a silent, and an evaluative protagonist. A little introduction follows the arrival of Fanny Price at Mansfield Park, and quickly passes through several years to reach the present, while establishing a set of contrasting secondary characters, who are even better than Fanny. Contrary to the popular opinion, I really liked the way how story progressed, with a couple of exceptions, first one being Henry Crawford's character. The second half of the book attempted a lot to atone for his faults, out of which came nothing. After all that time effort, it didn't make much sense to give him such an ending. My other complaint lies with the overall ending of the story. Though Austen does take her time delivering some very unforgivable (and satisfying) verdicts to some of the antagonists, Fanny and Edmund's ending felt a little hurried. Edmund's last minute shift in opinion felt like a paradigm shift! 

“If this man had not twelve thousand a year, he would be a very stupid fellow.”

"The temptation of immediate pleasure was too strong for a mind unused to make any sacrifice to right."

However, when all is said and done, I still find myself adding this book to my 'favorite fiction' self. After all, it is an Austen. How could one do anything else?

  
    There is nothing like employment, active indispensable employment, for relieving sorrow.