Rating: 4/5

Review of 'The Comfort of Strangers' by Ian McEwan.
Recommended for: Travel phobiacs,Armchair travellers,McEwan fans

Travel advisory by Ian McEwan:

Do not travel.
Do not travel to Venice(&amp; Amsterdam as well).
Do not go to Venice in summer as the soporific  heat dulls the senses &amp; makes you behave like an airhead.
Must have heavy lunch so in case you miss your dinner,you won't go looking for a hotdog stall outside a bar through dark &amp; deserted alleyways.
Better take your children along so you won't find time &amp; privacy for lovemaking &amp; stuff so you won't fall asleep &amp; miss your dinner &amp; go looking for that above mentioned hotdog stall.
Do not talk to/follow strangers: esp. when that stranger happens to be wearing a clingy semi-transperant shirt,slashed down to the waist &amp; is always touching you &amp; your partner while talking.

Am i sounding facetious? I'm not sure.
The comfort of Strangers plays upon the inherent fears &amp; apprehensions of an average traveller: The fear of an unknown place/culture/language,the fear of getting lost but most of all the pressure to"enjoy a holiday".

Tourism remains one of the mainstays of any economy but let's be truthful,travelling is stressful (unless it's an all expense paid vacation) &amp; with increasing restrictions on airtravel,the packing &amp; unpacking,the bloodpressure sure shoots up.

Ironically the lead characters here are Europeans,in an European city &amp; still fail to find their moorings! Tellingly the best part of their holiday is spent,cooped up inside their hotel room,rediscovering their lost passion for each-other:

"The thing about a successful holiday is that it makes you want to go home."
Indeed going away would've been better than the fate that awaited them.

It's a twisted little tale where the guilty party is first presented in such a sympathetic light that you don't initially root for the wronged couple,snickering that these dumbos deserve it but as the penultimate &amp; final chapters play out,you realise,horrified,that these are"ordinary people" like us.

Robert is one of those psychopathic characters in literature that are fascinating &amp; chilling at the same time: a product of a cold &amp; cruel household,he is a damaged person,possibly a victim of incest (the "bad dreams" of his childhood) &amp; a repressed homosexual (the hint is that his horrible father is also one).

I'm reminded of Blanche duBois from 'A Streetcar Named Desire',who,while being led away to be institutionalised,says that she has always depended on the kindness of strangers. Poor Blanche,bereft of all the vestige of her once genteel Southern past,still can't bring herself to use the loaded word 'comfort' &amp; settles for'kindness'

Now that Goodreads is all agog with reviews upon reviews on books like Fifty Shades of Grey &amp; others of its ilk,with everybody jumping on the bandwagon with pretend reviews &amp; parodies,books like The Comfort of Strangers are reminders that some one's twisted fantasies become another's horrific nightmare.

Think about that.