Rating: 4/5

This is an excellent, well-written and enjoyable historical novel. It tells of the years from 1777 to 1779, when George Rogers Clark played a pivotal role in defending the norwestern Colonies during the Revolutionary War.

While the battles were going on along the Atlantic Coast, the British were also trying to gain a foothold in the NorthWest Territories. They had forts in Detroit, in Kaskaskia,Illinois and Vincennes, Indiana. Of course, these were not states then--they were all together referred to as the "Northwest Territory". Besides building forts on land claimed by the newly formed United States, they also stirred up trouble, encouraging the Indians to attack American settlers for bounties.

George Rogers Clark, as told in this excellent novel, captured two of the forts--Kaskaskia and Vincennes. The latter was especially diffuclt as it was a winter campaign.

The author has done excellent research. Except for a handful, noted in the author's note at the end, all the letters and proclamations in this novel are genuine.

One scene I particularly liked was describing the Vincennes assault. For over a week, the men marched (only a few packhorse and horses for a scout or two were available) all day. Eating parched corn and strips of dried meat, the would march all day, with cold wind and often drizzle. At night, they could not build a large fire--it might be seen by enemies. Sometimes it was too wet for any kind of fire. They would drop on the ground, wrap themselves in a blanket, fall asleep from exhaustion; get up[ and begin the next day--and the next and the next...

Reminds me of what I had read about Marines in the Pacific---severe weather; scant rations due to supply issues; day to day exhaustion.

This novel really shows the harships our frontiersmen suffered in the Revolutionary times.

Alas, Clark's sucesses came early in his life. All these events occurred before he was 30.

In later life--I found this particularly sad--he was plagued by poverty. During his campaigns, he himself had often borrowed money for supplies for his troops. Yet, the state of Virginia--and later the US Congress--refused to acknowledge these debts. Clark had kept careful records, but it was claimed they had never been received. Finally, in 1812, Virginia granted George Rogers Clark a pension and acknowledged his services. He died six years later. (Oh--and many of the receipts and vouchers Clark had sent WERE found--in 1913!)

Not nearly as well known as his younger brother, William Clark of the 'Lewis and Clark' expedition, this novel introduced me to a fascinating character. After you read this novel, when some says "George Rogers Clark", you'll think--"yes, quite a unique man"and not "Who?""

Historically accurate, exsciting, a bit long--500 pages--but usually well paced, this kept my interest. Recommened for fans of histrocal fiction; especially recommend if the Colonial-Revolutionary War ear is of interest to you. Fans of regular history would probably enjoy this as well.

Edited 12-6-12 to fix typos.