Rating: 5/5

Founding member and keyboardist of the 1960s psychedelic, jazz-infused, blues-inspired rock band The Doors, Ray Manzarek writes about his life and his time with one of the most inspirational, legendary, and mythical bands of our time. 

Born and raised in Chicago, Manzarek recalls quality time spent with his mom, dad, and brother eating the city's good food, exploring its neighborhoods, and learning to play piano as a youngster. It was when he first heard Chicago blues on the radio that he felt a new kind of spark - music was his calling. After moving to California to attend film school at UCLA, he met his soon-to-be wife Dorothy, and a shy, attractive, and misunderstood fellow film student by the name of Jim Morrison. On the beach is where Jim famously shared the beautiful and haunting lyrics of his poetry with Ray. It was at that moment that their song Moonlight Drive was born, and there was no stopping them from starting a band that would sound like no other. While on a meditation retreat in India, Ray and Jim met their drummer, John Densmore, and guitarist, Robby Kreiger, two like-minded musicians who could bring a pulse of jazz to their music, and in Kreiger's case, another talented songwriter.

Manzarek's voice is strong and authentic throughout. Reading his memoir is truly like being inside one-fourth of the collective creative mind of The Doors. He doesn't just share facts about the band, but their philosophies on life, music, and art. He writes adoringly of his wife Dorothy as well as his friend and fellow creator Jim. The emotion behind his tales of Jim turning into "Jimbo," the drunken buffoon he'd turn into after binging alcohol, were vulnerable and revealing. These weren't just two band members; they were friends, humans figuring out this crazy thing called life. Manzarek's love for his old friend still thrives to this day, and it was heartbreaking reading about those moments of tension. 

The Doors were a true four-part band, and the integrity each of them had not only when Jim died; therefore, ending the band, but when they were still together splitting the credits equally, indicates what they wanted most of all was to share amazing music with the world. And, my, how they did that.

Some may struggle to get past his deep philosophical analyses, but readers who embrace Manzarek for showing up on the page as who he really is will appreciate this book. Included are photos, and an ungodly number of mentions of mythological creatures - I'd love to tally up the number of times Manzarek referred to Morrison as "Dionysius."

A must-read for Doors fans and music fans alike!