Rating: 4/5

I was so busy admiring the Grimm's fairy tales as well as many other fairy tales that the Danish ones I read as a child were forgotten by me. Not completely, I wrote reviews for some of Hans Christian Andersen's works before. Only did I forgot to write a review for his complete fairy tales.

This might sound as if Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tales are forgettable and not worth reading. This isn't true. His fairy tales are still held in high regard to this day for good reasons. 

For instance, he didn't collect fairy tales like the Grimm Brothers did, he created them himself. That's why you may find people who state that they prefer Hans Christian Andersen over the Grimm Brothers. As far as I know his fairy tales don't even include any references. 

Another reason is his ability to write beautiful stories with meaningful messages. Many of Hans Christian Andersen fairy tales look messy on the surface only to reveal something bigger. It's like opening a sea shell. Some have nothing inside while others have treasure hidden inside them. Not all of his fairy tales are perfect, but that's fine, 'cause the protagonists in his stories aren't either.

That brings me to my third reason for many people (including myself) holding his fairy tales in high regard. Almost all of the protagonists in his fairy tales are misunderstood and/or outcasts. At first this gives each of these stories a sad and hopeless feeling. Most of them even have a sad ending, but isn't it more hopeful to know that life can be awful early on then being disappointed later that life isn't like a cheerful fairy tale? I personally prefer a strong spirit who accepts fate than one that is weak and defies fate. Fate isn't as simple as most literatures depict it. Sometimes accepting fate is the wiser choice.

This doesn't mean that the strong spirit is simply giving up. The protagonists that are misunderstood and/or outcasted develop. What started as a withered flower slowly starts blooming even if the sun isn't shining. For the sun doesn't have to shine directly at them to understand that it's time to awake. One may wait a lifetime for somebody else to pick one up. One has to pick up oneself. Carry oneself. Cheer oneself up. Develop oneself. Hans Christian Andersen teaches children early on that depending on someone else is stopping the natural flow of personal growth and development—something every child needs to grow up later.

To sum it up, Hans Christian Andersen's whimsical and emotional fairy tales have meaningful messages. Often as social commentary but also as self-development. The relatable protagonists show how fairy tales may exist inside of each of us.

StoryGraph review