Rating: 4/5

Hawaii - the place of my birth. My father was stationed there for a tour in the US Air Force and I just happened to be born during that time. Since we left when I was barely 18 months old I have no memories of this beautiful and enchanting place. So many years later and although I had a connection to the island I really only have the most basic knowledge of its history. I had always wanted to read some Michener... and figured that this would give me a chance to try out his writing style as well as learn more about my home state.

Is it historically accurate though? According to the intro only one of the characters was a real person. Nevertheless most of the major characters seemed to be based on actual people or amalgamations of a few people. Why did Michener not just use their real names? I’m just guessing, but I think it gives him a bit more freedom to write creatively. Each chapter introduces new a new main set characters and families. The storylines follows these families and their children in subsequent chapters to add continuity. It is probably a little easier for the reader to think ‘oh that’s so and so’s kid’ rather than introduce a new non-fictional character. I was looking things up as I went along... there was a LOT to keep track of - haha.

The events of the story follow history pretty closely from what I can tell. I could tell he did a thorough job researching people, places, and events. After he had this basic framework established he had the simple task of building an interesting story interconnecting all of these characters and events into an epic tale covering millions of years and well over a thousand pages. OK... not so easy, but Michener did this brilliantly.

The book is broken up into six main chapters / parts.

Chapter 1 - From the Boundless Deep - This is the ‘millions of years’ part of the story 😀 🌋 Michener goes into great detail of how the island came to be from a geological standpoint. Although this was written in the late 1950s I think the science underlying this part of the story is pretty sound. The science geek in me really enjoyed this - I love this kind of stuff.

Chapter 2 - From the Sunswept Lagoon - This goes into a theory about how the first native Hawaiians came to be on the island. The idea was that a group of people from Bora Bora sailed north in canoes 🛶 around 800 AD. These original inhabitants discovered the new island lacked much of what they needed to survive. Because of the isolation of the island many types of plants and animals abundant in other parts of the world just didn’t exist there and had to be brought. This chapter is one that didn’t draw on specific historical people and events. Did that make it any less enjoyable? Not for me ! I really liked this part of the story and Michener created some interesting characters and plausible explanations for how this all transpired. No matter what the current theory is as to the origins of the first Hawaiian settlers the main ingredients are the same: they were very brave, very adventurous, and very tough. 

Chapter 3 - From the Farm of Bitterness - Fast forward about 1000 years. This chapter is about the first missionaries that traveled to Hawaii to spread Christianity ⛪️ to the island. Two main characters and families are introduced here... Abner Hale and John Whipple. Both are sent forth to save the Hawaiians from their heathen ways... Hale... who is based on Hiram Bingham... is a staunch Calvinist and has a pretty much my (or his interpretation of God’s) way or the highway approach to conversion. Whipple - who is much more pragmatic - walks away from the conversion part of his missionary role and tries to do right by the island and himself - becoming a successful businessman. I found the story of their trip to Hawaii to be quite interesting.

Much of this chapter focuses on Hale and his wife Jerusha in their interactions with the Queen of Hawaii. She is determined to educate herself and her people so as to be at less of a disadvantage when dealing with westerners. Secondary to this is to convert to Christianity. There is a lot of conflict with the native Hawaiians on this latter one of course as many don’t want to simply abandon the old ways. In addition to the religious aspects there are also plenty of fascinating aspects of Hawaiian society that evolved in that time including a strict set of laws that not only pushed them into more of a western way of thinking, but also tried to protect them from the whalers and other traders that took advantage of the hospitality of the islands. When a ‘no adultery’ rule was suggested the question of ‘which of the 23 ways of adultery should be banned?’ I had no idea there were 23 ways.

Additionally... the character Rafer Hoxworth is introduced as well. He is a sea captain that does way more harm than good and can be thought of as the villain of the chapter. He’s not totally bad though as he sometimes surprises by doing good things... Every time he does so, however it seems like he does something particularly bad to undo any of his good deeds. 

The loose connection between chapters 2 &amp; 3 is that some characters claim to be able to trace their ancestry all the way back to the original characters from Bora Bora.

Both the Hale, Whipple, and Hoxworth families via their offspring are pivotal to the storylines in the rest of the book. 

Chapter 4 - From the Starving Village - it mentions in the book that when Captain James Cook visited Hawaii in 1778 that the native population was estimated to be between 400k and 800k. After 100 years of diseases being introduced to the islands from Westerners... that same population dwindled to 40k... So to sustain the island’s economy Chinese workers were brought in to supplement the diminishing workforce. This introduces two new characters Kee Mun Ki and his wife Char Nyuk Tsin to the story. They are brought over by none other than (much older) Rafer Hoxworth and John Whipple. 

The chapter spends a lot of time dealing with the integration of the new immigrants to the island. It goes into the horrors of the Molokai leprosy colony (I didn’t know what a lazaretto was... I just thought it was a catchy song by Jack White). During this time there was an attempted overthrow of the monarchy which led to the US annexation of Hawaii. It also talks about how the plague impacted many in the Chinese community and how the attempts to contain it led to a great fire that ravaged much of the same. 

The children of the Key family play an important role in the rest of the story. 

Chapter 5 - From the Inland Sea - Bringing in Chinese workers was a big help to the Hawaiian economy. What wasn’t expected by those that intended to use them as cheap labor was that these same Chinese would save their money and become entrepreneurs and develop their own businesses. So the next group to fill in this ‘cheap labor’ role were the Japanese. So enters Kamejiro Sakagawa to the story. 

This part of the story talked about the growth of the pineapple industry in Hawaii. In the story this was Whip Hoxworth’s doing... (descendant of John Whipple and Rafer Hoxworth) in reality it was probably James D. Dole. Sakagawa works for Whip.

The next major historical event was the Pearl Harbor invasion and the aftermath. Four of Sakagawa’s children enlisted in the military to fight for the U.S. and get placed in the 222 ... this is another thing Michener changed - it was really the 442. In any case this was a primarily Japanese American group that was sent to fight in the European war theater. I found this story fascinating and looked up more about this fighting unit on the web. 

Chapter 6 - The Golden Men - The book explains that this is about the generations of Hawaiians that because of the diverse cultural backgrounds look both to the East and the West to mold Hawaii’s future. It is probably my least favorite chapter, but I did learn several things from it. I was unaware of the tsunami that hit the island in 1946. (Dummy me) I didn’t realize that Island Records was formed and based in Hawaii. The politics behind making Hawaii a state was pretty interesting to me. There was also a lot of discussion about introducing labor unions as well as breaking up the oligarchy in the book called ‘The Fort’. The Fort was really called ‘The Big Five’ and represented five major companies that controlled much of the business on the islands. 

This is the longest single volume book I have ever ventured into. It was very entertaining and I plan to read more Michener.