Rating: 3/5

Calvin Trillin is a tremendous writer. I've read his "Tummy Trilogy" twice and hope to again before I die. His political writings, no matter how dated, still enlighten and outrage. After a small binge of true-crime sagas, including VULGAR FAVORS (the killing of fashion designer Gianni Versace), MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL (a killing blamed on Savannah's most prominent "bachelor socialite") and IN COLD BLOOD (in many respects, the daddy of them all), I ran across mention of this Killings, not a "long-form" true crime saga but a series of sixteen moderate-length essays that ran in the NEW YORKER magazine in the late 1960s and 1970s. In my opinion Trillin is always good, but this is not his best. 

As a whole, these essays portray an America that is in danger of becoming seriously addicted to violence. Perhaps the most ironic is the story of a "clean-cut" Pennsylvania youth who hangs out with drug dealers and "hippies" (at this time, anyone vaguely counter-cultural in appearance was still tagged "hippie"), who dealt in drugs to indict the miscreants, then cleaned up his appearance, testified, and moved on to perpetuate the "hippie" entrapment act again. Perhaps the most inexplicable is the bound-for-success Navajo youth who was radicalized, took a shot at the local liquor-store-owning mayor, and was slain by police. A dysfunctional family in a small Tennessee mill town shows the human cost of taking the local welfare agency from a reunite-the-family-at-all-costs approach to something resembling a family-systems approach, with empaneled experts and physicians giving advice. 

Strangely, the most disappointing of the essays in my opinion had to do with a Savannah heir to a distinguished family who disappeared and was not found for weeks -- chief among the delay the fact that his family would not accept that "a Mercer" could possibly be involved in anything shady. Trilling gets off some vintage cheek about the ca. 1980 alternative newspaper serving that city, the kind that is designed "to sell stereo equipment to twenty-nine-year-olds," that ran up against the power of the established daily. Perhaps it was unfair of me to expect Trillin to dissect the Coastal Georgia pecking order as exhaustively as John Berendt did in his Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil, but I finished this article a little mystified at the fact that the local aristocracy was mystified by its modern inability to completely shelter its own. 

In fact, perhaps my greatest take-with from these essays was my feeling that some of them, in the hands of a different kind of writer (the late Ann Rule, say), might have been better treated at book length rather than the close confines of a NEW YORKER article. This would lead to a greater sense of background, a larger cast of supporting characters, and perhaps as a result, a clearer delineation of motive. As for Trillin, I found his approach in Killings at all times top-notch, but rarely superlative in the way of the books I mentioned at the top of this review. He is factual, eloquent even, but other than the occasional smirk along the lines of twenty-nine-year-olds and stereo sets, he has not quite mastered the technique of being utterly factual but with a squint, in the manner of, say, Joan Didion. If you're a Trillin fan and have not yet encountered Killings, it's an enjoyable read, but don't expect the utmost.