Rating: 2/5

2021 read: keeping two star rating to make sure I never reread this again, really don’t like H/h, mystery is obvious, all around waste of reading time for me. This and the dark, crazy cousin book Cousin Kate are my two least favorites, never-to-reread Heyer romances (and one of her mysteries, Why Shoot a Butler?).

1/2017: Rereading with Georgette Heyer GR group; determined to finish this time, but somehow the Walter Isaacson bio of Leonardo, which I was like 8 or 9 in line for at my public library, became available, and I’ve put this annoying Heyer aside for now. But thanks to the insights of my fellow Heyer readers, I would bring my rating up to a 2-2.5 stars for the research alone; H and h are still humorless and the mystery is pretty obvious to anyone who reads a lot of mysteries, but in all fairness this was her first Regency! Just not holding my interest, same as my last attempt.

Finally finished! Still two stars as a Heyer for me, humorless and definitely not a favorite. As a mystery, same; mysteries are my favorite genre and this one was pretty obvious as to who the villain was - I’d go so far as to say it’s one of the oldest red herrings in the book! I would say Heyer definitely got better at Regency romances and mysteries, this one had very little of her sparkling wit and humor, but a lot of her usual careful research- in other words, still better than a lot of writers today, so I’d give it three stars! I didn’t mind the excessive exposition and found a lot of it interesting, but some parts dragged on as some of our members pointed out. If I got bored I just skimmed.

6/2008: First time ever I couldn't finish a Heyer - I'm glad I got it from the library! I just found it humorless; Judith was one of Heyer's beautiful, haughty, strong-willed heroines, which is fine when balanced with warmth and humor, but I just didn't see it. 

In fact, I didn't see much of Heyer's trademark humor at all; the hero (his name escapes me, since I stopped reading it last week and started another!) was the typical handsome, dashing, "top-of-the-trees" Corinthian, leader of the ton, etc., but he was also a cold fish w/o a spark of humor or warmth. He was also very mysterious with his explanations to Judith and her brother, even though they were his wards; I understand from other Amazon reviews and the dustjacket that some sort of mystery develops later about someone trying to poison Judith's brother, and you are made to think it might be the guardian, but you know that can't be because he and Judith are destined to end up together (you know the signs!)

Anyway, I got about half-way through and realized summer vacation is coming to an end, which will curtail my reading time, so I didn't bother to finish.