Rating: 5/5

This one was sneaky. I thought I was enjoying a handful of entertaining short stories, and by the end of the book I realised I'd finished a particularly wonderful, moving novel, and I'd had no idea. There were actual tears in my eyes. So, apparently John Mortimer has created a character with so much life and zest that I couldn't help but feel for him, intensely, and weep tears of joy at both the happy ending, and the masterful writing. (I cry when things are good: when first seeing the "Kiss the Girl" scene from the Little Mermaid with the faux cinema verite camerawork, when turning the corner and discovering "La Grande Jatte" in Chicago's Art Institute, or upon walking into the interior of Gaudi's Sagrada Familia).

I'm racking my brain trying to think if I've cried at a mystery before. I think I must have at Kate Atkinson, but it's a rare phenomenon. As much as I adore Agatha Christie, she doesn't induce such emotions. 

Anyway, back to the book and it's titular protagonist. He's considered a bit of a loser by his colleagues and counterparts, but he tries hard, he means well, and he doesn't back down. He's an easy character to like (but apparently not to work alongside). His cases vary: theft, murder, rape, divorce, and the emphasizing isn't so much on solving the mystery as in whether he will be able to clear his client (regardless of guilt), so it's actually about the legal action, which I appreciate. As fond as I was of Murder One season one, I felt that it could have ended with the verdict ... instead, the episode went on to solve the crime. That's not the show I thought I was watching!

Speaking of television, it's my understanding that this series began as television, and then was turned to book form, which is not a process that normally leads to spectacular writing, despite my early fondness for Earthquake, The Fantastic Voyage, or, in a sense, Peter Pan and Wendy. So kudos for Mr. Mortimer in doing a brilliant job of translating from one medium to another. So much of the impact of this story is predicated on the goings-on inside of Rumpole's head, I can hardly imagine what the show would have been like without it. (Or maybe they used voiceover for his hidden thoughts--I should find out. I'd probably like it!)

(Note: 5 stars = amazing, wonderful, 4 = very good book, 3 = decent read, 2 = disappointing, 1 = awful, just awful. I'm fairly good at picking for myself so end up with a lot of 4s.)