Rating: 4/5

I followed the ragged lives of four individuals with a myriad of conflicting feelings: anxiety, unrest, exasperation, abhorrence, sympathy. At the end, the title of this novel made perfect sense. While collecting my thoughts about this book, it dawned on me that all four characters were seeking a home and going to the end of the world to find it for themselves.

Jonathan, a homosexual; Bobby, likely a bisexual; Alice, Jonathan’s mother; and Clare, a heterosexual woman took turns to narrate the paths they each chose to take before they eventually found what they thought they wanted out of life. 

‘This is what you do. You make a future for yourself out of the raw material at hand.’

Making that future was not easy for all four of them. Their quest included an acceptance of one’s sexuality, hard lessons on friendship, a thirsting after love, and a longing to find a true home (even if an unconventional one). 

None of these characters was likeable; none was happy. Whatever semblance of happiness they experienced had in it a grudging quality. They all seemed to live messed up lives and I found it hard to fathom how dangerously they willed themselves to teeter on the brink of self-destruction. 

Clare, a jewelry designer in her thirties, had many lovers, was married, had an abortion, and was divorced. When we met her, she was living as Jonathan’s half-lover and wanted a baby with him even though their love was not physical. She said, ”People who’ve been well cared for can’t imagine the freedom there is in being bad.” She could well be right. 

Jonathan, a journalist in his twenties, had a ‘random sexual life with strangers.’ He lived recklessly. As a five-year-old, he played with dolls and was told by his father not to do this in public. Jonathan revealed, “I felt my first true humiliation. I recognized a deep inadequacy in myself, a foolishness.” He claimed that Clare was his main love. He also loved Bobby, his first teenage lover and close friend. It is possible that Jonathan’s sense of inadequacy stalked him even as he abandoned himself unreservedly to his physical desires.

Bobby, born to parents who were teachers, was introduced to drugs and alcohol at age 9 by his 16-year-old brother. A string of family tragedies left him practically an orphan, and he spent a lot of time with Jonathan’s family. His deprivation made him hungry for an orderly home and home-cooked meals. Alice, Jonathan’s mother observed, ”He looked at our house with such open, avid greed.” He picked up cooking from Alice and became a chef. Unlike Jonathan, Bobby was passive and compliant in an annoyingly sweet way. He went with the flow and let things happen to him. 

Alice, married to Ned who ran a movie theatre business, was thrifty and sensible. She loved Jonathan but was unhappy in her marriage. Her sense of duty bound her to Ned and she lived with a nascent longing for a different life. Her conversations with Jonathan over his love life were painful to listen to. That episode of what she wanted Jonathan to do with his father’s ashes made me quite riled at her selfishness. 

In years to come, Jonathan, Bobby and Clare left New York City for Woodstock and set up a home and a café business in the country. They became parents to Clare and Bobby’s baby, Rebecca. 

This is a book that raised some difficult questions. The characters were flawed but real and honest. Who can decide for anyone what is right for him or her, who to love, what love is, and what makes a family? A Home at the End of the World is written in impeccable prose. It is a difficult story but not one without hope.