Rating: 5/5

I don’t think I could talk about this book without putting spoilers into the review. I will try to make them as unimportant as I can so that if you haven’t read the book, which you should, do it now, it won’t mean I’ve ruined it for you too much. 

The main character in this, a young and deeply troubled black man, disappears early in the book. The book had been mostly seen through his eyes up until that point and so I looked at how many more pages remained and scratched my head. Suddenly, there were lots of white and no black characters anymore. The book had shifted beyond what I thought was possible. It was an interesting move dumping the central character so early in the book, not unlike what Shakespeare does with the Fool in King Lear – and it was one that could very easily have fallen flat on its face – and for me, anyway, as I struggled to find something to hold onto in the suddenly very turbulent waters of the novel at that point, it wasn’t clear how safe I was going to be allowed to feel with the plot after that point. All the same, the main character remains central to the novel, but this stops being the novel you assume you have started from that point. 

At one point I decided that the title of this related to ‘the past’ being Another Country, and so I was expecting a lot of reconsideration and reflection by characters – and don’t get me wrong, there is lots of that – but my understanding of the title changed over the course of the novel. The interpretation I probably like the most now I have finished the book is that other people – lovers in particular – are another country. Of course, Baldwin himself, like one of the characters here, left the US for Europe – so as to find another country where he could be himself. The US at the time was anything but a safe place for a homosexual black man, just as it is hardly a safe place now to be a black man, as we see with sickening rapidity. 

I think that twice in this book we are told that falling in love with someone immediately turns them into a kind of stranger, a kind of ‘another country’. Love is another country – but it is ‘other’ in the dialectical sense of the impossibility of understanding someone else, and that this is due to us finding it impossible to see how much of ourselves it is that we love in the other. It is this projection that so often causes us to loath and despise and damage the person we love – when the mirror shifts and we suddenly see in our partner what we despise in ourselves. The horrible violence of the first love-affair in this book isn’t quite repeated, at least, not as intensely as it first is – but there are many, many damaged relationships in this book. But the damage is most often done to the ‘I’ before it is done to the ‘we’.

There are quite a few sex scenes – both sex between men and women and sex between men – we are spared sex between women, always a good idea when the author is male. I often find sex scenes in books to be, well, you know, not particularly sexy. This is not at all helped when the author uses phrases like ‘his sex hardened’ or ‘he entered her’. But sex isn’t used in this book to be just about sex – if you are planning to be a writer, that could be used as a golden rule. For instance, the first part of the novel ends with love making, but it is as much a dance of power as erotica. The particularly horrible sex in the novel is generally reported, rather than forcing the reader to live through it, blow-by-blow, so to speak, but this reporting makes it all the more confronting in its own way, since whose perspective we witness this through becomes infinitely important. We are only given access to the villain’s perspective via the point of view of the victim. But then, our eyes are always directed through the perspective of a single character – so, this is generally true.

Perspective is remarkably important in this book, and I think, if I was to do a proper reading of this book – if I was teaching it or something – the first thing I would do is map whose head we are in throughout each ‘scene’. In fact, if you haven’t read this book yet and intend to, that would be my advice – a good question to ask as you read would be ‘why has Mr Baldwin got me looking out of this character’s eyes now?’

Again, at least twice in the novel we are told that one of the reasons heterosexual men have sex with gay men is because of the pleasure they receive of being the passive recipient of sex and desire. I’ve never had sex with a man, but this was something that felt based on a deep truth, at least in my own experience. The expectation on men – perhaps an expectation they place upon themselves – to always be the active person, the leader in the dance, can also make them feel (and by them, I’m taking it as being obviously I include myself) they need to be the source of desire, if never the object of it. I wonder how many sexual relationships have ended with the man no longer able to muster what feels like unreciprocated desire and the woman assuming they have become no longer desirable?

This paragraph will contain the main spoiler of this review – skip or stop reading now if you must. Richard is the least likeable character in the book, and it is hardly surprising that he essentially knows this and that it is what defeats him in the end, that is, his self-loathing destroys the illusion of his relationship with his wife and everyone else in the book. It is hardly surprising that he assumes Rufus is the one having an affair with his wife. He knows Rufus thinks his novel is crap and he knows his novel is crap. It is the cruel fate for so many writers that they can recognise the hallmarks of greatness in other writers, but that it is impossible for them to replicate that greatness in their own writing. But since that is all they want to achieve, their failure eats away at the foundations of all parts of their lives. Richard is incapable of seeing that he has pushed Cass aside but still feels he can get to play the cheated husband, when his insecurities made her cheating on him inevitable. Ironically enough, given my last paragraph, she cheats on him because she needs to feel desired again. 

Desire is such a complicated emotion, especially when the need to feel desired by someone is one of those things we have so little control over. We live in a society that depends of heightening our feelings of desire – desire for things, mostly – it is what makes a consumer society tick – but our desiring is a poor substitute for our need to be desired.

I didn’t really have a clue what I was getting myself into when I started reading this book. I only read it because it was banned in Australia when it was first published, although, the censor did say that perhaps literary types could be allowed to read it, just not everyone, with literary types obviously being able to cope with the fact the book contained scenes and language that was "continually smeared with indecent, offensive and dirty epithets and allusions". Really, epithets are the least of your problems here – I suspect many of us will see parts of ourselves in these pages – something that is rarely as comforting as we hope it might prove. This was a very good read – it shines a not-terribly-flattering light on relationships, and not just on sexual relationships. We see relationships as sites of power imbalances and of the consequences of battles we choose not to bother fighting for the sake of peace, for the sake of love, for the sake of companionship, and then we are shown the costs all this can claim. It is a book concerned with wilful blindness too, of course – but I guess I’d already made that clear when I said it was a book about relationships.