Rating: 5/5

This arrived in the mail today and I'm halfway through. I'm not sure what I was expecting. I knew it was going to be a humorous book from the reviews, but it is actually a how-to book on housekeeping. Some of the stuff doesn't apply to me, but I still get a laugh off it anyway. I have to admit I did skip the recipes section. I am trying to live a whole-food, plant-based diet, so all the meat, cheese and canned goods kind of throw the recipes out the window. But for the "random housekeeper", like me, they are good quick throw together recipes. 
What most touches me about this book is that I can identify with many of her insights and observations even though it was written in 1962. I don't know about anyone else, but I had this image in my mind of nothing but sparkling clean houses back then. I guess that comes from the media and the homemaking books of that time. I feel not so alone in my lack of focus on housekeeping now. It is something that has been around a long time.
A couple quotes from the book that I love, but there are so many, are ones that keep things in perspective.

At the end of the first chapter: 
"Before we press on: never think unkindly about someone else's housekeeping, nor speak unkindly either.
You don't know what she may be up against. Perhaps she gets dizzy spells whenever she thinks about woodwork. And don't be too critical if you consider her too neat. Perhaps you don't really know her husband. Perhaps she married one of those grim exceptions, and maybe little Napoleon turns purple if the window blind is one-quarter inch out of line.
There are many things we can't know, that's all, and as much as we all have our troubles, it behooves us all to hold our tongues."

page 49 (under the section "Things you needn't do at all and Things you needn't do half so often as the experts would have you believe":
"Also, I know a lady who lives in a perfectly lovely house and doesn't wax her kitchen linoleum. It isn't the kind the manufacturer tells you not to, either. She just sweeps it every day and damp-mops it once in a while...
...Although her system is heretical, we must remember that this lady has an equal chance of salvation with the rest of us and she does some interesting things with her free time, too."

There was another similar quote to the above but I can't find it.... darn paper books with no search function.

page 102 (a section about decorating): 
"For whatever queer things you choose to have around you are nobody's business but your own, and let nobody tell you different."

Well, more quotes in my final update. Hopefully, I will find the one I lost. 

Also, a book I now have to look up... Aunt Lucy's Compendium, first published in 1868.
Also, a product I now have to look up... indelible leg makeup.