Rating: 3/5

I DID IT!!! I finally finished this book! Good for me! It only took me approximately 8 check different check outs from the library before I actually completed the whole thing...Wow... now what to say?

Honestly, I didn't really like this book. It probably deserves a 2 star rating from me because I will not be re-reading. However, there were some good qualities that I think elevate this book to deserving of 3 stars, even if didn't particularly enjoy it. The characterizations in this book were poor - some of the worst I've seen in GLH. None of the main characters really had much interaction with the reader. Here is what you know: Mark is proud, stubborn, and handsome. Marilyn is beautiful, principled, and bluntly prudish. Billy is poor, mischievous, and utterly devoted to both Mark and Marilyn. I really struggled to sympathize with ANY of the main characters' decisions (except maybe Billy), and it was very difficult for me to get into the story as a result. (Although now that I think about it, I'm not sure that Mark or Marilyn were even in the book enough to be main characters...really Billy is the main character and Mark and Marilyn are side characters that get a lot of page time.)

As far as story line goes, this book felt rushed and unrealistic. The lack of depth of characterization didn't help, but I really struggled with the whole "I won't defend myself" plot line as well as the utterly prudish treatment of the rich young man who accidentally found his way into Sabbath Valley. The Christians in this book were by and large the type that give Christianity a bad name, and I struggled with that as well. 

Overall, I'm giving this a higher star rating because I felt like it made for a very good allegory for Christ's forgiveness. I understand the need for some bad character choices in order to really demonstrate Christ's love and forgiveness, and I appreciated the fact that this book actually had a hero character who had made some pretty bad mistakes (the only other GLH book I can compare it to would be maybe Not Under the Law - that one also had focused on God's grace to sinner's and had a main character who had broken the law, etc. although in a different way). This is definitely something that needed to be addressed and is not often discussed in GLH works. It's not something I particularly enjoy reading about, but I appreciate it. (I would have enjoyed it more if the main character had just owned to the mistake at the beginning instead of letting stupid pride get in the way of literally everything in the plot. That annoys the every loving crap out of me!)

Overall, I disliked the storyline and characters, but am rating it slightly higher because I thought the allegory was good.