Rating: 4/5

Irwin Wallace was a favorite author of my late father, and I read and reread his Seven Minutes and also New York Times bestseller The Prize. His socially liberal progressive in tune with the counterculture era of 1960 s appealed to me. It was this understanding I began to read Word. 
First of all I must confess I'm an avid fan of biblical origins and archaeology. The origins of Christianity, Historicity of Christ are themes that continue to fascinate me to this day. Dan Brown is a good story teller, yet his obviously fantasist approach with its empty core and plagiarized story failed to satiate my curiosity - not to mention shallow characterization of Da Vinci Code. Remarkably this thriller written in the early 1970 s is free of those flaws for the most part at least when it comes to the main character Steve Randall and the Ostia Antica papyrus that supposedly holds key to the true life of Jesus. 
Steve Randall, the protagonist, is a cynic, an embittered head of a successful New York publicity firm who's increasingly becoming disillusioned with his professional life tinged with commercialism and personal life besotted by marital problems and his clergyman father facing a cardiac arrest. In short Steve is in midst of a crisis of faith. In the meantime he's locked in negotiations with a big time firm to close a deal to sell his PR operation so he could have enough money and security to lead the rest of the life the way he wanted to in peace and quiet away from rat race. 
Then comes call from George Wheeler, the fat cat US biblical publisher, representing consortium of eminent publishers from Europe and America and theologians, asking Steve to become the PR head for a publicity campaign to market what is called International New Testament, which includes a hitherto unknown brand new Gospel written by Jesus's brother James the Just. What is remarkable about this new Gospel is it has first person view by someone who witnessed Jesus and his ministry unlike other Gospel writers writing decades after the event basing on other witnesses. Apparently this new Gospel was found by an eminent Italian archaeologist among the ruins of a villa belonging to probable Christian convert, Jewish merchant in Ostia Antica, with another parchment from a heathen Roman centurion attesting to the veracity of the crucifixion of Jesus Christ. With this new gospel no longer would we view Christ through Glass darkly but had clear view just like second coming or Resurrection Two as the project is named. 
Reading the new gospel, Steve Randall was shorn of his cynicism and found his long lost faith in Christ and more importantly in life. But then lingering doubts began to assail Steve. The meeting with the radical protestant minister Dominee Vroom who's against the attempts by publishers and Church to use this gospel to preserve orthodoxy so as to prevent religious reforms from being enacted, makes Steve question motives behind the project. Further a more damaging and sinister allegation is being made that new Gospel is nothing but a forgery made in 20th century. 
With his faith and life on the balance, Steve Randall sets out to find the truth once for all, even if it costs him all that is dear. With over 700 pages in print edition and barring some repetitious boring sections, The Word is a thrilling read, a real page turner, and I found it a more satisfying experience than Da Vinci Code