Rating: 5/5

In his book, Aristotle teaches the reader the art of persuasion, otherwise known as rhetoric. He divides arguments – means of persuasion available to the speaker – into two kinds: non-artistic and artistic. 

The non-artistic kind are those that do not require from the speaker to be a skillful rhetorician. He just has to use them. Such non-artistic proofs are five, according to the author: laws, witnesses, contracts, oaths, and torture. He believed that lawyers who plead cases in court use them the most, but, if applied to modern politics, they can be used by representatives to persuade citizens to accept a new tax, for instance. I found his views on torture interesting. He noted that one can be tempted to use it because if it is in one's favor, one can exaggerate its importance by asserting that it is the only true kind of proof, and if it is in favor of the other side, he can dismiss it by pointing out that tortured people are likely to give false testimonies. Progressively for Ancient Greece, where torture was lawfully used, Aristotle underscored that torture cannot be relied on as proof.

The artistic kind of arguments are those that require rhetorical skills to be used. They are logos, or rational appeal, pathos, or emotional appeal, and ethos, or ethical appeal. 

When using logos, the speaker appeals to the understanding of the audience – he argues for his point. To argue, one has either to draw conclusions from affirmative or negative statements or to make generalizations based on observations. In other words, one has to reason either inductively or deductively. An instance of inductive reasoning is "Every grape that I ate was sweet, so all grapes are probably sweet." An instance of deductive reasoning is the well-known "All men are mortal, and all Greeks are men, so all Greeks are mortal." In logic, this deductive way of thinking is known as syllogism, a term that Aristotle used. It is important to remember that only a conclusion that is logical can be called a syllogism. Woody Allen's famous conclusion, "All men are mortal. Socrates was mortal. Therefore, all men are Socrates," is definitely not a syllogism. 

In rhetoric, a syllogism is called the enthymeme. As Aristotle writes, "The enthymeme must consist of few propositions, fewer often than those which make up a normal syllogism." This is why the enthymeme is now considered a shortened syllogism, an argument that includes the conclusion and one of the premises, with the other premise only implied. For instance, turned into an enthymeme, the syllogism above would sound like this: "Since all Greeks are men, they are all mortal." The conclusion – all Greeks are mortal – is included and so is one of the premises – all Greeks are men. The implied premise is that all men are mortal. The enthymeme helps the orator because it excludes the parts of the argument that the auidence would be impatient to listen to or unable to follow. 

Aristotle wanted rhetoric to focus only on rational appeals, but he was realistic enough to understand that people have free will and are swayed by passions and emotions. He accepted that if rhetoric was indeed the art of discovering all available ways to persuade, it had to include an inquiry into the means of touching people's emotions. This is why he devoted the second part of his work to analyzing human emotions, which the speaker has to know and learn how to provoke or restrain. For instance, he discussed how the orator can prevent the members of his audience from feeling pity by provoking their indignation and envy. He explained that these two emotions were the opposite of pity, so the speaker had to appeal to them: "if the envious man is pained at another's possession or acquisition of good fortune, he is bound to rejoice at the destruction or non-acquisition of the same."

The third way to persuade, as defined by the author, is ethos. It relies on the character of the speaker, especially on the way he presents his character in his speech. To appeal to the audience, he brings himself in their favor by making an impression that he is a man of intelligence, benevolence, and integrity. Aristotle believed that ethos could be the most effective of the three kinds of artistic ways of persuasion because even if the orator can convince the people with logic and touch their emotions, his efforts will not be successful if the audience does not trust him. However, he also wrote that which of the three appeals is most suitable depends on what we are arguing for, on the circumstances, and on the kind of audience that we are addressing. 

THE "ART" OF RHETORIC is thought-provoking and well-written. Translated by John Henry Freese, Aristotle's work is not difficult to understand. This book would be of interest to anyone who wants to know about rhetoric and to become more aware of the ways in which others can influence our views and choices with their words.