Rating: 5/5

Sooooo...... this was quite a surprise. With a title like "Code of Honor" I was thinking military... possibly police story. But the cover made me think it could be a romance novel. 

Well, it was neither... although there were people right and left who were attracted to each other and some marriages, the main characters were employer/employee. Whoops... hope that didn't give much away. 

Samantha was born and raised in a large Irish family, but times were tough. A future with husband and family were not in the cards for women in County Cork. Sam sees a notice that a plantation in Australia would pay passage there in exchange for 3 years of service, room and board on the farm. She takes the offer after a family tragedy, and two of her sisters come along.

The rest of the story is about Samantha's honor to stick to her agreement and do the best she can at her new place of employment for a handsome rugged farm owner, Sloan. Attraction, yes, but he is focused on his property and self, where she's focused on doing what she must and do right by her "master". There may be a little more to it than that, because, you know... things HAVE to get complicated... but what it is, I'll never tell. :)

Kinda feel sorry for the people who gave this book a low rating. Clearly they didn't get it. This was a really good book. 

There were a number of good characters that added to the story line, from unique Aborigines, to a meddlesome but honorable preacher, sisters who don't have the same ideals as Samantha, Sloan and his self-serving, yet magnetic ways, and an older recluse who becomes a big part of the plot later on.

The first thing that attracted me to this book, and made me actually sigh and say, "Aaaaaah" was Ms. Dengler's writing. Finally, after a number of books I'd have no problem deleting from my Kindle library, here's a book worth reading!!! Real people, real writing, real drama, real plotline. Love it. 

Just a brief exposure to her writing, and there were so many more quotables, but here goes... "In Ireland the constant green seemed a sort of backdrop to life, a landscape canvas against which the major characters of the drama of Samantha Connolly played their roles. This rain forest, though, was a living thing unto itself, a dense and brooding entity."

There were surprises along the way... what you think might happen (because you are so used to stories being predictable) might not happen here. I love that!!!

Do I recommend this? You bet!!!
Enjoy