Rating: 4/5

4.5★

Aaaarrrrgggghhh

I accidentally deleted my review! Yes, it was me not Goodreads. That'll teach me to idly scroll this site on my phone while watching TV.

Worse still, this means I lost all my notes!

So, I'll rewrite what I remember.

I have been a fan of (some of) the fabulous Mitford Sisters for quite some time. This is my first time reading any of Jessica's work. &amp; her left wing political views made her very different from the rest of her family.

Jessica may have called her journalism muckraking because she was wading through the mud of some very murky practices. Her own standards were very high!

The early essays weren't up to the standard of the later ones - understandable as Jessica (known to her family as 'Decca') wasn't a trained journalist. but when she hit her stride, she really hit her stride!

My favourite article was the one taking apart the Famous Writers School

  

I remember seeing the above picture in magazines that my aunt sent to my mother after she had finished with them. I was young &amp; naive to think of how kind these famous authors (although at the time Bennett Cerf was the only one I had heard of) were to impart their skills to beginners.

&amp; these writers were rash enough to sing like canaries when Jessica interviewed them!

"If anyone thinks we have time to look at the aptitude tests that come in, they're out of their minds!" Bennett Cerf.

Phillis McGinley "...Of course anyone with a real gift for writing wouldn't have to be taught."
 This fine establishment eventually went bankrupt.

My other favourite was about hoity-toity New York restaurant The Sign of the Dove After Ms Mitford wrote a critical article about an unpleasant experience dining there, the restaurant &amp; people associated responded by trying to imply she had been drunk. This is never a good idea when dealing with a combative (but charming) journalist who is married to a lawyer. You could feel Mitford's glee when she took them apart.

Highly recommended.

https://wordpress.com/view/carolshess...