Rating: 4/5

One of the best religion books that I've read this year. Told in a simple and direct prose, Scott Hahn's main points here are that the last book of the Holy Bible, The Book of Revelation is actually describing the Holy Mass by the Roman Catholics and that the Holy Mass is actually a taste of heaven here on earth. The title comes from the fact that the Jesus' passion and crucifixion in the New Testament is actually foreshadowed by Abraham about to sacrifice his son Isaac in the Old Testament. During that time, lambs were God the Father's preferred animal as offering to Him. That's the reason why Jesus is also called the Lamb of God.

Are you a practicing Catholic and you sometimes feel that the Sunday mass is becoming monotonous or boring? Do you complain that the sound system is bad so you cannot hear what the priest is saying? Or the priest has a low IQ and that shows in his meaningless and pointless homily? Do you find the people in the church with the children roaming around and shouting and sometimes crying while you are trying to pray distracting? Do you feel that the gospel is something that you've heard and probably read a hundred of times that they are no longer exciting to hear? Do you wonder what are the meanings of those phrases and words that they say during the mass?

If your answer is Yes to any of these, then this book is for you. Scott Hahn used to be a Calvinist and the first time he attended the Catholic Mass, he got so interested that he researched on it and wrote this book. What is it with these converts that they make good books and better evangelists if not believers? It's because they know something about their former religions so when they delve into Catholicism they bring with them their knowledge. The effect is that they are more convincing as their listeners or followers learn some new things about their former religions. Also, they tend to thirst more about Catholic religion than non-converts so they try to discover the teachings, read more books, talk to more cardinals, bishops, priests and other men of God. They also want to prove themselves that the community that accepted them will find them worthy. So, they prove and try to assert that they are part of the flock. I hope they will just continue and not start and become flash-in-the-pan.

My first Scott Hahn book and definitely not the last. There are more books by him in this bookstore:

Totus Bookstore
2nd Flr. Missouri Square Bldg. Connecticut cor. Missouri Sts., Greenhills, San Juan City

Telephone no: 723-43-26

Email Address: info@totusbookstore.com