Rating: 5/5

Originally published in 1903, this children's classic has been a sunny delight for ages. A colorful, clever, larger than life young girl has an outlook on life that faces down tragedy, change, and things like poverty with a rich imagination enchanting nearly everyone who encounters her.

Rebecca is one of seven children from an impoverished family. Her mother is a recent widow and the family farm is eking along. Long ago, her mother married a charismatic man that the aunts didn't approve of and her father turned out to be a dreamer who wasn't good at a livelihood. Now, the aunts have sent for Rebecca's older sister to cultivate ladylike decorum and send her off to school so she can learn something and earn her own way while also sending funds home to help the family. Rebecca's mother doesn't have much need of a child like Rebecca so she sends her instead of the steady, hardworking Hannah.

From the coach driver to her teacher at the little school, Rebecca charms them all. That is everyone, but her oldest stern aunt who only sees her frivolous father in her. Aunt Miranda will have no nonsense and can't under stand the creative and sunny child she has under her roof. She is stern and even cruel in ways while Aunt Jane softens Miranda's dictates where she can seeing Rebecca as a loving, willing child. Rebecca grows up under their influence and, more so, under her own winsome ways. She is generous and kind to those whom others pass over and she is a source of effervescence imaginary adventure to her school chums. Even when away at school and nearly grown up, she catches the attention and makes her own way, but still, there is always the concern about her impoverished family back home and even the liveliest of young lady's are brought to earth by some woes. But, Rebecca shows an inner strength and earthy maturity that surprises, no matter what live throws in her path. 

I forgot how sparkling and uplifting this story was and was tickled to rediscover it when I spotted it on audio. Lorna Raver was a new to me narrator, but she captured Rebecca's voice and that of old, young, male and female as well as what sounded like the Yankee accent that might be heard regionally in smalltown Maine.

All in all, this inspiring classic hit the spot. I can recommend it for those looking for Victorian era Americana fiction or a children's story that is a bubbly classic.