Rating: 4/5

I found a copy somewhere a long time ago but didn’t buy because I dunno. And then I found this list of must reads for young adults and saw The 3NBs of Julian Drew in it. So when I found a copy again at Booksale, I bought it this time. 

The 3NBs of Julian Drew is the story of this boy Julian Drew who is uber abused by his step mother, and well, his father at the same time. After his mother’s death, everything changed. Starved, caged, lambasted, tortured…oh well, lotsa bad things that can make me vomit. And to express himself, pour out his angst, Julian writes in his journals. He writes in codes so that his stepmother wouldn’t know about it. All the bitterness…all his desires to see his late mother once again. Plus the blooming love affair with a disturbed girl. The twist of the tale is how Julian managed to survive…and well, how he got braver and braver as he wrote in his journals 

I found the book very disturbing. But it’s a slice of life. It slaps me of of what I think about my American Dream…that I wanna have my teenage life in the States. What I see in the movies, what I read in some books…it’s total different here. It’s the mentality of abused kids…and I wonder if it really happens. I mean, well, it can happen here in the Philippines. But I really doubt in the States. 

And I was thinking Julian is going to be mad. Gawd, after all he’d been through…it’s kinda traumatic. And he keeps on hoping for a miracle…of twisting time and seeing his mother once again. The ending was kinda confusing…I believed I understood but I think not quite. 

And well, the whole book is really confusing if you’ll not try to understand. I was researching in the internet and discovered Leet Speak…or L337. Those codes that Julian used, yes. But as the story progressed, you’ll notice he’s no longer using the codes, which means he’s no longer afraid. Thanks to his English teacher who was very understanding…and this girl in class. 

Speaking of this girl in class…she’s also weird. I forgot her name (sorry) but well, she’s one important character in the story. I could relate to her and Julian…talking about weird stuffs together, sharing the same angst…wanting to escape together. They ended up falling in love…but in such a complicated way. You just have to discover the love story if you’re planning to read the book. 

I give this book 4 and a half stars.