Rating: 3/5

A year in the life of a psycho ward intern. Straightforward, brave and honest and full of introspection that makes 

atavistic, mishegas, solipsistic 

Mr Plummer (a patient) prefers to say nothing. When he talks, his monologues are about his powers of mind-reading, telekinesis, visions of the future, all things magical. When I ask him if he feels his medication is robbing him of his powers, he smiles back and says, "Yes!"

...

We try to listen like Saul the adviser, like Theodore Reik, author of The Third Ear, whose humor and childlike amazement informed his ability to remain interested in people like an artist, not to classify or even try and cure, but rather to understand and in this process come to love them precisely for their contradictions and suffering. Saul's acceptance is like an embrace.

...

"You a psychologist?" asked a gnomelike man who walked in with complaints that red, white and blue bugs planted in his teeth by the CIA or FBI were devouring his nasal passages and making it impossible for him to breathe. 
"That's right" I replied.
"Read my mind!" he shouted gleefully.

...

The malingerers and the mentally ill I meet at Eastmark share the intensity that come from being alone in the world. Embracing their feelings makes me aware of my own loneliness. When I am able to imagine their suffering, and their dignity in the face of it, I feel hounded, too, and disliked, and cut off from society's enterprise. I think that's why the Them and Us mentality prevails in the the mental health professions. By cutting Them off, we create the illusion that They are not like Us, and that We do not harbor the thoughts and feelings that they embody.
If we view madness on a continuum, however, we have become aware of those features of our souls that we would rather pretend do not exist. The constant shuttle of patients through Eastmark confronts the commotion inside the clinician who observes as if from a distance. But in the end, there is no faraway pain, and there is nothing remote about their suffering. Their misery and their madness are fundamental human experiences.
I believe that's an important part of why the mentally ill are quarantined; to know that They are simply more vulnerable to the horrors of existence is intolerable because it means that the horrors, whether real or imagined, are familiar, and that it is the reactions to them that vary the most. The mentally ill realize this better than any of Us. So We separate Them in order