Rating: 5/5

Larry Brown sets the scene in Mississippi as a family trudges down the road carrying all their possessions. Gary, one of two central characters is described as “small, but he carries the most.” This is a prophetic description. His family has lived all over in many small towns, in tarpaper shacks, and in ditches by the side of the road. In this story, they will stop to take up residence in an unclaimed cabin. Gary is fifteen, he thinks. He has no birth certificate. As the story develops, I empathize with Gary’s plight more and more. His abusive, alcoholic father, Wade Jones is a shiftless, no good, low-down rotten skunk, who’ll do anything he has to do to get his next bottle of beer or whiskey. That includes stealing money from his hardworking son. Wade Jones is reminiscent of Erskine Caldwell’s despicable character, Jeeter Lester in “Tobacco Road.” Wade Jones, however, has a whole lot more marbles in his head and is much more conniving than Jeeter; and thankfully, Brown gives this story something that “Tobacco Road” lacked entirely, ...Hope. Gary’s mother is portrayed by Brown as a mostly powerless victim. She seems beyond raising the motivation much less the momentum it would take to leave Wade Jones. She is a cautionary figure for anyone caught in the cyclical patterns of abuse. 

The first sequence of events is oppressive, but Brown paints a wash of hope onto the page with some beautiful writing. “It was that part of evening when the sun has gone but day light still remains.” Gary is what daylight remains for this family. 

Joe is the other central character, and he and Gary are the hands on the clock that create time in this story. Joe is running a crew of men who are injecting poison into the trees to kill them off so another stand of trees can be planted. Gary asks Joe for work and young as he is, turns out to be one of Joe’s hardest workers. Joe could be a good-ole boy stereotype, but Brown makes sure that doesn’t happen. Brown rounds him out, making him fully fleshed in all aspects, but what I like most about Joe is he cares about Gary.

Brown builds ominous clouds that rise up out of both character’s past and present. I am riveted and become convinced that anything could happen. Grit lit as a definition of the hardscrabble south without romanticism seems appropriate for this narrative. The suspense is oddly enticing, even as I hold my breath praying that nothing bad happens to Joe or Gary. At the same time, I hope that Wade Jones will drop dead.

I loved Brown’s prose style, which is often beautifully descriptive. For those who don’t like loads of descriptive verbiage, let not your heart be troubled. There’s also authentic southern dialog, action, hunting, drinking, a feud, womanizing, dog and drunken man slobbering, and epicness. Joe’s ex-wife, Charlotte, will balance the portrayal of Gary’s mother’s victimhood with strength and the ability to do what it takes to give her children a decent life. This was a May book read for the group, ‘On the Southern Literary Trail,’ and for me, a selection that was captivating.