Rating: 5/5

To Dance with the Devil
24 January 2014

	Well it looks like my commentary is going to disappear among the hundred or so other commentaries that have appeared on Goodreads in relation to this magnificent play. Okay, poor old Marlowe has unfortunately not just been overshadowed by Shakespeare within the theatre circuit of Elizabethan England (that is if he wasn't Shakespeare in the first place – gee that's just opened up a huge can of worms) …

	Anyway, as I was saying, it wasn't enough that as a playwright he was overshadowed by Shakespeare (and then proceeded to find himself on the wrong side of a knife in a bar fight) but two hundred years down the track, Goethe rather unthoughtfully decides to also write a play based around exactly the same character, though with a somewhat different theme, and ends up stealing all of the lime light. Oh well, as they say, shit happens.

	Anyway, the question that nobody has asked and probably isn’t even thinking of asking, is 'who is this guy name Dr Faustus?' Okay, ignoring the obvious, he's the guy who happened to sell his soul to the devil (and got a rather poor deal out of it in the long rung) for knowledge and power (read to become a sorcerer), at least according to this place:

	There are a number of characters to whom it could relate, including the business partner of Gutenberg (you know, the guy that invented the printing press and in turn proceeded to change the world in a way that very few people in history have done) but the one that many people seem to agree on is some guy named, guess what, Dr Johan Faust who happened to be a magician and an alchemist who lived in Germany (where the story originated). Whether this guy sold his soul to the devil or not is another story.

	I have actually had the pleasure of seeing this play performed (which is a treat in itself since not many Elizabethan plays that are not Shakespeare are performed) at the Globe in London, and then saw it again when the film version of the play (ie the play was filmed and then shipped around the world) came to Melbourne for a limited time. I was glad that I had the opportunity to see the film because I missed the first 45 minutes of the play when I got the times mixed up, but at least I got to see the play (rather than having to deal with the 'sorry you're late, doors are closed, now fuck off'). I'm going to have to see if I can make my way to Stratford upon Avon the next time I am in England (though I am unsure when that is going to be, and if it is actually going to happen).

	Well, it seems that I haven't actually got to talking about the meat of the play, though I must suggest that when I first read it I considered this to be the perfect example of a tragic hero. In a way it seems to me that what The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus could be a template of a tragedy and a tragic hero. The reason that I say that is that it is not because the play is necessarily a bad play, but it is not complex in the same way that some of Shakespeare's great tragedies are complex. Faustus is actually a very simple and straight forward character, though he does develop as the play progresses, but his development is merely based on the fact that as the play progresses he gets ever closer to the inevitable doom that he had set up for himself by making a deal with the devil. At first it appears that he is having fun, though one needs to question whether he is actually having fun. Take for instance where the first thing he desires is a wife but it is denied him. Why? Simple – a wife and marriage is a gift from God, and as becomes clear at the beginning of the play any speculation or discussion about God and the things of God is forbidden to Faustus, which means that despite the pact the one thing that the devil can not provide to him is a good and faithful wife. Instead all he gets are whores and phantoms.

	Having read the play twice and seen it performed twice I am not convinced that Dr Faustus is doomed from the beginning. I believe that throughout the play Marlowe has provided a way out for Faustus, and this is seen with regards to the appearances of the good and evil angels and the debates over whether his soul has been saved. However, even when he does decide to take the way out, he is always approached by Mephistopheles or even Lucifer and lured back into the path of damnation. It is only at the end that he has filled his head with the lie that due to the pact and due to his actions that he is entirely doomed, and even then the good angels say otherwise.

	Plotwise, as suggested, this play is very basic in structure, and in a way there are only two plots running through the play and they do not necessarily support each other. Basically we have the serious plot in relation to Dr Faustus, and then we have the comic plot that involves his servants attempting to follow in his footsteps and making a complete botch out of it. The other thing about the version of the play that I have read, which differs from other plays that I have read from that period, is that it has not been divided into the traditional Elizabethan five acts. In fact the play does not seem to even use the act and scene structure, and I have attempted to search the internet to see if that is just my edition or whether that is the case for all of the versions, and of the two that I looked at it seems that the edition that I read (from a small hard cover book called 'The Complete Plays of Christopher Marlowe’) is the standard.

	People seem to have made comment on the Helen of Troy part of the play. I note that one of the commentators has compared Helen to Jackie Onasis (who had the distinction of being married to a shipping magnate, which is why he compared her to Helen), but I was always under the impression that this woman:

	
	would have been more in line with the tag of 'the most beautiful woman in the world', though rumour has it that she did end up sharing something with Jackie Onasis, and it didn't involve launching ships. Anyway, that is beside the point because my understanding of the Helen of Troy aspect is that she was little more than a ghost. I remember the version that I saw performed and Helen did not come on stage as an actress but rather as a massive puppet, which to me adds to the idea that the whole scene was little more than an illusion, another of the lies that Lucifer had bedazzled Dr Faustus with.

	This is the idea that I wish to finish the commentary with, and that is the idea that any deal with the devil, such as Faustus', is never going to come out the way that one wants it to come out. Dr Faustus made the deal because he was board and he wanted more power and more knowledge. He had basically reached the pinnacle of his learning ability for the time, and was not satisfied, so he stepped out to seek more, and because he could not attain more within his human limitations, he had to make a deal with somebody that he believe that could deliver, and that was Lucifer. However, as it turns out, and we see his torments and struggles at the end as his time on Earth comes to a close (the deal meant that he knew exactly when he was going to die) that he realised that the deal was a mistake, and that all of that knowledge and power has come to naught. Notice that throughout the play Faustus doesn't actually have any friends. In fact the only person whom Faustus seems to communicate with is Mephistopheles, and even then Mephistopheles becomes less and less of a companion as the play progresses and more and more of the antagonist.