Rating: 5/5

This story revolves around a character who is a vital presence at the outset, with disturbing memories, and then, as she is seen more and more from the perspective of others, gradually becomes objectified. Ann is an adolescent runaway with a domestic situation behind her that would inspire just about anyone to flee. She now has no home other than a sagging tent pitched at a campground outside a down-at-the-heels logging town in Washington, and one day when foraging for mushrooms she sees the Virgin Mary.

Her chance companion, Carolyn, is older and very cynical--not just about the repeated Mary sightings but about everything. Father Collins, the young priest Ann seeks out, wants to believe her but cannot (truth be told, he wishes he could relate to her as a man). The most problematic character might be Tom Cross, one of many out-of-work loggers in the area. Tom can swing between fits of rage (he crippled his own son) and hopelessness, but mostly he just tries to cope with an unrewarding life.

When these people speak, the dialog is wonderful. It should be read aloud. The story should be enacted. To me, it feels almost more real than actual life. (But I will say, as I recently did regarding a Saramago title, that the refusal to set off dialog with normal punctuation is a needless distraction.)

The setting of the story almost qualifies as a character, as well. Not having been to the Northwest, I wonder if the forests there are truly as perpetually dank, dripping and cold as North Fork is depicted on virtually every page. In the midst of that, Ann's constantly mentioned pallor and feverishness stand out even more than they would otherwise.

It's a complicated story, somewhat similar to 
  Lying Awake
 as far as the question of possible divine revelation goes. Not being a Catholic, I don't get the idea of Mary as an intermediary between God and man. I've never given a moment's thought to reported Marian apparitions, and so feel bemused by the multitude of Mary followers (I almost said groupies) who descend on North Fork. That did not interfere with my admiration for how the story is handled.

I'm not sure the conclusion is as satisfying as I'd hoped it might be, but overall this is a remarkable philosophical novel that is also an intense page-turner. What else might I have expected from David Guterson?