Rating: 5/5

Albert Nolan was a Dominican priest in South Africa and the first edition of this book was written in the Apartheid era, not an inappropriate setting to compare with Roman occupied Palestine in the time of Jesus. Whilst on retreat, I devoured this book in a day; it is both an easy read and supported by impressive scholarship, two qualities rarely found together. Too many attempts to reconstruct the “historical” Jesus founder on the author’s presuppositions, like one I read which insisted that Jesus must have been illiterate because he was a Mediterranean peasant and Mediterranean peasants were illiterate. Nolan, contrastingly, would place Jesus as the son of a carpenter as middle class. What distinguishes Nolan’s Jesus is his overwhelming compassion, his sympathy and feeling for the poor, the sick, and the outcast–the lost sheep of the House of Israel. Nolan does not think that Jesus ever claimed to be the Messiah (hence Christ would be a post-resurrection anachronistic title), though he had a uniquely close identification with God as his father. I’d already believed that Jesus really did foresee the destruction of the Temple (it hardly required supernatural foresight to see that the Jews in Palestine were headed towards disaster). For Nolan Jesus’ only claim to authority came from the truthfulness of his sayings, not divine authority.

As the only contemporary nonbiblical source of information about Jesus is Josephus (who tells us more about John the Baptist than about Jesus), we have to use the gospel accounts whilst remaining sceptical of their accuracy. Reasoning in circles is unavoidable; the investigator cannot avoid picking and choosing, with the risk of preferring as genuine evidence those lexia that support the author’s theories and rejecting as fictions of the later Christian church those that don’t. (As Nolan explains, the gospel accounts were written for Jews and gentiles outside of Palestine.) Personally, I liked Nolan’s having Jesus hiding from Herod and the Temple authorities, travelling about in disguise and advising his followers to carry swords. The account of the feeding of the 4000 or 5000 was exciting but I still cannot imagine how the suggestion they share their picnic lunches could have been blown up into a fill-scale miracle. Nolan tells us that Jesus never intended to create an organization to carry on his work and that Jesus was seriously annoyed with Peter for suggesting he try to become ruler of Israel. But I don’t think there’s a real contradiction between Nolan’s historical Jesus, the man who actually lived in 1st century Palestine, and the Jesus Christ who was and is the Head of the Christian Church. Orthodox Christians have always believed that Jesus Christ is truly human and truly divine simultaneously, so there is no reason Christians have to suppose the during his lifetime Jesus went about thinking he was God. Both believing Christians and unbelievers should profit from reading this book. Whatever the ontological status of Jesus, his effect on those he encountered in his life, who carried on his teachings and work, was indeed miraculous.