Rating: 2/5

Sonya is a poor Russian-Jewish immigrant; John Manning is the upper-crust WASP. This is their love story, of sorts, based on the question: How did these two even get together? Turns out the answer is Manning is in the business of helping the poor, and Sonya... well, Sonya is rather manipulative. She is, after all, the Salome of the tenements. As a modern woman, this isn't an easy book to read at times. The Radical Novel Reconsidered publication made me think that Sonya would be a real bad-ass, a force to be reckoned with based on her strength and conviction.

In reality, Sonya was pretty hard to stomach. She said things like, "A woman should be youth and fire and madness - the desire that reaches for the stars. A man should be wisdom, maturity, poise. John Manning has everything I need to save my soul. He can give me the high things of heaven and the beauty and abundance of the earth." (p 7)

I thought that her attitude would improve as the book progressed, but what we see is a woman who cared so much for fine clothes and other superficialities that she used her "womanly wiles" to get what she wanted from everyone else. She wanted John Manning, she got John Manning - leaving in her wake everyone who dared get in her way or slow her down. The whole thing made me cringe. "One must starve a little to keep one's figure in style." Ack!

By Chapter 10 I still found Sonya completely insufferable. "He is the end, the purpose of life. To get him I'd pluck the moonbeams out of the moon. I'd draw the sun-rays out of the sun. I'd dry oceans and level mountains - only to get him!"

Is this Twilight?? Did Stephenie Meyer write this book?

The issue of the story (the corruption of the settlement homes, etc.) was completely overshadowed by just about everything Sonya did and said. She's a 1-dimensional character with one end in sight - John Manning. She doesn't care about her own situation, her standing in the world, the circumstances surrounding her, the living conditions of others in her building... none of it. Her goal was to hook the man, and come hell or high water that is what she was going to do.

She does grow a pair by the end of the book. Sort of. Not really. Maybe a little.

Huge disappointment.