Rating: 4/5

I first read this book in elementary school - and hadn't seen it since. I just finished it Thursday, and found it worth rereading.

Two of the stories had especially stuck with me, though of course over the course of 50 years and more I'd lost almost everything to do with them - "Slime" and "The King of the Cats." Rereading them I found myself remembering what would come next, though until I got to that point I couldn't have told you. I had entirely forgotten "The Man Who Sold Rope To the Gnoles," but upon seeing the title I knew I'd seen it before, and bits and pieces proved familiar. The same was true for "The Young One." And when I came to "The Desrick On Yandro" I wondered how I could have forgotten the story - if nothing else the Bammat and the Behinder ought to've stuck with me. But since I had forgotten it, reading it now was like reading it for the first time.

These stories aren't horror as people today think of horror. Stephen King, with his practice of grossing people out if he can't scare them (I'll never read Misery again - I don't have the stomach for the physical torture scenes), and Hollywood movies which think horror is nothing but psychopaths slaughtering people, have given people the impression that horror fiction is nothing but blood and guts splashing on the walls. You won't get that here. What you will get is stuff that's not gross, but scary. And there is a tremendous difference.

The best way to scare people is by just hinting at the horror of the matter. H.P. Lovecraft didn't describe the figure his narrator saw in the railroad cut in the moonlight in any detail - he simply said that "one, who led the way, was clad in a ghoulishly humped black coat and striped trousers, and had a man’s felt hat perched on the shapeless thing that answered for a head…" Unlike modern vampire stories, with blood flowing in rivers, Dracula shows Bram Stoker's genius, where most of the predation occurs out of view, and even the most graphic scenes would be nothing in today's fiction. Even Stephen King can achieve this, more perhaps than he realizes, as we see in 'Salem's Lot where he only describes the beginning of a ceremony, and then says, "It became unspeakable." Or there's Saki's almost perfect story "Sredni Vashtar," where the conclusion is simply, "Conradin made himself another piece of toast."

That's the kind of thing you find here. Mommy Gwen clearly is the victim of the shadow thing that lives on the wall - but we never see any graphic description of what happened. Perhaps the most explicit story is "Slime," but even then the action takes place at night, with the monster blending with the darkness - and there are no descriptions, in clinical detail, of what happens when the creature captures a human being.

I could go on and on, but I dislike interminable effusiveness, and so I'll try to avoid that. I'll just say that this is one worth reading over and over again.