Rating: 3/5

"Float like a butterfly sting like a bee." This quote came from the worlds best known boxer, Mohammed Ali. His punches and jabs were lights out for anyone who stood in his way trying to take away his championship belt. But he was not always like this, big and able to take on anyone who is challenging him. 

He grew up in Harlem but is originally from Kentucky. No one would have ever guessed he would be the one to grow up to be a star amongst other people. He was small and skinny, couldn't fend for himself. But I guess this all changed. Maybe he could make something out of his life, like everyone has the chance to, but he became the greatest, as said by him. "I'm not the greatest; I'm the double greatest. Not only do I knock 'em out, I pick the round." Muhammed Ali, or Cassius Clay, faced a lot of troubles growing up in such a dangerous city. He faced everyday troubles such as racism, politics, and religion. I like to think that these troubles are the reason he has become the man he is today. He became a star in the public through his failed relationships, and the relations of his only child. Cassius changed his name to Ali, with intentions of not going into the army, also because he changed his religion to Islam. After this he spent several years in prison.

I liked this book because it gave me a better depth of the real life of one of these athletes, how they grew up, and what shaped them to become the people they are today. I found the way his life was shaped very interesting. I was sitting on the edge of my seat the whole time, knowing that he had the courage to keep stepping up to the plate and striking out, but he kept coming back and eventually hitting a home run (metaphorically speaking). This man, Muhammad Ali, had true courage and is the reason why he is where he is today. Another reason why he stood up to me is because of his religion. Not only because we are both muslim, but he fought for the right to be muslim, to be any religion. We shouldn't discriminate because someone is of a certain religion, we are all equal. And I understand his pain as sometimes in America there are teenagers who don't think the same thing. And I have spoken to these teenagers, and what they have been taught or what they think can hurt. But Ali stood up for himself and Islam, and converted, though he went to jail I still believe he sent a powerful message. He has always learned how to come back from a fight, and will continue to do so.

I would recommend this book to all kinds of readers, especially if you are into boxing. The author, Walter D. Myers writes the boxing scenes as if you have a front seat watching it for yourself, a sort of movie goes on in your head. "...the kind of universal story that needs writer as talented as Myers to retell it for every generation." - Kirkus, pointed review. The events of Muhammed Ali's life helped to fuel the civil rights movement as well. So not only is he a good boxer, but a good person.