Rating: 2/5

Near-future writing is always a challenge. This book was written in 2000, continuing the world he created in 1996, set in 2016, which I am reading in 2024. We're likely still decades away from the kind of implant technology that exists in the story, which is the kind of thing most authors are too optimistic about. But what baffles me is that this entire series revolves around one of the main character's obsession with meteors and the danger they pose. In this book there is a conversation between the president, who has vetoed funding for more research, and scientists who want to persuade him to keep funding. In this conversation the president mentions that no one has ever been killed by a meteor and the idea that the dinosaurs were killed by meteors is a vague theory rejected by most paleontologists. And the scientists don't correct him, don't mention that the universal scientific consensus since 1990 has been that the Chicxulub crater is where the meteor that killed the dinosaurs hit. Of course the author had no way of knowing about the Chelyabinsk event which happened in 2013, but it's bizarre to read about a conversation set in 2016 where that wouldn't have been mentioned. But there was also no mention of Tunguska (1908). For this to be such a crucial storyline it is staggering that the author seems so oblivious to actual meteor activity.
As I was reading this it occurred to me what has annoyed me most about the series--the language! Flnn felt the need to invent his own slang and his own expressions and then needed to include his own lingo in practically every sentence in the book! And characters who were in their teens in book 1 are in their 30s in this book and still talking exactly the same. Most of the people who thought things were "groovy" in the 1960s or "radical" or "gnarly" in the 1980s are still alive today, but people grow up and want to be taken seriously in the adult world and start talking like adults. But not Flynn's characters. It's common in sci-fi to use words to describe things unique and easily identified in that world/universe like light sabers, transporters, sonic screwdrivers. But using his own made up words 30-50 times per page is just distracting and annoying!!!!!
And it is probably the most perposterously, ridiculously, unrealistic ended of any book ever written. The leader of an environmental group holds a press conference. A PRESS CONFERENCE!!!!!!! Presidents can hold press conferences, MAYBE governors or heads of agencies if there is a major crisis directly relevant. Heads of non profit groups do not and have never announce a press conference and then have dozens of reporters show up, and networks do NOT do last-minute rescheduling of their regular programming to air them live. But in Flynn's world they do. And practically every character who has ever been in any of the books, from students to hackers to scientists to machinists to business tycoons to senior white house staff all stop whatever they are doing to tune in LIVE and the book ends with all the different reactions of all the characters to what is being said. Out of the thousands of books I've read I can only think of 2 more awkward plot devices I've ever encountered.