Rating: 3/5

As much as I love CJ Cherryh as an author (an adoration I grew from reading the Chanur books), again and again I find her stories to be tricky reads. I like them a lot thus far, but often there's a struggle to understand just what is going on. Sometimes it's a lack of being able to picture the environment precisely, and other times it's having to go back and re-read a sentence where she casually dropped some jarring twist or moment of action that I read right by without realizing what was happening. Other times it's the simple struggle to comprehend the story, understanding the logic of things, of what or why something is happening, and character motivations.

Yet, I like it. I think all the confusion is intentional, that Cherryh has worked hard to give the reader only the knowledge that the POV characters would have, and worked even harder to deny them knowledge they shouldn't have. There's no convenient leaps of logic or jumping to conclusions in a Cherryh book just because the story would need it. Characters are real, and think like real people.

With all this in mind, I once again think regretfully on the splash of knowledge I DIDN'T want to know; the first book began with a prologue explaining the premise, and this book briefly reiterates it: there once was a galactic, time-and-space spanning empire that used gates to move around from different planets and different eras. Use of the gates broke their empire by causing ripples of causality and anomaly. Now, in the ruins of this empire when the former masters are legends, a woman named Morgaine carries out a neverending and futile quest to destroy all the gates so they can never do the universe harm again.
All this lore is something I'd have much preferred not to have had explained to me. My pleasure surely would have been greater if I had, on my own, begun to guess at everything slowly from the facts of the tale, realizing Morgaine's magic is technology as she is described casting fire from a weapon (laser gun), beginning to ponder why she would be set to destroy the gates and why her mission is so deadly serious, and so on.

With all that being said, I do still like Well of Shiuan. It's compelling, even in its grueling slowness and oft-all-pervading unhappiness. I expressed my displeasure with the last book that the protagonists were trudging through the snow the entire time (a personal peeve of mine, that I hate reading about winter wilderness survival). This time things are changed up in that they trudge through a miserable, MARSHY land, where the seas are rising higher and higher and drowning the world. It was a strange and eerily compelling land, of swampy barrow-hills and soggy fortresses. In another author's hands the grimdarkness of this series would surely have become overly mean and rapey, but Cherryh seems to steer just clear of such things without sacrificing the bitter realities of the world.
Above all, I like the ideas going on in these books; a soldier woman of, one could presume, sci-fi-style civilized origins, armed with a laser and a weird sword that sucks people into a black hole, on a quest from one timeline and planet to another, companioned by, essentially , a knight she picked up as her vassal. There's outrageous possibilities with a premise like that, and while I won't pretend that I wouldn't enjoy a touch more of fantastical happenings, Cherryh keeps things fairly grounded, hinting at the more odd and outre, but cementing most things in the point of view of Vanye, the knight, who mostly is just tired from days and days of exhausting travel, and perpetually on-edge from primitive superstitions that keep him afraid of and ignorant to anything that even hints to be technological or odd.