Don’t You Know There is A War On. 
	The book “Don’t you know there is a war on” is about a boy named Howard Bellington Crispers. He goes by Howie and His best friend is Denny. The two are in the time period of WW2 and they have been through some hard stuff. The food rations are making everyone hungry and hostile. The thought of having spies in the US from other countries is driving them crazy! The boys are set in their way and convinced that their principal is a spy. At one point, Howie is following him into someone’s house where he hides and listens to what he is telling the lady in the room with him. What he learns next will change everything! 
	Howie was my favorite character because he had such detail around him and he was the closest to a real person, not just a character in a book. He was thought out by the author and even though he is just a boy in a small town in a book he is the actual representation of a kid in that time period. Boys of his age would run around trying to do everything they could to be apart of the war efforts, and if that meant trying to scope out a spy in their hometown then that is what they did. They storyline was easy to follow and the words are easy to understand. Though it was a small book it had a lot of details in the words that brought it to life and made you feel as though you were surrounded in the book. Although it was a good book, it did not grip me to it all the time, I had a hard time getting lost in the book every time I sat down to read it. 
	When you have trouble getting into the book it is hard to focus on the good things about it. I was not completely into the book so when I would try to read I would fall asleep. They book is written well and done in detail but it is not the book for me, I think it needs some more action. 
	This book was overall a good book, it was not my favorite but it was not my least favorite. I would say this is a book I would recommend to others who are looking for a short book to read for fun. The book is good for anyone who does not like to read a lot at one time. I believe that it is a well thought out book that is a good read for most people.