Rating: 4/5

Okay, first of all, may I just say: 
  you should see the movie before you read the book.
 The thing about this play is that it absolutely relies on tension. And that tension is absolutely there in a quality rendition of this show. But it is not conveyed on page. 

Likewise, most of Blanche’s character is in her nuance, in the subtext of each scene where she acts nervous and worried and in how she is framed and in her fear and turmoil. In a character like this, a character full of ambiguity and hurt and angst, how could an on-page rendition be so sympathetic? How could she gain your sympathies despite her flaws? 

The answer is that she doesn’t. Until you see the movie and she breaks your fucking heart.
Honestly, I think there is a lot to be said about this play and its connection to the downfall of Southern white life [wow, we have read about that a lot in AP Lit this year]. There is also a lot to be said about its occasionally-weird gay subtext - there’s some explicit text that the movie cuts because homophobia, but also the fact that this is essentially a love triangle between a woman’s husband and her sister? Which is something the movie plays up, um, kind of a lot. [There’s a scene framing the two sisters as Hollywood lovers and it is weird.] 

Also, I’d like to point you all to the comment underneath this status stating that Stanley is a caricature of a straight man and Tenesee Williams just doesn’t understand straight men, because holy shit, that is the funniest thing I have ever read.

But honestly, I think explaining the subtext wouldn’t be the best decision either for spoiler purposes [a lot of the thematic stuff is pretty easy to understand] or for my mental health [I am running off far too little sleep and I don’t think this review is coherent, probably.] What I will say is that you should see the movie, and then read the play and compare the two, and that I really liked this. It made no impact on me when I read it, but it's worth the watch.