Rating: 4/5

Although I tore through most of Jim Thompson's hard-boiled pulp epics many years ago, I picked this one up a while back as a late addition to the canon. His last published book during his lifetime, it certainly has a slightly different tone than the crazy, violent, disposable (now classics of the newly appreciated genre) potboilers he wrote for years to stay alive when his more serious work got him nowhere in terms of publishing fame or monetary recompense.

I preface this review this way because I think Thompson actually wears his love of literature and frustration with publishing on his sleeve. As I've returned, since finishing this novel, to one of his pulp classics--The Killer Inside Me--I can really feel the difference in tone and approach and it makes me pity the author who, like me, just wanted to spend his life writing and producing books but was forced to cow-tow to an industry in order to survive.

I feel like, but could never prove, that, after having worked for Kubrick and written a few TV scripts, Thompson, by 1967, finally laid down the expectations (and his slightly condescending attitude in writing them) of the dime store novels he'd been producing, and tried to return somewhat to the Stienbeckian "Okies in the dust bowl" high literature that he'd failed at all those many years before. Thus South of Heaven remains something of a hybrid. Some reviewers here have remarked that they enjoyed the setting and detailed descriptions of building a pipeline in West Texas in the 1920s more than the slightly convoluted and not all that dramatic crime story herein. I get that and even agree with it to a certain extent. Still, I really enjoyed this novel as a whole as I thought it did pretty well both by invoking a long-lost world or hobos and rough men working in the boom towns of the Texas oil days as well as the tension and drama or the crime story playing itself out on the margins of the narrator's experience.

Yes, there are elements of the plot hard to believe--particularly around the romance elements--but I was willing to just read these as part of the fairy tale aspect of the story's mythologizing of itself. Remember this is written in 1967 or thereabouts, even if it takes place back in the 1920s, and the narrator tells us right at the beginning that he's in his sixties now and revisiting a much earlier stage in his life. He vividly remembers the tasks and procedures of the oil pipeline jobs, but whose to say he isn't over romanticizing and even making up some of the other plot details. 

So, suspend your disbelief and you'll enjoy this novel, I think. No, it's not as gritty as Thompson's pulp--grittier, I think now, as he was was bitter about having to write such schlock and was thus getting back at the genre and we prurient readers by pumping the volume of his pulp up to 11--nor has it the stature of a Steinbeck or Saroyan classic, given the pulp-like crime plot grafted on. Still, it's better than a lot of American literature of the period and a kind of wondrous time capsule of information on an America mostly vanished in the dust now covered by suburban lawns and housing developments.