Rating: 5/5

I bought a video called "Miracles are Real" by Questar video back around the year 2007 or so. I watched it many times over the years and bought a couple of books featured in the video. This author Paul Robert Walker was in the video and he's in other video's also about miracles. I bought this book Every Day's a Miracle and read it in 2012. I gave the book away and wrote a review here but now this is my new review in place of the old one. I bought the book again now in August of 2020 and read it a second time. I felt the need to read it and now because I love miracle stories and healing. I'm going to give it away again because I want other people to enjoy it. This time reading this book I'm drawn to a different story of the 52 miracle stories more so than the others. The story "In Two Weeks It Will Be Gone" on page 39. The story deals with a healthy, fit and very intelligent women however she has an illness. her illness in the story is not something a man could relate to or her personal relationship problem is also something I couldn't relate to however the lesson learned is something I'm drawn to. because of her anger and strong feelings over the difficult situation she was in in her relationship she developed an illness but she didn't want to go the route of traditional medicine or surgery. she worked through her feelings on the situation and worked with a massage therapist and she was healed. on page 41 she say's "the physical disease is often just an encapsulation of an underlying emotional problem" and "if you can get through to the emotional context, you can heal the physical disease." 

I also picked up on other things I didn't notice as much on my first reading of the book. I like how the author talks about his own personal background in the story "Virtual Impossible" on page 194 where he mentions how he was raised a catholic but left the church at age 15 and his wife is raised in a Jewish background. In this story I find I think the way the author thinks in various ways. 

In the story at the very start of the book "the meaning of survival" Sam Zelikson was a holocaust survivor that went through a lot in life and worked hard to start a new life in America. In
the end of the story he wins a lot of money in the lottery after he had gone through a life threatening accident. I find it an intriguing story

"The Touch of the Muse" is highly intriguing for me also. The story of a girl who was touched by a mysterious angel who was glowing in her room. the touch was a burst of electricity and it inspired her as she became a professional pianist.

If someone is part of a particular denomination of Christianity they usually reject the miracles of other denominations even calling them crazy stories from that crazy church across town. If you're part of a new age religion, do people in your group take seriously miracles that are a part of the Catholic church or vice versa? Usually not. If you're not part of any particular religion and enjoy miracle stories like I do, then you are open minded to all of them. If you're also a healthy sceptic you'll not believe everything. if an Indian guru is manifesting objects out of thin air but some people say it's just a magic trick he's doing then you'll be open to that possibility too. 

I really enjoyed this book both times I've read it so far. if my review interests you, I think you'll enjoy reading this book and I recommend you get a copy.