Rating: 4/5

Thoughts on the Overall Book: I've been a fan of Patricia C Wrede since I read the Enchanted Forest Chronicles, and this book is just as good as those in my opinion. It had a really awesome story line, one with a bunch of twists I wasn't expecting at all, and also a great cast of characters that I always look for in her books. I really enjoyed this one a lot.

Cover--Yea or Nay: The cover's okay. It's not the best cover in the world, but it's attention-grabbing, and you can tell it's a fantasy. I do like the incorporation of the snake ring on it.

Characters: As I said, this had a fantastic cast of characters. Lets start off with the two lead heroes, Jermain and Eltiron. Jermain was a great, likable hero. Quick-witted, strong, and capable. Eltiron was actually kind of the typical prince who's a genuinely good character but is still young and, though he is smart, he needs guidance occasionally. He is also able to conquer his fears, however, and face them when he is called to do so. They were kind of pretty much like the typical heroes Patricia writes about, but I've always loved her heroes so it didn't bother me at all or take away from the book. The supporting cast was awesome too. Ranlyn was a cool character; he had the grace and loyalty and sense of honor of the Arab races. I kind of kept picturing him like Artith Bay from "The Mummy". As usual in Patricia's books, her female characters were strong, but awesome, and never had an attitude. Vandaris is the kind of character that, if portrayed just a little off, would come across as really unlikable to me, but I loved her. She was sarcastic, and probably what one could call headstrong, but not in an "I'm a sword fighting woman, so don't mess with me" way. Just in the way that makes an awesome character. She got business done without worrying about what anyone thought. Crystalorn was a good character too. She was smart and capable, but still a lady. One of my favorite supporting characters though, was Amberglas. She was awesome, and funny, and I loved her round-about explanations. And despite the fact that she seemed a little crazy at times, you always knew that she was totally capable of anything that needed to be done.

The Romance: Eltiron and Crystalorn are set up to be married by arraignment. At first they are totally against it until they meet each other and decide the other isn't so bad. There really isn't a lot of time for romance in this book at all, it only comes around in the last chapter, kind of typical for Patricia's books, but it's sweet, and of the variety I like. Even if there had been more romance in this book, I wouldn't have minded at all.

Writing Style: As usual, I love Patricia's writing style. This one was actually rather dark in places, something I haven't really read in her books before, but she did it well. I really liked the concept of the Matholych, it was unique, and scary because no one was really sure what it was, and it was still scary when you finally found out. This book really had a lot of twists I wasn't expecting. In fact, about half way through, I thought I had guessed where the story was going, or at least had an idea and then several twists came along and totally changed my ideas all together, actually making the book all the more enjoyable for me. 

Problems/What bothered me: The only thing I could really complain about is that the story really kind of ends abruptly. I was kind of sad we never got to see the complete reconciliation between Eltiron and Jermain. This book felt like it should have a sequel, and I could totally see where she could continue this story into another book. Sadly though, it seems that it will remain a standalone. 

Conclusion: 4.5 stars. The only reason I knocked off that half star was because of the abrupt ending, but otherwise, the story was 5 stars. One of her better standalone books, definitely.

Recommended Audience: Patricia C Wrede fans who have not read this one should. Readers of high fantasy would like this too. Guy or girl read 15 and up for some moderately graphic violence.