Rating: 3/5

The start of this is really slow, and meandering, and doesn't seem to be accomplishing much. The last third picks up considerably, and is a lot better. 

Several important people are killed (alas), but the plot advances, the bank is wrecked (again?), and Burgundy is dead in a ditch. 

Dunnett can write a battle well, and the Grandson/Morat/Nancy campaign is handled beautifully. Much like King Hereafter, where the final battles were well-done there as well, it doesn't quite recover the plodding of the previous swathes of the book. I also feel like the characterization is lacking here, or has people operating differently from previous books. Maybe that's because we're 15 years on from the first one, but it still feels a little jarring. 

This loses a star for the handling of Anna/Adelina, which was really disappointing to me. She was set up really great, and then the finale of her arc just went out like a weak souffle collapsing in the oven. 

BUT ... it gains a star because of Nancy, and the triumph of Louis XI. My hero is so criminally underrepresented in historical fiction, and I cheered every step of the way for the crowning achievement of his reign with the destruction of Charles of Burgundy and his pretentions. I wish, of course, that more of that had been shown. There's a really fascinating contradiction that I think could've been demonstrated - the whole series of novels is supposed to be about the rise of merchant princes and trading empires and the power of towns, and the conflict between France and Burgundy was essentially a conflict between a ruler who understood and used that rising financial power (Louis) and one who did not (Charles). It would have fit very neatly into the series' themes, but Dunnett opts to basically ignore that and just pitch it as a dynastic struggle, which I think is a big missed opportunity. 

So we end up back where we started, 3/5. There's enough brute determination left in the tank to finish the series next month, but it still pales next to Lymond. 

Many thanks to my Dunnetteer buddy-readers who dragged me along on this adventure - Melindam, Alexandra, Roman Clodia, and long-suffering Nastya. See you on the other side!