Rating: 3/5

I absolutely adored the beginning! It felt like an homage to Georgette Heyer's classic romances, and it had all the bickering and fun!

"I take leave to tell you, my dear Miss Redfern, that I am accepted just about everywhere nowadays. I am a veritable pillar of society. You would hardly be so cruel as to deny a reformed rake such as me of your ennobling companionship?" The laughter in his voice was dangerously beguling. "Idiot!" She laughed reluctantly.

These two had some serious chemistry. The bickering was delicious, and I had so much fun with them! 

BUT

Then came the dreaded second half. Oh the horror! It hit all my pet peeves and then some. 

The sex scene:
It felt to me like it was added at a later date? It didn't really fit with the rest of the story for me, it sort of threw everything off balance for me. 
Also, there was the language. I thought it was really old-fashioned, to the point of making me cringe:

"You must have a lot of practice at this," she said, trying to sound normal beneath the hitching of her breath. "You'll thank me for that later."

"Are you going to hurt me?" she whispered, unable to hide her trepidation ... "A little bit, I'm afraid." ... "All ... right," she agreeed, still game but slightly doubtful. She'd felt pain before ... She could survive this.

"What?" She stammered. "That's not what you're supposed to do!" "Who's the expert at this?" he said in a low, beguiling voice. "You're just lucky I don't go use my mouth this time."

"I'll try not to hurt you." She could hardly protest, not after the astonishing thing he had done for her.

He was moving faster now, hammering into her, and she took him greedily.

The last-minute drama:
While the first half was absolutely delightful, the ending fell really really flat for me. 
So our dear rake's best friend turns out to be a spiteful, vindictive ass out to ruin his life. Then there was the drouble with his ex-wife, who seriously introduced herself as Lord Marlowe's WIFE only to announce a few pages later that she had divorced him three years ago and just never got around to telling him! I have no idea who thought that was a nice idea of a twist, but I absolutely hated it. It was such a big WTF moment, that I just couldn't get over. And compared to all that Drama, the reconciliation just fell flat for me. 

So, all in all, I loved the first half, but really hated the end. But who knows! Might just be my hatred for any sort of drama that stopped me from loving all of this.

3.5 stars