Rating: 3/5

Based on the experience of a famous journalist (Bernard Fall) with deep access to French military positions and personnel during the first Vietnam War (1946-1954), this book is regarded as one of the great works on counter-insurgency and a significant critique of the Vietnam War. Written in 1961, but with important forecasts and warnings about American involvement in Vietnam added in its 1964 edition, which I used. 

I do not understand why this book is recommended in defense academies, or as highly regarded as it is. The book is a strange mishmash of romantic anecdotes about the Foreign Legion (and French colonial military) a la Beau Geste (1939), analyses of specific campaigns which are described extensively seemingly only to prove how pointless and poorly managed the French occupation was, diary entries showing the 'interior life' of the French forces, and very brief but high quality political/economic/ideological perspectives on the conflict. The best parts of the books are the diary entry sections which give a great insight into the French occupation, and the brief section at the end of the book detailing the political and ideological dimensions of the conflict. Frustratingly, the authors thesis is only really touched on right at the end of the book, and in short. 

The basic thesis about 'Revolutionary War', that is a war who's mechanism is using popular support and the active participation of the population to replace a regime with another, is interesting but seems fundamentally different from what he chooses to spend time on in the book. His argument is that in this type of war, there must be an ideological alternative to the Communists, or else victory will be strictly impossible. No doubt this section of the book has a strong relevance to American involvement in the Middle East, where identical mistakes to Vietnam (by both the French and Americans) were made, with lessons learned only very late into the occupation when goodwill was exhausted and the military situation immensely complex. 

He seems to be deeply aware that the South Vietnamese state had no compelling ideology, the West was focused entirely on military and mechanical approaches to both wars, and that the Communists seem to be deeply popular throughout the country. Nevertheless, he is so anti-communist by nature that the book ends with phrases like 'the French occupation for a brief time let some 20 million people live free', and is committed to the idea that the Communist ideology was only popular through brainwashing and coercion. He cannot see the Viet Minh as genuine nationalists, yet they are literally the only organized ideology present in the anti-colonial and nationalist camp. At the same time, he excoriates the occupation as being strategically and tactically misguided from the get-go, and based on an empty ideology of colonial extraction and privilege. It's a bizarre combination, where you can tell he understands from a logical standpoint why the North was bound to be successful in villages and to win the war, but is unable to really deal with those facts at a personal level or see their outcome. 

There are parts of the book which seem so anti-communist and pro-colonial that it is almost hard to get through them, and parts of the book which have a profound and advanced understanding of the exact reasons why the French lost the war, and why the Americans were bound to lose. Though the author was killed in 1967 from a mine while a journalist on patrol in the exact section of coast this book is named after (The  street without joy , you can tell he understood how doomed a strictly military struggle against an ideology is when you have no alternative to offer. 

 In general, I'd recommend the book to anyone who wants to know intricate details about the French occupation, and for it's sections at the end describing what he thinks is likely to happen to the Americans there, but it's not a very good operational or strategic history of the war, and the authors powerful sympathy for the French occupiers is an albatross around the neck of what could otherwise be a great work analyzing counter insurgency. 2.5-3 stars. 

I think he has good insights though. I particularly enjoyed a colorful anecdote about a native Vietnamese officer who had a Croix de Guerre and many other medals from a long service in the French Army. The man wants to get some papers signed for his reassignment to a different unit, but the base officers who have to sign off are busy playing tennis and drinking in the afternoon. They make the officer wait for them, squatting next to the court, and are annoyed that he interrupted them. A bugle begins playing in the distance, for a lowering of the flag ceremony. Here, the native Vietnamese officer in the French Colonial army stands up and salutes in the distance, without being able to see the French flag, as is regulation. Meanwhile, the officers (and their wives) barely look up. Here, even the barest of ideologies provided by the French Colonial Empire, which people were readily willing to buy into, was only passively provided and not truly 'believed' in by the occupiers who were meant to be the standard bearers.