Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars

Miss Eugenia Chastain longs to dance. She'd love to dance a reel or even a scandalous waltz, if only she could. A childhood accident left her lame in one leg, so of course she can't dance. Her lameness doesn't really bother her much in the country but here in London, during the Season, no gentlemen have taken an interest in Eugenia. She heads out to the balcony of the Hathfords' ballroom to indulge in a good cry, only to discover the balcony is already occupied by one irascible young gentleman. Edward Finaly, Marquess of Bradford wants nothing to do with balls or young ladies. He only put in appearance because his father made him and because his beloved horse Nod needed a rest. Soon he'll be on his way to the country where he can have peace and quiet and Nod can recover from a recent illness. He also plans to continue searching for those he's lost and he wiln't be trapped into marriage! While in Kent, he discovers a child, a groom, a mongrel puppy, a young cat, and a parrot in his pasture bothering his horse. He misinterprets the situation and chaos ensues. When he brings the motley crew home, dirty and disheveled, he intends to give his neighbors a sharp set down. He's surprised to discover the weeping crippled girl from London. He feels a bit badly about the way he treated her, but he maintains his belief that he wants to be left alone. Eugenia tries to stay out of the way and even extends hospitality to her cousin Neil and his friend Mr. Arnsworth. Though she is suspicious of Neil's motives, Mr. Arnsworth is all that is kind and amiable. She thinks she might even accept a proposal if offered, but as she encounters her temperamental neighbor more often, she begins to see the real man behind the icy exterior. She senses a wounded soul in need and is determined to help her new friend. Lord Nightingale, Delight and her menagerie, and the Dowager Countess of Wickenshire are all also determined to help Eugenia and Lord Bradford. 

This is a beautiful story of two handicapped people coming together to heal with the help of a colorful cast of characters, which includes the title character, Lord Nightingale. The plot moves along quickly. The mystery kept me on edge, turning pages and I could hardly put it down. When I did stop, I picked it up again and then finished, picked up book 3 and started speedreading to get to the bottom of the mystery! The story leaves a few loose ends in terms of the mystery. I liked that there wasn't a central villain needing to be defeated, that the demons were inside but caused by a villain. The story is rather sad but there are a lot of light moments to keep it from being too heavy. The romance is a bit rushed at the end and I thought Eugenia deserved a better ending. Other than that, I like the way the relationship builds. This book almost reads like an inspirational novel without the frequent mentions of God and Scriptures. (There are a few quick send-up prayers towards the end but not enough to qualify as a real inspirational novel). The only quibbles I had with this book were a few historical inaccuracies that may be Victorian and also the fact that the characters call each other by their first names. I don't think the vicar's daughters would call Lord Wickenshire "Nicky." My only other complaint is that the characters stammer too much. I can't stand stammering when it's not a speech defect so I took off half a star for it. 

The characters are the real stand-out of this novel, especially the supporting cast. Dear little Delight is as delightful as her name. She sounds more like 4 or 5 than 8 though. She's so sweet and innocent and obviously very happy and secure in her new life. I love her devotion to animals and how her kindness brings out the best in everyone. Stanley Blithe and Sweetpea are adorable sidekicks for Delight and reflect her personality. I liked how nothing much is made of her port wine stain birthmark in this book. No one notices it and I forgot all about it. Lord Nightingale is also an excellent supporting character. His dialogue is outstanding and adds a lot of humor to the story. I'm dying to know what "Knollsmarmer" means. 

The other human secondary characters are a little less memorable but no less important to the story. Neil actually shows some character growth which I like. It makes him a less typical character. His friend Mr. Arnsworth is a nice young man. He's not taken from the book of supporting characters. He's not all that well-rounded either and his plot is concluded in the most unbelievable way, but I liked him. Lady Wickenshire is not a grand dame. She's a doting aunt who wants to see her niece happy, even if it means interfering a bit. She's amusing but she can also be tough when she wants to be. 

The main characters are great as well. I really liked Eugenia when I read Lord Nightingale's Debut, so I was eager to read her story and find out how she finds her happily ever after. I was surprised to find out she's very young, only 20, and in her first Season. She seemed a lot older in the first book. In the beginning of this book, she seems kind of silly and immature but she isn't really. She just has a good sense of the absurd and a sense of humor. She's a smart and determined young woman and I still like her. I didn't feel bad for her that she was lame, but I did feel bad that the gentlemen of the ton are so superficial, they can't see how great she is. I loved her relationship with Lord Bradford. He is also young but an old soul. His speech pattern makes him sound young in the beginning but he acts a lot older. His devotion to his horse really touched me, as an animal lover I can relate. I didn't fall in love with Bradford, but I think many women could. His story is so touching. His relationship with Eugenia is wonderful. They need each other emotionally and become friends. There's no real physical longing, just a meeting of the souls. I loved the romance so much, it made me sigh in parts.