Rating: 2/5

"I don't read books much anymore because I don't much care about how things turn out; they either turn out well or badly, and if the authors are at all truthful, they don't turn out very well or very badly. What interests me, I suppose, is how people get to where they find themselves in the end. I used to think I was interested in how lives turned out because curiosity was the last of the passions to die, but now I think there's more to it than that. I suppose I still want to know if my life had to turn out as it did." ~Pg. 13, Chapter 2 - North Chittendon

This is a chunkster of a a book, and it took me a while to slog through it. I had it on my To Read list from someone somewhere along the line - I forgot exactly. It sounded like a real page-turner. A young woman commits murder over love spurned. And the title is certainly eye-catching. In fact, no less than four people asked me how the book was with raised eyebrows when they saw the title as I was carting it around over the weeks. I had borrowed the hardcover edition from the library and had to renew it to finish it up. My response to each inquirer was - in a word - insufferable.

Agnes is our murderess and we get to spend hours upon hours revisiting her young life's miserable history. The time is set in the early 1900's in Vermont. She is the only (surviving) child of a wealthy farm family with a beautiful home perched up on a hill in picturesque New England. She is also gorgeous - from a line of women so attractive that stone carvers have traveled to their town over the years to carve their likeness into statues. But sadly for Agnes, she also comes from a long line of mental illness at a time when such things were not understood, diagnosed, or treated well. 

Despite the fact that we are told about how horrible Agnes has suffered mentally because the original, perpetually favored, daughter died before she was born, and the fact that she attempted suicide as a young teen, it is truly hard to root for her. Agnes flees her family in her mid-teens to escape a life her mother and grandmother before her never could. She finds her way to the closest city and takes up in a boarding house, finding work as a seamstress. She is ready to take on the world and make something of herself. But she is a roller coaster of emotions and overreactions - as I suppose many high-school aged girls often are. She lacks common sense and maturity, and is one of the most annoying female narrators I've come across in a long time. As I said, it was insufferable for me to get through the life history of Agnes. Where was all of the action and nitty gritty about the murder we are told from the opening chapters that she has committed?

Agnes falls in love, and out of love, and in love again. She lives and dies over her lover's every breath. She cannot separate herself from them as a unit instead recognizing she is an individual contributing to the pairing's success or failure. Basically, she is what today we would term "high maintenance" and "suffocating" within the relationship. She is utterly naive. She doesn't listen to solid advice or learn from experience. She crashes and burns.

I'm not going to give away the good part of the plot - which is when the book finally turns the corner and gets to the meat of the murder issue - the act, the aftermath and its impact. And I suppose it wouldn't be as engaging were it not for all of the history we sat through to get there. To be able to feel for Agnes in any compassionate way, when she is at her worst, we know her inner workings and can see that things are not always as they seem.

This is an interesting perspective on the point in history where women's lives were so constrained and determined largely by their ability to find a man, get married and have a family. For those who did not want or go through the motions toward these "achievements" in social mainstreams, it was a hard row to hoe. Mental illness was something to be managed or survived, rather than treated in most circumstances. Serious living was begun when people were so young in their experience. And life was all around plain hard. Having the historical setting allowed for greater compassion towards a less than likable narrator. I wish that the pace had not been long, drawn out and yes, insufferable. Because the end was a worthy journey - finding out how Agnes got to where she found herself in the end.