Rating: 1/5

Sometimes, stress causes you to do really stupid things, like eat mac 'n cheese at 9 pm...or read really, really dreadful novels. 
Take this one.
I like to think that if it wasn't so short, I would have wised up and stopped reading before the dreadful conclusion. Unfortunately, I decided to keep reading. 
I can't really begin to express how bad this book was. I feel like I am violently overreacting and yet at the same time I almost feel personally insulted that such a book exists. I knew it was going to be stupid going in and yet...I somehow thought it would get better. 
Take the Regency slang thrown in this book. Technically, it isn't used improperly. That shows some research. But then the author goes and says stupid things, like that at age 19 our heroine is almost an "ape leader." 2 seasons do not make you an ape leader! Good heavens! There were so many moments in this book where I just had to set it down and go, 'Did the author do any research? At all?' She blends her history and fashion and everything else together so dreadfully I stopped trying to sort it all out. 
BUT THAT WASN'T THE WORST PART. The worst part is how Freudian all these bloody characters are. Isabella is an 'ice queen' because she, gasp, once witnessed someone having sex in a pub! This has given her a horror of men. But don't worry, the manly-man will win her heart by behaving manly and boorishly and...stuff. Not, however, in a slimy way...that belongs to the villain, who goes about raping people who turn down his proposals of marriage. 
Sigghhhhh. I can't think of anything redeemable about this plot which makes it even more embarrassing that I finished it. It was short? No, I take that back. Lucy was cute (though her sudden transformation from chubby girl to young lady was ridiculous) and her parents were amusing. The servants were over the top but not necessarily in a bad way? I chuckled. 
That said, I'm still pissed at this book. I think I would be less so if it wasn't for the conclusion. I'm gonna spoil it (not that you should be surprised if you've read the synopsis?) so avert your eyes if you feel inclined to read this horrible novel. (I recommend against it.) 
Isabella gets nearly raped for the third time by the ridiculous villain and then the hero saves her. He says he will call off the engagement and she is relieved (after all...she doesn't want to get married. Because sex.) But then after he comes by to formally cancel the engagement, he's like "Remember when we kissed?" and forcibly kisses her and acts really boorishly and she's okay it with! Furthermore, she starts stripping! Suddenly, she's a sex fiend! Gone is the strong heroine. Gone is any message about love or equality. She doesn't know her fiance. He doesn't know her. But by golly, now that she's realized her holdups were stupid, she is not going to let anything get in her way of getting with her man! 
Excuse me while I go throw up and then sit in the corner mourning the loss of female dignity. 

I really hate this book. My foray into bad Regency is officially over...for now.