Rating: 5/5

I gave the book 5 stars because I thought the book itself was well written and very transparent. I’m sure it wasn’t easy for William J. Murray to relive some of those moments that were not his fondest, however, it was hard to relate to anything he wrote, because before Christ, he wasn’t a very good person. He struggled with anger, alcohol, he abused every woman he dated, neglected his kids, and portrayed himself as the victim. He lacked accountability throughout his life and put the blame solely on his mother. I understand why he and the rest of his family were dysfunctional, but by God, there was no self-awareness, just a cycle of bad behavior and bad choices. He repeatedly stated that he hated his mother, but found every reason to come back and fall for her tricks repeatedly. I know there is some psychological term that explains this, but as a reader, I felt no sympathy. He said he always came back to create a relationship with Robin and I believe that was a small part of his reasoning. I think he liked the money too. Especially at certain points of his life. Even as an adult. The only season I felt bad for him was when he was a child. A kid will do anything to gain the approval and attention of their parents. But eventually a line has to be drawn. He never truly did that. The kicker for me, was when he arranged Robin to stay with Madalyn. Worst part of it all. I disliked the person I read about and felt bad for Robin and Jade. They both deserved better. They were the real victims. 

As for his mother, Madalyn Murray-O’Hair. I think she was pure evil and that evilness that controlled her eventually caught up to her. She reaped what she sowed. It’s unfortunate how she passed, and I really do hope Her, her son Garth, and her granddaughter Robin, all had a coming-to-Jesus before they passed. I feel like she loved the attention she got from all the “different” causes she was apart of. When one started to dim, she would race to pick-up another one. It was a means to an end; attention and money. I think William’s dad not leaving his wife due to his involvement with the Roman-Catholic church spoiled religion for her. She was a vengeful person and she needed to blame someone like she blamed others for all of her misfortunes. 

In the end, I am pleased to find out that William found God and has tried to do his part as a believer. His book is a powerful testament of how God’s grace and mercy. 

I would recommend everyone to read this book at least once.