Rating: 4/5

Looking for a fine novel of world-building, in the vein of Herbert's Dune, and characters nuanced, new, yet familiar, like Niven's Known Space tales? Slonczewski offers up the five worlds of The Fold: Urulan, L'li, Bronze Sky, Valen,and Shora, all fascinating, all unique, all that remains of humanity after the destruction, long ago, of "Old Torr."

This is a story of cultural immersion, points of view slowly and subtly developed, and the fact that despite the trappings and traditions of societies dearly held, deep down everything is just a twist on basic human beliefs. The Story of Worldbeginning related by young Hawktalon on the Day of the Child holiday is a perfect example. The whole of Hawktalon's culture, on Bronze Sky, is another.

For all the beautifully rendered details of life on Shora, Bronze Sky, and the norms and values of all the planets, the whole novel revolves around the ancient and eternal question of what is human. As Kal Anaeashon, an Elysian, and Hawktalon's father, Blackbear, discuss on p.206:

 "For Sharers," Kal went on, "to be human is to share; no other relation exists. For you Clickers, to be human is to serve..."
 "To serve children, and one's goddess, and the Dark One."
 "And the Dark One. Now, in Elysium, who serves?"
 Blackbear thought for a moment, then he smiled. "No wonder your machines seem more like humans."
 "More human than the humans, you mean [...]Now, the Urulite view is exactly the reverse of the Clickers: To be human is to master, to master men, women, and chattel... The Valans, now, are like tamed Urulites; instead of mastery, possession of material goods...but for L'liites, to be human is to suffer...they will suffer on...and never come to stand on their own feet."
 "And Elysians?"
 "To be Elysian is to rejoice. To pursue joy forever. If we don't age, what other pursuit makes sense?"

To the author's credit, as philosophical as this book's foundation is, it is not devoid of action and adventure. Mystery, romance (illicit and accepted), intrigue, deceit, and revolution all can be found in this far-flung story as intricately woven as the long, black braids of Blackbear's "goddess" and Hawktalon's mother, Raincloud.

Come, enter The Fold, and be entertained for light-years.