Rating: 4/5

After his father's death, fourteen year old Devon March is sent to his new home in New England - the huge and forbidding mansion Ravenscliff, that all the townspeople he meets on his way warn him against travelling to. But Devon is not as afraid of his future as others in his shoes would be: he knows he is gifted with a special power, a power that protected him from the very real demons and monsters that he had dwelling in his cupboard and under his bed as a child. Now, he seeks to find who he is, and why such things happen to him, for on his death bed, his father claimed he was not his biological father. Guided by the calm and powerful Voice in his head, that grants to him his own brand of magic, Devon is eager to begin his investigation. What secrets lie there? Has his presence stirred things up? People warn him of the ghosts that lerk in the old mansion, the Muir ancestors in the family's legends. But Devon's on a quest. A quest to find his past.

Really good dark fantasy is a very rare thing because the authors usually just throw one shock after another at the readers. Huntington, on the other hand, utilizes gothic cliches (the sinister mansion with a tragic past, abandoned towers with lights, the weird caretaker) with the excellent idea of the Sorcerers of the Nightwing. Despite using a combination of stuff that could have been stupid if handled badly (demons in the closet, evil clown-face), and stuff that has been done many times before (gothic cliches), nothing Huntington does seems stale or affected. If anything, the gothic atmosphere is better because Huntington takes the old cliches and remakes them, rather than shying away from them.

He also handles Devon March very well; almost all of the book is seen through Devon's eyes, and so we have a good idea of his fears and thoughts. Cecily seems like a less chattery Lloyd Alexander heroine, while Alexander reeks with innocent-faced creepiness. Readers may especially like Rolfe; at first it seems hard to tell what side he's on, but he's intriguing right from the start.

His writing style is fairly descriptive, mainly when it needs to be but when describing the grotesque and the weird, such as a maimed ghost, he doesn't try to shock us. He also has a good sense of how to build up tension and suspense with little hints of the horrific, rather than flying blood and body bits; the plot twists and past events are well-drawn and evocative. The dialogue is also very good, especially anything uttered by the villain ("Can you spell it, boys and girls? W-R-O-N-G!").

Teenagers and adults will definitely enjoy the opener of this series, especially those with a love of ghoulies, ghosties, long-leggedy-beasties, and sorcerers who make books fly through the air. Can't wait to read the second "Ravenscliff" book.