Rating: 3/5

Six French comedy plays by Moliere, written in the 1600s. I only found one or two of them funny.

Moliere “never broke faith with the time-honored purpose of comedy, which is to correct manners” (xx). That’s the purpose of comedy? I thought it was to entertain. That’s how it’s been presented to me all my life. It seems modern comedies only make the viewers imitate foolish behavior in order to get attention and laughs in the real world. 

“Such Foolish affected ladies” was simple and amusing.
Favorite quote:
“That’s the way of the world—the first hint of disgrace and you’re shunned by those who were your dearest friends. . . . What people value is appearance without substance. They have no regard whatsoever for virtue unadorned” (27)

“Tartuffe”, the priest one, i think woulda been better if his hypocrisy was on display earlier instead of chars just talking trash about him. Also, so many chars have such long monologues that i feel sorry for the actors who had to memorize all those lines! I couldnt have done it!
Favorite quotes:
“You must be very susceptible to temptation if a glimpse of flesh has that much effect on you! I can’t possibly think why you should get so excited but, speaking for myself, I don’t get worked up so easily. I dare say you could stand before me without a stitch on and your whole carcass wouldn’t tempt me” (58).
“Why do you take it on yourself to defend the interests of Heaven? Does God need our help to punish sinners? Just leave it to Him to take care of divine vengeance. Keep your mind on the forgiveness which He would have us show to those who trespass against us, and forget human justice when you try to follow God’s supreme commandment” (68). 

“The misanthrope” was the reason I read this book. It did have a misanthrope in it, but the focus of the play was more on his love interest who was everything he loathed but he still loved her anyway. 
Favorite quotes:
“Flatterers are always to blame for the vices which prevail among mankind” (113). True for at least some vices.
“A man in love always justifies his own choice. His passion makes him blind to all faults and in his eyes everything in the woman he loves is lovable. He counts her defects as perfections or finds flattering names for them. If she’s pale, it’s the pale beauty of the jasmine flower. She may be swarthy enough to frighten the horses, but for him she’s an adorable brunette. If she’s thin, she’s slender and graceful; if fat, she has a queenly dignity; if she neglects her appearance, slight though her attractions may be, she is said to have a ‘careless beauty’; if she’s tall, she’ll have the majesty of a goddess; if she’s short, she’s an abridged version of all the virtues under heaven! If she’s proud, her nature is regal. If she’s sly, she’s clever. If she’s stupid, she’s all heart. If she talks all the time, she’s cheerful. If she never talks at all, she’s proper and modest. And so it is that the true and passionate lover worships the very faults of the woman he loves” (114). Good description of how any negative can be twisted into a positive, or vice versa.

“The doctor despite himself” was the funniest. 
Favorite quote:
“If things keep on as they are, I reckon I’ll stick to medicine for good. I find it’s the best of all trades because whether you do good or harm you still get your money” (171).

“The would-be gentleman” was the second funniest. It taught me that a gentleman was actually a man of nobility as opposed to a merchant. So when women of old said they wanted a gentleman, what they really meant was someone of high status. I always assumed a gentleman was just a civilized, courteous man. 

“Those Learned Ladies” showed that even in the 1600s there were feminists.

The man in the play seems to think that women should not have any knowledge of anything besides stuff that concerns being a wife and mother, because that is what serves him best. But then men will turn around and make claims that women are stupid, weak, frivolous, and incapable of holding a man’s job, when the very reason they are “stupid” or “incapable” is because men have prevented them from obtaining the knowledge/training to be more. Yes, tis inconvenient to have an educated slave, because the education interferes with her work and makes her aspire to be more than a slave.

“Being under the thumb of a woman is degrading” (279). This is a sexist sentiment. The reason why males find it degrading to be a woman, look like a woman, or be under a woman is because he thinks woman is inferior to man. The truth is men and women are more equal than not, and whatever one can do that the other can’t is a small amount of things that don’t amount to enough to warrant one being labeled inferior to the other. I liken men and women to being like the hands of a body. They help &amp; support each other. one does the writing while the other holds the paper. One pours the drink while the other holds the glass steady. One stirs the pot while the other holds the pot handle. One holds the pan while the other washes it. One wields the sword while the other holds the shield. One takes on the dominant role, but that’s not to say that the other hand is incapable of being dominant and strong. Both are capable. And just because one is dominant is not reason to say that the other is inferior/degrading, or that it’s bad to be left handed or right handed, or that one hand deserves nourishment/payment while the other does not.

The disrespect women have gotten over the centuries is why they wanted to have education, jobs, sports, and money. They proved that they could do almost anything men could do and are worthy of just as much respect. And they should have gotten respect when they were just housewives too, because even tho it pays no money, it is not an easy job. Women’s work is difficult in its own way, and it’s not right that they shouldn’t be paid or treated with respect. “Girl/woman” should not be an insult. The fact that it still is shows how sexist our society still is. Without woman, there would be no human race. It takes both men and women to raise a healthy family and to have a successful society. Both deserve equal respect. Men have kept women under their thumb because they probably knew that women were just as capable as men, but men didn’t want to compete against woman. They wanted their free cook, maid, and prostitute, and to hold all the money and power.