Rating: 5/5

Introduction

This book unveils much about the church that has been hidden or cloaked by misinformation though the centuries. Most people are ignorant of the history unveiled by Carroll in this book, particularly as relates to Jewish-Catholic relations and the relations between Nazi Germany and the Catholic Church. Here we find revealed a historical horror that many of us thought was embodied fully in Hitler, but which we now see spans hundreds of years before Hitler. Carroll reveals how Nazi ideology borrowed heavily form Christian eschatology and how antisemitism has been an unbroken thread within Christian history. Carroll subjects the Christian Church to a thorough psychoanalysis and, in the process, lets us see where we stand as human beings. 

The perpetrators of the holocaust were not a group apart from the broad population of Germans. Had the Nazi hierarchy encountered unambiguous and sustained revulsion by non-Jewish Germans, the holocaust would not have occurred. We have been indoctrinated to think that the holocaust was the result of Hitler’s manipulation of the people; but Carroll lets us see that it was more a historical consequence than something kindled independently by Hitler. An evil leader simply ignites the evil that already dwells within society.

One fault of this book is that it totally ignores the wanton acts of genocide that the Jewish people committed against the Canaanites; which involved the slaughtering of women and children, as related in their own scriptural history. The evil of religious and racial intolerance did not originate in Christianity; but has existed for as long as religions have existed. 

The Conflict of the Christian Cross at Auschwitz

This book opens with a discussion of the conflict between Catholics and Jews over the modern day placement of Christian crosses at Auschwitz. One unaware of the church's historical conflicts with the Jews, or its complicity with Hitler, might wonder why these crosses caused such Jewish protest. But one who has read this book will clearly understand why the Auschwitz crosses are such an insult to Judaism. 

Jews must wonder: why must Christians install a sadistic Roman execution device in this place called Auschwitz? The Romans hung Jews on crosses and left them to die, over several days, the slow death of suffocation, as their muscles gave out and they could no longer hold themselves erect enough to catch a breath. And once squeezed free of life, the corpses were left on the crosses to be eaten by buzzards. One may simply carry this evil image forward to the Auschwitz death camp to understand why Jewish people would protest the erection of crosses there. What is less clear, but addressed here by Carroll, is: why in the world Catholics insist upon maintaining crosses at Auschwitz? 

Scriptural Distortions 

The scriptures about Jesus were written fifty to seventy years after the death of Jesus. We have difficulty enough remembering something that happened five years ago; so writing factually about something that happened fifty to seventy years ago is especially difficult. It is naive to imagine a total absence of embellishment within writing done so much later. 

In fact, the idea of the Father of Jesus callously presiding over his son’s death, willed by the Father, as a means of salvation, doesn’t really take root in Christianity until hundreds of years later, with the emperor Constantine (288-337), who had political reasons for embracing such ideology. The reality is that we are heirs to a Roman imperial culture that controlled the writing of history and deeply influenced the evolution of scriptural interpretation. 

Western civilization is essentially an extension of Rome and we have been indoctrinated to perceive the Neo-Roman empire, as a civilizing work of human progress. Paintings and graphics depict an Aryan Christ. Mary, Joseph, and all their intimates are portrayed with blue eyes, light hair, graceful Hellenic robes, and in stark distinction to the Pharisees, Sadducees, and high priests, with their odd headdresses, glaring dispositions, oversized noses, and dark skin.

The extent to which scripture has been manipulated becomes even more apparent when we examine the ways in which it vilifies the Jews. We see Jesus attacking the money changers in the temple, which is the predominant historical occupation of Jewish people. Jesus becomes known as “The Nazarene” or “The Galilean”; to distinguish Him from Judea, which begins with emphasis on the syllable “Jew,” as in “Jew-dea”. Similarly, the vilification of Judas, as the betrayer of Jesus, emphasizes the syllable “Jew,” as is “Jew-does” and similarly associates the Jew with greed and betrayal. The scriptural symbology of Pilate washing his hands of the matter and declaring himself innocent of Jesus’ blood transfers the blame toward the Jewish crowd, as clamoring for His crucifixion. In fact, in Matthew, all the people are portrayed to answer: “His blood be on us and on our children,” a blatant indictment of Jewish posterity. 

This on-going conflict between Christianity and Judaism served the Roman empire by deflecting protest from the masses against Roman imperialism. This technique of using petty conflicts to deflect protests against the establishment persists into modernity and is widely practiced by modern western nation states. Carroll reveals how the Catholic church became an arm of such imperialism, fully complicit in sustaining such diversionary tactics.

Neo-Romanism

Rome had no choice but to embrace and corrupt Christianity because that was the only move that would keep the powerful message of martyrs from revolutionizing their entire society. The struggle of that revolution continues today against Neo-Rome. 

Imperial powers depend on the inability of oppressed populations to muster a unified resistance. This lack of organization is exacerbated by promoting conflicts among the masses. We see this today, in the conflicts perpetuated between liberals and conservatives, blacks and whites, believers and atheists, CNN and Fox, pro-life and pro-choice, rich and poor, Catholic and Protestant, etc. Perpetuating such divides prevents people from unifying and pressing together for relief in the things that really matter, such as: exorbitant taxation, absurdly expensive health care, barriers to the best schools, barriers to the most lucrative professions, unfair interest on savings, usurious rates on borrowing, insurance extortion, subjection of sons and daughters to horrible wars, etc. The weapon of divisiveness is utilized by the imperial system to keep the masses divided, conquered, and producing enough GDP so that a small entitled class may leisurely sift whatever goods and services they want off the top.

The masses have only each other to blame, because they are too busy blaming the liberals, conservatives, whites, Jews, blacks, immigrants, communists, youth, homeless, and other targets, to unite in blaming the establishment. The persistent drama of perpetual conflict within the Senate and Congress is simply a pretense for doing nothing other than guarding over the lucrative positions of the establishment. No better example exists than the constant promulgation of fear that social security is going bankrupt, when it would be more than self-sustaining, if Congress had not raided it’s accounts for other purposes. A similar example is the imposed limitations on contributions to retirement vehicles, like 401-k’s and IRA’s. The reality is that the establishment never wants the masses to retire, so long as they can continue contributing to the GDP; that is, contributing to a piling up of surplus goods and services so large that unbridled consumption by a leisure class goes unnoticed. Keeping the specter of outrageous health care expenses looming over the potential retiree is the most effective way to keep him at work. 

The ability of the establishment to manipulate the masses is no better exemplified than in the rise of Donald Trump, supported by a faction of the masses that have digested propaganda to the extent that they actually support a deterioration in their own access to health care, education, and sustained peace; while simultaneously supporting a disregard for the environment, war, and constant litanies of horrid insults. It is sad to see people indoctrinated to support policies that are contrary to their own interests. 

We are indoctrinated to think of the decline and fall of Rome sentimentally, as a tragedy. We have been inculcated with the belief that the reduction of imperial power would lead only to chaos arising from the dark hordes of indigenous masses. But, ask yourself, what if Roman power was the real darkness? The Roman war machine was as ruthless as the world has ever seen. 

It was for the oppressed, for those whom the Roman system was an endless horror, that the message of Jesus was addressed. That is, up until that message was hijacked by Constantine and twisted into a mechanism for controlling the masses. It’s easier for one educated in history to clearly see these mechanisms persistently utilized. The masses are much easier to manage once they are convinced of their inherent sinfulness, lack of self-worth, and obligation to tolerate suffering as self-deserved. 
 
Constantine

The approximate eastern extent of ancient Rome was the Rhine, which became Europe’s cultural fault line. Today the Rhine distinguishes the separation of Latin-derived Romance languages and Germanic-Slavic languages. The Rhine has been the defining boundary of the Reformation and a frontline of every major war fought in Europe. The Roman emperor Constantine arose from these western territories and established his palace in what is modern day Germany. 

 
Roman Empire

It was Constantine (288-337) who joined Rome to the ideology of the Church and converted the cross, the Roman execution device, into a battle standard. Constantine reversed the nonviolent message of Christ, a message of passive resistance, into a symbol of war, domination, and imperialism. 

The church, in 324, was a seething caldron of doctrinal rivalries between Docetists, Manichaeans, Arians and others. The church couldn’t even agree on how to calculate the date of Easter, much less on whether or not Jesus was God. Constantine asserted his right to exercise absolute authority over the entire Church and suddenly tolerance of theological disagreement was deemed unchristian. The answers that had eluded passionate minds like Irenaeus, Origen and Arius, would now be imposed by imperial fiat. Heresy became defined as a political crime. Since Constantine, totalitarianism has dominated Roman Catholicism, which has defined itself, not by Jesus, but by a dictatorial head. 

Constantine summoned the bishops to Nicaea in 325 to agree that Jesus was God and those who dissented were exiled. The Nicene Creed was developed, proclaiming that the Son of God became man in order to be crucified as the symbol of God’s love for the world. This led to the Catholic-Orthodox split, when Constantinople promulgated that the Holy Spirit proceeded from the Father alone, instead of from the Father and the Son, which undercut the full divinity of the Son.

Constantine initiated a campaign to build large and resplendent churches everywhere. He constructed St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome to revere Peter’s martyrdom. He constructed the Church of the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem, which was completed in 335, and which stood until 1009, when the ruling caliph ordered Constantine’s original destroyed. At that time, the tomb of Jesus was marked by a modest rotunda, which still stands, and is what pilgrims today revere as the Church of the Holy Sepulcher; but it is a pale shadow of what Constantine built. It’s interesting to note that the dome of the rock wasn’t built by the Muslims until the 7th century, so Constantine could easily have built there, had he wanted. However, Christendom had no desire to reconstruct the Jewish temple. 

The politics of relics began with Constantine. Fragments of wood, supposedly from the cross, appeared all across Europe and were venerated or worn as talismans. A piece of the True Cross is supposedly atop an obelisk in St. Peter’s Square. Legend ensued that Helena, Constantine’s mother, discovered the true cross; positing her like a mother standing beside her divine Son. In fact, a cult of Helena exploded in the late 4th century, as she was credited with discovering other relics like the nails, the sign, the thorns, the whip, the Nativity cave in Bethlehem, and the seamless robe that Jesus wore. 

Constantine sought to usurp Christ with himself and Mary with his mother, reimposing Christianity in a way conducive to Rome. In 326, Constantine ordered the murder of his own firstborn son and his wife; so that Helena might assume her place as holy mother and so he might be seen as an all-powerful father forced to put to death his beloved son. Constantine represents the beginning of what would ultimately become horrible corruptions in the Catholic Church, curtailment of which did not begin until the Reformation in 1517. In many ways, Constantine appears as an antichrist corrupting the message of the true church. 

Augustine

Augustine (354-430) came after Constantine and applied Platonic thought to Christian theology. Augustine argued against those who held that saintly virtue was a prerequisite for full membership in the church. Augustine’s position was rooted in Plato’s distinction between the ideal and the real. Augustine believed the real could not be experienced until God brought about the fulfillment of creation at the end of times. This explained the flawed human condition. Christians could come together before God, confessing sin, and knowing that the church itself, remained imperfect. 

Augustine’s theology of original sin and the fall has influenced all subsequent generations of Western Christians. For Augustine, only humans capable of understanding innate sinfulness could be capable of community, which thrives in the willingness to forgive. Augustine saw that relationships and unity were at the heart of God. 

However, Augustine’s late vision was influenced by the sacking of Rome by Gothic hoards in 410, Attila the Hun's successes in the Rhine, and subsequent coming invasions of Vandals. The looming barbarians caused Augustine to forsake reason and justify the use of coercion and force in defending and spreading the faith. Augustine supported the passage of laws against pagans and heretics. Augustine provided the theological rationale for the use of violence to stamp out heresy and establish totalitarian Christian rulers. 

Augustine’s writing denounces Jews for their rejection of the obvious testimonies of the prophets and declares that God has cast them off in favor of others. Augustine asserted that Christ distinguished between His faithful ones and His Jewish enemies as between light and darkness. Augustine called upon Jews to repent and come into the church. Augustine rejected genocide but supported the scattering or disbursement of the Jews; so that by evidence of their own scriptures, they would bear witness for Christianity. For this reason, Augustine supported the idea that Jews live as exiles everywhere. The theology that followed this was that Jews must be allowed to survive but never to thrive. 

Polytheists disappeared from the western world because they were given the choice to convert or die. Jews would have disappeared as well, but Judaism endured because Christianity permitted it to endure, largely because of Augustine. For a thousand years, the compulsively repeated pattern would show in bishops and popes protecting Jews from Christian mobs incited exactly because of what the same bishops and popes had taught about Jews. However, Jews were allowed to be attacked whenever that were seen to be thriving. 

This mode of thought survived within the church well into the 20th century, with Cardinal Augustyn Hlond stating in 1936: “…the Jews are fighting against the Catholic Church, persisting in free-thinking, and are the vanguard of godlessness, Bolshevism and subversion.” This statement by Augustyn was read from the pulpits as part of official Catholic endorsement of the Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses. 

The Resurgence of Rome as the Holy Roman Empire

As we know, Augustine’s fears were realized as the barbarians sacked and ended the Roman empire. But the empire eventually began to revive. A loosely disbursed European people slowly became more consolidated and known as the Franks. 

 
Frankish Kingdom 

The Frankish leader Charles Martel (688-741) defeated the Muslims at Tours in 732, saving Europe from Islam. After Martel’s death, his son Pepin was elected king of the Franks and was anointed by Pope Stephen II. When a subsequent pope, Leo III, crowned Pepin’s son Charlemagne (742-814), he proclaimed him the Holy Roman Emperor. Soon knights would be dubbed at the altar and bishops would be warriors at the heads of armies. The Roman Empire mutated into the Germanic Holy Roman empire. 

 
Holy Roman Empire

Since its inception, the Holy Roman empire has persisted in violence. Pope Urban II called the first crusade in 1096 and he promised a guarantee of eternal salvation to those who died in the struggle against the infidel. This was the first time in Christian history that violence was cited as a source for obtaining grace. The second Crusade was launched by Pope Eugene III in 1146. The third crusade occurred in 1184, lead by Frederick Barbarossa. The 4th crusade was launched in 1202 and vented its fury on Christian Constantinople, for being schismatic, and it fell with a savage sacking. 

Pope Innocent III (1198-1216) chose to don himself the Vicar of Christ, as successor to Peter, and as bearing absolute spiritual authority, existing below God but above man. Innocent’s crusaders began attacking Christian heretics, even in Europe. Innocent began a religions monarchy, as his family would produce eight popes. Innocent himself was a nephew of a pope who had made him a cardinal even though he was not even a priest. 

At the 4th Lateran Council, in 1215, Innocent established the papacy’s claim to monarchial authority. It was this council that put in place the seven sacraments of Catholicism: baptism, extreme unction (anointing of the sick), eucharist (transubstantiation), confession, confirmation, marriage, and holy orders. This council also passed resolutions that Jews should be marked off in the public by the character of their dress (a precursor to Hitler’s yellow badge). Jews were denigrated, banned from taking public office, and had to pay a special tax to the Christian clergy. Hundreds of years later, the Holy Roman Empire would manifest again under Hitler.

 
Maximum Axis Expansion

CONTINUED IN COMMENTS BELOW