Rating: 2/5

"There is no Darkness" by Joe Haldeman (author of "The Forever War" and many other science fiction books) and his brother Jack Haldeman (a scientist and a writer) follows the story of Carl Bok, a student from the planet Springworld, as he makes friends and has adventures during a sort of interplanetary study abroad experience. 

The worldbuilding in this novel gives tastes of the fascinating. Our protagonist Carl, for example, is much taller and heavier than normal humans because of the conditions on the planet where he was born. He is a giant among others and stands out immediately. There are fascinating hints about the spread of language throughout this galaxy, including the fact that English is a dying language spoken on one planet (Springworld, helpfully) and some places on Earth. The students visit many planets as part of this program, one of which is Earth, which has turned into a socialist society with heavy taxes and endless social support (including fascinating medicine). Another planet that they visit, Hell, is a military training and battleground. 

The plot of the story is what left me a little bit wanting. Carl continually misbehaves and breaks the rules of his program, getting into gladiator fights on Earth to pay an entrance tax (which was an annoying premise and made me want to just punch him in the gut until he stopped being so stupid and getting people killed) and somehow getting kidnapped and conscripted into a war on Hell. Yet somehow they manage to wind up in a very privileged position by the end of the book in a turn that seems incredibly unexpected and like it was just a good way to wrap things up by having these troublemakers become near-omniscient beings with psychic communication powers thanks to getting in trouble with some lobster-aliens. I really just found the ending to be unfortunate; the troublemakers are rewarded with great knowledge and power, and they just got some poor unfortunate bystanders killed along the way. 

Overall, it was a fun read at times and annoying at others. The universe gives glimpses of intriguing details but never dives in too far. The plot is lacking in depth or nuance. I'd recommend this book for someone wanting a light sci-fi read that they don't have to think too hard about.