Rating: 5/5

Over the past several years, my friendship with Brother Cassian, one of the monks at the Monastery of the Holy Spirit in Conyers, GA, has been a special blessing. I visit him occasionally, usually arriving at the monastery in time to join the community for Vespers, singing the Psalms set to Gregorian Chants, which is done antiphonally from choir stalls facing each other across the nave of the monastery church. Cassian was our prayer partner this past week because on Wednesday, after his first five years as a monk, he made his “Solemn Profession,” or final vows, to live the rest of his life as part of the monastic community.
While few people are called to monastic life, the basic principles they live by—community, prayer, and work—are also good ideas for those of us who don’t live in a monastery. Their tradition of Ora et Labora, “pray and work,” calls for seven daily “offices” or times when the monks cease their work and pray. Most evangelical Christians, when introduced to the daily Benedictine offices, are surprised to discover how biblical their prayers and worship are. For the most part, they come directly from Scripture.
The Psalms are apportioned across the seven daily hours of prayer so that the entire Psalter is prayed or sung through each week. Cassian also introduced me to what has become my favorite and most used prayer. Their daily offices begin with the words from Psalm 70:1, “O God, come to my assistance. O Lord, make haste to help me.” Keep that prayer on your lips and it will change your life!
Several years ago, I picked up Joan Chittister’s The Rule of Benedict, a brief and readable commentary on the leading guide for monastic living in Western Christianity for the past 1,500 years. This introduction to Benedictine spirituality—especially the practice of praying through the Psalms each week—was intriguing. So, I decided to try it for myself. For forty days I observed the seven hours of prayer each day: Vigils (night prayers), Lauds (sunrise), Terce (9 a.m.), Sext (noon), None (3 p.m.), Vespers (sunset), and Compline (evening prayers that “complete” the day just before retiring), praying through all 150 each week for six weeks.
It was a life-changing experience. I came to know God better through simple immersion in the Psalms based on a Christian tradition dating back to the sixth century. Following that first 40 days praying through the Psalms each week, I returned to my usual practice of morning and evening prayer using Scripture readings from the lectionary in the Book of Common Prayer. But from time to time, I return to the seven daily hours for special seasons of prayer and devotion.
While most of you will never worship in a monastery, all of us can experience a deeper vision of God’s beauty and majesty through the Psalms, just as the Jews saw Him in the Temple, the early Christians in the catacombs, and countless believers across the ages have seen him in the only inspired, infallible hymnal we have.
However you do it, immerse yourself in the Psalms. Read them. Study them. Sing them. Pray them. O how it will bless you, and change you forever.