Rating: 5/5

Absolutely loved it. Branagh writes in a steady, clear and detailed style leavened with a great deal of humour and honesty. The book - and Branagh himself - are not only loveable but immensely likeable, too.

This tells the tale of Branagh's early years, from his family background in Belfast, through his developing urge to act, to his hard-won independent successes in acting and directing during 1988-89. And of course it's not just about him but about acting, actors, RADA, Shakespeare, London, and so on - and also includes loving portraits-in-words of Judi Dench, Brian Blessed, and other theatrical luminaries.

One such portrait I deeply appreciated was that of Rupert Everett, with whom Branagh starred in a stage version of Another Country. I am a big fan of Everett, but it can be difficult to see past the 'frosty' exterior, and the external noise, to the man himself. Not so in this book, where Branagh praises Everett's humility, patience and talent:

At the second audition for the play, Branagh is unexpectedly asked to read the character Judd. "I relied on sight-reading and discovered the scene as I went along. Rupert judged his reading beautifully. He could easily have bulldozed me, having played the part of Bennett already [in the film] to huge success; alternatively, he could simply not have bothered. Instead, he played the scene with me so that I could start to understand it as we went along." And so on. Bless them both.

Similarly we are treated to a wonderful view of Prince Charles, who Branagh first met when he was cheeky enough to ask for insight into playing the character Henry V for the RSC. Branagh tells Prince Charles his thoughts on how Henry's "loneliness is intense and his hurt at the various betrayals and losses is very acute". They talk about how profoundly this can change a person. Branagh sees in Charles the resulting "extraordinary melancholy" that had produced not bitterness but "a more useful but painful wisdom". Branagh concludes:

"He bore the inevitable bruises of his position with great courage, and although ... I could detect the haunted look of responsibility, the very fact that he was speaking to me was an indication of his continuing desire to give people the benefit of the doubt."

Wonderful stuff!

Recommended for anyone interested in acting, actors, or Britain generally.