Page 290: NO individual man can change the rules bc the mores of his tribe are all-conrolling. No individual woman can change the rules bc she is powerless against the entrenched establishment of male-crested business society. Besides, the minute she starts playing the genital -contact game she is a captured object as far as other participants and nonparticipants are concerned. "Fucking checkers"- a term actually in use by male players or would be players in this working game- is a public game spread out on a playing board for all to see. Every woman who gets into this game ( accidentally or on purpose) becomes tagged (unbeknownst to her perhaps) with a popular designation:" Sleep with one, fair game to all."

There's one way for a male-female combo to remove themselves as 2 individuals from an unvarying formula of the intercourse game; that is marriage to each other. This pits them as a couple into an unrelated and entirely different intracorporate game where the local firm's rules are generally definite and quite often written. That game is called nepotism and is not germane to sex checkers. 
Please see page 85. make sure you know the "jargon of the business game". Enititled: Locker room language: 80% SEX, 20% EXCRETA.
Here is a small sampling of some of the definitions you will learn in this book. 
Ass: A free swinging word usually preceeded with definitive adjective such as " fat". To throw a person " out on their ass" means to fire them or ruthlessly banish them from the immediate vicinity. "Cover your ass" stems from military usage under low-fire conditions when the productive mechanism is to throw oneself face-down on the ground; means to protect your exposed side, such as write a memo or oterwise " cover' yourself for a business decision or happening that can be used against you. Also describes a woman,as in "She's just another piece of ass." Also, the implied but unexprssed completion word for the obscenity, "Up yours!" 
Bastard or son of A bitch: A hated or despicable person; one who plays unfairly or illegally. Many businessmen are "bastards" in the way that they treat working women. The closest equivalent woman can use is "MCP, " or " male chauvinist pig."
Bitch: An aggressive, ambitious woman who speaks her mind; one who won't take any " shit" from anyone. In form 'bitchy" is applied to woman who sTns up for her rights. nowadays supplemented by explicit terms " Libber," or "Womans Libber."
Broad: Any woman. Often used with perfix "dumb" or "damn." Physically attractive young woman called "chick," "damn," "kitty," "beaver," etc...
Caught with yoru pants down or your fly open and a defintion:
Cocksman: Definition
Crap: See Shit, and so on.........
Fuc you know: A long definition. 
Girl: I want to make sure that I write his one out as I hate when people call me a "girl" as I have not been a "girl" since I was 13. I turned from "girl" to young lady then. It so surprises me how so many men call woman my age(30's) a girl. Hello? 
So, here is what this author says about the definition of "girl": Popular demeaning term for mature working women. Used widely throughout business as in " i'll have my girl call your girl to arrange it," or the girls in accounting will take care of it." Or who's the new girl? referring to a lawyer an M.B.A., an engineer, a vice president, etc if of the female sex. 
Masterbation exersise or Playing with yourself: An exersise in frustration, fooling yourself;manipulating stat's or profit-and-loss figures. Attempted coverup of unpleasant reality. 
Piss: another neat definition
Screw: yet, another lovely defention by this author
Shit: Watste material. Hot air, lying. As in 'he's full of shit". Or "That's bullshit, to "cut the horseshit" this means to stop making passes at the wrong women lying about something, or fooling around with ittiating manner. 
That was the end of chapter 4. There are 10 more chapters to go. This book was written in 1981 and wow, its an intertesing read. I purchased a box of books at a church garage sale. Each book was 50cents and I got my mneys worth. But, really this one is quite interesting. If men still think the way this book portrays them, then, I will be having some great conversations this week with my male friends.