Rating: 1/5

More Confused than Clever - 1 Stars 

This was a book of confusion. It was filled with confused characters, it seemed confused as to what genre it wanted to be and I am confused as to why the terrible books win the CWA award winners for best new authors.

 Plot Summary 

Lucy is British. Lucy escaped her life by going to Japan. Lucy is morose. Lucy is obsessive. Lucy has friends and Lucy loses friends. Maybe Lucy killed her friends.

 My Take 

I thought this book was a hot mess. For the most part, it was book of confusion but lets start with the positive.

Despite my obvious dislike, the author is not a bad writer. Her style is not amateurish. She appeared to have a plan with this novel and she stuck with it. Unfortunately, I liked very little of it. Although I wasn't enjoying the majority of the novel, the fact the writing itself was good and the fact book was relatively short, kept me from putting it down and giving it one star.

Just having quality writing skills does not translate into a great novel. For the most part, this was a character novel. A bad character novel. Lucy was the major character with two secondary characters. None were well developed and but worst of all, each lacked insight into their own actions and emotions. Lucy was morose and broken. Generally, I would not take issue with that but Lucy had no sense of who she was and failed to develop through the novel. She failed to grow and learn from her experiences. It left me feeling that the events were a waste of my time.

The story contains a mystery. Instead of being explored it is simply revealed. As we near the end of the story, the author tells us that we have been in the middle of a second mystery the whole time. Given the character's lack of insight, its no wonder it took the characters by surprise. A reader who does not lack insight saw it coming a mile away.

 Final Thoughts 

There was not much to enjoy here. The lack of insight displayed was disappointing. A bit of insight goes a long way. If you like your characters dull and uninspired. This is the book for you.