Rating: 3/5

“Primitive Rebels” is a series of essays casting light on outmoded varieties of social disturbance. It is the author’s belief that his generation of scholars had been steeped in the grander movements of the socialist persuasion and had overlooked some of these archaic forms. In Primitive Rebels Hobsbawm’s research postulates that the advent of capitalism into old-fashioned peasant cultures destroyed their way of life, thus provoking them into primitive rebellious responses. In the end, there was a lot of social agitation, but these interest groups were not able to leverage their activism into something more lasting. 

The setting for Primitive Rebels is western and southern Europe after the French Revolution, during the 150 years dating from 1800. Hobsbawm presents his case along two broad themes, one through rural mostly agrarian experiences in southern Europe and the other using urban mostly industrial episodes in northern Europe. Hobsbawm presents six articles on different types of social agitation.

The rural theme of Primitive Rebels is voiced through three approaches: peasant protests which usually possessed modest goals and little organization; the slightly better organized mafia families that rented land to the working class in an oligarchy of extortion but lost their import as political consciousness increased; and the millenarian movements that forecast a complete overthrow of the status quo but were unclear on how it would all come about. The urban theme also played out through three devices: unorganized city mobs that rebelled against rapacious prices and unemployment; labor sects with religious overtones standing in as working-class revolts; and ritual symbolism much in the fashion of trade unionism that faded quickly as modern social movements came to the fore. All of these forms of agitation possessed socialist implications, but in microcosm. They were primitive but not random. 

Primitive Rebels is an accessible and well-documented read. Hobsbawm brings numerous examples to support his theory of the rise of capitalism provoking rebellious responses in traditional peasant cultures. Hobsbawm does an excellent job painting a picture of social movements outside the classic motives, tracing social agitation during the emergence of capitalism.