Rating: 5/5

I wore out the VHS of this growing up, so it was time I finally read the novel! 

“Let’s get away from this joint. Gettin’ downright unhealthy round these parts.”

It was impossible not to imagine the likes of Gregory Peck as Mallory, Anthony Quinn as Andrea, and David Niven as Miller while reading this. The Guns of Navarone is fast-paced, just like the film. MacLean doesn’t waste time getting down to business. This is the first novel I've read in a long time that I found hard to put down!

There are numerous differences between the novel and film, yet despite this, I feel both author and filmmakers simultaneously made the right decisions. The futility of war was a strong undercurrent throughout, which made for some fascinating passages, such as mission-leader Mallory’s words to an enemy soldier.

“I regret we have to do all this. I trust we do not meet again - not at least, until the war is over. Who knows, some day we might even go climbing together.”

MacLean’s own war service and Naval experiences really added to the authenticity; especially the language. He knows what he’s talking about and this helped immerse me into the story, often feeling like I was alongside the characters as they attempted their impossible mission.

MacLean’s dialogue was a highlight, while some descriptive scenes came across slightly flowery – though it could be a sign of the era it was written. The character of Dusty Miller was my favourite. His one-liners and sense of humour were a breath of fresh air in often grim circumstances they found themselves in. 

“I like the heat. What I don’t like are them nasty cannon shells and bullets that can ventilate a man in all the wrong places.”

All the characters were incredibly well-developed, and unique in their own ways, which helped me forge a connection to them. Stevens had perhaps the most powerful character arc of all, proving that MacLean could write quite emotionally at times too. 

There were enough differences between the novel and the film to keep me guessing and occasionally surprised at various characters or plot turns. Overall, it was a very enjoyable, gripping read, and one in which gets me excited to read more of MacLean’s work, particularly the sequel, Force 10 From Navarone.

“More often than not, it is in the darkness of agony and exhaustion that the spirit of man burns most brightly.”