Rating: 5/5

THE BOOK
Hold the Autumn in Your Hand opens in east Texas during the Great Depression with sharecropper Sam Tucker walking to the commissary of a large-scale farmer named Ruston. Sam talks Ruston into allowing him to farm a sixty-eight acre plot that is located some distance from Ruston’s large farm.
 
Sam doesn’t want to sharecrop, because he wants to make the decisions about when to plow, plant, cultivate, chop, and pick the cotton that will be the main crop on the farm. Instead of a share, he wants Ruston to pay him the same that he pays his laborers: six bits a day. In addition, when his wife worked in the field she would receive four bits. Therefore, on those days that both worked the family would bring in $1.25 a day.

That income would have to support five people: Sam, his wife Nona, their two children, and Sam’s grandmother. That’s low pay, but Sam estimates that he only averaged forty-six cents a day during his last three years of sharecropping in a region of infertile and worn-out sand hills soil. This new farm, while infested with Johnson grass, is nevertheless an area of rich black soil. Besides, the pay would be set and not dependent on crop yield, and that would add a degree of certainty in their lives that was absent during their sharecropping years.

(Oh, and by the way, Granny is a memorable character and one that will be hard to forget, and a heavy load for Sam, but even more so for his wife, Nona.)

The crop would belong to the landlord, but Sam would have something just as important, perhaps even more important, and that would be the satisfaction of knowing that he had made the crop. Sam loves farming and wants for the first time to “hold autumn in his hand,” because that is when all the planning and hard work will pay off, the time that the cotton is picked and taken to the gin. 

It wouldn’t be easy, it never is, for there would be forces working against Sam – or any farmer: blight, insects (especially the boll weevil), rain (too much or not enough), hail, and invasive Johnson grass.

Even though Perry was a town boy, he had always sympathized with the poverty-stricken, but hard-working rural poor who made their living toiling in the cotton fields. He didn’t grow up on a farm but he nevertheless knew what it was like for those folks who did. He knew they were victims, but that they also could be dignified, courageous, and compassionate. His creation, Sam Tucker, was such a person. 

I will give Maxine C. Hurston the last word on the book. She wrote in the afterword to my copy, that the book is “a moving statement of a timeless theme, man’s struggle to tame the land, and it is a powerful statement of one of the ways in which the American dream has failed.”

THE AUTHOR
George Sessions Perry was born in Rockdale in east Texas in 1910. When he was twelve-years old, his father died, and a year later his mother committed suicide. He then lived with his tyrannical, short-tempered maternal grandmother. 

Beginning in 1931, he wrote six novels, which were never published, and about fifty short stories, which were never published, that is, not until 1937 when the Saturday Evening Post published one of them. That had the effect of breaking the dam leading to the publication of his first novel, Walls Rise Up (1939).

Hold Autumn in Your Hand was published two years later, and was a critical success and the recipient of the first ever National Book Award to be presented. 

After the entrance of the U.S. into WWII, Perry attempted to enlist in the army, but failed the physical. However, out of an admitted sense of guilt, he became a war correspondent. 

Participating in the invasion of Sicily, he became so traumatized by the unbearable nightmare of death and destruction that he witnessed, that he, as he put it, had become “defictionalized” and would never again want to write made-up stories – and he didn’t. Thereafter, he wrote only nonfiction. 

He went on to become a well-known, highly-paid magazine contributor in the late ‘40’s and early ‘50’s. His writing was published in several magazines, but primarily in the hugely popular Saturday Evening Post.

His personal life, however, was out of control. He suffered from both mental and physical illnesses. His ailments included extremely painful arthritis of the spine, severe depression, hallucinations, and alcoholism. On a cold day in December 1956, he walked out of his Connecticut home and disappeared. His body was found two months later in a nearby river. 

Since there were no marks on the body that would have indicated foul play, the police said it was an apparent suicide, but a coroner ruled that the cause of death was accidental drowning. Nobody who knew Perry in those later years was ever convinced that it was an accident. He was forty-six years old.

Today, George Sessions Perry is a mostly forgotten writer, but he is one who deserves to be remembered, especially for his agrarian Texas novel, Hold Autumn in Your Hand.