Rating: 4/5

"At 7:17 A.M. on the morning of June 30, 1908, a cylindrical object blazed across the cloudless skies of central Siberia, and the desolate Central Plateau shuddered under the impact of a cataclysmic explosion. The initial thermal blast was followed by primary and secondary shock waves, a hideous firestorm, and a black rain that contaminated hundreds of square miles. The seismic shock was registered in Moscow, Paris, London, even around the world in Washington, D.C." This quote was taken from the book jacket and it inspired me to read more. I learned that later expeditions never found a meteor crater, but what they did find were trees standing upright without any branches that had been directly under the aerial blast and other trees laying flat that had been leveled facing away from the center of the blast. Scientists have yet to explain what had happened. 
    Scientists of the day were recording events never seen before with their primitive instruments, though they had no idea what they were recording. Decades later American and Soviet scientists would estimate the energy output of the event to be the equivalent of the heaviest hydrogen bomb, and that its air waves traveled twice around the earth. 
    Due to World War I, revolution in Russia, and the remoteness of the impact site, it was not investigated as a possible meteor impact site until 1927. Because of the evidence presented by Leonid Kulik, an expert in his field, it soon became apparent that this was not the cause of the explosion. 
    Just what was it that exploded over Siberia? Reasons are given why it was not a meteor or comet, such as eyewitness reports of the slow speed of the object across the sky. According to other witness reports and ballistic wave evidence, the object changed direction before exploding. And why were people and animals dying from what some theorize as radiation poisoning?  In fact, the first person to present a theory that the explosion was caused by an alien spacecraft exploding was a leading Soviet scientist! 
    Since then all sorts of theories have been presented as to just what caused the explosion. Most of them center around an exploding meteor or some kind of Black Hole. Regardless of who is right the book makes for some interesting reading. 
 Please note: My copy is from 1976 and lists John Baxter &amp; Thomas Atkins as the authors, with an introduction by Isaac Asimov. ISBN: 0-385-11396-x