Rating: 4/5

The first book in this trilogy, set in Bucharest, is nearly perfect. Manning paints the odd ramshackle world of British citizens who have washed up in this (as they think of it) last vestige of Europe, as World War II tightens it grip on what has to that point been a backwater of delicious food, outdoor cafes, colorful gypsies, pre-modern peasants, degraded nobility and Jews (both wealthy/assimilated and desperately poor/religious). We see this fascinating world through the eyes of Harriet Pringle, a young Englishwoman in her first year of marriage to Guy, a left-wing teacher who collects society's strays (and there are many to be collected in Bucharest in 1940). 

There are dozens of sharply delineated characters in the Balkan trilogy - and Manning has a real gift for tragicomic flair, as in her depiction of Yakimov and his visit to his Nazi friend. 

There's also so much going on just beyond the margins of these books. Manning writes in the 1960s, and we know what becomes of the gypsies selling flowers and Bucharest's many Jews, both rich and poor, even if Guy and Harriet don't (though anti-Jewish persecutions are very much a part of these books). We know too, what lies in store for Romania after the war: we know where good old Joe Stalin (idolized by the leftist Guy) will take all of Eastern Europe. We know too that this moment is maybe the last moment in time when merely to be British is to have a certain ascendancy almost anywhere in the world (no matter how poor or shambolic you may be).

So this is the rich setting into which the jewel of Manning's epic story of marriage, class, war, masculinity, manners (so many things!) is placed. The first book, as I've said, is almost unputdownable. 

And the end of the 3rd book, when the noose almost closes (but not quite - they are British, after all) on the Pringles in Athens, the very last tip of Europe (and we sense how close Hitler came to having it all, indeed), is stark, dramatic and wrenching.

There's just a middle section where it all bogs down a bit, and takes the trilogy from a five to a four, in my book. Manning is an excellent portraitist, but her characters don't grow or change much. As we move through books two and three, Guy is still obliviously gregarious and blind to Harriet's needs, Lush and Dubedat stay craven, Yaki still wants a drink, etc. etc. Perhaps the claustrophobia of that world is part of what Manning means to convey but the third book of the Balkan Trilogy (except, as noted, the dramatic very end) is a bit too faithful to reality for my tastes in depicting the neverending round of bars, bad wartime meals and boring conversations. You feel you've seen Mannning's set pieces before and I at least grew weary of her almost real-time depiction of the events leading up to the fall of Greece. 

Nonetheless, fascinating, rich and well worth the read. One of those wonderful surprises that you feel you should have read sooner, but are grateful that you didn't, so that it is still there to delight.