Rating: 4/5

I came across this book during my trip to Grand Canyon when I was visiting the bookstore at Tusayan ruin and museum. The first thought that went through my mind was: "What? A woman architect in the old days!!?" If you asked me to name one woman architect in the old times (before women were allowed to wear pants), I would have just looked at you clueless. (Sad how little we know about women's contribution in any field of our world or local history).

Mary Colter went to California School of Design and after apprenticing in an architect's office, she became an architect and interior decorator. Her passion in buildings and decoration reflected the Native American style. Her love affair with the Hopi and Navajo Natives arts started when one of her friends gave her Sioux drawings when she was in middle school. Later she was hired to work for the tycoons of her days: The Santa Fe Railway and Fred Harvey Company.
(Remember we are talking about the early 1900s when women had only one duty in the society: To create and pop out little Adams and Eves as fast as possible till the woman died and found peace in the afterlife).

Colter was an assertive tough cookie perfectionist at her job. Especially, that she was the only woman who had to supervise a lot of men were not used to kitchen fugitives or career women of their time.
She never married and it made me wonder if she had any admirers given all the men she was working with. (Yeah,I'm being nosy because there was no reference to this). ;)
She never gave up on her passion for design even at old age and was bossing around the guys from her wheelchair during the end of her life. 

During a time when America was building foreign architectural styles such as Victorian,Roman,and Renaissance on the land, "Colter's philosophy was that a building should grow out of its setting, embodying the history and flavor of the location. It should belong to its environment as though indigenous to that spot. She could not visualize the design of a building or plan its decoration until she had thought out its "history"" (page 59). 

I cannot agree more with her philosophy. I experienced this in Iran. The traditional architecture of Iran matches the energy signature of the land. which in the old days was swept over and serenaded in poetry, romantic literature, astrology, geometry, science, art, and mysticism. All these elements can be found in the traditional buildings of Iran. For example, Google and look at the buildings in Shiraz: 1) Nasir al-Mulk Mosque, 2) Eram Gardan, 3)Shapouri building and garden
Unfortunately, since the Iranians have a fetish for western everything, recent architecture has left traditional beauty in the past and opted for roman,modern, or ugly Bauhaus styles. It's like a drawer of mismatched socks and colors. When a building is not in harmony with its surroundings, culture, history, and etc., it becomes an eyesore. 
Each country has a unique vibratory signature of the Motherland and Colter intuitively and intellectually understood this unspoken energy.

I highly recommend anyone who visits the southern rim of the Grand Canyon to read this book. 
You will time-travel back to a period in America when railroad was the biggest invention for human mobility and the start of tourism, hotel businesses, and restaurants along the "3000 miles of hospitality" of Santa Fe railroad. This was before cars were invented by Ford. 

You will learn how gradually the buildings came into existence in the south rim revealing Native arts to the business passengers and tourists. The humble buildings do want people to know about them. They are proud to represent the Native heritage. If they had tongues to speak, they would have been your tour guides and introduce themselves to you warmly, and explained how they came into existence within harmony of their natural surroundings through Colter's vision, and being the proud guardians of the beautiful Natives artwork.

This book is not about Colter's biography. There is about 10 pages maximum that talks about her childhood, family,personality and etc. sporadically through out the book.

I read this gem on my flight from Phoenix to Boston and on touch down, I was on the last page of the book. I look forward to returning to Arizona in the future when I've read a lot on the TRUE Americans: The Native Americans.

Meanwhile, till Arizona invites you to go there, Google Colter's "Inside Desert View Watchtower" images and enjoy the beautiful Hopi wall paintings done by Hopi artist Fred Kabotie.