Rating: 2/5

Once again, Kay Thorpe has written a book with too many improbabilities. The h's virgin sacrifice was just too over the top. We're supposed to believe she'd do anything to keep her father out of jail, but it still doesn't ring true that a young woman who was sick of men whose only interest in her was physical who let herself be used as a bargaining chip/sex object. And for the H to later claim that he had decided not to prosecute, as her father had made only one mistake in all his years at the company, but kept quiet about it because he wanted the h so much didn't ring true, either. Dropping the charges would have made her look at him in a much better light and he could have taken it from there and started a much healthier relationship than the one they started out with.

Also, her father's reaction when he found out was much too passive. Most would have been horrified, as well as outraged, and would have probably declared they'd spend a decade in a Turkish prison before they'd let their daughter prostitute herself. So, this didn't ring true either.

And toward the end, the H's dying grandfather (though I wouldn't be surprised if the old guy fooled them all and lived to be 100) going from stubborn resentment of their marriage to playing silly games in order to make them admit their true feelings was so out of character it was ridiculous.

It also bugged me that the h did an about face just when I was most impressed with her. Unlike h's who flee at the drop of a hat, scream 'I HATE you" without much provocation or refuse to acknowledge their desire, this h determined to fight for her relationship with the h (even though she wasn't sure exactly what it was or how they both truly felt) and admitted that the H's lust for her body was matched by her lust for his. Yes indeed, they sure were a couple of horndogs, eager for a bone (sorry, couldn't resist the pun)!

And she stood up to the predatory OW, the H's ex-mistress who married a rich older man for spite when the H refused to marry her, then got all butt hurt when the H married the h and determined to cause trouble. I liked that scene in the outdoor cafe, where the OW stops by their table and asks if they'd mind if she joined them and the h said yes, as a matter of fact, she does mind! She didn't expect that, BRAVO to the h for putting her in her place!

But then, the author had to make her cave when Grandpa tells her to take a hike, as it's better she and the H divorce (rather broad minded for an elderly man with Old World values) so the H can find an Italian wife (despite his being half British on his father's side). She takes him at his word that the H and OW are hitting the sheets again, and thanks to the H being crummy enough to get carried away at a party and kiss her (witnessed by the h, who didn't confront him like she should have, another disappointment) she heads home to England, where the H follows, to tell her that they were set up (Gramps wanted to see if the H cared enough to follow her, if you can believe that), that he did go see the OW, but only to tell her to stay away from him for good (something wrong with a phone call???), and that he loves her and not just her body!

 But first, she acted like a silly child and locked herself in her room to avoid speaking to him (she was 23, not 18, so the time was past for that stuff), another disappointment from a h who showed so much promise.

As for the H, he apparently had loved her for a long time but wasn't sure how she felt about him (ditto for her), yet for a guy who wanted her love, he sure went about it wrong, always talking about her lovely body, how much he wants her, making her feel that sex was most of their relationship, giving her the idea that he's tire of her body eventually and then what would be left? And while it's true that you can't always help who you're attracted to, having him admit that he finds a lot of women attractive and probably always will, that he'll be tempted from time to time but won't give in, kind of puts a damper on the reconciliation. He was also pretty nonchalant about kissing the OW, saying she made a move on him and because of their past and the physical pull that was still there, he got carried away for a minute. I could except that if he and the h had been separated or were going through one of those separate bedroom phases, but since that wasn't the case, it's tough to let it slide.

Also, the H making a big thing about taking over the family business and estate in Venice because he felt he owed it to his mother's memory (despite his not wanting to do so and preferring to live in England) then doing complete bout face at the end was something else that didn't come off right.

And as I've noticed before, this author likes to throw some red herrings around, like when the OW shows up at the reception without her husband, but with an escort (new lover???) and his father, and there's speculation as to what's going on, but then that's just dropped like it never happened.

Also, when the H and h first get to Rome (when she's still in mistress mode) and she's on her own doing some sightseeing, she starts talking to a guy from England who's also sightseeing and you get the impression he might be the OM, but then he disappears, too. 

There's also a hint that the woman the H was supposed to marry (an arranged one that he wanted no part of) is in love with the H's cousin and that he feels the same way, but that too goes nowhere.

There are two weddings planned (the h's widowed father and his secretary and the H's female cousin and her fiancé) that you never see, and the h has an interesting conversation with the cousin, where she feels she's missing out on true love by settling for an arranged match, but that too doesn't come to anything.

Worst of all, the author mentions the h being pregnant but as a future event ("she was later convinced that was the night their baby was conceived") but there's no confirmation of it, and it appears when the story ends that at that point in time, she wasn't aware of being pregnant yet. kind of stupid, I think.

This author has too many of these kinds of incidents that just get annoying.

Okay, I'll shut up now.