Rating: 4/5

Maya---(the illusion of desires)

Did Joseph Conrad ever write a bad novel? I’m sure I could write an essay of a few pages on that, but I’m also sure that somebody already has. I will forbear here. VICTORY is set in Southeast Asia, among the islands of what is now Indonesia, but which were then the Dutch East Indies. A fictitious island, Samburan, is the setting, home to an abandoned coal mining operation and within view of an active volcano which lights up the night skies regularly—a metaphor for menace, for threatening Fate. The story is simple. 

A wandering Swede, an educated man from a good family, has cut himself off from all steady society and dedicated himself to that wandering life. He got involved in a coal mining venture which didn’t pan out. His partner returned to England and soon died. The Swede, named Heyst, was left holding the bag. He washed up in a hotel in Surabaya, a hotel run by a greedy, crude man named Schomberg with a cowed, oppressed wife. Schomberg takes a dislike to Heyst, slanders him, says that he probably murdered his ex-partner, and also begins to think that he must be hiding vast wealth from the coal mine deal. Meanwhile a ladies orchestra, not top quality by any means, turns up at the hotel. Heyst gets involved with one of the English girls in it. Schomberg has eyes for the same girl. Two criminals arrive. They play crooked card games, but are ready to rob and murder at the slightest opportunity. Heyst and the girl go off to Samburan to live in an abandoned house. Schomberg incites the criminals to go there, find out where the money is, and get rid of Heyst. He plans to get the girl of course. 
 Things don’t work out as planned. Sorry, Meatball doesn’t reveal endings.
 
 But the genius of the novel is not this rather melodramatic tale. Of course there’s the atmosphere of colonial Asia—“the tropics”, “the sleaze”, “the natives”, the Chinese who can never speak proper English—and the image of an imitative colonial life which will always be second rate, compared to the “cultured” world of “home”. The story of VICTORY is a kind of yin and yang one, in which the world is divided into those who desire wealth and possessions, desire to dominate others and those who don’t lust after such things. A peaceful man, withdrawn from the world and without attachments, gets sucked into a conflict with criminals who cheat and kill for gain. Perhaps it’s a universal theme, but it’s masterfully portrayed in this novel. The five main characters’ psychology is excellently developed. If you have ever read any Conrad, you can find another good novel here.