Rating: 3/5

I have read and enjoyed a couple of Joseph Sheridan De Fanu’s works in the past, two of them being his creepy Gothic novel Uncle Silas as well as his chillingly atmospheric collection of short stories within In a Glass Darkly (which was five stars all the way for me). I preface this because his rather unknown and obscure novel Checkmate jut didn’t have as much going for it, as it lacked that subtle unnerving quality and factor that makes the other works so much more Gothic and suspenseful. 

Checkmate concerns a certain named by the name of Longcluse, who is an acquaintance of Richard Arden. Longcluse comes into the circle of the Arden family. At the beginning of the novel, members of the family and friends are chatting it up about a terrible family incident that took place. This event will play a significant role later on, as well as a murder that takes place in a billiard room. 

It's difficult to reveal too much without giving away spoilers, but I think that two of the prominent themes or focuses that come into play are revenge and secrets from the past. As the title signifies, we are trying to figure out who is playing who. 

Checkmate has some moments, but overall felt lackluster in long stretches. It feels like the beginning parts were engaging where we are given a little exposition and get a feel for things as well as the concluding section where we are hit with a preponderance of clues and moments. However, there is a long stretch in the middle section where it feels like a whole lot of nothing happens. To be more precise, too much melodrama, characters speaking in circles, and a good deal of long-winded fluff that consumes an extensive portion of the plot. It felt like it took me a long time to get through this. (It could have been trimmed down significantly). 

Not to say that there aren’t moments when De Fanu doesn’t churn up the atmosphere:

“Over the melancholy precincts of Mortlake the voiceless darkness of night descends with unmitigated gloom. The centre- the brain of this dark place—is the house: and in a large dim room, near the smoldering fire, sits the image that haunts rather than inhibits it.” 

There is a nice little twist near the end that I thought was highly ahead of its time and inventive. 

Overall, though, while this book is classified as a horror, I would not say that genre readily applies here. Some intrigue and suspense here and there, but If you are looking for a solid De Fanu read I would go with the aforementioned Uncle Silas or In a Glass Darkly, where the Gothic style and creepy factor are in high gear.