Rating: 5/5

Second time lucky: in my first attempt, I put the book away after a chapter and a half, slightly daunted by maritime jargon and a little bored by the lack of action right from the start. I guess it also caught me in a bad spot, too tired to give the story a fair chance, because coming back to it years later, I couldn't put it down, immediately setting aside the other three books I had on. The technical terms are as eclectic and frequent as I remembered (the schematic of a square rigged ship included at the start helps a little) , but I believe the journey would lose a lot of its authenticity and appeal if it were dumbed down for easy consumption, whether it is about the difference between a sloop, a brig and a xebec, or a flying jib and mizzen staysail, or the Latin appelation of the birds Dr. Maturin is watching.

The opening scene is hardly nautical, with a couple of young men listening to a baroque concerto (Locatelli) and taking an instant dislike to one another. Jack Aubrey: English, blond, tall and overweight, enthusiastic but insecure and quick to anger. Stephen Maturin: of Irish-Catalan descent, darker, shorter, caustic and in general more reserved and analytical. Soon though, the generosity and frankness of youth will assert itself and the duo will have a chance to make ammends, brought together by a a common cause: they are both stranded in Port Mahon and in financial difficulties, one by the lack of an assignment from the Lords of Admiralty, one from lack of patients. The fateful letter that starts what promises to become a beautiful friendship I have quoted in here, because it marks the moment I decided I love the series, the main characters and the ponderous, archaic form of officialdom:

 You are hereby required and directed to proceed on board the  Sophie  and take upon you the Charge and Command of Commander of her; willing and requiring all the Officers and Company belonging to the said Sloop to behave themselves in their several Employments with all due Respect and Obedience to you their Commander; and you likewise to observe as well the General Printed Instructions as what Orders and Directions you may from time to time receive from any your superior Officer for His Majesty's Service. Hereof nor you nor any of you may fail as you will answer the contrary at your Peril.
And for so doing this shall be your Order.
Given on Board the  Foudroyant 
at sea, 1st April, 1800 

The  Sophie  is Jack's first command, and his elated reaction brought back to my memory two favorite short stories by Joseph Conrad :  Youth  and  The Secret Sharer  . After a short confusing moment (Jack has only one epaulette, as apparently a Commander is not a Captain), it is immediately evident that the sea and the Navy represent Jacks whole ambition in life, his ultimate passion, taking precedence over his love for music, food and women. Also evident from the first moment he steps on the ship it is clear Jack is caught in a trap of his own choosing. As the embodyment of military authority, he is expected to behave with decorum and to keep his distance from the men under him, to maintain a cold blooded facade that is against his natural inclinations. Hence the need for a 'secret sharer', and the invitation he extends to Stephen, who as his intellectual peer will ease the loneliness of command. From the Doctor's journal:

 It is odd - will I say heart-breaking? - how cheerfulness goes: gaiety of mind, natural free-springing joy. Authority is its great enemy - the assumption of authority. I know few men over fifty that seem to me entirely human: virtually none who has long exercised authority. 

This initial enthusiasm carried me over the next chapters, who are frankly a bit too technical about the comissioning of the ship, the test runs, the gunnery practice and the boring convoy duty. From a small initial engagement with pirates, things heat up nicely for the rest of the book as Jack receives the mission to disrupt commercial traffic off the coast of Catalunia, and he attacks like a hungry wolf every ship in sight. Some of the exploits of our fresh Commander are a bit over the top, but he is still fallible, vulnerable, and I found the battles at sea a lot more credible and well argumented with tactics and troop movements than those of supersoldier Richard Sharpe for example (the other Napoleonic War epic I'm currently reading). A lot of attention is given to secondary characters aboard ship, from the First Lieutenant to the last able mariner as we follow the forging together of a well oiled machine. The oil in this case is mostly prize money from captured ships and a LOT of booze, but the pride in their own prowess and the devotion that Jack inspires in the crew plays a significant part, too.

Speaking of motivations, it bothered me somewhat that Jack is very much an exponent of British Imperialism with few scruples about using every dirty trick in the book and with about zero empathy for his victims. It is left to Dr. Maturin the provide some balance and some dialectic debates on political and human implications of the war. He tries to explain to Jack that he probably shouldn't brag so much about his privateering, as from the Spaniards point of view he is a pirate, 'a false harsh brutal murdering villain, an odious man':

 - Identity? said Jack, comfortably pouring out more coffee, Is not identity something you are born with?
 - The identity I am thinking of is something that hovers between a man and the rest of the world: a mid-point between his view of himself and theirs of him - for each of course affects the other continually. A reciprocal fluxion, sir. 

Stephen Maturin has some reasons for his more nuanced approach. Despite his youth, he had been involved with a failed revolution in Ireland, betrayed by his own countrymen, prompting him to dedicate his life to naturalistic studies and to exclaim at one point :

 I speak only for myself, mind - it is my own truth alone - but man as part of a movement or a crowd is indifferent to me. He is inhuman. And I have nothing to do with nations, or nationalism. The only feelings I have - for what they are - are for men as individuals; my loyalties, such as they may be, are to private persons alone. 

The first volume ends with a large battle between capital ships near Gibraltar, which Aubrey and Maturin witness from afar, another good touch from the author where he doesn't insist at placing his chosen hero in every major historical event of the period. There's also a very interesting debate about the fine line between recklesness and courage, between putting the lives of men in needless danger versus failing to uphold the honour of the Fleet (an officer can be court martialed if he runs away from the enemy).

Between the battles and the philosophy, there is still place in the novel for a bit of humour, a touch of romance and the poetry of the sea, for  days when the perfection of dawn was so great, the emptiness so entire, that men were almost afraid to speak.  

I've turned the last page, and right now 19 more books of the same look less like hard work and more like a highly anticipated adventure.