Rating: 3/5

Please ignore the synopsis provided by Goodreads since it contains spoilers while being misleading, making up things. 

The book is really entertaining and well written. I actually read it in Spanish, which is my first language, but it translated well and kept it's humor, which is a good sign for the quality of the original. 

I enjoyed the construction of the female characters, specially the growth of Julia (Juts) and even of Louise (Wheezie). Cora, despite being shown mostly through the eyes of others, makes her nest in your heart too, like she does in most character's.

I'd give this book 3,5 stars if I could. The things that made me not feel like giving it 4 are mainly those related to male characters: most of them are kind of sanctified in this book, which seemed so unrealistic I couldn't stand it. They are mostly nice guys, on the basis of not much. They are either saints from the beginning or have redemption moments to save them, somehow. Except from the Rife ones who are pure evil. 
I also hated the sudden bisexualization of Celeste, who was presented as a proud lesbian from the beginning. The whole Ramelle loving her through loving her brother thing could even have had a pass but I found it profoundly disturbing that Radicalesbian Rita Mae Brown erased all lesbian characters from a novel of hers. In my opinion this book also shows some other resentment towards the Women's Liberation Movement that maybe she managed through the writing of this clearly self-referential book. 
At times I didn't know how much she intended for the reader to think of this book as part of her biography and the story of her family.
The introduction of Nickel's biological mother and her circumstances was so intentionally vague it made me angry. I know more about the crazy Patience lady who worked at the train station than about this half-sister of Cora who casually happens to be unable to take care of a baby which all the rest of the community will attend to, only if the baby gets to be Julia's now. That part was really messed up and felt forced, the narration had a clear distinct angry and rushed tone which you cannot find in the rest of the novel, and that makes me think that's the part that may be more biographical or a way to deal with the moral grey (dark grey) areas of this scene. 

Some parts really created a deep ambiance, I could hear the rain the whole time Celeste was looking for Aimes, and feel the snow storm the day she decided to bring justice to Runnymede. 
It turned out to be a really americana book, but I still enjoyed the sense of history it built.

It's a novel that even if it doesn't give you a valuable reflection to carry for the rest of your life, it gives you enjoyable stories and characters that you get to accompany for a while.