Rating: 5/5

The United States Senate has the constitutional right to “advise and consent” to the nomination of the President’s selection for Secretary of State. This rigorous approval process is the basis for Allen Drury’s 1960 Pulitzer Prize winning novel. Throughout this massive (656 pages) work, Drury endeavors to posit both the good and the bad, the “hectic and shabby, but sometimes the moving and noble” aspects to America’s politicians as well as our governmental system of checks and balances. One reason for the novel’s length is the development needed for each of Drury’s multiple first person narrators. The escalating story is told by at least four main characters, each of which are fully developed. It is tempting to try to link some of the fictitious characters to famous 20th century politicians. For example, the nominee for Secretary of State can easily be confused with the historical Alger Hiss case in 1948. And the president’s health concerns were reminiscent of those with which Franklin Delano Roosevelt struggled during his tenure. However Drury provided some important “twists” to historical characters. The hot-headed Wyoming senator seems much akin to Joseph McCarthy, however he is consumed not by anti-communism, but rather with a rabid liberal worldview. And some aspects to this story seem timeless. Politicians are still prone to seek to win the day and destroy their opponents using underhanded and vicious personal attacks. The press is portrayed as myopic and one-sided in their “objective profession” (“Why shouldn’t we throw everything we can at anybody who gets in the way?”). However the novel also gives hope that there are still those who will not sell their soul for personal gain and who can be civil even in their disagreements. Drury reminds the reader that if our legislative system is reduced to solely “Power and Ambition,” then there is not much difference between American and totalitarian regimes and machinations. This novel was powerful and gripping . . . highly recommended!