Rating: 1/5

Ok, so this will be a hard one to review, I gave it a one because it wasn't enjoyable to read at all, it had blatant spelling errors, and was incredibly repetitive. So the basis for the authors main argument is that kids can't tell reality from fiction, that the fact that they read Harry Potter means that they are going to go out and try to do witchcraft on their own. This is incredibly offensive to me, because I was a child once and having adults be this distrustful over something so minor was a huge annoyance, I was like Rowling pretty lucky in that my mom would generally let me read anything I took and interest in, sometimes reading the same book with me so we could discuss anything that bothered me. I'm mainly citing in this situation when as a 12/13 yr old in middle school I started reading Crichton, pretty hard core science thrillers, these diverged from my normal adult flavored Star Wars books so my mom took an interest to make sure I wouldn't get scarred.

Speaking of Star Wars, even as Avery young child, though I wished to be and pretended to be a Jedi, I knew for a fact that this dream would never come to pass. This didn't lead me down a dark path of drugs that ultimately lead me to join the Jedi religion in Australia. Assuming that all children are going to just turn against everything they know that their parents have taught them because a book gave them an idea is a bit silly. But I digress......my point is that almost every point in this book is invalid.

Example: Abanes says that C.S. Lewis' classic Narnia series is very subtly Christian, while Harry Potter is blatantly trying to turn little children pagan. Ugh, where to start with this one, first off, Lion-Jesus isn't all that subtle, it's a great literary device and add depths to the story that it didn't have before the situation arose, but it's been pretty obvious to anyone who's read the books what the meaning is. On the other hand Harry Potter has no obvious religious anything, they're just stories about a boy in school making friends and fighting evil...like you do. Any mention of the occult no matter how well researched is going to turn some faithful Christian kid pagan.....that's not what these books are about. And to the point above, just because a dude named Nicholas Flamel existed doesn't mean that alchemy actually works or that kids believe they can become immortal or turn lead into gold.

My review comes down to a few things, one is trust your kids, you're the one who raised them, you're the one who taught the. Right and wrong, they aren't going to forget all that just because some characters in a book are snotty to each other now and again. Next is, being reactionary about something you personally perceive as a threat shouldn't affect everyone outside of your per-view, basically, teach your kids and you'll be fine, it's not fair to try to ban a book series just because it has some things in it you don't agree with, acting like everything that everyone else likes is a personal attack on you isn't going to make anyone listen to your ideas in act it will have the opposite effect. So chill....