Rating: 4/5

Whenever I sit in a Café with an espresso and a croissant, I sometimes like to think that Georges Perec once sat exactly where I am sitting. Whenever on the Métro, I am somehow reminded of Luc Besson's 1985 film Subway. Whenever I climb into a taxi, it's just in the hope that the driver isn't some knife wielding maniac. The next time I happen to hop onto a bus, then there is every chance, Exercises in Style will immediately come to mind. Not 99 times though, just the once. Briefly tied in with the French Surrealist movement before breaking away, Raymond Queneau presents an incident on a bus between two passengers, where one accuses the other of stepping on his toes. After an exchange of words, the young man moves to another seat. Then later that same day, he is seen standing at a train station, where a friend is advising him to adjust one of the buttons on his overcoat.

And that's pretty much it.

Literally nothing else happens.

And by the end of the first page you have learned everything you are going to know about the events on which the book focuses.

But what follows, is the same incident played over and over and over again. Ninety-nine times to be exact. In different ways, told in different voices, different styles, and different points of view. It's like being trapped by a comic peerless prankster writing and rewriting and rewriting. But here's the thing - it was such a joy to read!. The laughably and ingeniously simple premise results in one of twentieth century fiction's best show-off acts. Each section has a utilitarian title - Hesitation, precision, Ignorance, Insistence, Awkward, Reactionary, to name a few. The core story could even have been something Queneau himself witnessed, and wrote about it simply because essentially it's of little or no importance. But it's a random anecdote that holds many ideas behind it. What's great is Queneau actually manages to transcend his own absurd restrictions by remaining punctiliously within each piece, at all times. The book somehow, and I don't know how, contrives to feel kind of profound even though it appears at first to be pointless.
 
One is left thinking by the end, of the endless possibilities that any simple story could be told. Exercises in Style has an effect on the reader that really opens the mind. It illuminates the reality of multiple perspectives from which everything can be viewed. The best way to read this (I found it helped anyway) is in as little time as possible, otherwise it's pleasures start to thin out. It went down a treat for me accompanied by a few beers!.