Rating: 5/5

A COLLECTION OF CRITICAL ESSAYS 

Frederick Campbell Crews (born 1933) is Professor Emeritus of English at UC Berkeley; he has also written/edited books such as 'The Memory Wars,' 'Follies of the Wise: Dissenting Essays,' etc. 

He wrote in the Preface to this 1998 collection, "[The book] is the work of eighteen authors, but I am the only one who should be held accountable for its intent: to restore the mythified 'discoverer of the unconscious' to human size and, in the process, to expose his system of psychological propositions to the same kind of scrutiny one would apply to any other aspiring science." (Pg. ix)

He admits, "Some features of classical psychoanalysis, to be sure, do have a ring of initial truth about them. In particular, one cannot easily dismiss the proposal that 'defense mechanisms' such as projection, identification, and denial affect mental productions... And unquestionably, their invocation allows hermeneutical feats of quite dazzling ingenuity to be performed on utterances, texts, and works of art." (Pg. xxv)

One essayist suggests, "Freud did not fall into the seduction error through believing his patients' stories; he did not fall into it through ... underestimating the frequency of seduction in the general population. Freud fell into the seduction error through the use of a procedure which to this day remains the basis of the psychoanalytic reconstruction of infantile life: the attribution to patients of certain infantile experiences because they appear to the analyst to be living 'through them with all the appropriate emotions.'" (Pg. 41)

Another says, "[Jeffrey] Masson, feminists, and child-abuse activists tell us that Freud covered up the despicable actions of pedophile fathers. Not so. He covered up the hypnosis that allowed him to obtain the stories, while leaving the astonished world with an oedipal unconscious. The Oedipus complex is a hypnotic myth, superimposed on the no less hypnotic myth of 'infantile seduction,' and it serves no purpose whatsoever to oppose the one myth to the other..." (Pg. 53)

Another writer argues, "Freud infers relationships in a scientifically inadmissible manner; if the enlightenments of interpretations given to ["little"] Hans are followed by behavioural improvements, then they are automatically accepted as valid. If they are not followed by improvement, we are told that the patient has not accepted them, not that they are invalid... We have combed Freud's account for evidence that would be acceptable in the court of science, and have found none... It seems clear that although he wanted to be scientific, Freud was surprisingly naive regarding the requirements of scientific evidence." (Pg. 172-173)

These essays are (to this reviewer) not nearly as devastating as Crews hopes (his 'Memory Wars' was more effective), but they will be of considerable interest to anyone looking for critiques of Freud, and his ideas.