Rating: 4/5

I have to say that it surprised me how much I loved this book. The recommendations I get from Goodreads are really hit-and-miss, but I took the leap with this one and thoroughly enjoyed it.

I don't think the synopsis really does the story justice. It's about two people from very broken backgrounds, who have taken different approaches to their hardships. The hero is bitter and jaded because he has mostly seen nothing but cruelty in his life (especially from his family) and is convinced that humanity (and especially women) are conniving, greedy, and manipulative. Even though he's jaded, he still maintains a decency in his heart; he's a good person, just super grumpy on the surface. The heroine has a family that has emotionally abused and used her for years, yet she views the world through very optimistic and sunny eyes. She's almost too perfect in her selflessness.

This book does a really good job of present the insecurities that come from both sides while falling in love. Though the hero is super confident and alpha male, she turns him more and more into an insecure wreck, which is really sweet to watch. She isn't a mess, but simply knows she's too unattractive, unconnected, and poor to attract such an impressive man. Watching them fall in love is wonderful (and the story does it without getting melodramatic or resorting to ridiculous plot twists).

My only complaint is that the heroine seems almost too perfect. The author does give her faults and weaknesses, which keeps her from being a one-dimensional saint, but I wish there had been more to her character. There were times I found myself wondering why she was falling in love with the hero because though we see into his head and see the true motivations behind his actions, she doesn't. From her perspective (and she even points this out at one point), he's rude, bossy, and a short-tempered. It didn't bother me enough to ruin the story for me (after all, someone so starved for love and affection would fall easily for someone who showed her even an inkling of it), but I think the author could have laid the foundation of their relationship a little bit better.

That being said, I keep wanting to read it over and over, so it's pretty fantastic.