Rating: 5/5

I want to give credit to MJ Parfitt, author of “The Onionologist” for reminding me of this book. My review of her book is here: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... 

Re-visiting this book is an interesting experience, as the book was first published in 1978. And, since this book, there have been 9 more written depicting the life of a group of friends in San Francisco. 

I also understand that “Tales” was originally serialized as regular installments in the San Francisco Chronicle prior to becoming novels. Even the iconic apartment house that includes some of our characters at 28 Barbary Lane has become a part of popular culture. This included more bestselling novels, along with a Peabody award-winning 1993 television mini-series and staged musicals in 1999 and 2009. In 2019, Netflix produced a sequel mini-series. Another fun fact was that the BBC News in 2019 considered this book one of the 100 most influential novels. 

And speaking about it being serialized, because he was writing in ‘real-time,’ the author included many current events into his stories. But reading this one in 2025, which as I mentioned was published in 1978, makes it seem somewhat dated. Still, it is nice to be brought back to a time when rents were affordable in California. Especially, San Francisco. Is that when we sigh, ‘those were the days?’

Maupin also had a way of using this column to pave his way to his own personal truth. He shared in 2007 how he , “…used this column, in fact, as a means of finally telling the truth about myself, coming out to my parents in North Carolina.” One of his characters uses that exact letter in the story. He also said…

“I would not have been able to do any of this had I not felt so embraced by a city where everyone – gay, straight, and traveling – had learned to recognize, if not yet fully celebrate, the infinite possibilities of humanity.” 

I wonder how Maupin would feel in today’s world. Would he have been able to share his truth so readily?

Even so, as we travel back in time, Maupin has a wonderful way of creating believable and quirky characters, and sharing how they interact with one another. This was truly the 70’s – very hippie, free love, drugs flowing and women finding their independence. Where finding themselves and a career, for our women characters, took priority over falling in love and getting married; and, having children. The author also touches on gay rights, black pride, gay pride, secrets and lies, and how it impacted the character’s lives. 

The chapters are short which made the story an easy-quick-read. It is easy to form connections with the characters, and appreciate their journey. For anyone looking for an escape into the past, and some characters to pal around with, this is the place to be. 

4.5 stars