Rating: 3/5

Three novellas published in 1950.

  Man Alive:

A woman wants to hire Wolfe to find her Uncle. Not normally the kind of case Wolfe will take. What makes this case unique is that she believes she saw him at a fashion show where she was a model. The problem? He supposedly committed suicide by jumping into a hot spring at Yellowstone. Her Uncle was a co-owner in the fashion designer business. Shortly after her Uncle's suicide the other co-owner drowned. Wolfe sends Archies to the next fashion show to see if the Uncle shows up. He doesn't but he is found dead later in the fashion designer offices after business hours. The niece just happened be in the office too. There is no ID on the victim and Inspector Cramer wants to know what Wolfe knows when the police follow the niece to his brownstone. The only suspect is Wolfe's client. 
 

  Omit Flowers:

Wolfe's friend and restaurateur, Marko Vukcic, asks for Wolfe's help in clearing a former great chef of a murder charge. The chef is now working for the family who own a chain of restaurants. The wife was with the chef. The siblings and spouses were together and alibi each other. The murder weapon was a knife that was one of a set that the chef had brought to the house to show the victim. Then there is an attack on the wife. It couldn't have been the chef because he is in jail.

  Door to Death,:

Readers of the series know that Theodore Horstmann is a member of Wolfe's household and takes care of the orchids. In this story Theodore is called away for an indefinite time to take care of his ailing mother. This leaves Wolfe without an orchid nurse. This is so unthinkable that he gets in a car and has Archie drive him to Westchester County where he plans to hire Andy Krasicki. Unfortunately while talking with Andy he finds the body of his fiancée in the greenshouse. Naturally the police suspect Andy and take him to jail. The result is that Wolfe still doesn't have an orchid nurse and he is in Westchester County where he can't eat meals prepared by his chef, Fritz Brenner. If the murderer isn't Andy it must be one of the other members of the family for whom Andy worked. He knows that if he returns home he will never leave. Besides one of the family members had the impertinence to call him Nero.

In additon to the dialogue between Wolfe and Archie there is the nostalgia of Rex Stout's stories. The Nero Wolfe books were published between 1934 and 1975 (there was a posthumous book published in 1985). The golden era was during the 30's, 40's, and 50's. There are payphones, hotels with elevator operators, drug stores with lunch counters. Times were different and when you read one of these stories you get to revisit.