Rating: 4/5

I think I got this book from the free shelf at my school library. I wasn't sure what to expect since the book takes place in the 1850s and mentions a librarian who wants to stay single and is friends with Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Stanton and also discusses the Underground Railroad but is also a mystery. I didn't know if it would be too serious for what I enjoy from the genre. I wasn't disappointed by the book, though!
The topics in the book are serious, of course, but I feel like Monfredo handles them well for the most part. There are some comments, descriptions, word choice, and analogies that might be in poor taste, but I think that's always hard to avoid when writing about feminism and slavery in the U.S. The book is very rich with historical details and people, although the main characters are fictional, and the descriptions of the town of Seneca Falls and the surrounding areas, along with Virginia, are lively. The mystery itself was interesting, but the bulk of the book is more about the issues surrounding the mystery. The mystery is more of a frame for the main contents in my opinion, but that didn't bother me in this case because the main story is suspenseful and interesting as well. The courtroom scene was a little deus ex machina-ish, but since the mystery is still left unsolved after the court, it wasn't bad. I was surprised by the reveal because I had my sights on someone else entirely, and I had peeked ahead a little and saw a different name, so I guess my peeking and sleuthing skills weren't great this time. I was happy that, despite my bad habit of looking ahead, I was still caught off guard by the reveal. That actually made me happy. I also like the end, how it shows, that even though Kiri and Zeph are safe, it wasn't like slavery was resolved in the novel. I thought that was a great addition on Monfredo's part not to act like the issues are over just because they are for her fictional characters. It was just a good way to show that the implications of the complexity of slavery still existed within the book but also still exist for us now, something I couldn't help but think about as I read . 
Overall, I enjoyed this book and got more out of it than I expected to. I've looked at reviews of the other Glynis Tryon books and might be tempted to read another, especially Book 3, which seems to feature Jacques, probably my favorite character in this book!