Rating: 3/5

That fount of wisdom, Wikipedia, tells me Wood has been dubbed "the thinking woman's crumpet" (note to self: new nickname for husband), and accordingly he's written a very engaging popular history of English identity. This is one of several In Search of books Wood has penned, so it's obviously working for him. The chapters are a glorious mix of the epic and infinitesimal, exploring national and regional mythology alongside the devastating impact of Henry VIII's dissolution of the monasteries on antique and medieval manuscripts. The third (and, IMHO, most successful) part presents snapshots of the past that show as much as tell readers about Wood's passion for history, whether he's trying to pinpoint the location of a great battle or articulate a humble building's centuries-long narrative. Here are a couple choice excerpts:

You may think, then, that the search has been fruitless. Just a series of unsubstantiated leaps of the imagination. But to me, it sums up the joy of historical research. I can't pretend that my long trawl through the documents and landscape history of these two South Yorkshire parishes has brought me much closer to understanding the dramatic events of the tenth century. But what it did do was illuminate a corner of the English landscape. What I carry with me from my search is a sense of the layers of our history — symbolized in concrete by the Roman road, the canal, the Victorian railways, and the motorway (itself destined to be ancient one day). And there are the layers of history in terms of people's lives, too: Arnkel, the Saxon farmer of Tinsley; the medieval colonists, like the Heryng family, grubbing the forest; the metalworkers, canal engineers and railway navvies; the miners' families 'scratting' for surface coal in Tinsley Wood in the strikes of 1893 and 1984; the newcomers on the post-war housing estate at Brinsworth; Reverend Gibson and his dwindling flock at Tinsley today. But on this particular journey through time, two things especially stick in my memory: the ancient chapel of Tinsley with its mysterious predecessors, whose Victorian ghost still stands under the viaduct; and above all, Tinsley Wood itself — the magnificent forest of the Domesday Book, whose origins must lie even before the Bronze Age, in the wild wood which covered Britain after the last Ice Age. The forest still seen by Joseph Hunter in the 1820s, with its glades and walks, 'where the grandeur of solitude may be felt'; now just a straggle of trees along a municipal golf-course, in earshot of the unceasing noise of the motorway.

(Chapter 11 - Tinsley Wood, 220-1)

and

Michael was talking about Bede in particular, and medieval people in general:

'Do you think you can ever know them?'

To me it seemed an irretrievable distance. You make a stab out of the fragments which have survived. Occasionally, with people like Alfred, you think you're getting through to their real feelings.

'No, not really,' I said.

But of course the truth was I didn't know them well enough to be able to begin to know them — if that doesn't sound too much of a contradiction. To know how Bede thinks, you have to start by sinking yourself into his beautiful, clear, simple Latin. A task beyond me. And a lifetime's work. That's what it means to be a true scholar.

'Do you?' I asked.

'Oh yes,' he replied. 'I dream of Bede.' He shook his head as if he had taken himself by surprise. 'He speaks to me. I feel as if I know him.'

(Chapter 13 - Peatling Magna: August 1265, 247-8)

Downsides: This book contains some sloppy editing and many, many sentence fragments. If you're going to incorporate French words, please get the accents right. Wood's occasional commentary on recent/contemporary politics was a real turn-off for me, and I was also annoyed that the final chapter — the only one to address England's multiculturalism in the context of historical patterns of immigration (though, weirdly, not conquest) — was framed merely as an epilogue. These are relatively minor flaws and I'd still recommend the book to pop history fans and Anglophiles. (Or should I say Angel-philes?)