Rating: 4/5

I watched the new adaptation on Prime. I've also seen the ITV's two versions, a not-good 1990s film and the weirdly contorted Agatha Christie's Marple version; and oddly enough the book was cheap on Kindle a few years ago, so I gave that a peruse when I saw this version was coming; I should, at this point, be able to teach a workshop in Christie Adaptations.

The new one is very, very pretty. Rufus Sewell, as Mark Easterbrook, is very, very pretty. Mark's flat, the village of Much Deeping, his Lagonda 3-litre drophead coupé, all of it, very, very pretty. Deviations from the novel include doing away with Ariadne Oliver (*barely* present in the book, anyway!) and the Dane Calthorps and the peculiar appendix that is the Ginger/lawyer subplot; the ending isn't even remotely like the novel's, and is quite...murky. I will say that the scene where Easterbrook puts together the clues that lead to the solution was hair-raising, pitch-perfect Christie (even though it's absolutely nowhere in the book).

The Agatha Christie's Marple version hewed more closely to the ending of the novel. It was actually very good, and the two-hour episode was darn good at creating the eerie atmosphere needed to sell the misdirection at the heart of the story.

The 1990s movie was flat, uninspired. The whole thing reeked of budget woes.

The book...a 1961 publication so squarely in Christie's best years...is delightfully twisty. The plot is not the point, as when is it ever in a Christie book; the plot makes her point: we destroy others to live, whether or not we know it, and leave a wake of carnage that only a change in perspective reveals. It is masterful, and beautifully hidden in plain sight.

Enjoy the read for what it is; then, without letting your inner book-snob turn you into a harsher critic than is called for, enjoy the new films. Yes, the text is changed; no, the story is not. The point is still very much the point and it's still turned around to stab you as well as the other victims.