Rating: 2/5

This was the first novel by Ian McEwan that I've read ages ago. I got a copy from a supermarket sale and read it in a day, wondering all the time how someone could write down so many nasty things and get away with it. Cut me some slack, I was 10.

So, as I sat to rediscover this classic, I hoped to feel at least a fraction of the weird pleasure this novel brought me back then. The thing is short - 120 pages long - and you can easily breeze through it in two hours.

I have to say that this might be McEwan's darkest book, but it's also his most nonsensical, beating even the infamous On Chesil Beach. NOTHING in this book makes any sort of sense whatsoever, and the plot can be best described as "two morons go on a holiday where they meet two crazy people who do horrible things to them for no apparent reason". McEwan can write and the best thing about this novel is his prose, but unfortunately he proves that he can write about nothing in particular and not only get away with it but also win accolades for his fiction.

Amazingly impropable plot developments (the couple goes to the beach when the sky is completely overcast, and is even described as being black...the bars are closed at 9PM in a big city(!) and when the couple find a bar, the waiter refuses to serve them water(!!)) combined with amazingly stupid and inconsistent character actions (the man our couple meets is a thug with a gold chain, who shares on the spot the story how his father abused his siters and how they took revenge of thim, which included a lot of feces and turkish rugs - AND THEY GO AWAY WITH THIS DUDE TO HIS HOUSE, it's true check for yourself!) combined with a lot of calculated, creepy stuff thrown in for further shock value (the man tells the girl that he'd like to bind her to a machine that would constnatly penetrate her body, even after her death - and she tells him that she'd like to cut his limbs off and keep him for sex - AND THESE PEOPLE HAVE CHILDREN, thank God this is fiction!) combined with a lot of schtooping and booze (the two lovers eat practically nothing, sleep in the streets(!), drink gallons of alcohol and when they get back to a hotel they make sweet and passionate love for like FOUR DAYS - what was McEwan thinking?).

All of this is written in McEwan's cool, detached prose, with not a smile in sight, which leads me to the interpretation that he was writing this as a satire of some sorts, a black comedy, a spoof, daring the reader to laugh out loud. But the back blurb speaks about "an elegant and miniature gothic...smooth and classy", and McEwan himself stares at me with his confident, serious look from the author portrait, which means that both he and the readers actually took this stuff seriously. How they could is beyond me. Is everyone stupid? Maybe the paragraph where the man reveals the fact that he feels an emptiness between his scrotum and anus was to be taken as "the power of evil"? Or when they find themselves naked in the house of the guy they've meet (the feces guy) and accept his dinner proposition is to be taken as "erotic menace"? I don't known. Stupidier things happened to people, but nowhere you'll find a cumulation of them more embarassingly put together than in The Comfort of Strangers.