Rating: 4/5

This is a very fine, indeed excellent history, but it is despite the collection of voices from all sides a history about America's involvement in Vietnam and aimed at American readers. This is hardly surprising almost all books on the Vietnam War in English, whether fiction or nonfiction, viewed and reported that conflict through the prism of American involvement. I do not excuse myself from this skewered perspective and will admit that it was only after reading Viet Thanh Nguyen's 'The Sympathiser' that I blinkered my view of this war was because when I had thought of the Vietnamese story it was only of the North Vietnamese. The South Vietnamese, the people for whom the war was fought and who fought and died in vast numbers in that war had never entered my thoughts.

None of this is to criticise this particular book but to emphasise that we, those in the USA and the West, need to move on from viewing of Vietnam through our eyes and perspectives (though actually understanding the post WWII roots of the conflict would also help Fredrik Logevall's 'Embers of War' is excellent but there are many others) and thinking about it as a war of the Vietnamese people. The involvement of France, the USA and even Australia (talk about being forgotten! how many reading this knew that 60,000 Australians fought in Vietnam that 523 died and 2,400 were wounded?) had long term repercussions for them outside of what their involvement meant for Vietnam. But it is a Vietnamese story first and it is about time we free ourselves of our mental blinkers.

Still this is a fascinating book, though like all oral histories at its best it tells you what people thought at the time. Of course all memory is flawed and retrospectively we rearrange, reinterpret and refine our memories. More importantly, oral history is not necessarily an accurate history. Books like this tell a truth, but a fractured truth, and while all history may be partial an oral history can be mendacious in fact but honest in reporting what people thought.