Rating: 4/5

My first book by this very prolific author. Kind of between a 3 and a 4, really, as parts of it are a bit slow, but rounding up because I'm so impressed by the general caliber of writing for a young audience (arguably young adult, but with a 12-year-old protagonist I would imagine it appealed more to readers under 14). Part of that is due to its age alone, but even among its peers it stands out to me in terms of both style and how unafraid it is to go in depth into giving readers a historical &amp; cultural education about Scotland, not to mention some walking tours. Which I generally enjoyed as someone with a bit of Scotch heritage as well.

And while there is not a particularly grand mystery to solve in the way the title implies, I absolutely loved the little extra suitcase her grandmother packs for her. Half a dozen mystery packages wrapped in tissue paper with instructions about when to open them, inside of which she finds little items and brief letters or instructions explaining what she should try to do with them -- tiny mysteries on their own, often a sort of scavenger hunt to find a person, place or thing, but not always straightforward. They certainly get her engaged in both the trip and the people around her, and the ultimate goal is that by working together with others to help her solve things, she will find she has made both new friends and firmer bonds with her extended family. 

I also have to talk about the one status update I made before getting entirely wrapped up in the story, which is that there are a couple of chapters that detail the process of boarding, layovers, and flying in an airplane, and it showed me exactly why my mom waxes nostalgic about how genuinely nice flying used to be. Nowhere was it more apparent than in this description of one of their meals:
The stewardess came down the aisle with Cathy's lunch. A small pillow was pulled from the pocket of the seat ahead and set on her knees. Then the stewardess handed her a small blue cardboard tray, notched to hold little blue plastic dishes containing everything from the main serving of steak and gravy to soup, salad and dessert. There were even tiny shakers of salt and pepper and an envelope of sugar.

I will say that the ending feels a bit abrupt. (though invited to continue traveling with her aunt &amp; uncle after they leave the Isle, who have just let her know they want her to live with them upon returning home rather than her stodgy maiden aunt, she gets word that her grandmother has "taken a turn for the worse" and so must rush home to visit her. There are a few more pages to wrap up the loose ends of her quests, and she's perfectly satisfied with her visit, but it ends with her on her way home. Why would you leave me dangling on the anxious feeling that Grandma's on her deathbed??))

Still, I'm very glad I scooped this up at a book sale on a whim because I was frankly stunned to see how expensive secondhand copies are, despite this having been published in many editions. Nothing under $20 online right now, and for mass market paperbacks at that. (which, side note: even for mass market this is bitty font, which gets even smaller in her grandmother's letters)