Rating: 1/5

I don’t think I’m going to finish this one. Im at about 50%. I stopped precisely when I learned the result of the heroine’s action of running off with her first husband. She was really selfish. All this time I thought it was her reputation alone that got ruined I didn’t realize these stuff extended to their families like all five of her sisters spinster, can’t imagine how much her parents suffered socially before they died and her brother meh. I feel like this author is really good at making me really think about her characters actions and what it means for them as people (kinda to her detriment and in this book specifically) because I just ended up getting a nagging feeling about main characters as I continued to read. To compare, loved book one. When Dylan was introduced I was intrigued and I looked forward to reading his book but this man is a WHORE of degrees I’ve never read before and just generally not a good person. He’s not a rake. He’s that step above a rake and he’s also a scoundrel. He’s gambling and winning a whole human being through a gamble? Kissing people on ballroom floors in front of everyone? Taking hard drugs and drinking all the time? When you truly think about his actions and say if this was a real person would I want them around me the answer would be no. For the life of me I can’t understand why the heroine even likes him especially after all she went through with her first husband (yes she was facing homelessness etc so I get why she took the job but she was legitimately attracted and it’s like what) and her quieting the ringing in his head made no sense to me. This is a regular book not a fantasy or anything. You’re a regular civilian act like it (lol). The child had no behavior and she’s going to be hell when she grows up especially cz she’s idiolizes the hero. Anyways, the hero disgusts me and the heroine is idk I’m upset in how much she messed up her family’s future and she’s gonna end up happily while her family she left in the country reputation will still be in the rut.