"Of course, I cannot break through a wall by battering my head against it if I really do not have the strength to break through it, but I am not going to resign myself to it simply because it is a stone wall and I am not strong enough. 
 As though such a stone wall really were a consolation and really did contain some word of conciliation, if only because it is as true as two times two makes four. Oh, absurdity of absurdities! How much better it is to understand it all, to be conscious of it all, all the impossibilities and the stone walls, not to resign yourself to a single one of those impossibilities and stone walls if it disgusts you to resign yourself; to reach, through the most inevitable, logical combinations, the most revolting conclusions on the everlasting theme that you are yourself somehow to blame even for the stone wall, though again it is as clear as day you are not to blame in the least, and therefore grinding your teeth in silent impotence sensuously to sink into inertia, brooding on the fact that it turns out that there is even no one for you to feel vindictive against, that you have not, and perhaps never will have, an object for your spite, that it is a sleight-of-hand, a bit of juggling, a card-sharper's trick, that it is simply a mess, no knowing what and no knowing who, but in spite of all these uncertainties, and jugglings, still there is an ache in you, and the more you do not know, the worse the ache." (12)

"The fact is, gentlemen, it seems that something that is dearer to almost every man than his greatest advantages must really exist, or (not to be illogical) there is one most advantageous advantage (the very one omitted of which we spoke just now) which is more important and more advantageous than all other advantages, for which, if necessary, a man is ready to act in opposition to all laws, that is, in opposition to reason, honor, peace, prosperity 0 in short, in opposition to all those wonderful and useful things in only he can attain that fundamental, most advantageous advantage which is dearer to him than all." (20)

"After all, this very stupid thing [the idea of desiring only what is rational], after all, this caprice of ours, may really be more advantageous for us, gentlemen, than anything else on earth, especially in some cases. And in particular it may be more advantageous than any advantages even when it does us obvious harm, and contradicts the soundest conclusions of our reason about our advantage - because in any case it preserves for us what is most precious and most important - that is, our personality, our individuality. Some, you see, maintain that this really is the most precious thing for man; desire can, of course, if it desires, be in agreement with reason; particularly if it does not abuse this practice but does so in moderation, it is both useful and sometimes even praiseworthy. But very often, and even most often, desire completely and stubbornly opposes reason, and... and... and do you know that that, too, is useful and sometimes even praiseworthy?" (26)

"Gentlemen, let us suppose that man is not stupid. (Indeed, after all, one cannot say that about him anyway, if only for the one consideration that, if man is stupid, then, after all, who is wise?) But if he is not stupid, he is just the same monstrously ungrateful! Phenomenally ungrateful. I even believe that the best definition of man is - a creature that walks on two legs and is ungrateful. But that is not all, that is not his worst defect; his worst defect is his perpetual immorality, perpetual - from the days of the Floor to the Schleswig-Holstein period of human destiny. Immorality, and consequently lack of good sense; for it has long been accepted that lack of good sense is due to no other cause than immorality." (26)

"...Heine maintains that a true autobiography is almost an impossibility, and that man is bound to lie about himself." (35)

"I was standing by the billiard-table and in my ignorance blocking up the way, and he wanted to pass; he took me by the shoulders and without a word - without a warning or an explanation - moved me from where I was standing to another spot and passed by as thought he had not noticed me. I could even have forgiven blows, but I absolutely could not forgive his having moved me and so completely failing to notice me." (43)

"I have never been a coward at heart, though I have always been a coward in action. (43)

"Now I suddenly realized vividly how absurd, revolting as a spider, was the idea of vice which, without love, grossly and shamelessly begins directly with that in which true love finds its consummation." (77)

"I did not understand that she was hiding her feelings by sarcasm and that this is usually the last refuge of modest and chaste-souled people when the privacy of their soul is coarsely and intrusively invaded, and that their pride makes them refuse to surrender till the last moment and shrink from expressing their feelings to you." (86)

"But if you were anywhere else, living as decent people live, I would perhaps be more than attracted by you, I would fall in love with you, would be glad of a look from you, let alone a word. I would hang about your door, would go down on my knees to you, we would become engaged and I would even consider it an honor to do so. I would not dare to have an impure thought about you. But here, after all, I know that I have only to whistle and you have to come with me whether you like it or not. I don't consult your wishes, but you mine. The lowest laborer hires himself as a workman but he doesn't make a slave of himself altogether; besides, he knows that he will be free again. But when will you be free? Only think what you are giving up here! What is it you are making a slave of? It is your soul, together with your body; you are selling your soul which you have no right o dispose of!" (87)

"Love! But after all, that's everything, but after all, it's a jewel, it's a maiden's treasure, love - why, after all a man would be ready to give his soul, to face death to gain that love." (88) // the honor of inspiring such beauty and depth in another

"Perhaps she was like you, proud, ready to take offence, not like the others [prositutes]; perhaps she looked like a queen, and knew that happiness was in store for the man who would love her and whom she would love." (89) // to know oneself, to carry oneself well, to inspire beautiful things in others

"...it was as though he were chemically combined with my existence." (100)

"...and have nowadays come to the point of sometimes thinking that love really consists in the right - freely given by the beloved object - to be tyrannized over." (111)

"Tell me, does one really have to be without individuality to be happy? Does redemption lie in impersonality? On the contrary, on the contrary, say I, not only must one not be without individuality, but that is just what one has to become, an individual, even more and to a higher degree than it is known in the West today. Understand me: voluntary, completely conscious and totally unconstrained self-sacrifice for the benefit of all, is, in my opinion, a token of the greatest achievement of individuality, of its greatest power, its greatest self-control, the greatest freedom of its own will. To sacrifice one's life willingly for others, to be crucified, burned at the stake for others willingly, can only be done at the highest point of the attainment of individuality. A highly developed individuality, completely convinced of its right to be individual, no longer fearing anything for itself, cannot possibly do anything else with its individuality, that is, can find no greater use for itself than to give itself up entirely for others, so that others too may become equally autonomous and happy individualities." [excerpts from Dostoyevsky's Winter Notes on Summer Impressions] (184)

"Of course, there is a great attraction to live if not in brotherly fashion, at least simply on some rational basis, that is to live well, with everything guaranteed to you and only work and acquiescence demanded in turn from you. But there is another joker here. It seems that man is guaranteed everything, is promised food, drink, work, and in turn only the smallest iota of his personal freedom is asked for the general good, the smallest, smallest iota. No, man does not want to live according to those calculations, he will not surrender the single iota. It seems to him, in his stupidity, that it is a prison, and that he would be better off by himself, because he would be completely free that way And after all, though he is beaten when he is free, though he has no work, though he dies of hunger and has no freedom at all, the queer fellow still prefers his freedom. Of course, all the socialist can do is throw up his hands and tell him that he is a fool, immature, a child, that he does not understand his own advantage. That an ant, some mute, insignificant ant is more intelligent than he, because life in the anthill is good, everything is well ordered, everyone is well fed, happy, each knowns what his task is. In short: man is still a long way from the anthill!" [excerpts from Dostoyevsky's Winter Notes on Summer Impressions ] (187) // because the men who set up such a situation are not as trustworthy as an ant. what do ants know of immorality and selfishness and others of the basest human emotions?

"'Young Pen! You will participate in the critical section. Therefore instill in yourself the principle that a real apple is better than a painted apple, the more so as one can eat a real apple, but one cannot eat a painted apple. Consequently art is nonsense and a luxury and can only serve to amuse children. That "new idea," so grand in its simplicity, must henceforth replace all courses in aesthetics for you and will immediately give you the necessary point of view for analyzing all so-called "works of art." Do you understand?' But Munificent grew so courageous with joy, while o the other hand he started to lose his courage, that he did not dare to say anything even against that. That, in the first place, a real apple and a painted apple are two entirely different subjects and cannot in any way be compared; that, in the second place, let us grant that a real apple can be eaten, but that a painted apple is painted specially to be looked at, not to be eaten; that, after all, not everything in the world can be eaten, and that one cannot limit the utility of all things and works to their edibility." (218) [excerpt from Dostoyevsky's Mr. Shchedrin, or, Schism Among the Nihilists]

"That is what you did with art, with moral ideals, with the historical march of events, with all life. Where is your practical sense? You are going against life. We are not supposed to prescribe laws for life but to study life and extract laws from life itself for ourselves." (228) [excerpt from Dostoyevsky's Mr. Shchedrin, or, Schism Among the Nihilists]

"Before you can do anything you have to make yourselves into something, to assume your own shape, to become yourselves. Then and only then will you be able to have your say, to present your own form of a world-view. But you are abstractions, you are shadows, you are nothing. And nothing can come from nothing. You are foreign ideas. You are a mirage. You do not stand on soil but on air. The light shines right under you -" (228) [excerpt from Dostoyevsky's Mr. Shchedrin, or, Schism Among the Nihilists]