Rating: 4/5

The Legend of Good Women is a book of poetry by Geoffrey Chaucer attempting to reclaim the good name of women in romantic literature. The title was applied to the work throughout time, and, to me, is a misnomer: the book is not about good women broadly, but about good women in love or courtship. Saying that it is a book about good women seems only to suggest that a woman's value is only as a wife, whereas even in Chaucer's time this was not thought the case; many a nun or celibate woman was praised (and slandered), after all.

Chaucer introduces the text with a long praise of the daisy and a dream about Cupid and Alceste. Cupid considers him a foe of love because he wrote numerous poems abusing lovers and showing their evil actions, but Alceste not only shows that Chaucer wrote poems in favor of love and lovers--but also may not have wrote his works for the purpose of abusing love at all. (She, perhaps the most beautiful of women, is dressed like a daisy herself and her story includes her becoming a daisy.) Chaucer agrees with her in the latter part, but Alceste says that love cannot be reasoned with, and he still must repent; hence, she gives him a task to write poems that show the constancy of women in love, even in the worst circumstances. Instead of writing of the chaff, Chaucer must now write of the corn. 

I will not here talk about all of the stories. Most of the poems are very good.

The Legend of Lucrece is one of my favorites. In it, the famous rape of Lucretia is given another rendering. Chaucer, of course, chooses to highlight Lucrece's chasteness, even going to the point of mentioning that she made sure no part of her body would be shown when she killed herself for fear of shame. What I like about this poem is that Chaucer seems to suggest that Lucrece is wrong in her actions. She is noble, sure, but she is following the mores of Roman society around women--that she is unchaste merely for having sex, even non-consensual sex; that she must feel shame for being exposed--and these mores are ultimately the cause of her death. 

The Legend of Thisbe is one of that is somewhat odd in the collection. Indeed, if I am not mistaken, it is the only legend in the whole work that contains a truthful male lover. Piramus and Thisbe suffer a similar fate to Romeo and Juliet, only this time as a result of a misunderstanding surrounding a female lion. In this sense, Chaucer is saying that a constancy in love ought be expected from male and female, and hence gives Piramus' suicide the same nobility that he shows Lucrece or Thisbe herself. If we see different standards for men and women within the text, in the least that seems to be the same.

The battle scene in the Legend of Cleopatra is very nice. 

A few of the stories in the book can (inevitably) be viewed as exploititive of female suffering. Sure, we are meant to sympathize with the women put in such dire scenarios; indeed, the point seems to be to show that men are untrustworthy or simply evil. I do not think, however, we can only view these poems through the lens of their moral purpose. They were created--(that Chaucer cared about metrical versification and humor suggests this)--as a means not only for schooling the reader in truth, but also for the pleasure of the read itself. It is a work of pleasure, therefore. In that sense, the inclusion of stories like the rape and sexual slavery of Philomela cannot simply be understood as a means to a moral end, but as something with a shock value that goes beyond sagacious example-giving. I suppose what I am trying to say is that we all ride roller coasters and enjoy them--but maybe this roller coaster is not as benign.