Rating: 5/5

On the 20th of July, 1714, in the Spanish colony of Peru five people descended to eternity when they fell into an enormous abyss. Ironically as colorful birds sung sweetly nearby a beautiful scene of snowy mountains far away seen, and green vegetation with pretty trees below. The noon collapse of the bridge of San Luis Rey not only killed the poor unfortunates, but maybe more important showed the world how precious life is. An uncommon novel because it tells the reader at the very beginning, the ending. Brother Juniper a curious tired Franciscan monk, had stopped to rest and saw the horrible, deadly catastrophe from the road. The distant tiny hurling bodies falling quickly from view, doomed no possible rescue...But unlike others didn't think how lucky he was (he had survived!). His thoughts though were why these beings ? At the mountain Juniper decides to devote himself to finding out all he can about the deceased. Knocking on every door in the small capital city of Lima, talking with the people filling many notebooks writing a long book afterwards, from six years of an exhaustive investigation. Nevertheless can anyone really know another person? The locals were greatly shocked, the land where frequent earthquakes bring sudden death, tidal waves that crush and destroy coastal cities, rampant disease which decimates the frightened population occurs too often. Did they think the century old Inca made bridge of vines and twigs, was going to last forever. Or maybe that much used ancient artificial structure, linking the towns of Lima and Cuzco would always be safe...An "Act of God," as the lawyers say, changed everyone's perspective. A royal old lonely lady, an orphan girl, a surviving grieving twin boy, the uncle of a famous actress and her sickly son all perished on the bridge... Later the somber Requiem Mass at the Cathedral in Lima, for the poor victims with the Archbishop presiding, the Viceroy in attendance as are all the notable people of the city . "There is the land of the living and a land of the dead" said this book " and the bridge is love".....Poignant story that is sad at heart no happy endings , but asks the question is life worth living... You only can answer that...... A new bridge made of stone has been built where the former legendary one was...Symbol of hope and the indomitable spirit of mankind, can prevail over adversity...May it always be that way.