Rating: 1/5

The opening of Soul-Eater, Dana Brookin’s 1985 horror novel, where a house exacerbates the prejudices, hatred and bitterness of Edgar Falls’ inhabitants to the point of homicidal madness, held a promise. The fairly personable prose and relaxed tone used in the first few chapters to set the story up and introduce a plethora of well-known characters both seemed to point towards an unusual take on the ‘haunted house’ genre, a sort of Payton Place meets The Amityville Horror. At least at first. But then it all fell apart when the book’s ambition, namely an exploration of the inherent darkness lurking within the human soul - a tall order but not a bad gig in itself - became glaringly obvious. Painfully so.

The book’s main protagonist, the tragically wholesome Bobbie Topin, a 12 years old lad living with and taking care of his seriously ill grandfather stands as a perfect opposition to the rest of the characters, all warped by pettiness, arrogance, greed, lust or hypocrisy. From Lobe Peter, the proprietor of the town’s only newspaper, ridiculously twisted by a thwarted ambition to Penny DuJong, the candy shop lady, a predictably embittered old maid and terminal gossip, all of them are merely cardboard cut-outs serving specific functions within the plot, each of their quirks or dialogues borrowed from a long list of b-movie characters. What could be said of cad extraordinaire Gary Purdy, so wilfully bad and misogynistic he constantly tests any reader’s suspension of disbelief? None of these characters have any coherence or real agency and tend to behave according to the story’s requirements. Another case in point: take little Bobbie whom, we find out in the course of the book, is somewhat a bit of a psychic. The extend of his talent is never explored - merely mentioned in passing - and yet proves incredibly handy as the book rushes towards its laughable Scoobidoo-like climax. 

Soul Eater’s main draw back however is that it lacks conviction and is even coy in its description of the horror, never daring to look directly into the darkness. As a result, the sometimes clunky and often arch writing increasingly turns more and more gnomic as the story progresses, adding strange ellipses on top of each other to the point of making the narrative unfocused and confusing. This, in turn, gives the distinct feeling of a writer who progressively got tired of her own story and couldn’t wait to pass the finish line.

Now, I have no way of really knowing this for certain but I’m convinced that Soul-Eater was the work of a young and fairly inexperienced writer. Dana Brookins read all the right novels but had not yet developed a voice of her own. Or an original story for that matter. In fact, this novel is more than influenced by Shirley Jackson’s The Haunting of Hill House and Stephen King’s The Shining. Both classics are actually mentioned in this book and I don’t think that’s a coincidence.

Soul-Eater may be another title to add onto the Land Registry of Horror’s ledgers but a forgettable one.