Rating: 3/5

‘Slan’ by A. E. Van Vogt (a respected “Golden Age of Science Fiction’ writer) is probably van Vogt’s most famous book among the many famous novels and short stories he has written. It was first published in 1940. The science-based weapons and spaceships he has extrapolated from what was the current atomic physics discoveries of his era are laughable, actually, but very cool at the same time. It is certainly true many succeeding science fiction stories have taken the original ideas from his stories and incorporated them into new original or tribute stories. 

I have copied the book blurb:

”In the 1940s, the Golden Age of science fiction flowered in the magazine Astounding. Editor John W. Campbell, Jr., discovered and promoted great new writers such as A.E. van Vogt, whose novel Slan was one of the works of the era. 

Slan is the story of Jommy Cross, the orphan mutant outcast from a future society prejudiced against mutants, or slans. 

Throughout the forties and into the fifties, Slan was considered the single most important SF novel, the one great book that everyone had to read. Today it remains a monument to pulp SF adventure, filled with constant action and a cornucopia of ideas.”

The slans are believed by both normal humans and slans to be superhumans, capable of superior physical and mental efforts beyond humans. They learn faster, mature quicker, and have superb physical abilities. The slans’ feelings of superiority led to racial conflict and war. Eventually humans gained the upper hand, and began a policy of genocide of the slans. 

Jommy is born long after these events, and he has no awareness of why humans hate his kind. He saw his parents murdered when he is nine years old. Since they had prepared him for survival on his own if they were killed, he knew he was not yet old enough to stay safe by himself. He has to find a human who will provide him with a safe home, even if they don’t like him. He finds such a human, a drunk old woman, who uses him as much as he uses her. But he yearns for the company of slans. Is he truly the last one, or do others exist out there in hiding? Well, spoiler alert, he does find answers. History is more complicated than he knew, and so is his future.

While I thought ‘Slan” very interesting, I also felt the dialogue was wooden, due to a lot of oversharing of facts. I was reminded a lot of Star Trek’s Vulcan characters. But the novel is short, so, and a “must read”. I also wanted to keep reading every time I put the book down, too. It is interesting and I wanted to know what would happen next. Jommy Cross, the main character, is enduring the genocide of his race including himself, and I was concerned! At first glance, it appears it will be a fictionalized sci-fi version of the many true stories of genocidal behavior in human history. Which it is. However, it soon becomes apparent that van Vogt is writing also about a dystopian society resulting from an overreaction to an evolutionary change and a lot of twists and turns in loyalty, not just about the genocide of a people who are different. 

I liked it. I didn’t love it. That fracking dialogue!