Rating: 3/5

I, Judas, a shocking (for its time) book about the ultimate betrayer. 

This review is from: I, Judas, Mass Market Paperback Edition 

I don’t suppose it’d be much of a spoiler, to tell you how this story comes out. Jesus Christ is crucified and is buried and on the third day he rises again from the dead. Sorry if I spoiled it for you but if you didn’t already know how it went for Jesus, you maybe shouldn’t read this book.

If you like exposition as dialogue, you’ll love the first forty or so pages of I, Judas. Palestine, in Judas’s time, was a very complicated place with Jews and Greeks and Romans and with a myriad of factions. There’s a lot to be “dumped” on the reader. The confusing maelstrom needs to be understood before the story gets going, so let’s just get it all out at the start, even if it means having three of the most erudite Jews of the time adorning everything they say with superfluous information already known by even the most ignorant peasant.

I, Judas was originally published in the mid-seventies and back then, exposition in dialogue, especially in historical novels, was considered acceptable. Today it’s a hoot but with Gamaliel and Annas and Caiaphas, it’s compelling, even as stilted dialogue, to watch the interplay of these bright, political minds. These are cunning men, each capably representing his own faction and what they’re saying is necessary stuff so don’t worry about the information dump. Just take it all in, because once it’s all on the table, the story can get going.

Except it doesn’t, not so well.

The biggest disappointment for me was Jesus’s miracles. There was no awe. I suppose it must be a very difficult thing, to describe the effect of the miracles on the folks who witnessed them. But when Jesus turns the water into wine or the few loaves and fishes into multiple loaves and fishes, the folks who witness it don't seem overwhelmed with wonder and joy. Pedestrian miracles. It was especially glaring with raising Lazarus up from the dead. You want to see how to bring Lazarus back, read Kazantzakis’s account or watch how Scorsese does it, shades of Jaws! Either will send chills up and down your spine.

That said, this is an interesting book. There’s not a lot of action, it’s mostly talking and thinking. It’s seeing a turning point in history from the point of view of the ultimate bad guys. Except they’re not entirely bad and each in his own way is sort of sympathetic. That was blasphemous in the mid-1970s and is still controversial today, especially with the publication and explication of the Gospel of Judas.

Judas has always had a bad press. Dante put him in the lowest ring of Hell, a traitorous lout who got what he deserved ─ hanged, or did he fall down and have his guts spill out? But wait a minute, the authors are saying. If Jesus’s mission, to die on the cross for all men (and women) was foreordained, if it was prophesied and if Judas facilitated it, which he did, willingly or unwillingly, then don’t we owe Judas? Didn’t he help redeem us?

I won’t get into Judas’s motives, that would be a spoiler, but I will say this much: He is, in this work of fiction, a more complicated, although maybe no less devious fellow than how he’s been portrayed elsewhere and he certainly didn’t do it just for those thirty pieces of silver.

Judas is a Pharisee, an educated rich man who harbors a certain amount of disdain for the rest of the Apostles, rubes, in Judas’s estimation, and they’re distrustful of Judas, not because they know he will betray the Master but because, well, he’s different from them. Jesus has a respect for Judas, seeing him as less provincial than the others. Jesus seems to know what Judas is intending. It's as if Jesus knows Judas’s mind better than Judas knows it himself.

And what about those high priests, the men who orchestrate Jesus’s death? Think there's no more to them than there is to Judas? Unmitigated, unadulterated evil? Think again, the authors say.

How those priests see it, the Romans don't have any patience for messiahs and so neither do the Jewish leaders. The leaders abet the Romans even as they manipulate them. The high priests are historical villains, with what they do to Jesus, but look at what the priests are faced with:

What messiahs did, and there was no shortage of them at that time and place, is stir up the people, get them into trouble with the Romans. The priests are realists. There’s no fighting Rome. Once the Romans conquer a place, it stays conquered. Or gets obliterated, losers’ choice. While zealots like Judas and Barabbas are looking for a militant King of the Jews, the Jewish authorities are just trying to keep their people together, a not ignoble purpose and with so many messiahs around, how are the Pharisees to know Jesus is the real deal?

Two thirds of the way through, the book picks up steam, beginning with the Last Supper and on through the trial and all the rest of it. We see Judas and those others trying to tilt things their own way, to manifest an outcome different from what was apparently inevitable. Judas has his own agenda and cards to play and does he play them poorly or does he just not have the right cards? Or doesn’t it matter, what Judas or any of the others do, given the inevitability of it all?

The ultimate denouement, Jesus rising from the dead, is anticlimactic and not so well done, just another miracle, the greatest miracle, done in mediocre style.

What the authors are really good at is villains and there’s one more bad guy who needs to be mentioned. There’s more to this man too. He's riveting in his nefariousness. I'm talking about Pontius Pilate, who, no surprise, turns out to be a more complicated man than we thought and who was married to a woman who was destined to become, in some Christian churches, a venerated saint.