Rating: 5/5

The Jailing of Cecelia Capture is a very unique portrayal of the effects of trauma and hardship on a native woman. If you don’t know much about Native American’s history of discrimination, this is a perfect foundation for starting to learn. And even if you do, it’s an essential book to add to one’s knowledge. We start with Cecelia, being brought into jail for a potential DUI charge, only to find that it may not be the only reason she’s there. As we progress, the book reflects on her life and her experiences leading up to where she is now. We reflect on Cecelia’s past detailing poverty, abuse, alcoholism, family ties, ethnicity, toxic masculinity, suicide, and identity. It’s important to have a good balance of self-care and caring for others, and we see that Cecelia tends to put this on the backburner throughout most of her life. We base so much of our lives off of human interaction, and from a very young age we see Cecelia being shamed by her parents not only for her love life, her body, and her personality, but her own ethnicity. If our own ethnicity is challenged, then where does one’s soul lay? In literal terms, the ‘jailing’ referred to in the title is expressed through the incarceration, but it could also mean that she is a prisoner in her own body. This book is not only metaphorical, as the title suggests (the ‘capturing’ or ‘jailing’ of Cecelia) but it is also strikingly truthful. Us as readers play the waiting game, just as our main focus, Cecelia. We know just as much as she does, and it almost feels as if we are in the jail cell with her, anxiously waiting for answers. In the beginning we immediately have so many questions, and as time goes on we slowly learn more and more, which makes the book absolutely impossible to put down. The clever use of flashbacks whilst present-day spans over the course of just a few days, we get a true glimpse of the manifestation of thoughts happening whilst waiting in a jail cell, mixed with the thoughts and reflections that can push one over the edge.