Rating: 3/5

I am no literary critic. I will merely try and express what I experienced while reading this book. 

I am glad I read it, but I admire the author's opus more than I enjoyed it. Honestly, it was often a struggle. 

It has a very slow start. The book's narrator, after a third of the way through, states that only now will the story begin. All that before had just been an introduction to the characters! That "introduction" doesn't read as a normal introduction; you are thrown into events that you scarcely comprehend. Often I was confused, and so also upset, but always I did eventually come to understand what was happening. There are lots of characters. Actually, the number is not the main problem. The confusion is caused by the immense amount of details thrown at you. When I begin a book, I have no idea where the book is leading so I try and remember e-v-e-r-y-t-h-i-n-g. I was swamped. From all these details the author does periodically summarize and clarify so you do understand. These details do serve a purpose; they very accurately depict life in Paris in the early 1840s. 

The book was first published in serial format in Le Constitutionanel. Balzac wrote it to compete against another popular feuilleton author, Eugène Sue, of a socialist bent. Balzac supported the House of Bourbon and venerated Napoléon Bonaparte as a champion of absolutist power. Balzac’s aim was to realistically describe life after Napoléon’s fall. Given that it was published as a feuilleton, he was writing for people of his day. References are made to individuals and events that were the talk of the town. So they understood what he was referring to much better than we do! Much is left unexplained. In addition, the popularity and success of the writing depended upon keeping readers engaged. Melodrama, excitement, titillating scenes and moralistic elements pepper the writing. This very much affects the writing style. I think he magnificently depicts the different social classes vying against each other in Paris, but as with other books written in serial format something quick and exciting must happen in each episode. Do you see why I admire the writing, but don't really love it? 

Then there are the characters. Some critics say his figures are complex. I didn’t see them that way. The reader easily spots different character types: 
Bette - think of one seeking revenge. She is the cousin of Adeline. 
Valérie Marneffe - the beautiful, seductive, greedy mistress of four. And she is married!
Baron Hector Hulot - consumed by sex. Let’s just call him the dirty old man. 
Baroness Adeline Hulot - Hector’s saintly wife.
Célestin Crevel - the wealthy, retired tradesman and rival of Hulot. Here and elsewhere Balzac shows the importance of wealth.
Wenceslas Steinbock - the artist. Here Balzac has a chance to spell out what it takes to succeed in art – hard work! You can reflect on Balzac’s own efforts. He wrote this novel in two months! His health suffered. 

There are several more figures in the families:
Hortense Hulot - daughter of the Hulots married to Wenceslas
Victorin Hulot - the Hulots' son married to Celestine.
Celestine - Crevel's daughter married to Victorin
Maréchal Hulot - Hector Hulot's honorable brother
Johann Fischer  – an uncle of the Hulot family, someone handy to send to Algiers to embezzle funds

And mistresses and lovers:
Josépha Mirah - singer, Jewish, abandoned child
Baron Henri Montès de Montéjanos - another Baron, another lover, but Brazilian this time
Agathe - kitchenmaid, mistress and........

I am listing the characters for two reasons. To help those planning on reading the book and to illustrate the caricature each represents. I prefer more complicated, complex characters. I don’t see them that way. There is a strong moral message conveyed. 

Yet, Balzac did have a great idea in writing his Comédie humaine, a multi-volume collection of interlinked novels sharing many of the same characters. He completed over 90 novels and had begun over 40 more. You hit upon characters that have turned up in other novels. You remember other things they have done and said. This added depth for me. In Père Goriot I met the criminal in-hiding, Vautrin. Here he is in the police force, and we meet more of his family! Doctor Bianchon was one of the diners at the lodging house Mason Vauque. We meet him here too. I liked this very much. You don’t have to read the books in a particular order, but the more you read and the more you know, the fuller the story becomes. As in real life, as with real people, the more you learn about each, the more interesting they become. You become curious for more. 

The audiobook I listened to was narrated by Johanna Ward / Kate Reading. She knows how to pronounce French correctly. That is important. For me she spoke too quickly. She dramatizes, but she does this well. Me, I would give the narration four stars.

So the book IS worth reading, but it is difficult. You have to pay close attention. It is by no means an easy read. For me it was a bit too didactic, a bit to melodramatic, its characters a bit too simplified. The next I will read from the Comédie humaine will be Eugénie Grandet. My curiosity has been piqued and I do want more, but I need a breather first.