Rating: 5/5

When I finished my undergraduate degree, I was reading the local newspaper in bed and there was an ad asking for people to volunteer to tutor people in adult literacy. I felt so lucky in having done my degree. No one else in my family had been to university and I deeply felt the need to ‘pay forward’, as they say. So, I became a volunteer and quickly felt completely out of my depth. I found out that there was a graduate certificate course being offered in adult literacy and basic education. It became my first post-graduate qualification. And god, I loved it. My students were a joy and learnt far quicker than I expected. I tried to share with them my love of reading and to show them the world that opens up from inside a book. During my course in learning how to teach people to read, we were given this author’s article What No Bedtime Story Means. It was a revelation to me. Over the years, I’ve told endless people about it and how deeply it affected me. But, for some reason, I never thought to see if she’d ever written anything else. I wish I’d read this at the time or even a while later – but I’ve only come to it now almost by mistake. Really, you don’t think you need to read this book, but you really do. It is a remarkable piece of research and the author has a real way with her material that you find yourself racing along with her.

This is the story of three separate communities. One black, one white and working class, and another white and middle class. It is the story of their remarkably distinct relationships with literacy and language more generally. And the author applies ethnography in ways that take your breath away. The things she notices about their use of language and the likely impact these will have on their future academic success are masterful.

The black community doesn’t use books or other printed material nearly as much as the other communities. And this is as true of the adults as it is for their children. As such, there are few role models for these children to encourage them to be readers. What is stunningly interesting is that the children learn to speak by actively listening to adults speaking around them. This is obviously true of all children, but in this case the adults are less likely to have conversations directly with their children. A lot of the speaking events that are most prized in the community involve exaggerations and low-level insults. That is, it is hard to know the literal truth of much that is being said. The point of conversation is often as much to entertain as it is to provide information. The insults are often intended to be humorous, rather than degrading. There are lines that are not to be crossed, but these are not always immediately obvious. And they are likely to be significantly different depending on your relationship with the person you are speaking to. In theory, at least, these children are highly practiced in creative thinking and playing with language, but because they do not have the literacy skills prized at school, these talents rarely are brought to the fore. And what make it worse is that their methods of telling stories are also not those valued by the schools. This can mean that their teachers are unable to even follow these as stories. With that said, a large part of the end of the book is dedicated to teachers who try to do exactly this. The author teaches them ethnographic techniques to help them understand their students and their community language standards. This is not merely to better understand these students, but also to find ways to engage them with a richer variety of language experiences, but as the author repeatedly says, if teaching children language is done so as to separate them from their communities, then children are more likely to reject the teacher than their family and friends.

The working class white children look as if they are doing the right things. Their parents tend to buy them books that help them learn their letters and to read simple words in alphabet books before they begin school. But the parents belong to evangelical Protestant groups and so other than Bible stories, the children are exposed to very little else. Their parents also have a very low opinion of ‘stories’ more generally. They see ‘telling stories’ as effectively lying. This means their children get no experience in being creative prior to school and have a strange and messy relationship with some of the books that they are exposed to at school. So much so that they end up living a kind of double life – with the expectations of school and of home being decidedly different. When people interact, they are most likely to tell stories about themselves that has a kind of moral to them. That is, they will say something that happened to them in life, generally something far less than flattering, and then possibly link this to a story from the Bible. This near obsession with what you saying being ‘true’ makes some of the things asked of the children at school culturally difficult for the children.

The middle class white children are immersed in literacy throughout their lives. They are read to, their parents write notes to each other, they engage with texts by asking their children questions about the story and events that occur within them, they are encouraged to be creative – all things that are highly rewarded by their schools as well. Their children are also encouraged, in real life, to notice things in much the say ways that they are expected to notice things in the books that are read to them. Their parents speak to them and make reading books an important joint time between parent and child. It could hardly be surprising that these children will successful at school.

The mistake here would be to assume that only the middle class parents actually care about school. All three communities are very keen for their children to do well – but only one community has life habits that match those of the school. As Bernstein says, for some children school is a direct continuation of their home life, for others it is a direct break and not always one that either makes sense to the children. Worse still, the children quickly see that the world that schooling is leading them towards is often away from the world they were born into. And again, it is made clear to them that the world schooling might lead them towards is unlikely to welcome them with open arms. Because so few teachers know anything at all about the other life worlds of the children they teach, it is much more likely for these teachers to simply believe that these children are incapable of learning.

The research took over a decade to complete. As the author says at the beginning of the book, it was only due to a strange intersection of unlikely events that it came about in the first place. But it would be very hard to come away from this book and not think that this kind of ethnographic research ought to be a priority for schools everywhere – particularly schools that are dealing with diverse student cohorts. There is a particularly lovely part of this book where the least able students are given hard back books to bring home and the pride that this instils in them is something else. In another example she uses, students in a low-achievement grade are given an assignment to effectively become ethnographer of their own communities. This is something the students take to with gusto. We forget the power of giving students things to do that are meaningful to them. The students were not ‘left to their own devices’ in these projects, but rather guided along every step of the way – but it was clear that it was their own work and, because the assignment was innately meaningful to the students, they approached it with determination and enthusiasm. 

This is such a lovely book and, as I’ve already said, shows the power of using ethnography in changing how we see and understand communities – not least in how particular attributes of communities engagement with language might set them up to fail at school. We live in a world today where such considerations are moving further and further away from being considered important in teaching and learning. In a world of standardised tests and explicit instruction, the assumption is that all children respond to identical strategies and high impact pedagogies. But again, quoting Bernstein, if over a hundred years of educational research has shown us anything at all, it is that children learn best when their teachers have discovered what and how they currently understand their world, and then to use that knowledge to help to teach them. This ought to be obvious – unfortunately, if education teaches us anything at all, it is that what is obvious is rarely what people end up seeing or promoting – particularly not for ‘other people’s children’.