Rating: 5/5

Edit 4/10/2014: In my first review of this book in 2011, I noted that they left out the epilogue that appears in the The High Queen. However, upon reading this book (again) this year (love it so much!), I realized that what they did with the epilogue that seemed to be missing was they turned it into a prologue when they put The Child Queen and The High Queen together into this set. So, I was wrong that it wasn't included at all (I must have somehow skipped the prologue the first time I read this as a set??), it's just that in the The High Queen it is an epilogue rather than a prologue as it is in Queen of Camelot. Honestly, I am not sure why they did this because I don't WANT to know the outcome before reading this book, so I would recommend skipping the prologue of Queen of Camelot and instead reading it as an epilogue once you have finished the book, as was originally intended when the books were first published. Also, note that I have put it up to five stars since the information wasn't missing, it was just in a different area.

-------------------
Below is my original review:

I have essentially already reviewed this book in my reviews for "The Child Queen: The Tale of Guinevere and King Arthur" and "High Queen," giving them both five stars. They are two of my favorite books from childhood.

However, I felt compelled after reading this compilation to note that they left the epilogue that appears in the original printed version of "High Queen" out of this compilation.

As I finished the Kindle version of "Queen of Camelot," something nagged at me. I could have sworn I remembered more to the story. Indeed, I checked my beloved printed copy of "High Queen," and there was a dozen-page epilogue that they left out. I have no idea why they would do this, because it rounds out the story and closes several loops. I bought the printed version of this compilation and it arrived today and the epilogue is also missing from the printed version.

Thus, I had to give this version of the book only four stars because, I'm sorry, the ending is nothing without the epilogue, which they thoughtlessly left out. If you can, find a copy of the original version of "High Queen" in order to read the epilogue.