Rating: 3/5

"Hello, everyone. Welcome to chaos." -Emily Brontë upon publishing this book, probably

Inside me, there are two wolves. (I am saying there are two wolves in order to reference the meme, but what would be more accurate is to say that inside of me there are two boring and nonviolent creatures. Like a pigeon. Or an accountant.)

One wolf, or whatever, has such a constant and undying need to share its opinion that it is currently ranked #1 on Goodreads for most annoying best reviewer. (Don't check if that's still true. I doubt it'll stick and it'll be awkward for all of us if it isn't.)

The other wolf (slash what have you) thinks every other wolf (or entity of your choosing) has a better grasp of every concept on earth than it does, and that it should shut up for one second and let the other wolves talk, like seriously, Jesus Christ, be quiet already, oh my god.

The latter wolf wants to let you know that there is a very interesting conversation on the topic of this book, its categorization as a love story, and its history in the comments of this review, and you should scroll down to read that instead.

But the first wolf is going to keep talking up here anyway.

Here is a list of facts about this book:
- it was published in 1848
- its author had a grand total of about 1 year of formal education
- it was said author's debut and written while she was in her 20s
- it contains barbaric characters, total disregard for etiquette, necrophilia (or intent to commit), the devil embodied in a man (who is also the main love interest), The Royal Tenenbaums-style incest, premarital friskiness by 19th century standards, violence, emotional abuse, cruelty, and enough gaslighting to maybe make TikTokers consider for one second how often they use that word.

Kind of surprising, no?

In spite of the fact that I was told one hundred thousand million times that this is not a love story, I was told TWO hundred thousand million times that it was. And honestly I went in expecting something like Agnes Grey: it's not a satisfying romance, but there's something there.

I was not prepared for this.

This is a very intense and stunning and beautifully written novel, and if I ever reread it I think I will like it more then.

But no matter how hard I tried on this first read, my brain will always lump the Brontë sisters and Jane Austen together.

And this wasn't even Jane Eyre-level. It would have given Austen war flashback style nightmares.

Bottom line: We'll get em next time!

-------------
pre-review

well. that wasn't what i thought it would be.

review to come / 3 or 3.5 stars

-------------
currently-reading updates

readathons are all about binge-reading books you haven't been able to make yourself pick up ever until you're in a reading slump. 

this is my first time doing one but i'm pretty sure.

clear your shit prompt one: a book in which somebody dies (just guessing but seems like it)
follow my progress here

-------------
tbr review

confession time: i have now amassed 3 copies of this book, in the hope that one of them will suddenly inspire me to read it