Rating: 2/5

UPDATE: After completely the series, I discovered that I enjoyed the stories after BEATRICE. Perhaps I wasn’t in the right frame of mind when I listened to this book (or it simply wasn’t my favorite). Nevertheless, I plan on re-listening to the last story (the series conclusion) and can see myself revisiting the entire series at some point. Although this series is filled with antics and ridiculous behavior, sometimes that’s okay and can lighten the day. 

ORIGINAL POST:
MY RATING GUIDE: Not 3 Stars for me.

1= dnf/What was that?; 2= NOPE; NOT FOR ME; 3= This was fun/okay; 3.5= I enjoyed it; 4= I liked it a lot; 5= I Loved it, it was great! (I seldom give 5 Stars).

England (early 1800’s) ~ 
Miss Hannah Pym, at 45, is the former housekeeper of a wealthy but reclusive man in Kenningston. When her employer dies, Hannah is bequeathed with a generous gift of 5000 pounds in appreciation for her 33yrs of service. Considering her sudden financial gain, Hannah decides to indulge a little. For a time, she will travel throughout England by stagecoach and experience life through the sights and the people she meets. 

Hannah is on her fourth stagecoach adventure in BEATRICE GOES TO BRIGHTON, (bk 4 of 6) Excited with her matchmaking success on her 3 previous journeys, Miss Pym has meddling again on her mind. But this trip presents different challenges than her earlier trips.

Comments ~ 
1) BEATRICE GOES TO BRIGHTON is bk4 in MC Beaton/Marion Chesney’s “The Traveling Matchmaker series.” BGTB could be read as a Standalone tile but a story arc runs throughout the series loosely connecting the books. (I actually preferred the first book over the titles that have followed). 
2) I purchased and listened to the audiobook of BGTB. Helen Lisanti’s performance was fine, actually quite good. I have no complaints there.
3) I simply thought BGTB was too silly most of the time. I didn’t find the characters all that likable (with the exception of one gentleman). After the first book, I was curious whether or not Miss Pym would be able to match herself to the gentleman she cares for. But I feel less invested in the end result after finishing BGTB. I have purchased 2 audiobooks in this series but am unlikely to buy any more. I only recommend this book/series to readers who are okay with busybody MCs and silliness. 

READER CAUTION ~ 
PROFANITY - Yes. Strong language is used on a few occasion. 
VIOLENCE - PG.
SEXUAL SITUATIONS - G/PG. No scenes of intimacy. Kisses, embraces, apparently “acceptable” nude bathing for the men (mentioned).