Rating: 2/5

TRIGGER WARNING: forced marriage, rape culture

My facebook reviews:

Apache Wind: Claims to actually be about an Apache this time, but his name is Cord MacIntosh.

Apache Wind is the worst thing I've ever read. If I ever meet the author, I'm going to kick her in the shin.

Depression: "This vital, dynamic man had turned sullen, and no one could draw any emotion from him. He merely existed--like a hollow shell abandoned by a turtle."

Sex: "His hard, penetrating thrust sent her spiraling through a universe of glittering rainbows and warm sunshine. It was such a satisfying paradox to be held in his arms and yet experience a unique sense of freedom to soar like a wild, free bird."

"Odd, Tempest thought as she was consumed by an incredible rapture."

So the hero was constantly referred to in the narrative as "this man"
or "this giant of a man." The heroine was called "high-strung" at least once a chapter for objecting to being kidnapped, married against her will, and essentially raped by this giant of a man. She's also repeatedly referred to as naive, which the author seems to think is a synonym for virgin. It got weird when she was called naive and a cynic in the same paragraph. Repeatedly.

The kidnapping was a somewhat understandable case of mistaken identity, but then came the forced marriage, which didn't really happen for any good reason. They were married by a friend of the hero's, who fully understood that the heroine was being kidnapped and raped, and had a good laugh about it. During the ceremony, she tried to say "I do not," but it came out as "I do--ouch!" because he pinched her. You'd think, being a "lady lawyer," that she would know that she wasn't legally bound to the kidnapper who signed her name for her on the marriage certificate, but hey, she was never shown to actually be any good at her job.

So the novel was basically coercive sex scenes that she always came around to because he was handsome, laughably overwrought metaphors, and him forcing her to confront her fear of heights by dangling her over the sides of mountains and then making fun of her for being high-strung. I admit it wasn't actually, literally the worst thing I've ever read, but it wasn't good.

Oh, and the heroine's name was Tempest Litchfield. The hero demonstrated his razor-sharp wit by constantly referring to her as "Miss Witchfield," emphasis not mine.

-Mercury