Rating: 4/5

That's it there needs to be a new genre - Dark Classics! Going so much against the grain of the times, this is the story of Tess Durbeyfield trying to live her life in 19th century England; eldest daughter to aspirational educated rural working class parents with their sights on their wealthier 'family' the D'Urberville's. With family tragedies, deaths, sexual harassment and assault(!), gender inequality, eschewed religious values and more, Tess maintains a pretty clear idea of her wants, needs and personal moral compass, balancing them against her struggling family's needs throughout this relentlessly well constructed true classic, a dark Victorian 'romantic' saga with the masks of civility completely ripped off; as this is read, it leaves little to the imagination of how the power of male dominance is used and abused in the day. It's no surprise that this was censored and Hardy castigated. I can see why the so-called religious majority got so up in arms about this ground breaking work.

Many critics see this as a look at the corruption of the rural communities by industrialisation, a few more say that it is a look at the corruption of the innocent and pure (rural) working class by the privileged urban dwellers - but me, maybe because of my 21st century lens would say that this is not only an epic depiction of the flawed gender in-equal (Victorian) society, but also a swipe at the dominant wave of (popular) romanticism of male-female unions of the day. In a thousand years I hope this is still deemed a classic as many others fall by the wayside. An astounding book, in that with the limitations of the world he knew and lived, Hardy managed to tell this story and so well convey Tess' true heroic nature and that her true enemy was Victorian society and its so-called values.

I make no apologies for reading up on this book after completion to ensure that nothing was lost on me, as, like a lot of writing of the day it is overwritten and has maybe too many detailed descriptions of farming life - but it's worth reading through and through. A gem of a read. 8 out of 12 Four Star read.

2022 and 2010 read