Rating: 4/5

I read this book while vacationing in Italy. I was visiting with two friends and we were at the end of the second week of a three week holiday. We were renting a villa in Tuscany and tempers had risen a little high while driving around - somehow the one who didn't want to drive or navigate KNEW the way to go. Needless to say some escapism was what I needed. I perused the bookshelf of the rented villa and was very pleased to see a Ludlum in their oeuvre. I escaped to the terrace with a glass of wine and settled in for a good read. 

This is a mostly riveting thriller, especially considering it was only his second book. The story takes us to a weekend of friends that was orchestrated by John after John is contacted by a CIA agent and convinced that one or more of his friends are actually engaged in a conspiracy that threatens national security; are in fact Soviet agents. John is coerced into arranging this "vacation" weekend with his friends when it is actually an opportunity for him to spy on these people he thought he knew. We are left constantly guessing if the CIA agent is right, if one of John's dear friends are indeed agents, or if this is some sort of double blind with the CIA agent really being the one who poses the danger. The twists and turns the story takes never seem contrived and leave you sincerely wondering what is coming next. It takes you through paranoia, fear, anger, incredulity and loss... loss of trust, loss of friendship and definite loss of well being in some cases. 

This book did start off slow but it was well worth the slog through the first part. Once all the parties have arrived the action really takes off. I love a good spy thriller and usually prefer those books of Ludlum's but this every man story was very good. Ludlum really took the time to let us get to know the characters and in doing that we were more invested in the outcome. 

I can't say that in reading this book I didn't visualize my travel companions as spies I needed to take down but what it left me with was a better appreciation of how easy it was to lose a good friend. 

The afternoon and evening with this book on the terrace was just the escape I needed and I am happy to say that I didn't bug my friends rooms, hold them at gunpoint until they surrendered the maps of Italy or poison their wine. 

All in all a very satisfying read.