Rating: 4/5

Addictive, compulsively readable, often savagely funny, Olivia Manning’s trilogy turns Rumania and Greece and the advent of World War Two into a stage for a vast array of characters from displaced European royalty, to members of the British ex-pat community, to Rumanian antifascists. They are described with such meticulous photographic detail and I sat through so many meals listening to them pontificating, joking, gossiping, arguing that I was convinced I really had met them before, perhaps at the English Bar in Bucharest’s Athénée Palace hotel. And I was fully persuaded that I might see them again tonight or run into them in town. 

All of these people are flawed, empty in some way, yet I found myself growing fond of them; and as the darkness gathered and the Nazis massed on the borders my exasperated affection turned to dismay and a reluctant, futile sense of responsibility for these often useless idiots. 
 
The book opens on the Orient Express as Guy Pringle and his bride, Harriet, head for Bucharest. They have been married barely a week and have known each other for hardly more than a fortnight; this wartime marriage of strangers is the central mystery of the novels: “She could only wonder at the complexity of the apparently simple creature she had married.” Guy, a leftist, is interested in ideas, intensely sociable, generous to a fault; he collects new people with an avid yet somehow impersonal hunger. His Marxism is the substitute for a deep religious urge and, perhaps impelled by his beliefs, Guy becomes a one-man safety net for his many hangers-on in Bucharest.
 
Harriet is the watcher who sees everything with clarity and a deep vein of cynical distrust. Intensely interested in private lives she longs for an exclusive love, a singular devotion that Guy can never give her. She is her husband’s opposite and even by the trilogy’s end we don’t know whether their marriage will become a partnership or fracture along fault-lines that are clearly marked. “Watching him urging the performers with the force of his personality, Harriet wondered: 'How did I come to marry someone so different from myself?' But she had married him; and perhaps, unawares, it was his differences she had married.” 
 
Harriet is our guide for much of the trilogy and we rarely enter Guy’s mind, but there is one more character who serves as part-time narrator—Mannings’ most inspired creation, Prince Yakimov. When we first spot Yakimov he is draped in a moth-eaten sable-lined coat, a gift to his father from the Czar. Yaki is also possessed of a crocodile case, a British passport, and a receipt for an Hispano-Suiza, his beloved automobile impounded at the border in lieu of cash for his unpaid bills. For “Poor old Yaki” is as usual “a bit short of the ready”. Yaki is often down but never out and through his eyes we see Bucharest’s seamier side, as well as the faded grandeur of Europe’s displaced nobility who crowd the posh restaurants and cling desperately to their dwindling consequence. Yakimov drifts between the two worlds, longing not just for sustenance, but for the luxurious: the perfect asparagus of a particular kind, caviare blinis, rich with sour cream, piled layer upon layer.

Because at first food is everywhere in Bucharest—and food and hunger (physical and emotional) are central motifs that run through the trilogy. 
 
“The heart of the display was a rosy bouquet of roasts, chops, steaks and fillets frilled round with a froth of cauliflowers. Heaped extravagantly about the centre were aubergines as big as melons, baskets of artichokes, small coral carrots, mushrooms, mountain raspberries, apricots, peaches, apples and grapes.”

The characters in Manning's first novel go from one gigantic meal to the next, from one party to another, drifting between cafes...talking, talking endlessly. The food, the plenty all around them is taken for granted. “They had been served with a goose-liver pate, dark with truffles and dressed with clarified butter. Inchcape swallowed this down in chunks, talking through it as if it were a flavourless impediment to self-expression.”

But hunger is there: A nightclub singer, Florica, who “…had the usual gypsy thinness and was as dark as an Indian…[was] singing there among the plump women of the audience, she was like a starved wild kitten spitting at cream-fed cats.” Beggars are everywhere: “A man on the ground, attempting to bar their way, stretched out a naked leg bone-thin, on which the skin was mottled purple and rosetted with yellow scabs. As [Harriet] stepped over it, the leg slapped the ground in rage that she should escape it.” 
 
As winter, and eventually war, descend on Bucharest, and then on Athens, food vanishes even for those with some money left. Tame ducks in the parks, pet cats disappear—we clearly understand they wind up in pots. An obese British woman whose tented form once overflowed chairs is reduced to a skeleton draped with empty pouches of skin. 

By the time they reach Athens most of the ever-smaller band of British ex-pats are getting two-thirds of their meager calories from alcohol and they draw together to find comfort. Yakimov, once an irritant, has become somehow, very dear to them—and to us. Even the loathsome Ben Phipps gets his “comic coda” breaking down the door to an infamous Major’s cabin, a storehouse packed with tinned food and rolls of toilet paper that Ben redistributes, in grand Socialist style, to one and all. “Here you are, ladies,” he said as he gave three squares of paper to each. “One up, one down and a polisher.” “What about tomorrow?” Miss Jay asked. “Tomorrow may never come,” he cheerfully replied.

I have reviewed The Balkan Trilogy as a single novel because that’s the way I read it. Despite its thousand pages, I was hard-pressed to put it down. If you read it be sure to get the three-volume edition because if it hooks you, you will not want to stop reading. In fact, even though my TBR plate is as full as a pre-war Bucharest banquet, I’m starting Olivia Mannings’ The Levant Trilogy RIGHT NOW because, as with any good soap opera, I can’t wait for the next installment.

Content rating: PG for wartime themes, scenes of poverty and destitution. There is no sex, not even a chaste kiss, and only occasional slang and jokes on scatological and sexual subjects--all fairly obscure. There is an intimation of possible infidelity, but nothing happens!