Rating: 4/5

Four and a half stars. I borrowed this from my sister in law and am going to have to buy her a new copy, I've thumbed it so well these past two months. I took a college writing course my senior year of high school and the concluding project was a 25 page term paper. I chose the topic of how divorce affected children. My parents had divorced some years previously and at that time I knew very few people who were divorced. I had to dig much harder than I thought I would to find enough source materials for the paper. I knew from personal experience how divorce could affect children and I got an A on the paper but tracking down data to support my experiences was rather challenging. 

Well, the times have changed and I doubt there's a kid out there unfamiliar with divorce these days. Whether you are divorced, thinking about divorce, a child of divorce or an educator or social worker or a part of the court system I highly recommend reading this book. First published in 2000 it is not a new work but it's premise was what caught my eye - a 25 year study that followed up not only on the children of divorce but their peers, from their neighborhoods, whose parents did not divorce, whether they were happily married or not. What differences would they find between these peer groups from the same basic socio economic background over the course of 25 years? Some were rather predictable but some not so much.

One of my most valuable take aways was that she points out that there is a third party in many divorces, the children, and that as a society, outside of setting up visitation and some child support, not one has really considered the needs of the children over time. That as a society we have bought into the myth that if the parents are happier following divorce then that happiness will simply trickle down to the children. But it doesn't. Not to spread blame and guilt, I imagine sometimes it does work out this way but once the divorce is final the kids are expected to just be happy with what they get, whether or not it meets their needs and wishes several years down the road as they change and mature. Or don't. Many of the outcomes I could have predicted but some took me by surprise, such as the data indicating that children of divorce or less vested in supporting their aging parents. Apparently having failed to support their children this is a sort of turn about is fair play, what goes around comes around type behavior. This has huge implications for the future with an aging population. And there's lots of food for thought in this book. And we'd better start thinking and chewing it over because 15 years down the road from the publication of this book I don't see any improvements on the horizon.