Rating: 4/5

Actual review: 4.5

  “We can’t alter the world, we can only adapt ourselves to it.”

I have quite a soft spot for the Poldarks and their extended family. The characters, the storylines and the drama is subtly interwoven in such a way that keeps me invested. Although not as good as the previous book, I was glad to see the characters move forward from the mess that had previously occurred. 

I did miss a few characters in this installment, and I was pleasantly surprised by how much I liked the additional characters introduced to us. I am not yet that invested in their stories, but the way it’s going, I’m sure that I will want them to be as happy as possible, too.

I must also tip my (imaginary) hat to Mr. Winston Graham, for his understanding of the female species, the complexity of relationships, and the ridiculous expectations about marriage. Demelza said it best:

  “You see, Ross, in every right marriage, in every good marriage a woman has to be three things, don't she? She's got to be a wife and look after a man's comforts in the way a man should be looked after. Then she's got to bear his children and get all swelled up like a summer pumpkin and then often-times feed them after and smell of babies and have them crawling all about her... But then, third, she has also to try and be his mistress at the same time; someone he is still interested in; someone he wants, not just the person who happens to be there and convenient; someone a bit mysterious... Someone whose knee or -- or shoulder he wouldn't instantly recognize if he saw it beside him in bed. It's -- it's impossible.”

This series is just such a pleasure to read. The philosophies and discussions, especially, are those I find fascinating.

  "Underneath the religious vision there is the harsh fundamental reality of all our lives, because we know we must live and die as the animals we are. But sometimes I suspect that under that harsh reality there is a further vision, still deeper based, that comes nearer to true reality than the reality we know.”

I look forward to the next book. There is such warmth in the writing, and I really enjoy that. 

I’m also glad our favourite couple is working through what happened in Warleggan.