Rating: 2/5

The Question of Separatism: Quebec and the Struggle over Sovereignty, by the legendary Jane Jacobs, is a bit of an odd cookie. Jacobs takes to writing about the Quebec Sovereignty movement that was gaining momentum in the 1980's, only a decade after becoming a Canadian herself. This allows her to offer a fresh perspective on the issue, one from a neutral stance, and with an undoubtedly solid background in political and economic issues, which Jacobs possesses in spades as a legendary urban planner and political activist.

However, this book offers very little argument that is refreshing or even feels overtly knowledgeable. The first chapter of the book discusses the linkages between Quebec and Canada, and backgrounds the political movements toward independence in Quebec, and its backlash in Ontario. She then spends almost half of the book discussing the succession of Norway from Sweden, which Jacobs uses as a guide for Canada. But why? She mentions herself that Quebec is far more populated than Norway, that it would have economic clout at a similar level and so on. But it seems this is the model she has chosen. The Quebec-Canada separation issue is much different, namely because of Canada's southern neighbour, the US. That would be like Norway separating from Sweden, with a massive Swedish speaking country next door to Sweden, lets call it Super 
Sweden. The geostrategic outlook for Canada would be poor, even without any annexationist movement in the US. The economic outlook for Canada would be bleak at best.

Jacobs then moves back to Quebec finally, after giving us an interesting look at the Norwegian separation, albeit without any real context to Quebec. She looks at the two competing camps at the time (1980's). René Lévesque's Parti Quebecois and their separatist movement and Chris Ryan's Liberal Party. The Parti Quebecois were firmly separatist, although they advocated for a close monetary union with Canada, as well as joint passports, free trade and close military association, up to joint forces and a maintenance of current military associations (ie. NATO, the UN etc.). Ryan on the other hand, was all for a reintroduction of Quebec's federal association in Quebec. He was a federalist, but wanted a whole new deal for Quebec. Terms such as Sovereignty Association were thrown around by Lévesque, and reformed association by Ryan (both were ill-defined). This was an interesting chapter about Quebec and its sovereignty movement in the 1980's, which is often supplanted by the much closer 1995 referendum in Canadian literature. 

A comparison between Montreal and Toronto is offered as well. With Jacobs decrying that Montreal will never achieve any degree of greatness if it is not the cultural centre of an independent Quebec. This has not proven historically accurate, as Montreal has developed into a cultural and economic centre regardless of its association with Canada, and to this day maintains a pro-federalist majority. Even so, her analysis of the issues with Canadian urban linkages and its economic reliance on raw resources is interesting and poignant, and still relevant today as Canada struggles with oil shocks and a credit slump. Toronto maintains its position as the dominant city in Canada, although Vancouver has emerged as a centre for Asian investments and a possible location as a major port of call for Canada. Trade linkages between provinces remain weak, as Jacobs notes in 1980, and perennial schemes to correct this issue are brought up and often fail due to provincial/federal political machinations. 

The next chapter was also interesting, touching on a Quebec post referendum in the 1980's. Jacobs was firmly against Lévesque's monetary union proposals due to the failure of Breton Woods which was still fresh in many people's minds in the 1980's. The pre-cursor to the European Monetary Union at the time is also held up as a poor example as well, with Jacobs saying a proposed monetary union would be a poor idea due to the influence one nation could have on the others in the Union, with inflation effecting others, as well as the CPI and so on. These issues are used in allusion to economic issues that would probably follow a proposed monetary union between Canada and an independent Quebec, and indeed Europe seems to be suffering from something similar with the Euro. 

All in all, Jacobs The Question of Separatism is a mixed bag. It is a historically interesting perspective, and offers some interesting points on monetary union and common currency issues, but has little meat when it comes to the sovereignty question. Jacobs is blatantly pro-separatist, arguing that other separations in the past (like Norway and Sweden) were successful, why not Quebec? She also states that smaller things are often less complicated than larger things, which is an argument I found so simplistic it shook my respect for her past works to a large degree. There are much more in depth accounts of the separatist movement in Canada, and much better manifestos both pro and anti-separation. Jacobs treatise is an interesting read, but offers little to the movement, little against the movement, and just little in general. Small isn't always better, Jacobs. Not a recommended read.