Rating: 3/5

Welcome to my summer camp review thing. This time we're finally back to horror with Shadow Zone. This is a series started in 1994 that lasted for a bit, and is by JR Black. Barely any info on him exists and it's rumored to be an MT Coffin thing but I can't find proof either way. This series somehow got two TV movies, one of which I reviewed. It was eh but that was the movie. I will do the other movie but before that I wanted to possibly read one of the books that didn't become a movie to judge one of these totally on their own.

And I got my chance via the randomizer. Anyway, this was fairly good, but with some caveats. Gina is being sent to Camp Slumbering Pines, even though she doesn't want to go to some gross run down camp, along with her brother Frankie. She doesn't get along with her bunkmates at first and things get worse when she bumps into Big foot. Or rather, a Big Foot as again we have a whole race of them and it turns out they generally aren't too bad they mainly want her to stop the owner of this camp from tearing up their land.

Being 11, that may be hard but she'll have to try, or else. Yep, another Big Foot camp book, weird but I don't mind. So off the bat I'll say the main problem is with Gina, spefically her "voice". They try to have more of snarky tone here which doesn't quite work. She comes across as rather judgemental twoards others, and is rather whiny early on. It's not Camp Massacre bad, nothing is, but she can have moments that take me out of it.

Now, this is kind of the point, as she does get development. She has a nice thing with her brother, always like seeing that and she does eventually get along with the others in a decently natural way. I liked that, it did help. I just wish her snark was toned down and her liking this nerdy came in earlier than it did. Some of the snark works, like towards the camp owner guy, but some is kinda tryhard.

It will likely be a hurdle for some wanting to read this, as I know some have a lower tolerance with this kinda thing. That said, everything else is good. Pacing is solid, it gets started early on and doesn't have much filler. It keeps moving at a solid clip. The story is well done with there being some solid setup and payoff, as little seemingly pointless details come back. Again, there is some nice stuff here as well, even if could have been better.

The bigfoot stuff is interesting. This becomes an environmental story, as the camp owner, a typical greedy capitalist, wants to expand the camp and do it over the land the Big Foot are on. If this sounds like a colonialism commentary, that's cuz it is and they tell us the Big Foot long ago knew some Native Americans that were killed by "other humans". Yep, speaking of Camp Massacre, we get this again.

This keeps popping up, yeesh. It's a small moment here that I feel only exists so that the Big Foot aren't too awkward of a stand in, as otherwise you could poke more holes in that. It's interesting, I can't say how that fares but on its own I like the Big Foot, they are fed up with how humans are and threaten to really get riled up is Gina doesn't do something. The owner guy is a typical villain of his type but still fun/ It's cheesy but as far as this stuff goes, it works.

There isn't a ton of "horror" per say but the thread of what could happen if she doesn't help works fine. Also, the titular Zone isn't a metaphor, it's a real thing and it's weird and confusing. I know seemingly most of these do that and it does feel pointless and confusing, but it's kinda neat how it is used at the end.

The twist is whatever but we get a better wrapup than usual. As a whole, it is flawed to start out, but when you get past that, it is good. It's well paced, has some nice bits, and is a unique take on a Big Foot thing, as cheesy as it could kinda be. It's fairly solid, if my flaw was cleaned up I would rank this higher possibly. As it is, this worked well enough, despite some annoyances. 

We'll see how Teacher Ate My Homework pans out but this does make the series look alright, a bit treyhard in the writing but decent stoeywise. Oh and there's a couple vocab words, had to fit that in there. Camp setting is sued decently well BTW, works on that level. Honestly, it's kind of a better version of Camp Cold Lake, as this has a kinda whiny girl failing to get along with others, a brother who is cooler and finds it easier to make friends, and one of those other girls has asthma. 

Weird lol.

Anyway, that's it for this one. Next time, the wheel has picked a spooky mystery type thing, should hopefully be fun. See ya then.