Rating: 3/5

This book picks up where the last one left off but switches the point-of-view to Lord Bradford's brother Peter. Peter is about to do a very bad deed that will land him in Newgate prison if he's caught. He's desperate for money for passage to India so he can make his fortune and marry the woman he loves. He's not sure about that last one because he's on the run from some men who will likely throw him in prison if he's caught. He can't ask his beloved Mary to be on the run with him. Mary has other ideas. When she comes across Peter in the Earl of Wickenshire's barn, she is thrilled her beloved has returned. She's determined to follow him wherever he goes no matter what. She cares nothing for her reputation, only Peter. The pair head on the road to London with a kidnapped Lord Nightingale in tow! When the vicar discovers his eldest missing, he enlists the aid of the Earl of Wickenshire to bring her back. Along the way they hope to discover the whereabouts of Lord Nightingale as well. Meanwhile, Edward and Peter's father shows up determined to stop his heir from marrying a nobody. Serendipity is ready to throw him out but the Dowager Countess sees hints that the Duke is not as black as he's been painted. If they can keep him there, the ladies (and animals) can try to melt his icy exterior. 

I speed read through the first half of the novel, eager to solve the mystery of the missing Peter. I wasn't too thrilled with the way the plot went. Nothing happens for most of the first half until the middle. Then we finally get some answers and things are tidied up. I was left wondering what next? The second half deals a lot more with inner demons and what has made the irascible Duke so hard. There's also the mystery of who wanted Lord Nightingale and why. Nothing much happens in the second half either until the end. There are still some loose plot threads so I have to read the Christmas book to find out if they're resolved. I found the solution to all the problems a little too neat and tidy. There's also echoes of Jane Eyre which I found a little too convenient. 

I really didn't care too much for the new characters. I wanted more Bradford and Eugenia! Peter isn't as appealing as his brother. He's prone to melodrama and makes a lot of stupid decisions. He tries to be noble and I found him rather trying. Mary is exactly as Neil said. She's no better than she should be. She's just too modern for a story set in the Regency era. She doesn't care about her reputation at all and is ready to throw it all away. A lady's reputation meant everything and she never once thought about how her elopement would affect her sisters. She was selfish and annoying. 

All the previous characters return in this book. Nicky and Sera are major supporting characters. I still like Nicky and I liked Sera better now she's a bit more wise. The Dowager Duchess is as mischievous as always and I still like her. Edward and Eugenia make a brief appearance too and it wasn't enough to satisfy me. As usual Delight and her pets steal the plot. She still sounds just like my 5 year old niece and not an 8 year old. Also appearing in this novel are Lady Vermont and her granddaughter Alice. They have little to do and I was hoping for more. Lord Nightingale is the best character in the whole book. He continues to make me laugh with his dialogue. We finally learn more about him, including what "knollsmarmer" means. The villains are also in this story as cardboard as ever for one and the other develops a bit which I like.