Rating: 3/5

review of 
John D. MacDonald's The Good Old Stuff 
by tENTATIVELY, a cONVENIENCE - April 20, 2026 

I tend to get paperbacks, esp crime fiction &amp; SciFi, b/c they're easy to carry around in a pocket so that when I go for a walk I can have them w/ me. I walk for awhile &amp; then sit somewhere, usually on a park bench, &amp; read a couple of pages &amp; then move on. Since I tend to go on walks somewhat frequently I'm usually in the midst of reading at least one paperback in addition to at least one larger bk that I don't carry around. Since these paperbacks are usually easier reading &amp; engrossing at a plot level I tend to read them fairly quickly while bigger bks get dragged out much longer. 

MacDonald's The Good Old Stuff was enjoyable for me. I respect people who can write in a way that I don't, all crime &amp; science fiction writers qualify for that. This is a collection of short stories &amp; I'd already read one of them in a different collection. I read it again anyway, I didn't mind, I liked the story. I usually avoid rereading things but it happens now &amp; then. In a way, I don't have much to say about this, people know what they want from mysteries: perhaps a vicarious taste of a criminal life that one wd rather not encounter in person, an engaging story in wch the outcomes aren't so obvious that there's no thrill at the end. Page turners. MacDonald's as good for that as most. 

1st paragraphs 'inevitably' set the mood. Often they're scene setters, descriptions. I admire the craft of writing descriptions that're vivid. The 1st paragraph of the 1st story, "Murder for Money" isn't really a scene setter, it's slightly unusual as psychological / philosophical ruminations on the part of the investigator. 

"Long ago he had given up trying to estimate what he would find in any house merely by looking at the outside of it. The interior of each house had a special flavor. It was not so much the result of the degrees of tidiness, or lack of it, but rather the result of the emotional climate that had permeated the house. Anger, bitterness, despair—all left their subtle stains on even the most immaculate fabrics." - p 1 

The next story, "Death Writes the Answer" starts w/ this: 

"He held the magazine up as though he were still reading it, but he watched her across the top of it, ready to drop his eyes to the story again should she look up. 

"For the moment the excitement, the carefully concealed anticipation, of the past month faded, and he wondered, quite blankly, why he was going to kill his wife. Myra had no major faults. In the eight years of their marriage, they had had no serious quarrels." 

[..] 

"But Myra, even though childless, seemed to find it impossible to handle the housekeeping details of an efficiency apartment with its miniscule bath, ucbbyhole kitchen, Murphy bed. Eight years of litter had worn away his quite impressive patience with the monotony of water dripping on sandstone." - p 39 

I have to admit that even tho it wasn't that long ago that I read this I've almost completely forgotten it. I have a vague memory that's mostly about spousal murder, more than 2 or 3 stories on the subject. That seems to've been his thing. I think I found that disturbing, even in fiction I seem to prefer that people in relationships love each other &amp; NOT plot to murder each other. That strikes even me as a bit ridiculous. 

The next story, "Miranda", starts w/ this: 

"They put a plate in the back of his head and silver pins in the right thighbone. The arms were in traction longer than the legs. The eye, of course, was something they couldn't fix. 

"It was a big, busy place they had there. The way I had come in, I guess, was a sort of chellenge to the doctors. A post-graduate course. See, gentlemen, this thing is alive—indubitably alive. Watch, now. We will paste it back together the way God made it. Or almost as good." - p 49 

MacDonald had been a soldier in WWII. These stories are post-WWII that cd only be published for a little while in that era. Then the publishing houses were ready to move on. This one was particularly good at presenting a casualty not-exactly-successfully adjusting. "Miranda" is another spouse murder. 

"Since the kid obviously could not support Connie in the style to which George had gradually accustomed her, nothing seemed simpler than to find some nice safe way of knocking George off and glomming onto the fifty-six thousand bucks his demise would bring in." - p 50 

"Miranda" having been 1st published in October 1950, $56,000 insurance settlement at the time wd be the equivalent of $767,300 as I read this in 2026. That's a little hard to fathom. Inflation has increased by 13.7 times in my lifetime. If my father was making $5 an hr when I was born, I'd have to be making $69 an hr just to be at his level now. In other words, for most people, any income progress in our lives is likely to be completely illusory. Cost-of-living increases are a bad joke. 

"They Let Me Live" is marked as my favorite story but I have no idea why. It's the longest one, weighing in at 78pp. 

"I held the little gold button with the eagle on it in my hand for a while and looked down at it. I wasn't being bitter. I wasn't being the hot novelist's idea of the cynical soldier. I just didn't want to wear the damn thing. I knew they'd see the buttonand tie it up with the little limp and the missing fingers and the deep scar across my face. I didn't want to be a professional veteran. I tossed it into the trash can after the suit." - p 84 

Oh, yeah.. NOW I remember why it was my favorite story. A soldier gets lost in the snow in the mountains. He's found &amp; nursed back to health but it takes a looonngg time. When he gets back to the US, the war is over &amp; he looks for his former best friend only to find that he died in disgrace. He doesn't believe the story so he goes on the investigative trail to try to find out what really happened. It's quite an epic, novella style. 

My interest in a story always perks when music is mentioned that I like: 

"From the amplifier came muted music, old jazz paino by Errol Garner and Mary Lou Williams and Art Tatum." - p 192 

Have you heard the recordings that Williams made w/ Cecil Taylor? Amazing. 

Ok, even tho I don't own &amp; don't want t own a gun I can find the following interesting: 

"Okay, then. You put a deep notch in a forty-five slug and you spoil the ballistics&gt; I figure that a guy who would know enough to notch it would know about it shortening its effective range. The slug hit her in the back while she was still forty feet from me. The odds are that he couldn't have hit me with anything but an unmarked slug.["]" - p 271 

I almost never write fiction (although the beginnings of a story were on my mind today) but when I imagine writing something I imagine that it'd be best w/ a wealth of detail like the above. Do you ever think about that? About how the fictional world you might be reading about needs all these details to really come alive?! So to speak. It's amazing to me how many writers pull this off, it seems almost 'miraculous'. 

Moving right along, "A Trap for the Careless": 

"Physically he is a big slope-shouldered character with a round, guileless face, baby-blue eyes, curly blond hair, and a shade more weight below the belt than above it. Dressed to his best he looks like an overgrown kid being sent off to a church social. Stripped down, his thighs are like beer kegs, and restless slabs of muscle crawl on his shoulders and arms with every movement." - p 294 

I don't think I want to meet this guy. 

The author: 

"The author of 20 Travis McGee novels, 600 short stories, and nearly 70 books in all, John D. MacDonald is simply one of the world's supreme storytellers. His worldwide best sellers include not only every one of his McGee mysteries, but such blockbusters as Condominium." - p 331 

If there's anything amazing about this review it's how little I've actually sd about the bk. I didn't want to write clichés about 'hard-boiled detectives' or such things, I didn't want to give away the surprises.. so, instead?, you get close to nothing. Shd you read this? Sure, it's fun. Do I care? Not particularly.