Rating: 5/5

While the title may have you thinking this is a book about the Pilgrims, don't let it fool you. Everything you need to know is splashed across the title. This book is about Plymouth Rock.

For someone who grew up in New England and with many history buffs in my family, I'd heard plenty about Plymouth Rock. There's been lots of talk about it being moved and breaking. It's kind of local history, so I'd learned a good deal about it.

Even so, the book was refreshingly amusing. Jean Fritz doessn't give you any kind of opinion on whether the Pilgrims really did land on Plymouth Rock or not, but she does a wonderful job of giving the more modern history of the rock, how and when it got it's fame and what happened.

If you're covering American History and have already stumbled upon the myth (I refuse to call something unproven a fact) of Plymouth Rock, this book would be a great addition to your study. I've never heard of anyone studying the Pilgrims without stepping onto a story about how they first stepped off at Plymouth Rock. While this has little to do with the Pilgrims (or First Comers), I think it's wonderful to get the whole story. For Plymouth Rock, that means facing the facts, that it may just be a rock that no one of note ever stepped on! It adds a wonderful bit of trivia for anyone who likes history, and is short and amusing enough to engage both children and adults.

While I don't think this book is essential to any history lesson on the Pilgrims, if you've got a young historian on your hands, or are planning a trip out to see Plymouth Rock, then this book is definitely a must. It gives children a chance to think critically about history (given that the whole rock thing may not even be true, yet it's treated like it is). It also gives them a chance to get the real story behind the historic landmark, should they ever venture out to see it.

It's wonderful to think that there's a history reference out there that states recorded and marked history isn't always right. It definitely helps children think that perhaps they shouldn't believe everything they read. It encourages fact checking by as many sources as possible (as clearly the people in this book never did!) While it's never directly stated in the book, I think that's one of the many wonderful lessons that can be learned!