Rating: 4/5

I really enjoyed this book. It's a little different in several ways.

First, the kidnapping. There's only one other reference to a kidnapping case, in the first book, FER-DE-LANCE (Goldsborough makes it the subject of one of his books). Technically, Wolfe and Archie are not involved in the kidnapping per se; they are on standby just in case the victim doesn't get safely home. Essentially, Wolfe has been hired to flex his detectival muscles and state: "Ignore me at your peril." The job is not as simple as it seems; as Wolfe points out to his client, he is putting his reputation on the line. If the worst does happen, he will go after the kidnapper with everything he has. If his client wearies of the chase and withdraws her support, his integrity will force him to continue, no matter how long it takes or how much it costs.

Secondly, Wolfe and Archie pick up a whopper of a clue almost as soon as they take on the case. They foresee a swift capture of the criminals once the kidnap victim is safely at home. Even when the case abruptly veers into murder mode, the information is still useful.

Thirdly, Archie mentions one of the all-time best television characters ever to grace the small screen: Paladin. It doesn't surprise me that Archie is a fan of "Have Gun, Will Travel." But I like to think that, if Archie ever manage to persuade Wolfe to take a look, Wolfe would appreciate this excellent Western as well. Paladin, in fact, has a lot in common with Wolfe and Archie. He appreciates fine food and beverages, he loves to read, he enjoys poker and women. He has traveled widely, knows a number of languages, is a brilliant strategist...and, oh, yes, he charges high fees, too.

Fourthly: Archie doesn't link up with the girl! Miss Tedder, daughter of Althea Vail, is attractive enough, but in spite of (or because of?) the fact that her mother was an actress (and her grandfather a bandit) she has turned out a raging snob, not to mention a complete priss who moves like her hips are in a cast. Wolfe doesn't think much of her intelligence or that of her brother Noel. I'm not so sure that they're stupid; its more likely that their lifestyle has simply limited their opportunities to exercise their wits. Even with normal intelligence, Wolfe could run rings around them with one frontal lobe tied behind his back. So rather than the young lady, Archie in fact helps the young man to grow up. Noel Tedder has enough wit to hit his mother up for the ransom money at the proper psychological moment, and he's smart enough to go to Wolfe to ask his assistance--and very smart to offer him a hefty percentage, unlike his nitwit of a sister, who felt Wolfe should help her for nothing, because of his previous large fee. Noel not only learns to stand up to his mother, he keeps his word to Wolfe and Archie, and even throws in a nice bonus for Archie, Saul, Fred and Orrie, that was not in the original oral contract.

There was one thing I found annoying in this book: although a lot of the action takes place in Westchester County, our favorite evil state cop, Con Noonan, is nowhere to be seen. Did the good people of Westchester get fed up with him? His replacement, Captain Saunders, has a virtually identical personality; he just has more authority.

Not a brilliant mystery, to be sure, but a fast, fun ride. Enjoy.