Rating: 2/5

After previously reading Willard Sterne Randall's wonderful book about Benjamin Franklin and his son William, A Little Revenge, I had high expectations for his take on Thomas Jefferson. Unfortunately, my expectations were not nearly met. Overly detailed in certain parts, and completing lacking in context in others, this book came out quite uneven. This began immediately as in the Introduction on page xix, Randall calls Jefferson the "best-traveled" President until late in the 20th century. He repeats that assertion on page 367. Where is that coming from? Jefferson was extremely well-traveled, but not quite as much as John Quincy Adams was. And I can think of several other Presidents who were just as well-traveled as Jefferson was. 

In his introduction, Randall writes that his original intention had been to cover only Jefferson's five years in Paris as Minister. Perhaps he should have stuck to that as this important part of Jefferson's life is covered in exquisite detail. At times Randall even goes to a day-by-day account of Jefferson's travels and activities, especially when he goes on an extended vacation through rural France, then along the Mediterranean Sea to Italy, and back. This part, despite being more detailed than I would have cared for, is quite interesting. Jefferson was a fascinating and complex man on many levels, with a massive variety of interests. He was intellectually curious about a great many things. Randall manages to capture that curiosity and provide a swift-moving narrative as Jefferson notes changes in topography, climate, people, and agriculture. This section is one of the strengths of the book although I did find it starting to drag towards the end (Randall devotes seven pages to Jefferson's English garden tour with John Adams - does the reader really need seven pages about that?). Another drawback here is that Randall provides no maps to help the reader visualize Jefferson's route to and from Italy. 

However, before Jefferson's Paris years (which by themselves took up an out-sized portion of the book, pages 365-492), Randall spends an inordinate amount of time on Jefferson's early life, youth, and his rise in Virginia politics as a lawyer and then Delegate to the House of Burgesses. While I am glad that Randall did not commit the all-too-frequent mistake of blasting through a President's early years so that the man is middle-aged by page thirty, here he just takes way too long to move the story along. The reader is treated to page after page of mind-numbing discussion about colonial Virginia quitrent and escheat laws, and Jefferson's role in them. I cannot begin to tell you how exciting that was. 

While Randall provides liberal does of criticism concerning Jefferson's many failings, he clearly has an overall positive orientation towards Jefferson, and I noticed a tendency to keep letting Jefferson come out looking better than his opponents. This happened time and again: with Adams, with Alexander Hamilton, with Patrick Henry, with John Marshall. No doubt all of those men, and others, are ripe for criticism of their own actions. But Jefferson had no shortage of personality flaws and compulsions. All too often these were, while being identified, minimized or offset by more positive attributes. 

Randall really blows it concerning the Sally Hemings controversy. Writing on page 477: "It is impossible to believe that Jefferson abandoned his love for Maria Cosway [a married woman whom he was having an affair with while living in Paris] to force his affections on even the most beautiful adolescent slave girl, just as it is beyond belief that Jefferson would pay the blackmail demanded fifteen years later by a hireling political scrivener to keep the affair out of print." On that same page he says that the claims made "...by a man who described himself as Madison Jefferson, son of Jefferson and Sally Hemings... cannot be credited." Shortly after this book was published, DNA results pretty much conclusively showed that Jefferson did indeed have at least one child with Hemings, if not multiple children. I am okay with Randall not knowing this at the time he wrote this part; I am not okay with him dismissing the possibility of it being true. Why did he feel confident enough to take Jefferson's denials at face value? 

Along with that, in general Randall makes Jefferson out to be better than he was on slavery by repeatedly stating that Jefferson did not like slavery and that he made attempts to end it. While this is true, and while I do believe that Jefferson - much like George Washington - had some serious moral concerns about the practice and the fact that he owned other human beings, he still owned enslaved people his entire life and after a certain point seemed resigned to not being able to convince his fellow aristocratic Virginia planters of the necessity of eliminating the inhumane practice. Jefferson's slaves brought in needed income for him. As it was, he was land-rich and cash-poor his entire life. He could not finance his expensive material hobbies without slavery. 

The biggest issue overall that I had with this book is how top-heavy it was when it came to Jefferson's life. His years up to his return from France in 1789 take up most of the book. This is a 595 page book. Jefferson becomes President on page 547. Yes, after spending pages and pages discussing Jefferson's gardening habits and French travels, Randall dispenses with his presidency in about forty pages. How can that be? Jefferson's time as Washington's Secretary of State is likewise passed by rather quickly. These are important parts of his life, but Randall seems to think that the earlier periods deserved much more attention. He does not give any reasoning for this, but it seems to me that, after belatedly deciding to expand the scope of the book to beyond just the Paris years, he tried to cover all of the years after that as quickly as possible. The result is a biography heavily skewed towards the first half of Jefferson's life, while only breezing through his final thirty-seven years (his long, late-in-life correspondence with Adams is given one sentence). 

If you are primarily interested in the early Jefferson, and/or his life as a diplomat in France, you might enjoy this book. If your interest is geared more towards a different period of Jefferson's life, or if you are looking for a complete biography about Jefferson, this is not the book for you. The writing is not crisp, and certain events lack context while at the same time the reader is deluged with minutiae on relatively inconsequential matters.

Grade: D