Rating: 3/5

Weak 3 stars. Main conflict: she loves him but she doesn’t want to be hurt in the future so she lies to him and acts cold.

STORY BRIEF:
Kelly’s mother died when she was 11. Her father has been beating her ever since. One evening when he is out, she goes to a night club. Dan sees her, buys her drinks, dances with her, and takes her to his apartment. They both are close to drunk and have sex. She leaves during the night. Dan doesn’t know her name or how to contact her. Three months later her father guesses that she is pregnant due to her morning sickness. He beats her so terribly that she calls Dan for help. Dan takes her to his apartment to live during the pregnancy. He tells her he will take care of her and that he wants to keep the baby and raise it. He says he will give her money to go to college and get a start in life after the baby is born.

REVIEWER’S OPINION:
This was written twenty years ago and feels very Harlequin-ish. Dan treats Kelly wonderfully, buying her clothes, teaching her to drive, buying her a car, encouraging and supporting her dreams. There are two main conflicts. Every time he does something or says something nice to Kelly, she immediately ponders “he’s doing that for the baby not for me. He doesn’t care about me.” Dan likes Kelly a lot. He wants to have sex with her, but she refuses. Later when she says yes, they have a wonderful night of sex. The next morning she adamantly tells him “no more sex.” Her reason is that she realizes she loves him and she doesn’t want to be hurt in the future. Sex would bring them closer together and she must protect her heart. I’m sorry but that just doesn’t interest me. Later she leaves him for the same reason. When he asks her what is wrong or what she wants, she won’t tell him. This kind of thing is so overdone in romance novels, I can’t take it. But many readers don’t mind this.

They are living together for four or more months before the happy ending. This gives them time to develop a relationship, but nothing engaging or special happens.

On balance, there is no good plot, no interesting character development, and nothing special about dialogue. It might be enjoyable for a reader in a wishful thinking way: poor girl gets pregnant, prince charming rescues her, and he takes care of her forever. 2 stars for me is “I wanted it to be over,” and that is not how I felt. I was willing to keep reading to see what would happen, which is why I gave it a weak 3 stars.

DATA:
Story length: 244 pages. Swearing language: mild. Sexual language: none. Number of sex scenes: 3. Total number of sex scene pages: 9. Setting: current day Remembrance, Indiana. Copyright: 1991. Genre: contemporary romance.