Rating: 3/5

Does your enjoyment of a favorite author's book sometimes suffer because you expect too much? When I opened John Updike's "A Month of Sundays" and saw that it was written in 1974, I was excited. I've read about three fourths of his novels, and almost all of the ones written before 2000. Thinking about Updike's writing in the 70's brought to mind the Rabbit Angstrom books, and even the 1968 "Couples", my favorite Updike. "A Month of Sundays", the first book in his Scarlet Letter Trilogy, has its moments, but I don't think it compares to his best works. 

 First I will look at his writing in "A Month of Sundays", and then at stylistic and thematic similarities that this opus shares with his oeuvre. In this story, we are listening to the narration of 41 year-old Reverend Thomas Marshfield. He has just been sent to a monthlong retreat for wayward ministers in the desert southwest. Thus he will be missing a month of Sundays in his pulpit. He was caught having sexual liasons with several women in his church, albeit all consenting adults. Some were seeing him for marital counseling. At the retreat center, reading the Bible and religious discussions are forbidden. There are no visitors or letters. Therapy includes self-realization through daily writing (righting?) and recreation. The novel's structure is that of a recounting of his recent sinful past, interspersed with occasional chapters describing his activities and thoughts at the retreat. 

 When Updike set out to write a story of a minister derailed by sexual misdeeds ("Elmer Gantry" also comes to mind) he apparently decided to make the telling of it an encyclopedic tour of analogies between religion and sex. Updike can split hairs on the finer points of Christian faith, and I must admit that most of Marshfield's theologic musings were over my head. Amusingly, we find that when Marshfield has just said something "ministerial", his thoughts turn to sex, and when he has just had sex, he seems to refocus on religion. Probably disconcerting but perhaps not unusual. During his sabbatical, he pens sermons that align adultery with the eternal plan of God. He has decided in his ministerial wisdom that Jesus's refusal to condemn the woman apprehended in the act of adultery is evidence that He accepts the practice as a sad but unavoidable condition of humanity. Marshfield has been hoping for a revenge affair on the part of his wife and even subtly encouraging her toward this, because he believes it would halve the guilt he carries.

 In "A Month of Sundays" Updike had fun giving his characters rather descriptive names:

 The Reverend MARSHFIELD - his faith in God isn't clean, it's all mucked up. He later describes his own "softness... doughiness of the soul that... mires..."

 Alicia CRICK (crack) - his organist (she must be an expert with organs) with whom he has an affair.

 Mrs. Jane CHILLINGWORTH Marshfield - his wife. Frigid much?

 Mrs. HARLOW - another woman he has an affair with. Or should we read "Harlot" or perhaps sex symbol Jean Harlow?

 Above all, to me Updike is a master wordsmith. When he describes a setting, I am there - I see it clearly. He takes the time to link his characters' thoughts and actions together with great care. He loves the physical manifestations of the internal. He spends paragraphs detailing a face or a body - their shapes, their oddities, their smells. Phrenologists deduced personality traits from the shape of one's skull. Many Victorians assumed things about people's intelligence and souls from their facial features - forehead, eyes, nose, mouth, chin. Updike imparts the inner from the outer. I think he is ever fascinated by the symmetry and opposites that he sees in the joining of male and female bodies. 

 Most novels explore many ideas at once. I have the impression that one of Updike's greatest strengths is that his best works feel incredibly unified, in that he generates a lengthy and fascinating story that is truly a treatise centered around one idea.