Rating: 4/5

And here we come to the end of L'Engles Murry-O'Keefe books, and I find my feelings complex.

An Acceptable Time itself is a return to the early books in the series. We are also back with the Drs. Murry and at their home, a geographical connection that helps with the continuity. Time travel occurs here, but differently than it did in A Swiftly Tilting Planet and Many Waters. The story had themes similar to all of the books. They were explored in an interesting way here, and made different demands of the protagonist. I liked the setting, and the story overall, and have some ideas to ruminate on.

As a series, however, I find the Kairos/Time/Murry-O'Keefe books complicated, uneven, and strange. Were I to pick the books that actually went together and made up a respectable series, it would be:

A Wrinkle in Time
A Wind in the Door
A Swiftly Tilting Planet
An Acceptable Time

The other four books do not flow well with these four:

Many Waters: occurs at some point between the first three books, and has no bearing on the rest of the series
The Arm of the Starfish: the sci-fi in this one flows with the other books, but the setting, protagonist, and novelcraft differentiate it from the other books
Dragons in the Waters: this one intersects with the other books better, but the setting, protagonist, and plot also set it apart
A House Like a Lotus: I skipped this one for now after learning that it was originally written for Vicky Austin, but L'Engle rewrote it for Poly. I might return to it at some point but it wasn't important for understanding An Acceptable Time.

There is also a major oversight with a certain character that is bothering me after reading these books. Charles Wallace is mentioned in Many Waters and never appears again. He was such a crucial character to the first three books! It feels unjust to pack him off to Mandyville with nary an explanation of his life, career, location, or anything. L'Engle even gave Sandy and Dennys wives, and Dennys a daughter. Maybe Charles Wallace is mentioned in A House Like a Lotus, but he doesn't actually appear in it. He is, by far, the most memorable character of the entire series, and his absence is one reason why the later books are so lacking. I wonder if L'Engle couldn't figure out how to grow him up.

Overall, when I return to this series, I will stick to the four core books above, maybe to the others for their nuggets of wisdom, but attempting to read the whole series through the arduous second half was not enjoyable. I wish Goodreads would number the series differently, making the four outliers "half" books like other series have for prequels written after the rest of the series and so forth. These books are so complicated and the continuity is just not there with four of them--half of the eight books in what is labeled Kairos.

I would recommend the four core books listed above, but as the other four do not stand together, they must assuredly stand separately. I think my reading experience would have been quite different (and more enjoyable) had I read those four and then picked up the others occasionally. L'Engle's themes are just so good and her lack of cohesive worldbuilding presents a challenge when held next to her facility with storytelling. L'Engle hasn't been deceased long enough for a good literary biography to be published about her, but I am eagerly anticipating A Light So Lovely by Sarah Arthur and any other pieces of L'Engle criticism I can find. I am also, always, interested in writers who succeed in multiple genres, so I look forward to her journals and adult fiction.