Rating: 4/5

*** 4 *** 

A buddy read with the Kay Squad at FBR! Because he is a master at what he does!!! 

  "...“All the roads are dark. Only at the end is there a hope of light.” ..."

And at the end it is all about the choices we make as a free thinking individuals... Yes there are circumstances, there are good and bad influences, there are G-ds and Demons, curves and constructions on our paths, loss, love, more loss, joy, loss, rebirth and so on the world keeps going, as one of my favorite singers Reba says, " I guess the world doesn't stop for my broken heart..."

In our lives we take so many journeys of self discovery and quests for making our lives better, but many are abandoned even before we make the first step... It is mostly fear of not getting where we want to go, or feeling of futility, that no matter where we get, we might not find ourselves fitting there... Only rarely is it the situations we find ourselves into, but we love to make the outside influences the guilty parties for our failures... 

All meaningful paths are lonesome, but The Darkest road is the loneliest of them all... In this case, Kay makes the one taken by Finn The Longest, but the darkest is shared by many of our modern day heroes who found themselves in a parallel universe fighting for the Light against the Darkness ... Some of them reach their destination and find maybe not what they wanted at the end, but at least something that fulfills their true needs. Others only deepen their sense of separation and inadequacy, needing to go on if ever they want to find a place of forgiveness and self-esteem. But above all, we all need to undertake those roads of self-discovery and find the core of light which hopefully we nurture in our souls, so we may always do the right things, despite the cost...

  "...“And he realized, a white fire igniting in his heart, that he did not want her to die. He did not want any of them to die: (…). He was sharing their grief, he realized; it was his own pain, it was fire running through him. ” ..."

The Darkest Road is a Fantasy full of action and mythology, magic and even parts of the Arthurian Legend, but it is very character driven and Kay, as always, finds the way to tell it in a beautiful manner. There were some parts in the beginning of the book which read a bit weird to me, but once we got more into the story, all was well once again. It could have also been me, since I have been having a hard time sleeping these days and have been having issues concentrating at times. I also have a personal dislike for the character Jennifer and she had a more prominent role in this volume, so I think this might have influenced my rating and initial enjoyment... However, I loved her son Darien, whose personal journey was heartbreaking and very emotional... But what can you expect, when he has the body of a 15 year old, but has lived barely a year, so has the emotional experiences and strength of a toddler... He did amazingly well with this starting handicap, while most of the adults were screwed up for more mundane reasons... We do get wonderful victories together with the crushing defeats, so I would recommend this book to those who are fans of the genre and the author!!!

Now I wish you all Happy Reading and may you always find what you need in the pages of a good book!!!