Rating: 4/5

In this, the seventh of the Brother Cadfael mysteries, one night during Matins a young boy quite literally bursts into the chapel, and in pursuit is a mob from the village convinced that the boy, a musician and entertainer, has committed robbery and nearly murdered someone. Abbot Radulfus is happy to give him sanctuary and Brother Cadfael who is soon convinced of the boy Liliwin’s innocence has forty days on hand to clear his name. But the case is far more complex than a robbery in a house, where a wedding celebration (of Daniel Aurifaber) was underway. Things in the Aurifaber household are far from simple, and there is plenty of tension in the air aside from the added problems the robbery and attack on Walter Aurifaber have brought about. The matter becomes even more complicated when the Aurifaber’s rather nosy tenant who is concerned much more with others’ business than his own is found murdered, obviously connected with the original robbery and attack.

Brother Cadfael find himself having to wade through many complex relationships, secrets, and tensions in reaching the solution to this one. I enjoyed the atmosphere as always and the “feel” of the times, as always. But more than the mystery itself, it was interesting to see things play out in the Aurifaber household―the new bride trying to get a foothold in “her” home, Daniel Aurifaber, the handsome young heir juggling more than he can handle, and his spinster sister Susanna finding that she might be ousted from the only position she had, managing the household while Walter, their father is only concerned with the loss of his wealth and the old matriarch, Juliana, now over eighty still struggles with her temper. One gets caught up in their stories, wanting to see how things will turn out for each of them since all those who have a grievance genuinely do have a point, and if one person “wins”, the other will have to “lose”. Meanwhile Liliwin’s name must be cleared, and while some abbey members (Brother Anslem among them, who is happy to coach the young performer) are welcoming, Brother Robert the prior can’t wait to get rid of him. The denouement was quite a surprise, though the how the person turned out at the end was to me more a surprise than the who or why. Another engrossing read.