Rating: 5/5

Oh, you poor tortured asshole, Devlin O’Neil. 🥺 

I do love you so. I can see why Virginia just can’t quit you. 

This was a reread, and I’d forgotten the angst. 

I know you wanted us to think you’re cold and unfeeling, but Virginia and I, we saw the cracks. And you had us like this:

Honestly, I had almost given up hope that you were ever gonna be a swoony prince for Sweet Virginia… but then you took her to the modiste for a new wardrobe… and of course, insisted on staying for the fitting 👀… and well, a *gentleman* can only be pushed so far… 😳🥵 … and we saw you begin to crack… 

🔥🔥🔥🔥🔥🔥 Yeesh, Devlin. 😍

And then you really show your cards when Virginia is attacked and you fly into a rage and try to murder the perpetrator. 😳

Anwho, it was obvious all was not as it appears with our dear Hero. And I was able to carry on. 

You know what’s great about the pain these tortured heros put us through? When they do FINALLY get their sh*t together and recognize that they love their h and allow her to love him too, it’s sooooooo good. 

This was me the last 25% of this book:

💖Bottom Line? 4.5 angsty tortured stars. Why not a full 5 stars? It ends too abruptly. I wanted to see more of them together after all that pain. I wanted to see them with their baby. I earned it, D@MN it! 😅😈

⚠️FOR THE SAFETY SQUAD⚠️

- cheating? I mean… it’s a gray area, I guess. 😬 He does have sex with a maid after he’s kissed the h. At the time, He is actively trying to resist the h and it doesn’t occur to him that she could have feelings for him since he’s her captor. He uses the maid cuz the h has him in a lather. He has absolutely no feelings for the maid at all. A conversation with the h about his actions happens later, and his understanding of the situation kinda makes sense from his perspective. Do you still want to castrate him for upsetting the h? YES. Is it “cheating”?? Eh? 🤷🏼‍♀️

- no sharing

- OW drama - the H has/had a mistress before meeting the h, and we get a scene at the beginning of the book with that mistress, and we meet her later. She doesn’t really cause trouble. The H does not want her. He was only with her for revenge in the first place. And then of course the maid situation described above. 🤬

- no dubcon

- there are 2 attempted sexual assaults by OP on the h