Rating: 4/5

By my own reckoning, there are 2 books held within the sea tale by Richard Henry Dana, Two Years Before The Mast, one being a delightful account of the landscapes &amp; the people encountered ashore &amp; the other a virtually baffling &amp; rather overwhelming collection of nautical terminology, nomenclature &amp; jargon that would have been most familiar to any seaman working on a mid-19th century merchant ship, such as the brigantine Pilgrim, (a two masted, square sailed ship), the one that a young Dana shipped out on in August 1834, leaving Boston's harbor &amp; bound "round the horn" of South America for California.

However, my own version of the book had no helpful commentary, footnotes, glossary or other aids but having long ago bought a copy of the nicely-bound Harvard Classics Edition for $1 at a local library sale, after dusting it off, I decided to muddle through. An interlinear edition of the sort I used for Horace, Virgil &amp; Cicero while laboring through school Latin, would have been most useful! Here is just one example:We got up tricing-lines from the jib-boom-end to each arm of the fore yard &amp; thence to the main &amp; cross-jack yard-arms. Between the tops &amp; the mast-heads, from the fore to the main swifter &amp; then to the mizzen rigging &amp; all directions athwartships, tricing-lines were run. Then the head-stays, guys &amp; spitsail-yard were lined &amp; we got out the swinging booms to the forward after-guys. If the weather took hold, the royals were clewed up, fore &amp; aft, top-gallant yards clewed down &amp; the flying-jib hauled down.At the risk of putting readers off on reading this classic book, I still feel compelled to give fair warning. You either skip all of this detail or spend ages attempting to master the inner workings of such a ship. 

Suffice it to say by way of an introduction, having entered Harvard, Mr. Dana contracted measles &amp; had a discomforting loss of sight. So instead of taking a modified gap-year from Harvard by touring Europe in style or joining the French Foreign Legion, the young man, a certified Boston Brahman, signed on to be a merchant seaman, ordinary class, a voyage that lasted 2+years &amp; proved to be a growthful experience that affected the rest of his life.

On board such a ship, the work detail is almost constant, especially since to save the company money, it was understaffed. The ship's captain is lord &amp; master but more like a god, with the chief-mate akin to a prime minister in charge of men, supplies &amp; the ship's log, while the 2nd-mate is looked on as "dog's berth" or "sailors waiter" &amp; disliked by all. There is also a cook &amp; a steward who acts as the captain's servant + a carpenter &amp; a sailmaker. 

The social distance between the captain &amp; the crew was extreme, something that must have entailed a great adaptation for a well-bred Harvard man used to some degree of luxury. Dana seems to have headed into all of this with a considerable amount of energy, self-reliance &amp; an ability to assimilate life on board rather quickly.

 

Every day a sailor's life hangs in the balance due to frequently shifting weather patterns, sometimes unpredictable ropes &amp; sails, lack of sleep, occasional outbreaks of scurvy, tightly rationed food &amp; water and the relationship among the seaman can make a critical difference. One young sailor falls overboard &amp; with heavy winter togs &amp; unable to swim, he perishes. Even a sudden misstep by a seaman that brings him close to death while furling sails in treacherous weather is never acknowledged by his mates, for "a sailor, not being free-agent, is indifferent to the rights of others." It is all just part of the job, with compassion &amp; commiseration in very short supply.

The Pilgrim has been enlisted to sail far around South America via Tierra del Fuego &amp; the Drake passage with its severe winds, rogue waves &amp; seasonal ice &amp; snow in order to reach California, a most hazardous endeavor but at this time, the fur &amp; hide trade at various ports in California was still quite lucrative. At the point of the voyage, California was still Mexican territory but many Americans &amp; others were attracted by the lure of gold, among other commodities &amp; the appeal of the unknown. 

While ferrying back &amp; forth along the California coast, Dana's ship encounters a ship from Sitka in what was then still Russian Alaska. Part of the charm of Two Years Before The Mast comes in considering just how perilous such a voyage was before the Panama Canal was completed &amp; modern navigational equipment came to be and also how different America was before "Manifest Destiny" caused its eventual expansion from the Atlantic to the Pacific. 

 

Alas, the book details a period toward the middle of the 19th century, a time when even a Harvard man who believes in the abolition of slavery in America refers to the African-American cook as a "darkie", sees all Mexicans he encounters as shiftless &amp; lazy, with their color "like an Irish man's pig" &amp; their form of speech a "creole drawl" while also being "untrustworthy knaves". 

Meanwhile, Indians Dana meets ashore speak "speak a brutish, inhuman language" and the Irish who found their way to California in an attempt to better their fortunes are described as of "low collective intelligence in relation to the number of faces". In spite of this seeming aversion to diversity, Dana does take a particular &amp; very keen interest in a group of "Sandwich Islanders" he encounters (Hawaiians who were then part of Great Britain) &amp; seems to genuinely embrace them one &amp; all, calling them "the most interesting, intelligent &amp; kind-hearted people I'd ever met."

Dana attempts to teach himself Spanish to enhance the trading of tobacco, cloth &amp; other items for the hides that the ship will transport back to Boston to be rendered into shoes &amp; gloves. He also learns to sew, repairing his own clothes &amp; making some new togs from cloth acquired along the way. 

En route to California, the captain of Dana's ship becomes irascible and severely flogs both a younger sailor &amp; an older Swede who speaks in his shipmate's defense, something that gravely offends Dana, so much so that when given an opportunity, he switches to another much more amenable ship, the Alert. On board the new sailing ship, he befriends &amp; learns from a man named Tom Harris, 20 years at sea but someone with an amazing memory &amp; an interest in books. The new ship is also due to return to Boston a year sooner than the Pilgrim, something that will allow Dana to re-enroll at Harvard much sooner.

The return trip after 18 months away at that point, including a great many weeks ashore salting &amp; curing hides for the long transit home, proves to be perilous, with occasional doldrums but also including a winter (southern summer) transit of the Horn of S. America in the midst of gale force winds, fog, icebergs, snowstorms and then later hurricanes after safely clearing the "Horn" &amp; finally heading north. We stood hour after hour, until our watch was out. During all of this time hardly a word was spoken, not a bell was struck &amp; the wheel was silently relieved. The rain fell in heavy showers &amp; we stood drenched &amp; blinded by the flashes, which broke the Egyptian darkness with a brightness that seemed almost malignant; while the thunder rolled in peals, the concussions of which appeared to shake the very ocean. 

A ship is not often injured by lightening, for the electricity is separated by the great number of points she presents. We went below at 4 o'clock leaving things in the same state but it is not easy to sleep when the very next flash may tear the ship in two, or set her on fire or take the masts down.

Some but not all seamen do survive such voyages &amp; upon his return, R.H. Dana was the toast of his Harvard campus. After completing his degree at Harvard, writing Two Years Before The Mast &amp; gaining a law degree, Dana spent a great deal of time representing the cases of common seamen of the sort that he had once been &amp; proposing legislation that would benefit them, even arguing a case before the U.S. Supreme Court. 

Thus, an elite Bostonian, once the student of Ralph Waldo Emerson &amp; whose own son married Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's daughter &amp; who Herman Melville befriended, feeling "a kind of Siamese link of affection for", in time became the benefactor of many he felt were without an advocate. His 1840 book endures, the tale of an adventure at sea that changed the author's life &amp; in so-doing, that of many others because of Dana's experiences during the voyage.