Rating: 3/5

Objectively - a two star read. But subjectively, I find I thoroughly enjoyed this one.
My semi-recent re-read of Three Lords for Lady Anne reminded me that I enjoy the writings of Charlotte Louise Dolan. So I decided to give her another try. 
I conclude that I still enjoy her writing style. At least, I must, because Fallen Angel has little else going for it and almost nothing to explain why I feel so satisfied. But I do feel satisfied. I would willingly re-read it, too! 
The story follows Gabriel, Lord Sherington, who believes only in accumulating power. He considers love a weakness and a tool people use to try and get things out of him. He wishes to cut his cousin out of the succession but fears a wife will try and change him. So when he meets a drab spinster who says she serves her family like the poor relation she is because she loves them, he decides she will make the perfect wife. Clearly, love makes her blindly obedient. The lord then tries to make her fall in love with him, etc. etc. Foreseeable consequences ensue. 
I like that this book focuses firmly on the characters and not on any dramatic plots. No kidnappings, elopements, or assassination attempts needed. The plot centers entirely on Gabriel's character change. And he goes through a lot of it. Poor Gabriel gets a ton of emotional baggage and the plot primarily centers on unpacking it all. A parent who hated him, sea captains who flogged him, servants that betray him, you name it. He got it. 
While his tumultuous past did come across heavy handed at times, his overall character change worked. I never found it unbelievable. It drives the plot along quite well. 
Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of his love interest, Verity. I have seen grass with more personality than Verity Jolliffe. She immediately falls in love with Gabriel and her entire existence thereafter centers on him. All she thinks about is how she would happily become his mistress; she would do anything to stay by his side; she thinks about him as she eats, sleeps, breathes! She treasures every second in his presence so that later, when he tires of her, she can bring them out and remember the happy moments. 
Enough to make you gag, huh? 
The girl had no personality outside of Gabriel. The plot tries to imply that under her wilting and deferential exterior lies a woman of strength. But we never see it. When she does show gumption, she immediately credits it to Gabriel. I never understood why anything about her seriously attracted Gabriel beyond his initial desire to find a dutiful wife. Particularly bizarre is how he goes from "it is great she is so plain because then she can't take a lover" to "she's the most beautiful woman I've ever beheld!" I didn't think love literally made you blind. Just stupid. 
Overall, I found the book endearing. The historical accuracy is horridly off and the characters behave in the magnanimous, modern fashion that I found so frustrating in Three Lords for Lady Anne. But truly, what brought this book down in my estimation was Verity. She needed a personality outside of Gideon!