Rating: 5/5

Outstanding, Sobering UFO &amp; Abduction Account

The Interrupted Journey, written in 1966, holds up brilliantly after 55 years— just as the Pentagon prepares to release a 2021 study of unidentified aerial phenomena (UAP is currently the U.S. government’s preferred official term for UFO.) 

The Interrupted Journey is a serious, carefully researched account that assiduously avoids sensationalism and leaves judgments about the veracity of reported events up to the reader. A reading or rereading of John Fuller’s seminal study is a worthwhile accompaniment to the 2021 Pentagon report, if only to remind us of the length of time that UAP/UFOs have baffled scientists, the military and ordinary observers.

The Interrupted Journey tells the story of Betty and Barney Hill, a New Hampshire couple who sighted a UFO while driving from Canada to Portsmouth, NH on the night of September 19-20, 1961. While both Hills recalled the sighting, about 2 hours in their trip remained unaccounted for, as did 35 miles of their journey.

In the two years following the trip, the Hills experienced substantial and increasing anxiety. Betty Hill’s anxiety was accompanied by vivid and disturbing dreams. Barney Hill’s anxiety was accompanied by insomnia, worsening ulcers and increasing blood pressure. Both felt that the UFO episode was central to their anxiety, although neither could account for the lost 2 hours and their inability to recall 35 miles of their drive.

After conventional psychotherapy failed to alleviate Barney Hill’s anxiety, the couple sought a highly qualified psychiatrist who could uncover their missing memories through hypnosis. They eventually entered treatment with Dr. Benjamin Simon, a highly credentialed psychiatrist who had led the U.S. military’s post World War II treatment of service members with shell shock (now described as PTSD/post-traumatic stress disorder), using hypnosis and therapeutic drugs to uncover and treat trauma.

The Interrupted Journey, written with the consent and participation of Simon and the Hills, is drawn substantially from Simon’s tapes of his treatment sessions with Barney and Betty Hill, a substantial number of which were conducted under hypnosis. Despite the controversial nature of the subject matter, what stands out are the Hills’ honesty and intelligence, as well as Simon’s careful therapeutic guidance. This is a sober account of the Hills’ experiences, not a sensationalized one.

Highly recommended for those interested in well-researched accounts of UFOs and their alleged occupants. Which raises a question: can John Fuller’s Incident at Exeter, a study of the Exeter, NH UFO sightings, be reissued electronically as well?