Rating: 4/5

Miss Winifred Appleton and Charles Howe
1874, New York

Based on the unknown author and the cheesy cover, I did not have high hopes going into this book. But wow, this was a surprising and enjoyable read that was not in the normal mode of romance novel at all. 

Winifred Appleton is a young woman in early Gilded Age New York. She is passionate in her desire to become one of the first female attorneys and has unsuccessfully sought admission to various law schools. Charles Howe is a local prosecutor who is smitten with Winifred and agrees to be her mentor so she can learn the law through apprenticeship and perhaps be eligible to sit the bar through that means. Winifred is committed to her studies and is opposed, on principle, to the idea of marriage as it will prevent her from her career aspirations. Unfortunately, at the beginning Charles is merely humoring Winifred and is convinced she will lose interest in the practice of law. But despite this character flaw, he is still a charming and likeable hero.

Although Winifred meets with opposition with the other males in Charles' office, she soon wins them over with her competence and hard work. But when Charles is required to prosecute an abused woman for the attempted murder of her husband, Winifred decides that her feminist principles require her to aid the defense rather than the prosecution and she leaves Charles' office. From that point forward, Winifred and Charles manage the constant conflict that the case causes between them with a strong attraction to each other. It's really quite well done how the plot of the case is seamlessly woven amidst the romance components of the story. Although a fair portion of this novel is dedicated to the trial of the accused murderess, it never felt like the legal story detracted from the romance and there was plenty of romance and interaction between the main characters. 

Things also get lusty when Winifred propositions Charles because she wants to experience sex once in her life. Charles surprisingly but realistically takes her up on her offer and although he could be overbearing and arrogant, he still remained ultimately likeable throughout.

All in all, this was a very unique romance that was written very well.