Rating: 4/5

Not as great as I'd hoped but still a really good ending to the epic trilogy. First, it's going to be hard to write this review without spoilers but I'm going to do my best. This book continues to follow the pattern of the previous two books in the series by bouncing from main character to main character to drive the plot forward. As the story is told from each of these character's points of view you learn more and more about that character thus building a rich and detailed picture of just who they are. Because of this, the characters are very much real breathing people. You really get what motivates them. What makes them strong. What makes them weak.In addition to creating detailed characters, J.V. Jones has also created a very real world for the characters to live in. When the characters travel, for example, it's more than hoping on a horse, finish the chapter, and then the next chapter they are where they need to be. There are real obstacles to traveling in this world: mountains, bandits, weather, shifty innkeepers, and on and on. It gives the world a depth and character that so many novels lack. The great thing, Jones does all this without slowing down the pace of the storytelling at all.The pacing in this book is much faster than in the previous books. As I had expected, the first two books really worked toward the major climax contained in this book. This is where all the detailed plot lines, that have been developing through the previous books, come together. All the questions get answered.So why not five stars? I guess in the end it came down to believability. Again without spoiling anything I just think the way things ended could have been done in a way that was a bit more believable and not quite so fantastic. Yeah, I know it's a "fantasy" novel but you can only stretch that so far and I think this went just a bit too far. I still really enjoyed it, just don't think it was worth five stars.The Book of Words is a series that is very much worth reading!