Rating: 5/5

In defence of Regency Buck

I have, recently, in a Georgette Heyer forum here on GR briefly addressed the perplexing nature of the hatred Lord Worth gets in comparison with other Heyer heroes (and Judith too in comparison with other Heyer heroines), but would like to take the time here to speak more extensively about it, because reasons.

Regency Buck was actually the first full Heyer I ever read (the actual first was an abridged audiobook version of Sylvester, but let’s face it, Richard Armitage’s voice is impossible to resist). At the time, when I first read Regency Buck, it never once occurred to me to hate either the hero or the heroine, I thought the story was fun, and my subsequent reading of every other Heyer I could get my hands on should attest to that. And I mention this here because many Heyer fans will have developed the skill of squinting away some uncomfortable parts of Heyer’s novels, like her anti-semitism for example, and try to enjoy them as the product of their time. I didn’t have that skill at the time of reading Regency Buck, I never knew I would need it until the universally beloved Grand Sophy came my way, in fact.

So it came as something of a surprise to me, when it transpired that most people felt that Lord Worth is “a raging arsehole”, and an “odious […] toad”, “cold fish” and “detestable” according to some of the top rated GR reviews here. I understand if someone disliked him or the novel (tastes differ, after all) but some of this vitriol seemed like a major, major overreaction, and I didn’t know what it was the hero was to have done, apparently, to justify that hatred.

So here’s my take on the character, point by point:

1.	He is rude, stand-offish and arrogant. That’s true. It’s also true of almost every other Heyer hero, except for her “Type II”, and certainly true of many much beloved ones, like the Duke of Avon and his son, Mr Beaumaris in Arabella, the Marquis of Alverstoke in Frederica etc. I see no difference in how arrogant and stand-offish he is and they are. 

2.	He forces an intimacy on Judith. True again. No worse, however, than what Damarel does to Venetia or what Vidal, in the Devil’s Cub, almost does to Mary. In all of those cases the hero takes the heroine for a simple village girl. This makes it no more ok than if they didn’t think them that, but apparently that made a difference in Heyer’s Regency World. If you find that detestable in his case, you must therefore find it detestable in all these other cases too. I should add that Heyer also seemed to imply that the heroes assumed that to some extent their overtures were invited and their actions changed drastically when they learn that they were not (Worth teaches Judith how to defend herself once she slaps him in self-defence; Damarel reads more than he should into Venetia’s not running away when given the chance; and to keep this spoiler free I will only say that Mary knows how to take care of herself).

3.	He dictates to Judith and Perry but refuses to tell them what he plans and suspects. So Lord Worth's charges, Perry and Judith, come to London, all good-looking and loaded with money, all full of youthful confidence, and without apparent ability to discern the bad from the good. Worth, after having insulted both of them unwittingly, finds himself in the position of having to defend their fortune, their lives and virtues, knowing the danger they were in and having the experience of town they lack, while at the same time knowing very well that whatever he says the pair of siblings will take against because they don’t like him (with reason). Judith in particular starts her relationship with Worth (once she learns who he really is) by negating near everything he says. So I think that on balance he actually acts very cleverly. He managed Judith’s more extreme reactions to him and Perry’s excesses by intervening personally, but discreetly, when he must (by rescuing Perry from being murdered, by sending Brummel Judith’s way to make her fashionable etc.) or ordering them in the right direction when he could. If you ask me that’s what a guardian is supposed to do. He was not just some random guy, after all. He had this pair of siblings foisted onto him by mistake, he didn’t ask for it, and then he managed them effectively. What I like about him is that he makes mistakes. Unlike some Heyer heroes who are infallible, he does err as he goes along by letting Perry marry, for example, or by how far he allows that villainous cousin to go with his scheme, or by letting his eyes off Judith, which leads to the Princely almost-rape, but all the time he tries to do his very best. 

4.	He threatens to beat Judith. True, but then he doesn’t actually beat anybody but the villain. Several Heyer heroes have, jokingly or no, threatened violence towards the heroine, usually in reaction to her wilful behaviour. Vidal, who is a much beloved Heyer hero, is the only one I can think of that actually does do it he chokes Mary so hard she has to cough painfully, and is forced to go meekly onto his ship. I think Worth was provoked enough to have said what he said in some just anger. I think he meant to impress upon Judith the difference between opposing him verbally in some nonsense about where she would live and opposing his strict order about something he knows more about, and something that concerns her life and reputation. She did act badly and he, out of worry and fury, reacted. It made sense to me and seemed proportional to the offence. And again, it’s definitely no worse than what Vidal does, or what, say, Charles says to Sophy in the “The Grand Sophy ”and he makes his ‘playful’ threat of violence together with his proposal of marriage no less.

5.	He is cold to Judith. Erh… is he? When I read the book he seemed actually quite the opposite. Other than kissing her and telling her he thought her beautiful several times, once he finds out that he is her guardian and that she is therefore off-limits, he hints to her about his feelings on several occasions. What is funny and I think very endearing, is that he knows she doesn’t like him, he knows that instead of being allowed to charm her as he probably ordinarily would, he is stuck with playing her father figure. I think it was amusing to see this super-confident guy struggle with his infatuation with a young woman he had managed to offend before they even officially met, and have to hide his feelings while at the same time waiting impatiently until he could tell her and try to win her. Their conversations I found funny. He provokes her and then appeases her in turn, and Judith, who is rather imperious with everyone else, finds herself unable to get the better of him. 

The Earl’s gaze returned to Miss Taverner. He said softly:
“You should ask me to sit down, you know.”
Her lips quivered: she could not but appreciate his lordship’s methods. 
“Pray, be seated, sir!”
“Thank you, Miss Taverner, but I do not stay.”

It is because of being unable to get the better of him that she tries to do the stupid thing of going to Brighton in a manner he expressly forbade, only she didn’t quite calculate how much she would provoke him with that – again his reaction there is hardly that of an uncaring, cold person. 

6.	He blames her for her almost-rape. Does he? Again, the scene reads very differently to me than to some other people, apparently. By the time that scene happens, Judith and Worth are in love with one another, but also each thinks that the other hates them (he because of all the million times Judith said it or acted like it and she because of the incident that forced him to threaten her with violence). So when he finds her fainting into the Regent’s arms, he doesn’t know what to make of it. Their interactions are tense with unspoken feelings. He asks her what she was doing going away with the Regent as she did. She tells him she couldn’t refuse. When he sees her distress, however, and sees that she really is in genuine anguish, he realises that she didn’t do this to once again go against his orders to provoke him, that something bad had happened to her and he both takes the Regent to task over it as far as he is able, and comforts Judith. I don’t see anything reprehensible about what he did. I didn’t read at any point any blaming of her for the molestation she suffers. He asks her what she was doing going away with the Regent – a perfectly reasonable question, after all, she might have done it willingly and consciously, how was Worth to know otherwise? And then she assures him that she didn’t, which he believes. Exactly how is this bad?

7.	He doesn’t fill her in on his plans of subverting her cousin’s schemes. So Worth knows that her cousin has some pretty shocking plans to kill Perry and have Judith inherit Perry’s wealth, and then to marry Judith and her enormous fortune. He also knows that he can’t do anything about that cousin or stop him from succeeding with Judith, especially since Judith thinks that Worth is after her money himself, and that it is he who is actually scheming to the same purpose. She has the roles of the two men exactly reversed in her head. Worth knows therefore that were he to say anything against her cousin, she would think that he was doing so with an evil agenda in mind. So he has to use her ignorance to make that cousin show her himself what he is in actuality – by foiling the cousin’s plans and at the same time allowing him to think that he was succeeding he brings matters to a boiling point, allowing the man to expose himself in front of Judith, and also committing convictable crimes in the process. Again, that seems to make perfect sense to me, I see nothing reprehensible in his actions. In fact, he was very clever in doing what he did.

8. He is an arrogant Darcy-like guy who never gets fed a Darcy-like humble pie. Actually, he does. It is a mistake, I think, to compare this to Pride and Prejudice, but if the comparison is made then let us be fair - Lord Worth does one *actually* bad thing. He kisses a girl he fancies on sight, because he thinks himself so great and he proceeds to pay the price for this for the 350 pages that follow, because he falls in love with the girl and the girl won't easily forgive him. Everything that follows and how unmanageable the siblings are is a result of his having been insufferably arrogant to people he thought beneath himself to begin with. 

In summary, this was Georgette Heyer’s first shot at the Regency period, and she would go on to make it her own in many enjoyable ways. I recommend all her regencies, all are great in their own way and to my mind Regency Buck is right up there among the greats. As to the hero and the heroine, I think Lord Worth is actually one of her more attractive, interesting heroes. I liked him from the start, and the scene in the end is very sweet and very romantic. I don’t want to write at length about Judith’s character, she is feisty and such heroines usually do tend to annoy some people. I think that it is good that Georgette Heyer didn’t just give her feistiness as a characteristic that attracts the hero, but also as a flaw that has consequences. That’s called good, believable characterisation. 

It’s a great novel, barrels of fun, highly recommend.

***2023 Re-read***
I stand by my defence of the novel, and reading it again I found it just as much fun as before. I also think that it would make a good adaptation. Worth's dandyism and how much it affects Judith reading of him would be particularly fun when you could actually see it. She also takes much more time in this one than in any of her other novels to tour Regency England, showing her research much more obviously, which I think would lend colour to an adaptation.