Rating: 4/5

The Octopus: A Story of California is a 1901 novel by Frank Norris. I loved this book. It was the first part of an uncompleted trilogy, titled, The Epic of the Wheat. The Epic of the Wheat sounds so boring, but I didn't find it boring at all, at least not the first book, by the time the wheat is made into bread and biscuits and all that kind of thing, who knows, perhaps I'll be bored.

Frank Norris was an American author born in Chicago. It doesn't seem like he stayed there long though. He also lived in California, London, New York and Paris, he worked as a news correspondent in South Africa and as a war correspondent in Cuba during the Spanish-American war; he seemed like a very busy person. Whenever I read anything about Frank Norris it says he was a "naturalist" writer, so I finally looked up the word. These are two of the definitions I found:

"Naturalism was a literary movement taking place from the 1880s to 1940s that used detailed realism to suggest that social conditions, heredity, and environment had inescapable force in shaping human character."

"The thinking was that certain factors, such as heredity and social conditions, were unavoidable determinants in one’s life. A poor immigrant could not escape their life of poverty because their preconditions were the only formative aspects in his or her existence that mattered. Naturalism almost entirely dispensed with the notion of free will, or at least a free will capable of enacting real change in life’s circumstances."

Emile Zola, Stephen Crane, Frank Norris, Theodore Dreiser and Upton Sinclair are all listed as major naturalist authors. So this is what I've learned; without giving a thought to whether I agree with naturalism, I certainly enjoy that style of writing because I love all those authors. 

The Octopus is the story of the conflict between wheat farmers in the San Joaquin Valley and the Pacific and Southwestern railroad. The "octopus" is the railroad, its tentacles spread out into every aspect of man's life, making itself even more powerful and of course always richer. The focus in the novel seem to be the power the railroad company has over the farmers and how the farmers are almost helpless to this "entity." The issue at stake is one of land ownership. Along the lines of the Pacific and South West Railroad, alternate sections of land had been granted to the Railroad Trust by the government. The railroad invited the farmers to settle the land and cultivate wheat, then offers the land for sale, at first to the first occupants. The price was promised to be between $2.50 and $5.00 per acre. Improvements to the land would not affect the price, therefore, the land would prove to be very valuable to those first farmers. As the novel goes on the farmers greatly improve the land through things like irrigation, however the railroad has no intention of selling to the farmers at the original price. When told that the farmers have improved the land they are told the presence of the railroad also increases the value of the ranches. Eventually the railroad decides to sell, but now the selling price to is be in the range between $20.00 and $30.00 per acre. Thus begins the war between the farmers and railroad trust. When the ranchers resolve to defend their homes and livelihood, there are tragic consequences of which you are going to have to find out for yourselves what they are.

I loved the book, a lot of people wouldn't. There is a lot of talk about wheat, a lot of talk about wheat prices, oh and a lot of talk about railroads. The railroad seems like its the main character, and it is a long book. I've often heard it said that if you're from California you would love the book. Well I'm not from California, have never been there (doubt I'll ever get there) but I still thought it was a great read. On to the next book, happy reading.