Rating: 2/5

Madalyn Murray O'Hair is an interesting person, to say the least, and I read My Life Without God primarily to learn about the author's firsthand experiences being raised by her, not so much for his conversion story. Murray's tale of his childhood is even worse than one might imagine: Murray O'Hair was a narcissistic, domineering and unstable person who took a special pleasure in belittling and abusing the men in her family. She was also a militant atheist and communist. When she discovered that she could garner national media attention for battling against school prayer in the courts on behalf of her mortified son, she put aside any considerations for his well-being for her own attention. Eventually the case reached the Supreme Court, and her thirst for the limelight never again dissipated. 

Murray describes a variously countercultural and conventional life throughout the Sixties and Seventies: working short-lived jobs, traveling around in broke-down cars between cities and to escape state charges, drinking and smoking weed frequently, carrying on dysfunctional relationships with several women. Murray hardly casts his pre-religion self in a flattering light. He beat multiple women, was mostly absent from his elder daughter's life (sending her to live with his mother, of all places!), and generally lacking a focus or purpose to his life. 

He definitely had some interesting experiences, but I found some portions of the writing rather dry, and I would have liked greater depth into his conversion story and how it changed him (although I didn't read the book for this, it would definitely add something to the narrative), if and how he has worked to mend the relationships with ex-wives and family that are salvageable, and a few other questions I found to be dangling towards the end. Also, I dislike the "everything happens for a reason" rhetoric that occurred in his description of the plane crash of his former boss. Finally, I can understand where he is coming from with his dislike of atheism given his personal experiences with its toxicity, but he is too harsh on atheists/the non-religious as a whole, perhaps not surprising given his association with the Moral Majority. The Murray-O'Hair murders do have some discussion in the final chapters of the book, although Murray had some distance from it since he had not been in contact with his family in fifteen or more years at the time of their deaths.