Rating: 4/5

Notes from Underground: 4/5

  "I say let the world go to pot as long as I get my tea.”
 

Going through the thoughts of others who read this edition of 'Notes from Underground' (bound here with additional, supplementary material), my favorite was the singular one-star review: "The cover is amazing." Shout out to Agnes for succeeding in that old adage: if you've nothing nice to say, it's best to say nothing at all. 

This is certainly not a rule of decorum our 'Underground man' is particularly inclined to follow. 

I love an unlikeable protagonist, so I figured I was going to like 'Notes' from the first line when the protagonist introduces himself: "I am a sick man...I am a spiteful man. I am an unpleasant man."

Why is that? 

Actually, I remember a discussion in a lit class at Uni where we mulled over why it is that unhappy stories about unhappy people are so much more readily accepted as having depth than happy stories about happy people. Considering that, for the most part, people claim to want to be happy, why are we so quick to dismiss happiness as being a symptom of shallowness? 

I ask this especially in this context less so because of what 'Notes from Underground' is and more so because of what it means to certain people. 

In his introduction, the translator and editor, Ralph E. Matlaw, gives an honestly pretty scathing observation about fans of 'Notes' of a certain type: 
Readers of the work [...]have all too readily accepted the image of the narrator as the symbol of the modern man, as a precursor of Existentialist thought, as themselves. Like the narrator they permit themselves a loophole -- it is what the narrator represents, it is his plight, his intellectual temperament that are recognized as their own, but not, usually, his personality."(p.xx) 
And I agree. People like Jordon Peterson (and fans of his I've unluckily spoken to) love how this narrator, the Underground Man, gives them permission to be miserable melts. 

Peterson, in a few talks he's given on 'Notes', goes on at length about the connection between nihilism and atheism (something that was certainly swimming around the waters when Dostoevsky put this together). His fans do too; the only difference being that the atheists among them think their nihilism makes them better than you. That being miserable is a sign of their intellectual superiority. "The worst of it is, no matter how I tried, it still turned out that I was always the most to blame in everything [...] In the first place, to blame because I am cleverer than any of the people surrounding me." (p.8) 

In other words, such people, just like the Underground Man, are cripplingly insecure (as we pretty much immediately determine the Underground Man to be) yet also have such an overinflated sense of ego that they suffer terribly from Main Character Syndrome and bray and bray and bray about how they deserve to be masters of the universe and 'deserve' (a key word) whatever success they think they've been robbed of. Oh, they'll keep up this little veneer of aloof irony ("I'm an unpleasant man."), but they really do think so. Their perceived mediocrity or (heaven forbid) failure must simply be the fault of someone else. Heck, in this case, it's the fault of human nature! 

That's what this is all about in the end: Dostoevsky putting forth a critique of the burgeoning popularity of Determinism and the accompanying hope that by accepting a lack of free will, Utopia can be achieved and everyone can be happy. Your Jordan Petersons love dovetailing this context with their own hatred of Socialism (though they'll usually start talking about Communism since that's easier to pick on). 

Now, listen, I'm not sure I'm 100% on board with Determinism, and certainly not how it's laid out so clinically in the novel Dostoevsky hated so much he wrote 'Notes' just to refute it (that novel being Chernyshevsky's 'What is to Be Done.'). And sure, there's merit in the question he raises about how, if they actually got everything they wanted, people would, by nature, still be unsatisfied. 

H o w e v e r, there's a vast, vast difference between 'people getting everything they want' and 'people being guaranteed to have their basic needs met, leaving them free to pursue what brings them pleasure.' 

Thus, focussing so much on the what ifs of a scenario as implausible as 'don't you think people would turn to nasty vices if they got everything they wanted because look at how badly behaved a lot of rich people are' feels detached from reality. Ironic, considering how much that certain sect of people who like 'Notes' (and by 'Notes' they really just mean the introductory ramble and maybe a few details from the third anecdote) seem to think it reveals that Socialism is bad or we need God or I don't know what. 

I think Dostoevsky was just a few steps ahead of those people, to be honest, and that Ralph Matlaw was absolutely correct when he called them out. If you take the mythologized version of The Underground Man away, you have a cripplingly self-conscious guy who fakes disaffection and snobbish cynicism and a love of misery just because he figures that if he can't be the hero riding a white horse, he may as well be the hero in the mud:
"I could not conceive of a secondary role for myself, and for that reason I quite contentedly played the lowest one in reality. Either to be a hero or to grovel in the mud -- there was nothing in between. That was my ruin, for when I was in the mud I comforted myself with the thought that at other times I was a hero, and I took refuge in this hero for the mud." (p.50) 
It isn't lost on me that what I've avoiding saying until this point is that the people for whom this is the true core of their bitter little hearts tend to be white guys in their 20s to 40s who poo-pah the notion that they've had any privilege in life because they are mediocre in spite of it. Unsung heroes. Undiscovered geniuses. And they'll settle for nothing less, be arrogant, standoffish, and generally not fun to be around, and salve their fragile egos by telling themselves they're alone or miserable or unsuccessful because of someone else who got the recognition, relationship, admiration -- take your pick-- they think they are owed got it undeservedly. 

We see this most strikingly in the second story, but it's there in the third one too. 

Next time I hear from some such poor lost soul that they identify with the Underground Man, I admit I'll enjoy a little sensible chuckle and elbow to the ribs with my pal, Fyodor. See, I can be spiteful too. 

That being said, I personally liked the first story the best, about him running around nursing a grudge and trying and failing and then succeeding at getting the guy who wronged him back only for that guy not to care much less remember that they've ever met before. I'll freely admit I've been the Underground Man in this story. Egg on my face when I realized how many showers I've spent arguing with ghosts of memories of little insults from years ago. Mulling over all the things I should have said that would've really gotten them. But you know what they say about holding grudges: it's like drinking poison and expecting the other person to die. 

Almost makes me wonder if there's some connection between his constant references to spite and his dying of liver disease... But I've waxed on enough. 

Thank you Fedya, you rascal, for holding your mirror up to us all yet again. Even if you were suspicious of Socialism. No one's perfect.