Rating: 4/5

The Skylark of Space was Edward E. Smith, PhD’s earliest written work, and was serialized in Hugo Gernsbeck’s Amazing Stories in August through October 1928. Due to its popularity, “Doc” Smith soon wrote two sequels, and much later rounded out the Skylark series with a fourth volume. I read this novel because it is covered in Lecture 6 “The Rise of the Science Fiction Pulps” in The Great Course’s How Great Science Fiction Works. Writers such as Philip Francis Nowlan and Doc Smith were among Gernsbeck’s stable, who collectively established the subgenre known as Space Opera.

After reading three of Edgar Rice Burroughs Mars novels and Philip Nowlan’s Armageddon 2419 A.D., it was a joy to find a pulp era novel that did not launch immediately into scenes of combat. Rather, in this novel, the brilliant young chemist (note that Smith was a chemical engineer) Richard Seaton inadvertently discovers a chemical process that converts all of the nuclear energies of copper atoms into repulsive force. Only he and his best friend investor Martin Crane have the insight to realize this could power a spacecraft, which they proceed to build. However, their rival Marc DuQuesne steals their idea and builds his own spacecraft using their plans. 

More remarkable than that plot, is the story of Dick’s courtship of his fiancé Dorothy Vaneman - the romance apparently being the contribution of the wife of a friend of Smith. One thing leads to another, and by the middle of the book, the friends are off on an interstellar adventure at hundreds of times the speed of light. Several creatively built planets are visited, with the primary theme being the awe of space travel. However, searching for a source of copper fuel, they ultimately land on a planet occupied by near-humans engaged in an age-old war between two peoples. Smith finally gets to indulge in some descriptions of an alien society. Amusingly, given the strictly traditional perspective on male-female relationships of the main characters, the aliens take a couple of pages out of Burroughs’ Mars, such as lack of clothing.

In spite of its whimsical science and antiquated dialog, I enjoyed this novel for its defiance of my expectations of pulp era space opera.