Rating: 3/5

Freestone (or "Phoebe" as he was nicknamed by Freddie) was Freddies assistant who lived in-house and went on tours, making arrangements, buying and preparing clothes and costumes for the band, arranging refreshments etc. So it comes as no surprise that this man has been given an insight into this incredibly talented mans life that not many can boast. I have known Queen from very young as I have an older brother who was a big fan in the 80s, so I knew their stuff really well before I was really old enough to fully appreciate the brilliance of their songs and Freddies breath taking vocals. I always knew Freddie was quite a shy man, who became the flamboyant show man we all know and love only on stage. I think this is partly why I find him such an intriguing person. Also, I recently read an article that said he met Brian and Roger during University, where he gained an HND in Graphic Design - much like the course I did myself. He was also a very talented artist. I have been meaning to read about his life for some time and I thought this would be a good account coming from someone who was actually around him and had such an intimate insight to the real Freddie. I found it extremely insightful. one thing I would recommend is to be near a computer whilst you're reading this book. There are a lot of people - famous - semi-famous or famous back then mentioned, who I found it interesting to be able to put a face to and know a bit about who they are, so google and wikipedia came in useful! There were also things mentioned, such as a knee injury Freddie obtained before the shooting of "Its a Hard Life", which was causing him pain, forcing him to give in to sit down, only at the very end of the video, and a few other little observations about the video that I had to look up on youtube and re-watch it so I could notice those things. I think Freestone did a very good job with this book. The only small negative I would say is that I did find in a few places he did go on into detail when it came to things like the interior of Freddies houses for instance. I can see why from his point of view this was something that would have been of importance, but to the average fan like myself, I'm not sure many would care what colour the floors were in the bedroom etc. Very interesting, very emotional read about a man who had massive talent and contributed so much to music today. If you are an admirer of Freddie, you'll like this book.