Rating: 4/5

I chose to read this book because during one of my last trips to Gaza, I met one of the men who was supposed to join the 1981 Irish hunger strike. He didn't, because it was finally called off after 10 men died in their struggle to force the British government to treat them as political prisoners rather than "common" criminals. Although I found the book tedious to read at times because it was difficult to keep track of all of the players, as well as to figure out some of the code words and Irish terminology the men employed in the notes they smuggled out to their comrades, it served as a fascinating case study of the possibilities and limits of the hunger strike as a tool of resistance. I have to confess that I remain conflicted on the use of hunger strikes; to be truly effective, you must be prepared to die a slow death. In this case, it was a price a growing number of families were not prepared to pay, with the strike finally broken when a growing number of families ordered their loved ones taken off when they lapsed into delirium. (Most of the prisoners themselves stayed committed to the end). I am debating in my mind what this means for Palestinian political prisoners, who frequently go on hunger strike, but do NOT take it to the death. Several of them reached 200+ days -- which means they were not on a true, total hunger strike. The longest the Irishmen could make it before dying was 76 days.

I also felt conflicted because the author (a reporter for the Guardian) did a good job of not romanticizing the hunger strikers and their comrades. I don't morally approve of deliberately targeting and killing civilians, even when fighting against an occupier. And many of these men were guilty of that. Still, this does not detract from my sympathy for their overall cause. Margaret Thatcher's administration was truly an oppressive regime, and without the resistance, it paid no price of its own. When will countries learn that when you oppress an entire population/culture, resistance will never die? It is inevitable that some elements of that resistance will be violent. The "original sin" is the occupation, and it must end.