Rating: 2/5

Why I Quit Reading Anne Tyler

Anne Tyler has been around a long time and when her books first came out I read them religiously, but I finally lost interest after "Accidental Tourist." "Ladder of Years" reminded me of why.

When Tyler first started publishing in 1964, there was something fresh and unusual about her style. She didn't judge her characters; didn't seem to be using them to symbolize anything. She simply seemed to like her characters, there was affection for them on the page. At the time that was unique, and that's what I liked about reading her books. However, eventually, I was bothered by that very thing. The books seemed too light. There didn't seem to be a point to her stories. Tyler was the quintessential “post-modernist.” Maybe I was just old fashioned, but I started needing more weight, more "meaning."

I got all the way to the end of "Ladder of Years" and [SPOILER ALERT!] when Delia returned to her husband, I did not see it coming. It was not on my radar, because Tyler didn’t put it there. But as I look back on the story now, it didn't matter. It didn't matter whether Delia ended up staying with her husband Sam or returning to her new life with Joel. Either ending was equally plausible. It was hard to care. But I felt cheated because I thought Delia had left her family because her husband never really engaged with her, yet in the end she goes back to him even though that hasn't changed. As it turns out, Delia didn’t really want to engage with him, or anyone else. In her new life, she works as a “live-in woman” performing housework and parenting tasks for people unrelated to her, because that’s the way she likes things, not too enmeshed. So I suppose going back with noncommittal Sam is just fine. But if Tyler was trying to make a statement about the virtues of familiarity, it was entirely lost on me. In the end I just didn't care; I was no longer invested in Delia. (Perhaps Driscoll's description of the Grinsteads is where Tyler tips her hand: "Not mingling or taking part, living to yourselves like you do; and then your pretend like that’s normal. You pretend like everything’s normal, you’re so cagey and smooth; you gloss things over; you don’t explain.” But I still don't see her point.)
 
Anne Tyler’s books are pleasant enough and she is a very skillful writer, with great descriptions that bring a world to life, but too often for me they read like cartoons. The colorful, pointless characters (Nat is a case in point) are amusing but not truly interesting. In this book, they even have quirky cartoon-like names: Binky, Pooky, Spence (for a girl), Lysander, Mr. Pomfret, Rick Rack, Joe and Amy Guggles, Frank and Mia Mewmew, Tucky Pearson...

I was also bothered by the way in which the folksy narrator’s voice leaked into everyone else’s, so that you have adolescent boys saying improbable things such as, “You’re going through those hankies like a spigot.” He’s 13 but he sounds like a little old lady!

I respect Anne Tyler but I can't recommend this book.