Rating: 5/5

My daughter-in-law was talking to me about The Day the Universe Changed which tickled a memory. Quick search, yep, James Burke. Then I showed her this book from my shelf. I’d watched some of the original series but hadn’t actually read the book (that I’ve had for at least ten years.) 

So I pull it out, start reading and then… I get a bunch of ARCs, more ARCs, have a life, more ARCs, finally clear the queue and pick it back up again. And - I notice I started it 17 months ago. No, it doesn’t take that long to read. Anyway…

This is like ADHD chains, except a lot lengthier pauses (for elaboration) in between squirrels. All of his connections are interesting, and I think the real insights are in his last chapter, “In eating the Future”. Burke says on page 287, “Why should we look to the past in order to prepare for the future? Because there is nowhere else to look.” And two pages later, he notes, 

“In the heroic treatment, historical change is shown to have been generated by the genius of individuals, conveniently labelled ‘inventors’. In such a treatment, Edison invented the electric light, Bell the telephone, Gutenberg the printing press, Watt the steam banging, [Musk the … yeah, never mind] and so on. But no individual is responsible for producing an invention ex nihilo. The elevation of a single inventor [or privileged billionaire worshipped as one by his cult] to the position of sole creator at best exaggerates his influence over events, and at worst denies the involvement of those humbler members of society without whose work his task might have been impossible.”

Spot on, even including my not-veiled-at-all editorializing. He observes in 1978 something that is worse nearly 50 years later: “Our industries are geared toward high turnover, planned obsolescence, novelty.” And, “The final alternative is that research and development should be directed towards product if more durable goods and less planned obsolescence.” Also spot on.

Good stuff.

Burke notes on page 87 that the Saxon word for aristocrats is “lord”, meaning “loaf giver.” I have been listening to Prof John McWhorter’s Great Courses Myths, Lies, and Half-truths of Language usage and talks about that specific language change (among many others.)

Page 140, “The process by which fundamental change comes about at times has nothing to do with diligence, or careful observation, or economic stimulus, or genius, but happens entirely by accident.” Isaac Asimov said, “The most exciting phrase to hear in science, the one that heralds new discoveries, is not ‘Eureka’ but “That’s funny...’”

Page 286, “Edison, it may be said, invented the business of invention, and so introduced the idea of change for the sake of change.”
This is too often a driver.