Rating: 2/5

This review is of “Savage Surrender”, book #1 in the “Savage Secrets” series by Cassie Edwards. (Reviewer notes: The original version was published by Ace in August 1987; the book was later republished by Jove (May 1991) and Leisure (May 1996). The “Savage Secrets” series is NOT to be confused with the “Savage” series also authored by Mrs. Edwards).

The book begins in Minnesota, circa 1840, at the home of the Pfleugger family, consisting of father Harrison, mother Carole, and their two children, daughter Brenda Denise, 17 and the heroine of the book, and son Tommie, 5. Sadly, this will be the last night the Pfleugger’s spend together as their home is attacked by soldiers led by Major Joseph Partain. Only Brenda survives the attack. She escapes to the woods and is found by Striped Eagle, the hero of the book and an Ojibwa Indian, who takes her to his village. There, they become lovers and Brenda finds herself in a constant battle, being pulled in different directions. On the one side: her love for Striped Eagle. On another side: her desire for revenge. On yet another side: Striped Eagle’s sister, Morning Flower, and her hatred of Brenda.

In the end, Brenda and Striped Eagle marry. Major Partain is killed. Morning Flower grows to accept Brenda as Striped Eagle’s wife and they have their Happily Ever After.

Upside: Mrs. Edwards is an excellent atmospheric writer, meaning she describes scenes in a way that allows me, as a reader, to feel like I am there as an observer as opposed to simply reading words on a page or screen. One other highly underrated and appreciated part of Mrs. Edwards’ work is the research she has done into her Tribe of the Book language and customs; there are many books about Native Americans that don’t do so the way Mrs. Edwards’ books do.

Downside: Let’s start with the characters. Although Brenda checks off some boxes for romance novel heroines-she’s beautiful and has a great body, she is also young-she’s 17-and impetuous. These qualities lead her into trouble multiple times which Striped Eagle has to rescue her from (she extricates herself in one instance). It’s not fair to call Brenda a Simpering Sara, but rather a Perilous Penelope.

At the beginning of the book, Striped Eagle is a bit of a bastard. Almost immediately upon meeting Brenda-and knowing she just witnessed her family’s murders-he’s pressing her to have sex with him, which is at best insensitive and at worst incredibly sleazy. He only becomes more sensitive and caring when his father dies, making him chief of his band of Ojibwa. There is no character development or depth, and the supporting characters only exist as foils for Brenda and Striped Eagle, neither of whom are strong enough to truly lead a book. 

Sex: Mrs. Edwards usually writes great love scenes; here, her love scenes are quite muted. 

Violence: Assault, attempted rape, battery, knifing, shootings and killings take place in the book. The violence is not graphic.

Bottom Line: “Savage Surrender” is not a great start to Mrs. Edwards’ Savage Secrets” series. 2.24 stars.

Heroine: Brenda Denise Pfleugger, 17, Red hair, blue eyes. Pioneer’s daughter.

Hero: Striped Eagle, 25. Black hair, brown eyes. Future chief of the White Bear band of Ojibwa Indians.

Tropes: Historical romance. Native American hero.

Location: Minnesota, 1840.