Rating: 4/5

Safer wrote this book back in 1989 when he visited Vietnam, 14 years after the fall of Saigon. As he says, "Not until I returned to Vietnam . . . did I really begin to understand the grip the place had maintained on me." I second that statement. 

Interview with Bui Tin, Colonel of the People's Army, retired: Kissinger believed if Americans weren't winning, they were losing. The NVA believed if they weren't losing, they were winning.///Soldiers would march on the Ho Chi Minh trail for 12 hours at a time, then dig in for 2 hours. A man could lose 200 grams of blood a day from leeches. Many men bled to death. They once shot an elephant and ate meat for 5 days.///Men drowned, fell off cliffs, died of malaria and snakebite.///He was puzzled by the one year tour of duty for American soldiers. Six months for learning, three for fighting, and the last three trying to stay alive and make it home. Such a policy made no sense to him. It was actually Westmoreland's idea. By spreading out the duty, he seemed unaware that he was exposing more Americans to disenchantment and a sense of uselessness. And fragging had begun. At the other extreme was General Giap's mercilessness about sending his troops to their deaths.///He thought the B-52 raids were the worst thing he had to deal with.///The worst part of the War was the time after the 1968 Tet offensive. It was a huge price but "worth it" for the change it caused in America. For me, that's just a lack of sensitivity to what actually happened.///When Safer talks about all the NVA wounded he sees, Bui Tin brags about independence. Such bullshit.//He has actually visited the War Memorial Wall in Washington. He thinks it is important to remember. 

Westmoreland believed Asians had a different attitude towards death. "They don't think about death the way we do. They accept it very fatalistically." Pardon me while I vomit. I have heard those types of beliefs many times during the War. Once again, however, we must mention that the other side wasn't much better. They treated ARVN soldiers like they were "only puppets." 

Safer remembers Long Binh and all the amenities, such as swimming pools, the soldiers had there. 

He tells the story of how once an old Vietnamese farmer was shot with a grenade launcher by a nervous guard. It did not explode, but was stuck in him. He walked 15 miles to Saigon for help. A team of American doctors, protected by sandbags, removed the missile. He then hopped off the cot and walked back home. 

Dr. Hoa was a pediatrician who was a spy for the VC. In 1979, she left the party, disillusioned.///She feels no bitterness that ARVN soldiers killed her brother. In the context of war, she finds it logical. Smart woman.///She feels the leaders now cannot function in peace. All they know is war and indoctrination. They have become corrupt with their new power.///And ARVN soldiers have endured four years of reeducation camps. Those poor guys were always treated like the bottom rung of a ladder.///Many veterans abuse their wives and children. They have no jobs, no money. They feel abandoned.///She feels nobody won this war.///One of her workers is a former ARVN officer. She was the only one willing to help him. He spent four years in reeducation camps. It was slave labor. Only enough food to barely stay alive. 

Safer attends a group meeting of former NVA soldiers and American veterans. The Communist host rattles on about defeating imperialism and other such nonsense. Finally, Safer breaks the rule of interference and urges the man politely to shut the fuck up. Which he does. Then the soldiers finally talk about their experiences in the War. 

Colonel Hoa describes finding a woman whose legs had been cut off by shrapnel. Beyond pain, she knew she was going to die. She asks the Colonel to kiss her before she dies. He does just that. 

I can never forgive Monsanto and Dow for Agent Orange and napalm. The area around Quang Tri is a poisoned land. 

In August 1965, Safer reported on the burning of the hamlet of Cam Ne by marines. Following the broadcast, Safer carried a weapon for the first time, fearing for his life. The story was broadcast over and over again around the world. Marines had taken fire from there every time they went by. This causes a rage that seeks revenge. The hootches are being set on fire. There are voices in one. Terrified people and a baby crying. A lieutenant orders a private to torch it. A Vietnamese reporter asks them to wait. He talks a woman and her baby to come out. After the report on CBS, the marines felt they were stabbed in the back. Officials lied about what happened. In fact, Cam Ne was part of the fortified hamlet program that the US had urged the Diem government to start. It turns out, the operation was requested by the province chief for nonpayment of taxes. A reported 150 houses were destroyed. Four prisoners were old men; five wounded were women. No guns, no captured soldiers. CBS was called the Communist Broadcast System. One marine said, "They are enemy until proven innocent. . . . I feel no remorse. . . . You can't do your job and feel pity for these people." 

The worst reaction to the Cam Ne affair came from the White House. President Johnson threatened to expose Safer's "communist ties." Even more dismaying for me was the inclusion of Bill Moyers in all of this. He is a man I admire. I guess it just shows what the times were like. 

The Cham people lived long ago. The relics of the Champa Empire are stolen and sold on the black market. One man hired Vietnamese infantry to foray deep into VC territory to pillage a Cham temple. 

Even chaplains mugged for the cameras. Safer saw one cover his face with mud when he saw cameras approaching. Their goal was probably to convert soldiers and to make a mark for themselves later. 

Some famous people got special treatment. Like the novelist John Steinbeck who was thought to be favorable to the war. The hawkish Joseph Alsop could be counted on to write favorable columns. Walter Cronkite was a bit harder to win over. LBJ was supposed to have said, "If we've lost Cronkite, we've lost the war" after the 1968 Tet Offensive. 

Hundreds of homeless people in Ho Chi Minh City. Some are ex-ARVN soldiers. They desperately pass notes trying to reach long-gone Americans who might be able to help them. 

Interview with Pham Van Thuong, who used to be in the Mike forces. They were mainly Cambodian, Montagnard, and Nung tribesmen. Commanded by 12-man teams of US special forces. Mike means "Mobile Strike Forces." Among the best-trained and most reliable soldiers. Were well-fed, well-led, and well-paid. Also among the most cruel. Some Nung mercenaries filled mason jars with ears they cut off from dead enemy soldiers. Ethnic minorities hated the Vietnamese. Once the Nung and the Vietnamese started to fight each other. Cutting off ears may have started with the VC but nobody knows for sure.///Thoung was sought after when Saigon fell. The VC smashed out his teeth. He went to reeducation camp for ten years, ARVN officers went for about 5 or 6.///Thuong wants Safer to meet his wife. 

Pham Xuan An was a correspondent for Time magazine, but he was also a spy for the North Vietnamese. Even he was sent to reeducation camp because he was corrupted by being with the westerners. 

Van Le describes killing an American. Now it starts to bother him, looking back on it. He wrote this poem: 

There's an American soldier 
Who returns to northern Cu Chi. 
He bends his back to the tunnels. 
What does he see? What does he think? 

There's a Vietnamese hero 
Now a grandfather. 
He asks the American to share wine 
Outside the tunnel. 

Each man is silent 
As he looks into the other's eyes. 
Something is rising like a deep pain. 

The war was terrible 
All that time past. 
The dead lost their bodies. 
The living lost their homes. 

How many American soldiers 
Died in this land? 
How many Vietnamese 
Lie buried under trees and grass? 

The pain still lingers. 
Why should we remember it? 
We are old, our era past. 
Our mistakes belong to bygone days. 

Now the wineglass joins friends in peace. 
The old men lift their glasses. 
Tears run down their cheeks. 

Safer is approached by two men: Duong The Tu and Tran Duc Suu. They worked for CBS and now 14 years later are looking for $3,000 apiece that is owed them because they are desperately poor. Safer promises to relay their message. He takes their pictures to prove who they are. A year later, they will be sent the money. They tell Safer they will work for CBS again in the future if needed. 

Boat People suffered horrible indignities trying to leave the country. Under pressure from world nations, Vietnam set up Orderly Departure Plan. But it is corrupt and slow. Perhaps half the nation lives with bags packed hoping to leave.