Rating: 4/5

Michael Jordan. A god ball in hands. An exceptional athlete and icon. A 'superstar' whose career goes beyond the small world of basketball to reach a whole era, incarnate a whole culture.

In 'Playing for Keeps', the historian and journalist David Halberstam, with passion and genius, has the talent to retrace more than the biography of the player -he also shows how the man, in his own way, personified the rapid changes of a society who shaped him to turn him into a God of sports and money. The thing is, turning professional in 1984, Michael Jordan, besides his incredible skills on the courts benefited also from an advantage his predecessors (Larry Bird, Magic Johnson...) didn't have: he came out of age, as a player, during the 1980s. It matters.
 
In a book which is as intelligent as it is detailed, Halberstam indeed shows himself instructive as much about how professional sports evolved during the past decades as he is about the triumphing capitalism fuelling it. Fans can rest assured -of course he retells the journey of the player, the big moments of his careers, from the kid in North Carolina to the Chicago Bulls (a tumultuous saga by itself!). He even shed some lights upon those who made such success possible in the first place (family, coaches, teammates, agents...). But it's not what stroke me the most in here. What sets such read apart is that he goes beyond it all to explain the rise of the Jordan's cult, a man who will end up getting paid more than $40 millions on average just to play ball. 
 
At a time when the NBA itself was in the midst of a revolution (new owners, new image, new politics), take a young player with an exceptional talent and just throw him into a frenetic globalisation, full up to the brim of American culture and where new medias serve more and more the cults of 'stars' whose salaries are increasing exponentially, and you'll have all the ingredients indeed to birth a legend. ESPN, Nike, McDonald and other leading companies embodying triumphing profit-making will do the rest -thanks to them a player will transcend his sport to become an icon, the symbol of a whole culture that Halberstam displays with brio and relevance. 
 
Fascinating, this perspective, besides being the retelling of the exceptional career of a basketball genius, adds a particular interest to a must-read which will no doubt please every fan. The only regret is that, published in 1999 (after Jordan's second retirement) it ends with the 1997-98 season. Such ending surely is epic (the Bulls' victory against the Utah Jazz!), but there's nothing about his return in 2001 and his following career with Washington (Halberstam died in 2007, he could have expended it). Nevertheless, here's a masterpiece of a biography! Brilliant.