Rating: 3/5

High school freshman Chris is going through some changes. He’s become prone to mood swings and finds that he’s hungry all of the time. No, it’s not just puberty. He’s actually turning into a vampire. Chris knows what this means. Eventually he will starve to death from lack of blood, or the thirst will drive him to kill someone, and he will be executed as a result. So when Chet the Celestial being offers to cure him of his vampirism, he can’t say no. In return, all Chris needs to do is infiltrate the local vampires and stop them from raising an evil ancient deity.

Thirsty is a strange but fascinating little read. In a genre filled with sexy, dangerous vampires, Anderson presents us with an account that’s far from romantic. Chris’s transformation from human to vampire is visceral and disturbing, a nice little metaphor for the frustrating time known as puberty. The writing here is very well done. Chris’s voice wanders back and forth between strangely beautiful to conversational, and it works well. I found Chris to be a very realistic character, not a superhero but a scared kid caught up in a very bad situation. Watching Chris struggle to do the right thing, when the right thing doesn’t even seem to be an option at times, can be painful. You can’t help but cheer him on as he tries to save the day, get the girl, and keep his transformation a secret. I also really liked the setting that Anderson set up here. As someone who grew up in a Massachusetts suburb, I instantly connected to the similar town found here, despite the fact that vampires weren’t preying on human beings where I grew up.

Thirsty is the second M.T. Anderson book that I’ve read, and despite the fact that I connected well to the setting, and the narrator, I couldn’t help but think about how it didn’t quite measure up to Feed (the first M.T. Anderson book I’ve read- which was written five years after Thirsty). Thirsty struggles from being a little too predictable. From the second Chris discovers that he’s turning into a vampire, I knew how things were going to turn out. Also, despite the fact that Anderson does a great job crafting teen dialogue, I was a little annoyed by the fact that so many of the characters (mostly the teenagers) sounded exactly the same. These two factors did bring down my enjoyment some. In the end, I still felt as if it was a strong story that’s walks to the beat of its own drummer. I would recommend it for people that like vampire stories, but are looking for something a little different that the dozens of vampire titles that have populated the YA section over the past few years.