Rating: 4/5

1996? really that late? I guess it means he wrote vols 2 and 3 much later than the first one; this could be expected to make him more nostalgic, more trying to bring the period and people of his youth to life, to remember them, record them. He gives brief life stories of a great many characters, seems to me wanting to show the richness of communities of people he knew in his lifetime. Which he succeeds in doing.

I wanted to believe this third vol. was autobiographical, but after checking Murray's bio on Wikipedia I think it can't be very autobiographical, though he must surely be drawing on lots and lots of people he knew well in real life.

GREAT BOOK, great read.

""In the triumphant concluding volume of the trilogy that began with Whistle Guitar and The Spyglass Tree, Albert Murray gives us what is at once an African American coming-of-age novel and a pitch-perfect evocation of a touring jazz band at the height of the Swing era. Murray's hero, Scooter, graduates from an Alabama college and becomes a bass player in an ensemble headed by the legendary Bossman. As Scooter criss-crosses the United States, he and his bandmates find themselves retracing Sherman's march to the sea, the Underground Railroad, and the conquest of the West. The Seven League Boots is nothing less than a jazz epic, so vivid, high-spirited, and infectious that readers will tap their feet to the music of its prose.""

Murray was not into Black Rage and dwelling on racist incidents, and apparently he was criticized by many because of this. I can see both points of view. In any case, even though Murray seldom refers to racist incidents and only a couple times addresses the topic at all, most of the book makes me very aware of the great distance between my narrow, provincial, small-town midwestern culture and Murray's culture among some groups or strata of African Americans. So many words and expressions used in the book I recognize right away have meanings over and above the meanings I am able to assign them. [e.g. a person 'signifying' seems to have a special meaning] The way people interact, the way they talk to each other [more than just the words used], all the unsaid, understood things underneath.... Of course there must be many subcultures in the country that are equally strange and closed to me; maybe it's precisely because Murray does such a great job of opening it up, showing it, that lets me see the gap.

By the way, unlike the first volume, this book is not written in any kind of dialect, barring a few bits of conversation.

The detail and depth of the discussions of the music played by the band in this book are incredible. [Murray did spend many years writing music reviews of this kind of music, so he really did know a lot about it.] I sure have missed out on a lot by not being well acquainted with this kind of music [or most other kinds, for that matter, even though I think of myself as someone who enjoys music...] It's a fascinating read.

The 'ancestral imperatives' are a theme in this narrative. Seems to refer to expectations of the community that raised him to make his life/achievements a credit to that community and maybe even a 'credit to the race' [not his words]. Schoolteachers, college teachers, family, other members of the community -- THEIR expectations of him, I think. I think it's in connection with the 'ancestral imperatives' that he also says "being an answer to the old folks' prayers". For Murray, or at least the main character of this series, the ancestral imperatives are a big force in his life, not exactly a guiding source, but a consciousness, an awareness. This volume has many references to 'down home' people and events described in volume 1.

I'm curious who the Bossman is modeled after. Both Duke Ellington and Count Basie are mentioned several times in the narrative [but not appearing] but surely one or both are used for Bossman?? Also, who would the Hollywood movie star Scooter lives with for a time be resembling? [One reader suggests Katherine Hepburn, could be.] I was a bit less interested in the last quarter of the book that went into this movie star and the wealthy Swiss aristocrat with great knowledge of jazz and blues that she felt she learned so much from and that she introduced Scooter to who was equally impressed; and then Scooter's few weeks in Paris, mentioning practically every Paris boulevard he walked on. Not real sure what the function of this last quarter of the book was; it's so different from the traveling blues band which was just so wonderful and amazing.

Some nice insights in the last part in the pros and cons of an American [esp. a brownskin] emigrating to live in Europe [e.g. Paris]. Also, reflections on the difference between playing blues/swing to a French audience and to an American audience [anyway one that grew up with the music].

Brownskin is the term most often used in this volume for what today we often call 'black'.

Here's a nice description of the Bossman:
"He stood up and came down out of the control booth walking his crotch-airing, knee-loosening, back-straightening, shoulder-adjusting sporty limp walk and took his place in the center of the studio..."

"All I can say is that as far as I was concerned the way that band played music was the way I had come to think about music. What I heard when I heard that band was not only the sound that went with the way things looked and felt but also the sound of how I already felt about things. It was the sound equivalent of whispering to yourself. 'The sound not only of my blues bedeviled situation, but also of my aspirations, my fears and frustrations, and my celebrations and exhilarations.' " p 303

Words I don't know:

VAMP [noun and verb]
'Every phrase [of the music] should be like a jive quotation from the signifying monkey"