Rating: 4/5

I had mixed feelings until a bit more than 3/4 of the way from the end. I liked Benjamin and also many of the other characters, but there were so MANY characters to keep up with (and not always very distinctively portrayed) that I started just ignoring the ones who didn't merit more than a mention. I found Benjamin's choice to go undercover as a slave to be relatively credible, given his character as a person who wants to right wrongs, his mother's manipulation, and his need of money to break free from her. What I didn't find too credible was his ability to survive undercover. To me there were far too many hints at his real identity - he didn't always speak like the slave he was pretending to be (did slaves, even those educated in Latin, speak credible phrases in spontaneous conversation with their masters, even kindly ones? Hambly does mention in her endnote that yes, some masters were extremely kind...but even so...). And the notion of putting a different colored bandanna on this extremely obvious tree near the water - well, who on earth wouldn't notice that and wonder why? But never mind. The book's pacing suffers from too many atmospheric adjectives, larded in too frequently. Every time Ben goes into the cane fields, do we need a description of the moon, the light, the soil, the way it feels, etc. etc. etc. Some editing could have helped. 
When the real narrative drive begins, it's a bit late - some will have already given up. I was glad I lasted, because this part was clear and spare and really good. I also loved the ending. Poignant and well-handled. So - I was ready to give three stars but upped it at the end. 
I knew very little about slavery in Louisiana and what the cane growing and harvesting involved. This was very interesting and well-done, as was the depiction of the differences between town life and country plantation life near the river and the bayous. I also never realized that a real distinction was made at the time (the 1830s) between Creoles of French lineage and "Americans," even free whites. Depictions of voodoo and the way it interacted with Christianity in these early slave times, before the 1840s camp meeting revivals took hold, and the way the ring shouts (to mourn the dead) and the field hollers evolved from remembered snatches of African music were also really good.
So I am hooked enough to investigate the first of the series, A Free Man of Color, which is considered to be the best.