Rating: 3/5

***This review has Spoilers***
I rate this book 3 stars.
The loving trap by Daphne Clair is a romance novel set in New Zealand. The plot revolves around the ‘H’ Marc and the ‘h’ Kyla, both successful business owners. They meet each other in Marc’s office, where he makes a proposition to acquire Kyla’s shop to expand his business. He offers to find another suitable place for her business. But Kyla is reluctant to agree to it. Marc interest in Kyla is piqued because he has never been the one to chase but the one to whom people have kneeled. He flirts with her, tries to capture her interest and get to know her personally. Kyla falls for him too, but she is unable to connect with him at either an emotional or a physical level. A mere kiss would throw her into panic mode and this gives us a hint of her dark past. Kyla keeps Marc in dark and he too turns a blind eye to it thinking she was shy. In spite of this, they get married but then their married life becomes a torturous ride instead of romantic. Marc tries to get intimate with Kyla on many levels (not only physically) but both characters end up fighting all the time, getting frustrated sexually because of their inability to consummate their marriage. At a party, some other guy ‘Duncan’ flirts with Kyla and forcedly kisses her and this triggers a jealous rampage and an attempt at marital rape by Marc. The couple even decide to get divorced. But circumstances bring them back together and since this is a HP book, the reader is guaranteed with HEA. 

My views: It’s a complete rant session now, so beware!
The hero, Marc, is a very handsome, well built, confident and a rich businessman who takes a liking to the h. He is a jealous and possessive alpha. He is hot headed enough to be blinded with anger and frustration often.
The heroine Kyla is a beautiful, shy, business woman. She seems to be brave given her abusive past. 
The book went from ‘Romantic’ to ‘Traumatic’ for me. Initially it was an engaging story. The scenes did sizzle a lot and my rating soared high to 5 stars as I reached the part where Marc proposes marriage to Kyla but then it just went downhill and it could never be the same. Marc and Kyla were utterly ignorant fools. Lack of honesty on Kyla’s part was the root cause of their troubles. 
In the party scene, I don’t understand as to why didn't Kyla fight Duncan just like she fights Marc, her husband, whenever he got forcefully physically intimate. But NO! The icing was when she supports Duncan for his actions and gives a dumb excuse to Marc for her actions OR rather lack of any action at all. This nonsense, at least, she could have spared Marc with. I also don’t understand why didn't she get any medical help...may be her parents weren't financially stable when she was young, but as an adult, self-dependent, earning woman, she could have opted for counselling sessions. Kyla cannot be so innocent as to not know what was it to be married and to have a family of one's own. She must be knowing that sexual intercourse played a vital role in a marriage. If she wasn’t comfortable with the idea, why did she have to agree to Marc’s proposal in the first place. It is not a crime to be unmarried. How could she expect him to be understanding when he didn't know the exact reason behind her panic attacks. Kyla keeping her past from Marc was like ‘cheating’ for me, especially when she had not dealt with it herself and finds it difficult to have a sexual relationship. I mean what is the point in getting married to a person if you are unable to have physical or emotional intimacy with him/her? Kyla shouldn't have subjected Marc to such misery by keeping such important incident of her life from him. If she wasn’t ready to deal with it she should have outright rejected his marriage proposal. What I mean to say is that it would have been easier for him to understand her and the situation. Truth would have saved them of the pain and all the time they lost.
And what kind of fool was Marc to not try to know the reason behind her panic attack. If he cared and loved her, he should have coaxed her to talk about it to him or a doctor, I mean that was the first step he should have taken, right? I loved the story so much when Marc was pursuing Kyla; his teasing smiles, his gentle caresses, his tender kisses, him seducing her slowly, the shyness of h and his concern for her, everything was fantastic. I loved the chase, the slow burn and anticipation. It was drool-worthy. But when such a confident man (or any other person irrespective of the gender) became so nervous while saying wedding vows, while touching his wife and dealing with her emotions, it just gutted me out. 
And although I liked Marc, at times I hated him because no matter what, he should not have stooped to low levels of animalistic behavior after marriage due to his sexual frustration and he should not have attempted to rape. Marc doesn’t rape Kyla but even an attempt of rape and violence is a big NO NO for me. Kyla's coldness followed by Marc 's violent attempts of seducing her…. I just couldn't take it anymore.
Considering her reserved attitude while dating, in the honeymoon and post honeymoon, all of a sudden after their temporary separation, Kyla warms up to her husband and even goes forward seducing him. How in the hell did she turn out to be so confident? Was it the distance that acted as a magic to break the dry- spell? That left me feeling weird.
Lastly about the writing… it was really captivating. I felt all the emotions of both the leads and my heart broke into a million pieces. The end however seemed abrupt, unsatisfying and I was pushed into thinking that all is going to be well just like that. But I shouldn’t care because, as much as I wanted their story to be a HEA, I wanted my misery to end quickly.
When the plot summary is given by the author, I personally feel there must be a warning of possible triggers. I couldn't sleep a whole week, the story was very disturbing and exhausting mentally to me; call me a softy! This story has got imprinted in my brain and it is taxing my mind till date. I got so involved in the story that it's consuming all my strength to get it out of my mind. It took me such a long while to contemplate and write a review about the plot. This book is definitely meant for brave hearts. It served me right for not reading the reviews having spoilers. I had read a few and I had got to know the h was a rape survivor, which acted as a catalyst for me to read it, because I felt she was a brave woman. But the scenes of attempts at marital rape, the emotional anguish of both the lead characters, sucked all my energy and left me dehydrated with all the tears pouring out of my eyes throughout the reading session. I know I am a dumbass for jumping into this story without casting a glance at the spoilers. I cannot smack my head enough for this mistake. So much for searching novels with alpha bossy hero. The loving trap was indeed a trap for me!

Triggers:
Heroine is raped when she was young and she hides it from the H.
Marital rape attempt
Lots of forced kisses.