Rating: 3/5

Simon Brett’s Charles Paris mysteries are unfailingly amusing, and packed with enjoyable theatrical and showbiz gossip. This one starts with a very funny parody of a bad theatrical sex-farce and goes on to include the recording of an audiobook at the beginning of the audiobook resurgence, when cassette tapes were still the dominant format. It’s all great fun and very knowing. I would bump this up to 3 1/2 stars if I could, since it is better than it needs to be, if not great, which it isn't trying to be.

Brett is no Wodehouse, but he shares with Wodehouse and comic writers like Richmal Crompton the ability to retread the same characters and themes almost endlessly without ever becoming boring or dropping beneath (or above) a certain self-imposed standard. There is no lazy writing. This review could apply equally to any of his books (although admittedly I haven’t read all or even most of them – perhaps there are some stinkers in there). The sex-farce parody is all the more amusing because I am sure that Brett is aware that his own books are perhaps only a few steps up the ladder from such shameless populist stuff.

If I have a problem with these books it is that I would frankly prefer that they were not mysteries. I would be more than happy to read them as theatrical comedies, without the statutory killings, but I suppose that wouldn’t shift as many copies (there has to be ‘murder in the title’). The theatrical bits are always the best. I have an especial love for novels of theatrical life, but they are known for underselling. 

In my private literary dreamworld I like to imagine this series, sans killings, as a kind of Dance To The Music Of Time of British showbiz life over the last forty years or more...

I am not a great fan of crime writing. I have no desire to read fiction about real crime (why would you?) and while I enjoy ‘cosy’ mysteries such as these (and the works of Bruce Montgomery) I have a fundamental issue. Is murder really a suitable topic for comedy? I understand that it is a way of coming to terms with unacceptable things in an acceptable way – but would we do the same with sexual assault or child abuse? Why is acceptable with the killing of a human being? I know I am overthinking this, but it does niggle at me sometimes…