Rating: 4/5

”’The women one meets--what are they but books one has already read/ You’re a whole library of the unknown, the uncut.’ He almost moaned, he ached, from the depth of his content. 

‘Upon my word I’ve a subscription.’”

  

There is a 1997 movie starring Helena Bonham Carter, Linus Roache, and Alison Elliott.

Merton Densher is in love with Kate Croy. Their circumstances, though seemingly impossible, are not unusual in a class bound society like Edwardian England. Kate’s future is held hostage by her Aunt Maude, who is attempting to save her from the ruinous circumstances of her father. ”’If you hear anything against her father--anything I mean except that he’s odious and vile--remember it’s perfectly false.’” Doesn’t he sound like an interesting chap? Kate does feel compelled by her father and his circumstances. To accept her father and his way of life would allow her to escape the life her Aunt is so determined to thrust upon her. 

She will be ruined of course, but a certain level of freedom does come with being socially wrecked. 

Does she love Merton Densher? 

That is a good question, and if you ask me that question at different times in the book, I might give you a different answer. He is a journalist, wonderfully knowledgeable about a great number of things. He is pleasant and charming and would make any woman a wonderful companion, but he is lacking one very important thing that nullifies all of his best traits…money. 

Kate could ruin herself with Densher as easily as she could with her father, but she hesitates to do so. The longer she takes to accept one of the gold rings her aunt has arranged, the more time she gains for circumstances to change. She is, in other words, more practical about their relationship than Merton. 

Kate and Merton both meet the American heiress Milly Theale, separately under different circumstances, but eventually they all become fast friends. Milly, after all, is in need of friends. 
  ”She was alone, she was stricken, she was rich, and in particular was strange.”

Milly is rather strange in the sense that she has no pretensions. She is who she is all the time, in contrast to her British friends who were raised in a society of so many rules governing their actions that they are often contorted into distorted versions of themselves. ”In The Wings of the Dove James was to return to an earlier interest--the clash between the American and British attitudes--which put ‘crudely and briefly,’ might be described as the conflict between innocence and experience.”

Henry James loves to spend a lot of time pulling apart everything anyone says or thinks to find the nuggets of meaning. His writing reflects this obsession, and at times his speculative archaeological digging into the various emotions and thoughts surrounding a conversation can be mind numbing to a reader. Ponderous is a word that comes to mind. I keep thinking of him writing a scene like a Picasso cubist portrait, showing all sides at once and in the process revealing the true nature of the speaker or the listener. 

His writing, despite the ponderous tendencies, is superb. I would read this book every morning before venturing into my office to write. I don’t write in a style even close to James, but his style elevated my awareness of my own writing. He is a grand master of the English language. 

Milly is diagnosed with an illness that will certainly shorten her life. Kate can see a way that this misfortune could eliminate the stumbling blocks between Kate and Merton’s future happiness. He simply has to marry Milly and inherit her fortune. Merton is appalled at the thought, but his gentlemanly morality is hampered by his love for Kate. ”There were moments again--we know that from the first they had been numerous--when he felt with a strange mixed passion the mastery of her mere way of putting things. There was something in it that bent him at once to conviction and to reaction.”

We’ve all known persuasive people like Kate. They are people so convinced that they are right that their certainty overcomes our objections. I am always beset with doubts as to the right decision. I can weigh and argue any side of an argument. There is generally more than one right solution to life’s trials and tribulations. The answer is A &amp; B, or maybe it is D, all the above, but for people like Kate, it is emphatically C. 

Merton and Kate both adore Milly, but that British upper class practicality lends a bit of callousness to how Kate perceives the situation. Milly has a crush on Merton so the acorn with which a tree can grow has been sown. Milly has no heirs, so why shouldn’t she marry Merton? She would make him a man of means. It would just be a matter of time before Kate and Merton can be together. 

”She must die, my dear, in her own extraordinary way.”

Of course, there is a delicious twist at the end. 

This is considered the first of his final three masterpieces, followed by The Ambassadors (1903) and The Golden Bowl (1904). My plans are, when I next feel that niggling desire to read James, that I will be proceeding to The Ambassadors. The Portrait of a Lady still remains my favorite James, so we will see if one of these other masterpieces can displace Isabel Archer in my heart. 

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten