Rating: 4/5

'Sweetheart, suffering doesn't have a colour. Does it? Can't we step out of this nightmare? I'd give anything, I'd give anything if we could.' 

'There's always further to fall, always, always.'

This is a much looser novel than either Giovanni’s Room or If Beale Street Could Talk, though Baldwin's writing remains raw and powerful. 

I actually could have read a whole book on Rufus and Leona as many of the themes and moods were already comprised in their troubled relationship though I guess their both being crushed under the weight of terrible suffering wasn't where Baldwin wanted to leave the book. Ensemble casts don't always work for me and there was an ebb and flow rhythm to this book where I sometimes languished and at other times sped up. 

Baldwin writes brilliantly about sex in both a visceral and intellectual way - and he has this incredible way of understanding perspectives: watching Rufus' sexualized violence, the text uses the word 'rape' - remarkable for a book written in 1961 with a nuanced understanding of how complex issues of consent and complicity can be - something with which we're still grappling. 

This is also a book which explores race in different dimensions, none of which are simplified. Against a prevailing racist discourse we have various mixed race relationships, just as different forms of sexuality are taken for granted, embracing queerness without smoothing out the real life consequences on the streets. 

Above all, this is a book about love and suffering. The siblings Rufus and Ida Scott, both Black, talented and charismatic, hold the book together and thread through many of the other relationships. 

It's hard to explain how alive this book is, wrapped in desire, desperation, despair. The amount of self-loathing Vivaldo and Eric feel took me back to the narrator of Giovanni's Room, and Rufus is written with a ruthless tenderness that reminds me of Sonny's Blues. 

In the end, the diffusion of Baldwin's attention over so many characters slightly diluted this book for me. But make no mistake, Baldwin is a supreme artist of vision and humanity. Does anyone else write more brutally and beautifully, more unflinchingly, about suffering, struggle, endurance and what happens when the spirit cannot sustain itself any longer? I don't think so.