Rating: 4/5

Taking place a long time after Don’t Bite the Sun, possibly decades though the passage of time is not often felt by the immortal Jang, Drinking Sapphire Wine returns us, at first, to the domed city of Four BEE and to our nameless protagonist. Starting off with a male/masc body, they are discontent and depressed. They still remember their romp through the desert in the previous book and their dead pet they had the androids of Four BEE bury outside. However, things within their Jang circle are getting complicated. They feel distant from their friends; Danor is returning from Four BAA and she appears to be on the fence on her feelings for the main character. Zirk, in both male/masc and female/femme bodies, is an annoying piss ant, Hergal is acting high and mighty, and Hatta is going through some change of his own. The main character keeps drinking (both the literal and metaphorical) sapphire of wine of Four BEE and just keeps living discontently.

However, after the main character and Zirk get into a duel, where they deliver a killing blow to Zirk, the androids that rule Four BEE ultimately decided give them a choice: remove their memories and original personality and de-age them to a child or exile till death. The main character bites the sun, they defy the androids. They choose exile. Now, by themselves in the desert. The main character will think upon their trials, tribulations, and relationships while surviving in the desert by working their own land. But they won't be alone for long...

Don't Bite the Sun was a strange novel that, despite that strangeness, ended up being a very thought-provoking novella. Drinking Sapphire Wine wasn't as thought-provoking as its plot returns to a more basic surviving in the wilderness story--though nothing too extreme happening--but it was still a fun and interesting novella that sees our protagonist's journey to its fitting end. It's also more humorous than the previous book and I very much enjoyed Tanith Lee's comedy. Prior to this little duology, I only read her more serious and darker works and the comedy wasn't too present there. Lee can be pretty damn funny when she wants to; her humor ranges from snarky to dry, but overall very British. 

In this sequel, several things come to light about the world. Both we as the readers and the main character themself come to learn that the utopia of the domed cities is a fabrication. Yes, the cities had laws of several kinds, but for the most part, even with the constant suicides of the immortal Jang teens, there was very little law-breaking or significant punishment that followed. This obviously changes with the main character's confrontation with Zirk in the beginning. In the domed cities, the desire to kill or murder has been completely effaced and as such there is no jail or form of punishment for such things. But after the confrontation, everyone, even the ruling androids, are at a lost until the main character is offered those choices that I mentioned at the start of this review. Once the main character leaves the domed cities, in a female/femme body--their last body change for forever--we start to see how insignificantly the androids regard them. Quite odd for a group who wish to see them returned to "proper" society and acting accordingly. Eventually, the main character is joined by other runaway Jang after a video of them and their new farm is broadcasted across the domed cities, and shortly after that more of the utopic visage of the domed cities sloughs off. Apparently, Four BEE sends the main character and their companions intentionally, faulty-built equipment that will malfunction, a way so they can't directly harm or kill them. 

Everyone who joins the main character are deemed anti-social and against the cities' ideals. It's quite interesting: a utopic society that lets humans do whatever they want and takes care of their every needs, immediately starts despising its former citizens who want a life outside of it. While we could see small cracks of this in Don't Bite the Sun, it's in full force here. Now, I want to remind people this a Tanith Lee book, The Dispossessed by Ursula K. Le Guin, it is not. Don't expect in-depth descriptions of how the domed cities or the main character's new farming commune are actually structured or work. If anything, the ultimate political thing that can be said about this novella, if anything, is that there are no true utopias. Even in a society where there is no capitalism, sexism, patriarchy, transphobia, racism, class distinction, i.e. the rest, utopia is but a masquerade. As soon as you step out of that utopia, your personhood is denied and written off as wrong. No idea if Lee was trying to provide a metaphor for something here or responding to something in real life at the time, but either way she isn't wrong with this criticism. 

But as I said, this book is more about the main character's personal journey. They feel very abandoned by their friends and loved ones, even before their exile. In a way, they come to finally love themselves and find happiness; but the true meat of the story, is them learning to cast off the domed cities' utopia and realize how it stunted them emotionally and mentally. The main character comes to learn that they can thing for themselves and that they can find their worth in both doing those things and knowing that they can do them. This is what the other runaway Jang come to eventually learn as well when they join up with the main character. The main character also learns that they can still make meaningful connections with others, particularly with Danor, who loves somebody else but still end sup being good friends, and with the mysterious Esten, who now wears the main character's former male/masc body. They can genuinely love all these people in different ways, not as forms of escapist pleasure or something to fill the void, but to actually love them as friends and lovers equally. 

And this is where we come to the title...

Sapphire wine is a literal drink in Four BEE. It's a beautiful blue color and delicious, but everyone drinks it a lot. At the book's end, the main character has started a vineyard on the farm with the other Jang and comments that it might not be the best tasting thing, but it will be better than the sapphire wine. The sapphire wine is the lies, the rose-tinted glasses, the naivete, the drugged-up revelry, and all those other overly idealistic things that the domed cities feed to the Jang, what keeps them inhibited. When you stop drinking it, you realize what you can do, not just with and for yourself, but with others too. 

Biting the sun will burn your mouth, but drinking sapphire wine is not the way to cool it.
I loved this little series.