Rating: 3/5

Note: Some of my goodreads shelves can be spoilers

Overall: ⭐️⭐️⭐️
Readability: 📖📖📖
Feels: 🦋🦋🦋
Emotional Depth: 💔💔💔💔
Sexual Tension: ⚡⚡⚡
Romance: 💞💞💞
Sensuality: 💋💋💋
Sex Scene Length: 🍑🍑🍑 
Steam Scale (Number of Sex Scenes): 🔥 (there are some additional short/vague scenes so it might feel hotter to others) 
Humor: A bit
Perspective: Third person from both the hero and heroine
Cliffhanger: No
Format: borrowed audiobook from Hoopla

(These are all personal preference on a scale of 1-5 (yours ratings may vary depending what gives you feels and how you prefer you sex scenes written, etc) except the Steam Scale which follows our chart from The Ton and Tartans Book Club )
Full break down on what my ratings above mean here: 
Overall: How I felt about it everything considered!
Readability: How ‘readable’ was the book? Did I fly through it? Did I have to tell myself to pick it back up repeatedly? Were any passages confusing? 
Feels: Totally subjective to each person but did the book give me any tingles? Any butterflies? Did it rip my heart out (in a good way?)
Emotional depth: How well do I feel I know the characters at the end? How much did I feel their emotions throughout the story?
Sexual tension: Again, subjective, but how strong was the wanting and longing to me between the characters? A book might have strong sexual tension without a single touch.
Romance: Was there romance? Did romantic things happen? This can be actions/words/thoughts of the characters and again is subjective. 
Sensuality: This is how the intimate scenes are written. Kisses and sexual scenes – how sensual were they? Were they on the mechanical side? Was there emotional pull tied in? Were the details explicit or flowery?
Sex Scene Length: How long the bedroom scenes are (generally (1) is 1-3 sentences (2) is a few paragraphs to a page-ish (3) is about average, a few pages (4) more well developed scenes, quite a few pages with descriptions (4) the majority of the book takes place in the bedroom 
Steam Scale: Generally, each flame is a scene. If scenes are super close together I sometimes combine them. If a scene is super short or so vague I don’t know what’s happening, I don’t count it. There’s some levels of grey but generally the number of flames is how many sex scenes there are (I max out at 5 so I’ll put a + after if there’s more than that) 

Should I read in order?
I did read book 1 and don’t think it’s necessary to read in order here.

Basic plot:
After Grace saves Dylan’s life, he hasn’t been able to get her out of his head. When their paths cross again, he finds an opportunity to have her stay with him as his daughter’s governess.

Give this a try if you want:
- Late Georgian (1832)
- London and country setting
- musically inclined mains
- widow/governess heroine
- child in the story
- lower steam – 1 full scene but some additional shorter/vague scenes

My thoughts:
I wanted to love this one so badly! I really enjoyed the first book of the series. But this one was a trial for me to get through and overall I wasn’t a big fan. 

I didn’t find myself liking either character for the most part, but especially the hero. It’s a bit of a heavier book to me – the hero deals with thoughts of suicide and really suffered from mood swings. The heroine has a lot of emotional baggage from her past. 

We through in a child in the story, which isn’t my favorite on a good day, and I found the relationship itself got a bit lost for me in all of this.

There were a few really cute/sweet scenes I appreciated. And I definitely got my heart engaged a bit at the end with the all is lost moment – but ultimately this happened at the VERY END of the book and I had to slog through it to get there. And the fact that it was all happening at the very end made their HEA feel unsatisfying to me. It left me doubting that everything was resolved with them. Overall this is not one I would reread or return to.

Content warnings:

- hero faces thoughts of suicide with an almost scene on page
- hero suffers from insomnia and tinnitus as a result from a horse accident
- mention of the hero possibly having tons of bastards
- heroine was in a bit of an emotionally abusive relationship with her husband 

Locations of kisses/intimate scenes:

Safe sex: Can't recall if anything is mentioned but I don't believe so - they are having an affair and are not married
8% - kiss
25% - kiss
45% - kisses
63% - kiss
79% - 🔥 kisses, fingering for her, her on top
83% - remembrance of scenes together (too short/vague to count)
85% - very short and vague scene