Rating: 3/5

➥ 3 Stars *:･ﾟ✧

BLANCHE: I feel so hot and frazzled. Wait till I powder before you open the door. Do I look done in?
STELLA: Why no. You are as fresh as a daisy.
BLANCHE: One that's been picked a few days.

━━━━━━━━━━━ ♡ ━━━━━━━━━━━

I've grown to appreciate this one more for its comedic value and its comedic value only. Well actually not really, I also actually appreciated the exploration of Blanche's character. I mean just look at this shit.

  STELLA: No. Stanley's the only one of his crowd that's likely to get anywhere.
BLANCHE: What makes you think Stanley will?
STELLA: Look at him.
BLANCHE: I've looked at him.
STELLA: Then you should know.
BLANCHE: I'm sorry, but I haven't noticed the stamp of genius even on Stanley's forehead.

I love her your honour. I can't help it when she insults men with such grace.

  BLANCHE: What sign were you born under?
STANLEY [while he is dressing]: Sign?
BLANCHE: Astrological sign. I bet you were born under Aries. Aries people are forceful and dynamic. They dote on noise! They love to bang things around!

She's been judging these men by their zodiac signs!!

  There is a crash; then a relative hush.
BLANCHE [brightly]: Did he kill her?

WHAT DO YOU MEAN "brightly" LMAO.

  BLANCHE: We are going to be very Bohemian. We are going to pretend that we are sitting in a little artists' cafe on the Left Bank in Paris! [She lights a candle stub and puts it in a bottle.] Je suis la Dame aux Camellias! Vous etes Armand! Understand French?
MITCH [heavily]: Naw. Naw, I-

This girl was putting in the work, trying to stress out these men to the max.

  STANLEY: I have a lawyer acquaintance who will study these out.
BLANCHE: Present them to him with a box of aspirin tablets.

I'm sorry but she's so real.

  STELLA: Blanche, you saw him at his worst last night.
BLANCHE: On the contrary, I saw him at his best! What such a man has to offer is animal force and he gave a wonderful exhibition of that! But the only way to live with such a man is to-go to bed with him. And that's your job-not mine!

BYE.

━━━━━━━━━━━ ♡ ━━━━━━━━━━━