Rating: 3/5

This is a collection of eight short stories about the lives of a handful of African-American characters by Cooper. I'm not sure how Cooper never crossed my radar before now. I think that her stories would be very accessible for high school students, and the bonus is that many of them serve as a very strong warnings against making bad choices in life. In these stories, one of the moral themes seems to be about the consequences of vanity and greed. The characters who care only about image and status fall hard, and the characters who live steady lives of hard work and romantic fidelity end up the winners.

What's most interesting about Cooper's writing is the voice in these stories. It feels like the beginning of each story starts when the narrator has set a big piece of cake or pie in front of you with a big cup of coffee, and then, as you're digging in, she starts to say, "Did you ever hear about so-and-so? Let me tell you her/his story..." and off you go. The writing has a very conversational feel, but what's even more interesting is that if these stories were read aloud and not read with the print visible, there would be a layer of meaning missing. There is a strong connection in Cooper's writing between how the word appears on the page and how it sounds spoken. In one story, Cooper even inserts musical notations into the middle of sentences.

Of all the stories, my two favorites were "How, Why to Get Rich" about three kids who try their hand working as day laborers in the field only to discover the brutal back-breaking work that farm work is, and "The Doras" which is the story about a young orphan girl, Dora, who takes her destiny into her own hands and tries to make the lives of her daughters better than her own. I liked this story best, actually, because the narrator plays more of a role in this story beyond simply telling the story. We see how the story of Dora and her daughters affects the narrator's own choices in her life regarding her marriage and her children. It felt less contrived, and it felt like there was more of a purpose for the narrator's presence.