Rating: 5/5

I'm falling in love with this book; I never want to leave this atmousphere. If you do not see me you'll find me with/in the weather.

"But the history of the atmosphere is recklessly slow."(intro/THE OFFICE FOR SOFT ARCHITECTURE)

The weather is the visible spinning of our world, it is the motion and thus the time we experience. Long before prayer bells there was weather, day and night, light and cloud and dark. These relationships have shaped us, we are not nocturnal in general. Our lives are shaped by the weather of our geographies and our geographies reflect the weather. Our history, indefinitely our weather, is recklessly slow.

"Dear Reader - a lady speaking to humans from the motion of her own mind is always multiple. Enough of the least. We want to be believed."(TOFSA)

Curious this gender orientation. Mother natureishness? Inevitably anyone speaking to humans from the motion of her own mind is always multiple. But this is the atmousphere right? The weather as the language for climate. The word as formal unit of English. Then, as noted in her esay, clouds are the formal moments of climate language. See our current huricanes, tornadoes in California. There is no longer an ability for minimalism when our construction of this experience seeks the circumference of the globe, we must sprawl, "We want to be believed."

"Some of us light a cigarette"(63).

More of this multiplicity into singularity, this shift of one to many. Many to one. By isolating the moments of weather we lose the context of its experience. This language, these poems are our moment: stratus of prose block, cirrus of lineation, clear skies btwn. Cirgarettes make clouds of smoke, this moment condenses the plural group into individual, individual action releases smoke into the air; we are liable for the weather.

"We speak as if / in you alone"(60.)

The collective sense of generalities becomes "Joe the Plumber." Why is this significant? In the continual deflection to "that guy over there" the lack of collective responsibility, the lack of unity through continual fractions eliminates a sense of whole, of weather. We need to understand all the parts in conjunction with each other, the atmousphere fills the gaps between our skyscrapers, not just the parts in and of themselves.

"Body of cloud of work. Where can a lady reside. Next the / earth and almost of out reach. Almost always electrified. / To surfaces of discontinuity. In light clothes and coloured / shoes. By the little flower called the pansy. O little bird / extravagant. Among its decayed houses. Against intoler-/able justice of betterment"(59).

The flowers, birds, the architecture, the poem, the phatic. The surface the decay of interior and exterior the minute extravagance, the cause for movement forward. This seems to unify the ecology of the poem together, align it with the poetic, tie it to our speaker as individual and as representative of the collective. All of these moments converge here, how she says in Sincerity that the weather is "breifly phatic."It the message most concerned with being a message. The text of the sky, we read down it, through it, as into tomorrow.