Rating: 4/5

Leith's impulsive buy of a run-down back-country farm with lottery winnings to escape from the big city (in this case, Sydney, Australia) and give her space to work her art as a professional potter would appeal to all us back-to-the-farm folk. The challenges she runs in to ... wood stove that belches smoke into the house ... clogged well ... chickens who hide their eggs and sheep who escape their pens ... were all light-hearted and laughable. The neighbors are, well, neighborly, and the run-down old farmhouse and outbuildings she purchases would give This Old House a run for their money. The story takes place in Tasmania, so for an American there were lots of unfamiliar terms, but not so many as to mar the story.

When Leith gets on a creative potting binge to do an exhibition, any of us who has ever had a noisy 'Muse' urging us to create could relate to how ridiculously obsessed she gets with her work. Reading how she builds her own woodfired kiln and then glazes pieces in it is worth the read alone.

The story missed out on a fifth star because, although the hero was enjoyable, Mace's interest in the prickly, self-reliant Leith in spite of how much she discourages him all the time just seemed a bit contrived. He's a successful farmer, attorney, and business man who already has a beautiful (if shallow) girlfriend, but instead he's chasing Leith. I would have liked him better if he'd ditched the shallow girlfriend earlier in the story, once it became apparent the self-reliant Leith was the kind of woman he wanted. The soon-to-be ex-girlfriend was not likeable and I was glad to see her get dumped, but Mace really strung her along (probably for sex). He was also a little too self-assured of himself sexually with Leith, a charm she was a little too susceptible to. Also ... what's with the 26 year old virgin stuff with Leith? C'mon! That assumption went out with the 1960's ... this book was written in 1985!

Leith's challenges managing the farm are hilarious and very, very human.