Rating: 4/5

This book basically tries to analyze and to some extent, answer two vital questions that will catch the attention of anyone in power:

1) Does the discontent of the populace actually have anything to do with economic development? If so, is it a positive or negative correlation? Why, as Tocqueville wondered, didn't the French Revolution take place during the worst financial years? Why didn't the Revolution take place in poor and underdeveloped rural areas, but instead it happened right in the heart of Paris, where people enjoyed the highest living standard in the entire country?
2) Does a revolution necessarily shake up the establishment? Does it actually reduce the power of centralized authority or simply construct a new one?

Reading this book along with Democracy in America is, in my opinion, recommended. The contrast between the outcomes of revolutions in France and the U.S. constitutes part of Tocqueville's principal arguments on social and political reforms -- the degree of involvement of lower classes in politics and their respective roles in the national economy varied sharply in the two countries, a fact that wasn't well understood by the revolutionaries and most of Tocqueville's contemporaries. 

Another interesting note to be added to this book, as I've noticed from several other reviews, is its increasing popularity in China. The political and social situations in China today resemble a lot of those in the late 1780s' France -- a growing economy marked by the expansion of middle class; the struggle between central government and the "estates", which depends on the bureaucratic system it flourished on; the gradual liberalization of private individuals and their increasing involvements in the politics, etc. There are more than enough reasons for the leaders of CCP to be aware of previous incidents and avoid their own version of the overthrowal of the Ancien Régime.

Even for those who aren't anywhere into political science and history, this book still poses as a great source of useful knowledge and cautionary tales.