Rating: 3/5

Hercule Poirot is now bored of commonplace cases and is looking forward to retire and grow vegetable marrows. An old acquaintance of his challenges him that he would never retire (remember when his previous such attempt was an utter failure?). He decides to take up only twelve more cases mirroring the task of his namesake, Hercules. Though disdaining the brawny and demoustached Greek legend, Poirot decides his tasks would be more cerebral than active.

  The Nemean Lion
: Poirot is called in to solve a case of a kidnapped pooch. But there appears to be quite a racket behind the simple case. And he stumbles on something even more serious, preventing a horrible crime. - 4 stars 

  The Lernean Hydra
: A doctor's wife dies and rumours about her murder spread around the village. In a desperate bid to salvage his reputation, he approaches Poirot. - 4 stars

  The Arcadean Deer
: Poirot is approached by a young man who wants help finding a maid who has disappeared. I found this to be rather boring and pointless. There was no actual crime either. - 2 stars

  The Erymanthian Boar
: On holiday in Switzerland, Poirot is enlisted to help catch the infamous thief and murderer, Marrascaud, at the top of an isolated mountain. Who is who in this odd little story? - 3 stars

  The Augean Stables
: Ugh, British politician, status quo, good woman doing charitable works, blablabla, save England! blabla - 1 star

  The Stymphalean Birds
: I think this is my favourite of all the stories in the collection. A young British diplomat is holidaying in Eastern Europe and gets caught up in a domestic dispute leading to murder. Meanwhile, two Polish women are loitering around ... absolutely brilliant! - 5 stars

  The Cretan Bull
: Another interesting case. A young woman approaches Poirot. Her fiancé has called off their wedding because he suspects he is insane. When Poirot arrives, he sees beneath the apparent relationships. Who is really sane? - 4 stars

  The Horses of Diomedes
: Who is the real drug dealer and who is the victim? Never like drug stories, but this was good enough. - 3 stars

  The Girdle of Hyppolita
: A schoolgirl and a precious painting disappear around the same time. Poirot is more interested in the girl. - 4 stars

  The Flock of Geryon
: Miss Carnaby from the first story reappears, asking for Poirot's help in saving her friend from a cult. This was a little fantastical bordering on bioterrorism, but if you overlook the utter improbability of the murderer's talents, a delightful read. - 4 stars

  The Apples of Hesperides
: A valuable historical cup has disappeared when the robbers died. But Poirot follows another tack and restores it back to its rightful owner. - 3 stars

  The Capture of Cerebrus
: Another drug story. Vera Rossakoff makes an appearance in this one, which is always enjoyable. My edition also has a previously unpublished version of the same story, and it was rather interesting to see how Christie developed her plots. However, for the actual story, 2 stars