Rating: 4/5

I first read this in my teens, and was astounded. This was the first science fiction novel I came across where the dominant pronoun in use for the entire story was "she". I had never read a science fiction or a fantasy novel until then where women were anything but props for the main male character, nothing more than helpmates (disgusting idea) or punching bags (even worse idea). For the first time, I read about a group of women flying spaceships, conducting trade, managing complicated political situations, keeping their heads in crises, and I was totally thrilled. 
I reread this book every so often and though I still find points that are a little confusing, I never feel anything but thrilled with Pyanfar Chanur and Haral and Hilfy and the other very capable women who crew the Pride. (I realized that Pyanfar reminds me a little of what a much younger Ilsidi-ji might have been like, many years before she met Bren in Foreigner.)
Pyanfar is competently managing trade for the Chanur, a fairly respected and well-off family on Anuurn, the hani homeworld. She's well-off, knows how to get a good deal, can deal well with the various other oxygen breathers in Compact space, and wham! A human drops into her world, and brings a massive number of problems to her ship, her family, her world, and all her assumptions about males and their behaviour. Py spends a good portion of the novel just trying to keep her ship intact and her crew alive and ahead of the machinations of Akukkak, a rather terrifyingly organized kif. She is also forced to begin rethinking her views of the value and actions of males, thanks to Tully, the human. Up till then, Pyanfar had been fairly content with the way hani females and males worked together.
Though this novel wraps up its action, it does set up a much bigger and more dangerous set of political situations across Compact space, which is actually in the same universe as Cherryh's Alliance-Union stories. And I find that once I follow Pyanfar onto the bridge of the Pride, I can't just leave her at the close of this book, and usually end up reading the entire series again.