Rating: 5/5

What makes this book remarkable is that it was written in the first place. 

Ken Dryden was a public person with a global reach. He was primarily known as a professional hockey player and rose to the very top of that sport. His championships, awards, and historic victories are numerous. He became a lawyer in the middle of his legendary hockey career, a nearly unthinkable accomplishment. Doing one of those things is remarkable, both is nearly incomprehensible.

After his retirement from hockey Dryden went into politics. While he was Ontario's first Youth Commissioner (1984 - 86) he realized he didn't know his constituents as well as he wanted to. Dryden made it his business to be connected with a constituent that would be representative of the people he would serve in the role of Youth Commissioner. This lead him to the father of a family that lived in Scarborough. 

He spent a week sleeping on a couch, in their home, and going to work with the father of the family. His goal was to observe their family life and the father's work at Imperial Oil. The book delves into some of the family's history and simply tries to tell their story; without sensational plotlines or voyeuristic reporting. The book doesn't ever feel inappropriate or exploitive. 

Dryden writes with a focus on the family's origins, and their circumstances at the time the book was being written. It is this genuine interest in their lives that gives the book its potency. It's not a thriller, nor is it a triumphant tale of a battle against enormous odds. Rather, its a story of one family's ups and downs, and how their day to day lives unfold. 

That a Hall of Fame athlete, and political appointee, would take the time to see what makes someone else tick, to set aside his ego and sleep on a couch in order to accurately portray this family is a tremendous act of humility, care and concern. 

In the epilogue Dryden says this about getting to know Frank Bloye, the father of the family, "Yet in the nearly five years I have come to know him, I have learned more about myself and my own life than at any other time."