Rating: 3/5

Edwardian England meets (and struggles with) the mores of the 1920s - eventually made explicit when the elder Sorrell is described as hankering after the London of hansom cabs, while his son Kit is quite at home with the bustle of the modern metropolis. There are flappers and unemployed soldiers and brassy females and wildly successful musical comedies; I was reminded at different points of Priestley's The Good Companions, of Sayers' Gaudy Night, of Mary Renault's The Friendly Young Ladies, and in particular of Dornford Yates' Anthony Lyveden, which opens with its impecunious ex-officer protagonist taking a series of jobs in domestic service (clearly a popular trope of the era, although Lyveden regains his status as a gentleman and Sorrell continues to regard himself as a social embarrassment to his son however financially prosperous that career becomes).

Ultimately this isn't so good a book as any of the above, though it's probably closest in style and theme to the equally-popular-and-then-forgotten Dornford Yates. Yates has a more consistent strain of lyricism, though, and more sense of melodrama; he is writing thrillers, and this isn't a thriller.

The title, which reminded me of "Dombey and Son", actually is a pretty fair description of the book. Ultimately it is about the relationship between Stephen Sorrell, who gives up his class and intellectual interests, and his son Kit, in whom Sorrell invests all his own ruined hopes. Kit is to be properly educated (which ends up involving a mishmash of just about every option save the public school of the type his father attended) and to pursue the career of his dreams rather than being pushed into one by family expectations; this turns out to involve studying to become a surgeon, which requires further long years of pecuniary support from his father even after Kit has taken his protracted medical degree. And he is not to emulate his father in rushing into an unsuccessful marriage with the first girl he goes to bed with.

The book spends quite a lot of time discussing contemporary sexual politics (the idea apparently endorsed by the author being the daringly modern proposition that marriage is only relevant if the woman decides she wants children), but in the end all the couples, however adamant on the subject of liberation, do somehow end up married - even Roland and his long-term muse Cherry. The author isn't particularly strong on romance, though; perhaps the most touching partnership is the side-story of silent film stars "Duck" and Ethel, who are trying to dodge publicity. (Luckily for them they are planning to give up the silver screen within a few years, since their style of cinema was to crash and burn within a few years of publication. One problem the author probably didn't anticipate was that by following Kit into adult life he ended up projecting his timeline into a fictional future... and in 1925, there was a great deal of drama just around the corner that nobody as yet could have guessed, which means that when you pause to think about it, the book depicts what amounts to a version of the 1930s that remains stuck forever somewhere circa 1922!)

At heart I think the story is intended to depict a chivalric ideal in terms of the father/son relationship, and a father who tries hard and effectively succeeds in being 'a friend' to his son rather than an overbearing Edwardian patriarch. Some of the other episodes are unsatisfying; it's hard to understand why Roland is regarded as a good employer when he deliberately fails to act on the knowledge that his protege Buck is bullying Sorrell to a state of physical breakdown and only sacks him when he engages in a consensual liason with one of the maids. The story of Pentreath and his wife, hinted at ominously, is abandoned and completely forgotten. And Kit's mother vanishes out of the story with convenient completeness after making her failed bid for Influence over him, while his first lover removes herself in an equally obliging fashion as soon as he starts to get bored of her, leaving him free to take up the heavily trailed relationship with Best Friend's Little Sister as soon as the latter becomes an independent adult... I could see that coming a mile off, and I don't know if it was just because it is an overused trope or if it really is being signposted with heavy handed obviousness. 

The politics are pretty heavy handed as well: the author preaches (but doesn't really demonstrate) the superiority of the lone aspirational rebel soaring above the mass of society that tries to drag down the noble-spirited. And he has a massive and unsubtle down on Labour with a capital L, and with a small one: ungrateful factory workers who bankrupt their paternal employers, savage and resentful masses in the industrial north, and lower class Londoners riddled with venereal disease. 

The politics per se are unsurprising (no one with Sorrell's history is likely to harbour sympathy towards socialism) and common to other novelists of the era, e.g. Nevil Shute, but here they are presented in the form of what amounts to random rants with nothing in the actual depiction of the story that backs them up. It's like reading tabloid headlines interjected into the novel at intervals. The character of Buck, for instance, makes sense, because we are shown glimpses of Sorrell through his eyes, those of the loud-mouthed petty officer feeling threatened by a sullenly intellectual recruit, a potential barrack-room lawyer. But when Sorrell fulminates about "social war" or proclaims himself an individual and a lone fighter, this doesn't seem to bear any relation to the life experience we have witnessed: he is ranting against something he has vaguely heard of rather than ever undergone. If you want the reader to believe in the threat of the envious many striving to pull down the superior few, then you might at least present a credible depiction of such behaviour within the story. 
Sorrell's ex-wife Dora is a credible character because she has some depth, and we get moments of sympathy or of showing the action from her point of view. But the threat of 'Labour' is simply used as a chimeric bogeyman.

There are very lyrical passages of writing: "Wandering out afterwards in the cool of the summer evening under a tumultuous yet quiet sky Roland saw the great trees of the Close all edged with gold. He passed in and stood looking at the cathedral's western façade, the magnificent windows recessed between two towers, the arcades and niches, and all that grey and delicate silence in stone. The lawns, like rich old velvet, sheltered by the trees, and refreshed by the mists from the moat of the palace, were vividly green in spite of the heat of the past week." The main issue from that point of view is that the author has a tendency to over-deploy dashes in dialogue in much the way that some writers abuse ellipses:
"Flowers.--Bowden sent them in--"
"Yes,--for the table,-- Kit's dinner."
"Good of Bowden.-- You are all being very good to us."

As others have commented, the story is mainly gripping at the beginning, when it is the tale of Sorrell struggling to achieve financial security. Once he becomes comfortably off and able to support Kit without a qualm into an indefinite future, even buying and furnishing him a house in London, the tale turns into that of Kit's travails with the fair sex in one guise or another, which are less compelling. Even when Kit nearly dies of blood poisoning and refuses an amputation that would save his life, no action is taken other than to do nothing and hope things will come out right all by themselves, massively against the odds.