Rating: 1/5

I’d up it to a 2 star because my 1 stars shouldn’t sit in the same bookshelf as CM. I’ve liked her writing and this wasn’t an easy book to write. I just loathed the incessant bickering between the mcs. There was no peace at all!

Regan shows up for a job interview and everything’s all dreamy until she gets to the first day at work. The location is far away in the country and all she has to do is be a support person/ chaperone to a teenage girl. She meets the teen and her father and realizes she’s been duped for her life. The father who is the H is basically a long time enemy to Regan, someone she’s heard about all her life. 

So now Regan has two options. Either be a mistress to the H or be his wife where she has to be a step mother to his teenage daughter. 

This was beyond a toxic mess. The h and H argue all through the book vying for the last word. The h has a flare for exaggerated drama and considers herself to be in the most horrid situation: marriage to an alpha dream boat of a wealthy Greek husband.

I enjoyed the part where Regan tries to break the ice with the teen girl who is pretty hateful and whiny. She can’t share her father’s attention and now Regan’s there as a young new wife. 

I can’t be bothered going around in circles over the wtf situations in this book but Regan grew up quite instantly playing a dutiful mother to her step daughter but went total Dr. Jekyll each time her husband approached her. She’d say vile things, hurl perfume bottles, run away screeching and make abominable cries of her misery. 

Tbh Regan was very much needing a couple of hard slaps from her husband. The H was no brooding quiet older wiser husband. He was instead argumentative, vindictive and scheming. 

I got sick and tired of their destructive marriage pattern. When they were together they bickered to no end. This was no sparring of the foreplay kind but more of the kind where you lose your brain cells. And as a consequence the H and h spent days and weeks of time away from each other. Like a lonely f’g existence and when you meet, you quarrel like a bunch of babies - aka baby boomers

I should stop picking up books this week. It’s one crappy one after the next. I didn’t care for Regans HEA. Her solace was simply when her husband said the three words to her and claimed undying love since I don’t remember when.