Rating: 4/5

An early Nero Wolfe novel which is also one of the best. As much as Wolfe hates to leave home he accepts an invitation to give a speech to the fifteen chefs named the greatest in the world. That doesn't sound like enough incentive to get Wolfe to leave home but he has an ulterior motive. He wants a particular recipe from one of the chefs.

Of course murder intervenes and the entire event goes off the rails. Wolfe and Archie find themselves embroiled in the investigation. Great premise for a great novel.

Review of Kindle edition
Publication date: July 9, 2010
Publisher: Bantam
Language: English
ASIN: B003V4BPTC
205 pages

This is an early Nero Wolfe novel, the fifth which Rex Stout wrote. It seems to me that Stout had yet to hit his stride and fully develop Nero Wolfe's potential. However in some ways this novel is one of his most entertaining. However, that's my opinion. 

Agatha Christie wrote,
"I have enjoyed a great many of his books. Archie is a splendid character to have invented and his first person remarks and descriptions are always most entertaining to read. I must also reveal that greed and the general enjoyment of food is one of my main characteristics and the descriptions of the meals served and prepared by Nero Wolfe's cook have given me a lot of pleasure and a great wish to have occasionally tasted these suggestions myself. Perhaps for that reason, I particularly liked Too Many Cooks."

I have read reviews and critics which call this novel and Rex Stout racist because of its portrayal of black men and its use of slang and derogatory words. I think that is an oversimplification. The slang is not used by Nero Wolfe, though Archie uses quite a bit. Nor does Wolfe display the racist attitudes of some of the other characters. Rex Stout may have been deliberately drawing attention to the unpleasant attitudes of the day (1938) and contrasting them with Wolfe's more enlightened attitude. Well, enlightened for 1938. I do know that Rex Stout did not normally display extreme racism in his writing.