Rating: 3/5

This is pretty much a "what you see is what you get" sort of book. Expecting a harrowing tale of survival at sea? Well, you got it. Particularly well drawn is the portrait of Poon Lim, the survivor in question, who during his 133-day ordeal is transformed from a passive and almost dimwitted lackey into a fairly resourceful, strong-willed person. 

During the first half of the book, in fact, I was so irritated by Lim's fecklessness and stupidity that I nearly gave up on the story, but I knew that something had to happen in order for him to survive. The author did a good job of getting into Lim's head to show how this transformation came about. (I'd wondered how she did this, but the postscript detailing her research methods made it clear that she'd had the chance to interview Lim himself.) 

Woven into the tale of survival at sea are fragments of Lim's earlier life, particularly interactions with his parents, which he was able to draw inspiration from in order to deal with challenges he met. Lim's eventual inventiveness and the solutions he finds to find adequate food, water, and shelter are approached in an interesting way -- the reader "discovers" the solutions along with Lim and thus vicariously shares each small victory. There's a surprisingly lyrical quality to some of the sections, particularly toward the end when Lim finds an odd sort of peace that he'd never known before.

I probably should have read rather than listened to this book as I wasn't very fond of the narrator. In this case, I really would have preferred a male narrator -- Johanna Ward, while a very clear voiced narrator, had a peculiarly schoolmarmish diction that just didn't jive with the tale. I grew weary of her over-enunciated k's and t's -- fine, I suppose, if one's doing Gilbert-and-Sullivan operetta but completely unnecessary here. Passages in which the author describes fairly gruesome things, such as drinking urine, seemed particularly out-of-sync with the voice of the narrator.