Rating: 3/5

.
3 Stars

I'm not impressed. It's like a short story padded with tons of useless dialogue. 

 As usual with my reviews, please first read the publisher’s blurb/summary of the book. Thank you. 

Leonard's dialogue is overstuffed, verbose and doesn't often advance the plot or reveal more of the character speaking. He also describes scenes and settings extensively, but not in an interesting or revealing way. 

The character Harry Arno is quite irritating and indecisive. The plot plods along, boringly, but with moments of good action, well told. 

Raylan comes across as independent-minded, mostly honest and highly skilled, yet his detection is pretty dull. 

Harry talks constantly about the famous poet Ezra Pound, his wife Dorothy and his mistress Olga. Harry had met them several times during and after WW-2. In some ways the Ezra Pound history is more entertaining than the main plot. 

Dorothy Shakespear, Ezra's wife

Full size image here 

Olga Rudge, the mistress

Full size image here 

Ezra Pound

Full size image here 

All in all, a pretty dull book. I'm going to read more of the series, but book #2 doesn't seem much better. 

Leonard is not much of a philosopher, so they're not many quotes. 

Notes and quotes:

October 29, Harry would remember, he had vegetable soup, a few crackers, iced tea, and the Jell-O, strawberry. Stepped out into the sunlight in his beige warm-ups with the red piping, his Reeboks, and there was Buck Torres standing by an unmarked car, a blue '91 Caprice. Harry had been arrested by Buck Torres a half-dozen times or so; they knew each other pretty well and were friends. Not socially, Harry had never met Buck's wife, but friends in the way they trusted one another and always had time to talk about other things than what they did for a living. Buck Torres had never asked Harry about his business with Jimmy Capotorto, trying to get to Jimmy Cap through Harry. 
-
He asked about guys who ran these clubs hitting on her. She told Harry they weren't her type. As Joy she'd open her act with Led Zeppelin's "Black Dog," do funky moves to the intricate guitar riffs between the lyrics and get the room's attention fast. Her glasses would slip and she'd push them back up while she danced. The idea was not to look too professional. 
-
Joyce said, "You know what happens when you play a country tune backwards? You get your girl and your truck back, you're not drunk anymore and your hound dog comes back to life." She said, "I was born in Nashville." 

.