Rating: 5/5

Wow. 'Wow' is probably the only word that really describes this book. From its begining to amazing ending, David Clemet-Davies' 'The Sight' is definately one of the best books I've ever read.
In its first chapter, Clement-Davies introduces us to the strange and dangerous world of ancient Transylvania through the eyes of a wolf. Transylvania is both riveting and terrifying, where danger and beauty is everywhere. In a vast forest, we meet Huttser and his mate Palla, two alpha wolves, the head pair of a wolf pack. The pack is running away from Palla's half sister, Morgra, who has taken control of the Balkar, a large group of fighting wolves that used to protect the free packs. Palla is heavily pregnant. Little does the pack know, but Huttser and Palla are about to become the parents of a she-wolf who is blessed with an ancient power called the Sight. What was a race for one wolf pack to survive suddenly becomes a war between good and evil when the pack learns about a terrifying prophecy.
According to an ancient legend that Morgra is bent on fufilling, this she-wolf, Larka, is the key to the enslavement of nature itself...if Larka chooses to join her aunt. 
David Clemet-Davies' works are always a joy for me to read. His writing is riveting and his views on nature is fastinating. He breathes depth and reality into his characters, especially Morgra and Larka. He created a tragic story behind Morgra's evil which really makes the reader want to sympasize with her. Larka is a bit annoying at first. She cleary doesn't want anything to do with the legend or Morgra. Guilt consumes her when most of her pack is killed off by her aunt's powers, which just gives her more meaning. She is so young when all of this begins, so it's really easy to understand the way she feels. And, eventually, she really matures and grasps her destiny. She deeply believes that love can and will stop the legend. Her faith is touching and unshakable, and it didn't just come out of nowhere. It grew in her heart over time, which enlightens her with depth. 
David Clemet-Davies gives us a breathtaking view of the life of the wild wolf, and only makes it more colorful with eerie fantasy based loosly on ancient Romanian legends. He clearly did his research before writing.
Though this is a fantasy, his characters still feel believable. He is able to give them an amazing amount of feeling while still managing to keep them wolfish. You always remember that you're reading about wolves when you read. The supporting characters are simply wonderful in every sense of the word. 
This story is long, though, and you do need to kind of force yourself along, but with the great writing and characters, you still want to keep going. The begining is a little slow, but I barely noticed that.