Rating: 4/5

"Bring your heart back to its place. Here you are again, little priest. I touch you with a recollection of your grief. I give you the knowledge to distinguish between what is holy and what is common. This is your moment now."(p.15)

"I did not quarrel with my voices. I took it down out of the air. This is called work by those who know and should not be confused with an Eastern trance."(p.21)

"Puffed up with their power and secure in their deceit. They speak for us! They dare! They dare to speak for us! One day this will be over. The war against the poor. Our fury will unfurl. Our fury will uncoil."(p.24)

"I'll live to see a decent society built around this page."(p.24)

"if you are unskilled in the subtle transformative process of language, it is best not to write down your ugly thoughts."(p.37)

"It is to be a collection of energies, a ganglion of light and loving-kindness. It will be invisible but it will exist in the world."(p.57)

"I was never strong, I was merely frozen with my sunlight in the ice."(p.60)

"Without the Name the wind is a babble, the flowers are a jargon of longing."(p.63)

"A wave bends me over the blue table, and a dream of the mountain rolling down over the roofs and the daisies."(p.98)

"You have no form, you move among, yet do not move, the relics of exhausted thought of which you are not made, but which give world to you, who are of nothing made, nothing wrought. (p.100)
We have all appeared here together. Creation and menstruation, birth and the birth from which nothing appears, these are the awesome limits of our existence here. Also, nothing happens when you fuck yourself."(p.115)

"Body is holy
Mind is a toy"(p.135)

"I found one thing in you to praise and on this pebble I built my fortress of love."(p.146)

"But I need it to keep my different lives apart. Otherwise I will be crushed when they join, and I will end my life in art, which a terror will not let me do."(p.168)

"and look, dear heart, how the virgin
she takes him into her gown
and see how the stranger’s armour
dissolves like a star falling down"(p.195)