Rating: 4/5

“Because of Bob Leffingwell, the Administration was going to have a hard time. Why couldn’t he have picked any one of ten thousand other outstanding Americans? Why the one most likely to cause trouble?” 

Sound familiar? It’s a paragraph that could have been written in today’s climate.

Alan Drury received the Pulitzer Prize in 1960 for his fictional account of the detailed interactions of the Senate and the White House around a Secretary of State cabinet confirmation. More importantly it is a story of the carnage that ensues. Advise and Consent is unquestionably a work of some real import. Drury was both a journalist and prolific author. The book exhibits great attention to detail and is based on the author’s inside knowledge covering the DC political beat as a reporter for some years. 

Despite being written almost sixty years ago, there are some obvious parallels in this book to the recent cabinet and Supreme Court nominee hearings in the Senate. Without giving the plot away in this book there are tragedies that result, despite the appearance of decorum and respect. It’s politics after all. The book is seeing a bit of a relevance revival based on the 24/7 news cycle coverage of the confirmation hearings during the Trump presidency.

Robert A. Leffingwell is the fictional nominee and his confirmation process is the basis for the book. We actually don’t hear much from him though as he prefers silence as he doesn’t want to inadvertently tank his own appointment. Rather it is the four ranking senators and the President and Vice President who the story keys on and where 90% of the dialogue is attributed. The press also plays a big role in getting the scoop, but most of the journalists are simply referred to by the newspaper they represent. 

The book is a bit dated and at 600+ pages is a tad too lengthy for my taste. The book features few women characters of any depth and as a result upon reading there is a decidedly male vibe. One can envision the cigarette smoke and nicotine stained stuffed shirts worm their way through the Senate offices. Despite the men’s only atmosphere Drury deftly captures in a very realistic way, and with all of the correct lingo, the Senate during the 1950’s. Along with the imagery he managed to both educate and tell a few interesting stories in the process. 

3.5 to 4 stars