Rating: 3/5

Overall: 3.5/5 I think I like the movie more than the book. 
Recently, I watched the movie My Fair Lady, filmed in 1964. It is an American musical comedy-drama film adapted from the 1956 Lerner and Loewe stage musical based on George Bernard Shaw's 1913 stage play Pygmalion. The main characters include Eliza Dolittle, who was acted by Audrey Hepburn, while Professor Henry Higgins by Rex Harrison. The prominent storyline is that Higgins was bet on turning Eliza, who was a lowly flower girl, into a noble and passing her as an upper-class lady. Higgins, despite believing that women would ruin men's lives, became attached to Eliza during their training period. However, Eliza slowly came to discover her powers over other men and found confidence in her speaking abilities. She realized she did not need to rely on Professor Higgins and could be an independent woman who could support her life. Higgins, as stubborn as he was, laughed at her and thought Eliza would quote-unquote, "come back crawling to him one day." However, when he was going back to his now-empty house, he was hit by the feeling of missing Eliza. The movie ended with Eliza reappearing suddenly and Higgins asking, "Eliza, where the devil are my slippers?"

I enjoyed the movie a lot. An 8 out of 10. Especially since I know the songs in this musical. I also like the character development of Eliza, which props to the scriptwriter and learned to be independent. In the original play, the name of it was Pygmalion. It originated from Greek mythology, where a God fell in love with a sculpture, and it eventually came alive. So in the musical and the movie, Eliza was the sculpture that came alive as she fought for her freedom and independence. She became more human and less like a figure sculpted and crafted by Higgins. However, the dubbing was a little weird, and I did not enjoy that the actress didn't sing the songs herself. 

The movie followed precisely with the stage musical. Initially, the scriptwriter Shaw ended the play by Higgins laughing to himself at the idea of Eliza marrying Freddy, another nobleman. However, popular audiences, looking for pleasant entertainment, wanted a happy ending for the characters they liked so well. On the other hand, Shaw explained precisely why the story couldn't end with Higgins and Eliza getting married because of the tremendous difference in their mindsets. Shaw insisted on protecting the play and Eliza's integrity by keeping the last scene. In my opinion, I am leaning towards the original script. I also think that there was too much history and differences between Eliza and Higgins. There was too much badness between them for there to ever be anything more. 

There was an enormous controversy over the lead actress in My Fair Lady. The director chose Audrey Hepburn instead of Julie Andrews, who played the first Eliza Dolittle on Broadway. Julie Andrews was also known for acting in The Sound of Music and Mary Poppins. Also, the songs sung by Eliza in the movie were dubbed by another person. It was estimated that only 10% of the songs were sung by Audrey. This is really sad, as she put a lot of effort into practising her singing skills and taking vocal lessons every day. All the while the director had already decided to dub her voice without telling her. It was said that Audrey was extremely upset by this fact and that she definitely shed tears over this topic. Audrey ended up didn't even being nominated for the Oscars.