Rating: 5/5

Simply a great book. It deserves your undivided attention. 

As far as I can tell, this book can be bought in old-fashioned paper form in the USA only from by Stackpole Books, based in Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania and in business since 1930. In addition to the inherent virtue of supporting a publishing institution of long-standing dignity and of location far removed from the traditional centers of power, I also think that this book is best experienced this way, because of the great pictures and maps in the book. It’s impossible to say that there isn’t an electronic format somewhere that will display this book adequately, but my Kindle ebook reader certainly will not do justice, especially, to the excellent maps in this book, apparently drawn by the author himself. 

The clarity and accuracy of these maps must constitute some kind of gold standard against which other military historians may measure themselves. Each complex and chaotic battle described in the book (and there are many) appears not more than three pages away from a crisp and beautiful map which clarifies the text considerably. Every place name or geographical feature referred to in the narrative appears on the nearby map. My only complaint is that the book should be sold as a set with a good magnifying glass, as a special offer to middle-aged history buffs who are too cheap to regularly update the prescription on their reading glasses. To put it another way, squinting at a book held two inches from nose is not consistent with the self-image I hold of my dignity.

All this praise of the maps shouldn’t lead you to conclude that the rest of the book suffers by comparison. The research was clearly phenomenal. Given the author’s clear and easy style, it’s also hard to believe that the author was born in Austria and his first language was French.

All this praise of the maps, pictures, research, and style shouldn’t lead you to conclude that the book doesn’t carry a clear and worthwhile message today about the effective use of military might. For example, from page 266: “...In a form of warfare in which political considerations regularly outweigh the military, air attacks against ’suspected enemy groups’ are all too likely to be self-defeating. The loss of support brought brought on by each innocent man or woman killed is likely to far outweigh the possible gain of hard-core rebels.” (This is actually a quotation by Fall from another book, but it’s to the author’s credit that he found and included it.)

For casual readers (meaning, if you’re reading this for pleasure born from knowing things, but not studying it for a class), I especially recommend the chapters (4, 6, 8, and 10) labelled “Diary”, which are adapted from the letters Fall wrote home to his American wife while doing research in Southeast Asia. They offer a fascinating glimpse into the day-to-day details of a time and place that is quickly receding from living memory. Some of it is even laugh-out-loud funny, like the anecdote on page 274 about the unexpected popularity with certain hill tribes of Vietnam of a US-government produced short documentary film about a volunteer fire department in Illinois.

In fact, if you are fortunate to live in a place where you can grab this book off the shelf of a library or bookstore, run down (right now would be good) and read these chapters while standing in the aisle. It will be the most enjoyable act that you will do today.

If you are not fortunate enough to be in a situation where you can study it with an expert, at least try to find a quiet moment in your life when you can read it with mindfulness. I think a beach vacation would be perfect for this purpose. In fact, I read it on a beach vacation. However, my understanding, based on observation of people who appear to fit the description of “normal”, is that many people inexplicably desire lighter fare during beach vacation. Why? Books like this one are far superior, and you will only have the time and energy to give this book the attention it deserves at a time when you are away from the thousand distractions of a normal life. Plus, you will be a better person for having read this book. Just go ahead and read it already.