Rating: 4/5

This book tells how to run your business by biblical principles. It covers many topics of interest to Christian business owners, including keeping vows, hiring, borrowing, pricing, lawsuits, and tithing. It advocates a different approach to running a business: "one more concerned with eternity than profits." I'm not sure I agree with Burkett 100% on all points, but even so, his book is a worthwhile guide to what the Bible says on these topics.

Burkett seems to cherry-pick verses a bit; I wish he referenced more verses when possible to give a fuller biblical perspective. The anecdotes are more numerous and longer than necessary to make the point.

Burkett seems to hold a double standard in that he says your counselors should be Christian so they share your Christian worldview, but that you should not consider religion when hiring (so that you can evangelize unbelieving employees). Perhaps the standards are different because counselors can change the course of your business, but employees generally can't.

Personal Lifestyle Goals
Luke 12:22 "is not an invitation to ignore the future but, rather, to avoid being consumed by fear of the future." Luke 14:28 uses pre-construction planning as an example of proper planning. Prov 6:6-9 uses the ant as a model of saving for the future. Ants don't hoard; they store only what they need. Luke 22:35-36 "seems to indicate that the problem is not so much with retaining resources as with depending on them more than on God." Scripture recommends retaining only modest surpluses to avoid dangers of materialism.

Jesus didn't teach believers to sell everything and be paupers, but He did warn against dangers of wealth (Lk 18:24). The proper desire is between poverty and riches (Prov 30:7-9).

Biblical Business Goals
"Just as a thermometer doesn't make a room hot or cold but measures the temperature, so money doesn't make us spiritual or carnal; it reflects who we are."

The Benefits of Counsel
Don't use unbelievers as your primary counselors (those who advise you day by day) (Ps 1:1-3). "The difficulty isn't in the advice they give; it's the advice they don't give, specifically, the lack of spiritual insight."

Hiring Decisions
Hiring only Christians stifles one of the greatest ministries available to Christian employers: evangelization of employees. 2 Cor 6:14 (don't be unequally yoked) doesn't apply to employer-employee relationship, which is unequal. In 1 Cor 5:9-10 Paul tells the church they don't need to separate from all unbelievers.

Firing Decisions
Before considering firing someone, communicate expectations clearly, communicate dissatisfactions clearly and quickly, in writing, and have a trial correction period. Never let sun go down on a problem without making a promise to handle it.

Borrowing Decisions
Borrowing was allowed in OT; that's why year of remission and year of Jubilee were necessary. Rom 13:8 doesn't forbid borrowing; if it did, Paul would've been clear that he was changing OT doctrine. Rom 13:8 is in context of paying taxes and tells Christians to not be left owing anything, even Roman taxes.

Principles (not commandments) of borrowing: Don't borrow needlessly. Don't sign surety. Don't take on long-term debt. Prov 22:7, 6:1-3, 20:16; Deut 15:1

We are commanded to repay what we owe (Ps 37:21; Matt 5:25-26).

"Debt is not a problem; it is a symptom. The problem is the consistent and systematic disregard for biblical principles. Debt is the result."

Lending Decisions
"It isn't the use of credit that is unscriptural; it's the misuse."

Don't sue Christians (1 Cor 6:7).

Bible doesn't directly teach that you can't sue non-Christians, but don't sue out of anger, revenge, greed. Consider Lk 6:30.

It's not unscriptural to sue a corporation, even one owned by a Christian, because it's a legal entity that has chosen to abide by the laws of corporations. Paul appealed to Roman law (Acts 16, 25) and we can appeal to laws of our lands. For same reason, it's not wrong to defend yourself or your business in court.

Corporations and Partnerships
Stock ownership isn't a yoke relationship.

Business Tithing
Tithing was never a commandment, because no punishment was prescribed for failing to tithe. Tithing was voluntary (2 Cor 9:7), though there was a consequence for not tithing (Mal 3:9).

NT didn't change principle of tithing.

Business owners should tithe from gross, not net. OT farmers tithed on harvest, which was before expenses associated with harvest (Prov 3:9).

Retirement Decisions
Only 1 verse refers to retirement: Num 8:25, which refers to priests retiring from service to perform other duties (not to be idle).

It's biblical to slow down with age, but not stop (Prov 6:6-8). It's prudent to plan, but not to hoard (Lk 12:16-21).