Rating: 3/5

I picked up "The Warrior Queens" for two reasons. One, back in January I read another book about female rulers (Helen Castor's She-Wolves) and found it interesting but lacking in some respects, particularly in the writing. Two, I'd read Fraser's Faith and Treason and enjoyed it immensely, which made me willing to read Warrior Queens and see how her thoughts and approach might differ from Castor's. 

I did find it both interesting and an easy read; after I'd added it to my Goodreads account I saw a number of reviews saying how boring it was, and I can't say I had the same reaction. On the contrary, I typically found myself wanting more information rather than less. This is a study of the attitudes of and toward women who have led their people in times of war, and while Boadicea is the central figure, each individual woman is treated in a relatively brief, self-contained overview; you can't and wouldn't go to this book for an in-depth examination of any one of the characters (and some of them are intriguing enough that I wanted a real, detailed biography of them). Possibly it's the archeology in the earlier chapters that strikes many readers as boring? At any rate, I found it generally engaging -- nor did I think that Fraser was more interested in telling the stories of modern/contemporary women than those of the ancient and medieval examples. Certainly one could argue that the many female leaders of the 20th century (most notably, Margaret Thatcher) inspired Fraser to consider writing such a book; but I thought she devoted an even amount of space to the women across the centuries.

That said, I can't say this one ranks up there with Faith and Treason. In any work like this one is liable to sense an agenda, and while I certainly find it useful to consider the special challenges women face in exercising power, I don't have a whole lot of patience for a "battle of the sexes" theme. It could certainly have been more annoying in this book than it was, but little things were nonetheless exasperating: things like putting "male" or "female" in parentheses to draw more attention to them, a habit that always seems to me to create an unnecessarily sarcastic tone. I also could not quite tell what the larger point was (or if there really was any) regarding the Warrior-Queen-as-harkening-back-to-some-primordial-goddess thing. Is Fraser actually suggesting some kind of matriarchal society in the distant past? She raises the possibility and almost dismisses it, but apparently quite wistfully; and then it continues to crop up. 

The more strongly feminist threads, then, did not appeal to me, but the book does point out interesting historical themes that did strike me as worthwhile (even if they are called "syndromes," which, like another reviewer, I find rather annoying). Elements like the Warrior Queen's tendency to see herself as unique among her sex and unwilling to promote "women's rights," and the tendency for the Warrior Queen to come to power by virtue of some connection to a powerful man -- these I found compelling. The more psychological aspects less so.