Rating: 4/5

Living, Henry Green's first novel, published in 1929 when he was twenty-four, is wisely and wonderfully written in a minor key about minor characters who demand major attention through their flawed, stumbling, enduring humanity.

The setting is Birmingham, England, where men work at a foundry that is foundering. The owner is about to die, but not yet, and the son is about to take over, but not yet. Meanwhile the workers sing and chatter to one another, gossip and comment,and have womenfolk and children at home with just enough cash on hand to make it through the week.

Lily Gates is the moral center of the tale. She's in her early twenties and must stay at home and take care of it for her father, Joe Gates, and her grandfather, Mr Craigan (as he is called). She'd love to have a job, love to live the kind of life she sees in the movies, love to be able to decide who is the better bet for marriage, Mr Dale or Mr Jones, both foundry workers. This ensemble reminds me of Colm Toiban's Brooklyn but the delicacy and ingenuity of the prose, its spontaneity, reminds me more of the flight of pigeons, an airborne motif throughout the novel.

Living is half overheard, a quarter lyrical exposition, another quarter striking, quick-paced encounter. At the same time it is curiously phrased not only in Birmingham dialect but also in a kind of notational style wherein articles and prepositions are deliberately omitted creating stumps of sentences that are pleasant to trip over. Some passages read like Dubliners, others like Ulysses, and then others like the sweeping montages of John Dos Pasos's U.S.A. trilogy, capturing public houses, the fizzing, foaming fury of molten metal, football match jousting, and the unexpected intrusions of the foundry owner's son's romantic disappointments. If he were not necessary to the unfolding of the plot, he would be more than expendable.

For reasons that are not always clear, Green divides this text into chapters. The chapters themselves dart everywhere with no transitional language to remind us that something that once was happening is happening again and is further along toward the police station, the sickbed, or a desperately unhappy elopement that cannot be other other than it comes to be. Mr Jones wants to do right by Lily; he simply can't; he doesn't have the money, the professional skills, the knowledge of the world, or the support of his parents (now lost somewhere in the maw of Liverpool, where he cannot find them.

In many ways Green illustrates the rule that there are no rules for writing fiction--only that whatever you are doing, you have to know how to do it, which he does.