Rating: 4/5

This was just the book to end the unofficial summer season with. This was another "I've seen the movie" book for me and I was not disappointed. It's very different from the movie and I think both stand highly for their own reasons. I found this to be a tense, taut read and I really loved the things that surprised me. I did miss the tennis featured in movie-Guy's character, no offence to book-Guy who is an architect.

I have to admit, I was very impressed by this being Highsmith's first book. That woman knew how to tell a story. I have to give all kinds of credit to the true creep factor of Miriam being stalked and killed simply because Guy picked up a stalker himself. The vitriol directed at her from a man who'd never met her was fairly terrifying.

I found some new-to-me words I learned that I'll add as soon as the holiday is over. One of my favourite reasons for reading old books is picking up new-to-me words. I've listed them below with a shout-out to my fellow word buddy Bob (aka Bobby Lee), who seems not to be around here any longer. Bob, wherever you are, I'll always think of you when I come across new words in my reading and those BLCC reissues. :)

Words I came across that may be useful in word puzzles and crosswords:

  marcel
- curling iron wave in hair.

  prarie oyster
- hangover cure drink (that sounded vile).

  roundheel
-slang for promiscuous woman.

There are a number of great lines that I wanted to remember, here are a few:

"The desperate boredom of the wealthy, that he often spoke of to Anne. It tended to destroy rather than create. And it could lead to crime as easily as privation."

"Miriam. Miriam Joyce." "Hm-m. Smart or dumb?" "She's not an intellectual. I didn't want to marry an intellectual."

"My mistake was in speaking to him. My mistake was in telling a stranger my private business."

"That's the mistake," Guy said aloud, "that nobody knows what a murderer looks like. A murderer looks like anybody!" 

Definitely recommended. Also, while it's important to be polite, do be wary of talking to strangers about your personal business. LOL