Rating: 5/5

Major Update: I am immensely pleased to announce that my original review was published in Heyer Society: Essays on the Literary Genius of Georgette Heyer in November 2018, which features a collection of essays and other pieces on the wonderful Georgette Heyer. 

***

Oh, I loved this one. I really, really, really did. It was sheer entertainment from beginning to end, and I embarrassingly laughed out loud several times. A great many people had told me prior to starting that they hadn't liked this book as much as other Heyer's, mainly because of the hero and heroine's fiery tempers, and the resulting scathing arguments between them. For my part, I greatly enjoyed it; both characters were strong-willed, intelligent, impetuous and their bickering was rather funny, since they were both blessed with a keen sense of humour. 

The title of this book, Bath Tangle was remarkably well-chosen. This story is nothing but a delightful tangle of misinterpreted sentiments, misguided actions and lots and lots of drama. Come to think of it, it's nothing that we've never seen. I mean come on, if these people had Facebook...

Serena Carlow added a life event: In a Relationship with Ivo Barrasford.

Serena Carlow changed her relationship status to: It's Complicated.

Serena Carlow change her relationship status to: Single.

Fanny Spenborough added a life event: Widowed.

Serena Carlow- with Fanny Spenborough at Dower House: Life is so boring! There is nothing to do around here! #mourning #bored #countrylife #notonparties
 Ivo said: I told you you should get a house in Bath!
 Serena said: And let my cousin ruin my childhood home?
 Ivo said: There's nothing you can do now, so you should just move to Bath!!
 Serena said: Selfish!
 Ivo said: Idiot!

Read the rest in Heyer Society: Essays on the Literary Genius of Georgette Heyer if you're interested!! 

I absolutely adore this book to bits and pieces, I don't care that the hero and heroine spend the majority of the story arguing, it's the most entertaining and electrifyingly romantic thing in the world. It's so good I can't even express my thoughts with existing words, apparently. #teambathtangle #bathtangledeservesmorerecognition #loveserenaandivoforever