Rating: 3/5

PRE - READ. 

...as he believes I read too much Abs books *wrinkles nose*

Commencing on the 8th of August (9 Aug - Aus time)

&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;

 POST-READ 

EDITED FOR  Luke's review link. 

This is the second time I read The Jungle Book. The first one was when I was in secondary school as I had to write an essay for it.

This story was memorable coz it was the same time when I first start wearing glasses. So, needless to say this was the very first story I read with my pair.

Back then though, you were considered/teased/called as a nerd when you wear spectacles. 
The bigger the frames, the bigger the lenses, the nerdER you are.
So, you can just imagine my hesitations and disappointment when I've been told I needed a pair.

Nowadays, every second person I see wears them.
Glasses became a fashion statement. 
 Glasses make a big fashion statement.  

So, back to the book. 
When Luke asked me to BR this classic, I said yes to it, of course.

When I got my copy though, I had to double check the cover. 
The book was thickER than I expected.
And then after reading "Mowgli's Brothers" I was surprised that there were more pages to turn. 

 Huh?  

So then I realised that the book consists of more short stories and poems.
Though, only three or four of them are actually stories about Mowgli, Baloo, Bagheera aka Baloogheera (as Luke cleverly put the two names together) and Shere Khan. 

Alrighty then, read more, I did.
{Side comment: I think my teacher has provided the class a "photocopy" of Mowgli's Brother story only)

I liked all of the stories and they all fit together okay as Kipling showcased animals.
Animal fables to which the author explored themes such as courage, loyalty, friendship and love. But my favourite is "Riki-Tiki-Tavi". That mongoose was adorable and his loyalty &amp; love for the family who took him in were boundless and admirable.

 Love lovelovelovelove this character. 

I'm not gonna go into details as I'm sure everyone has read this. 
*grumbles* am I the only one here who was surprised that it's a collection of poems and songs?!

But what I'll do in this review of MOWGLI's STORY (only) is to compare what I read and what I watched.

The Book.

The writings was old and there were parts that made me either bored or had to stop and absorb what Kipling was trying to say.

Baloo was very wise, teaching Mowgli almost everything. He was very strict and always ready to strike a blow on young Mowgli when he doesn't pay attention or get anything wrong.

“Better he should be bruised from head to foot by me who loves him than that he should come to harm through ignorance,” Baloo answered very earnestly.” 

Bagheera, who is another companion of Mowgli and a wise one too.
I forgot about his story. His secret bald spot and that mark. The collar mark that no one knew.

 “And yet, Little Brother, I was born among men.
Fed behind bars from an iron pan till one night I felt that I was Bagheera—the Panther—and no man’s plaything, and I broke the silly lock with one blow of my paw and came away.” 

And Kaa. Interestingly enough as I couldn't remember, as almost everything in this book, that he was an ally too who helped Mowgli to escape from those rambunctious monkeys. 

The difference.
These 3 main characters were nowhere near anything like this in the film. 
They were fun and very entertaining. 
Never felt that I was watching an adaptation of a classic story. Disney film had changed the plot enormously. And even added a new character.

One other thing I noticed though, was that Mowgli didn't have a female influence on his side. 
Sure he had mother wolf but she had a very short role and did nothing really heroic.
It makes me think that perhaps, this was the reason why Kaa, the python was voiced by a female actress in the new film to balance the gender equation that influenced young Mowgli.

 Could it be? 

The other difference. 
Over the years, I managed to collect 4 pairs of glasses (2 of em are useless; prescription-wise) and have earnt myself another pair recently.

Also, reading it this time around is not because of school requirement but just for the sake of reading and enjoying it as it should be.
And what makes it a spectacular read too is I BR it with a very good friend.

Now, I will edit this review when Luke had finished and posted his review.
His review link will be added as I'm sure his thoughts will be thorough.
After all there's a reason why he is 
the writer and I, I use that other pair of glasses I just acquired. 

Rating it 3.5  Baloogheera-for-the-win  Stars