Rating: 5/5

89th book of 2021. 

4.5. A 2000+ year old discussion on Love, a subject that can never tire. Though I started at 4-stars, I think I'll bump it to 5 purely on account of it lingering about in my mind since finishing, which to me is always the sign of something greater. I read for those books that possess you. Several dialogues within a "dialogue". When considering the wider context it's doubly interesting to ponder why Plato decided on the form of this text. Though the people are real there's no indication of any such evening happening or even any such speeches being given, Plato has fabricated a dinner party and dropped in Socrates, Phaedrus, Pausanias, Eryximachus, Aristophanes, Agathon, Socrates and Alcibiades to drink, chat and talk. (Though Socrates is obviously a heavy-weight—why wouldn't he be?) 

It's no doubt that Aristophanes' speech is perhaps the greatest of the text and has been stated by some as Plato's 'most brilliant literary achievement'. Having said that, it is within Socrates' speech that my favourite quote from the text occurs:

  Later he will observe that physical beauty in any person is closely akin to physical beauty in any other, and that, if he is to make beauty of outward form the object of his quest, it is great folly not to acknowledge that the beauty exhibited in all bodies is one and the same; when he has reached this conclusion he will become a lover of all physical beauty, and will relax the intensity of his passion for one particular person, because he will realise that such a passion is beneath him and of small account. The next stage is for him to reckon beauty of soul more valuable than beauty of body...
 
And finally to add to the review, purely because I wish to keep it myself, this tender description of Socrates' character,

  'The servant brought me water to wash before I sat down, and another servant came and said that Socrates had taken up position in a neighbour's front porch, and was standing there, deaf to all the servant's entreaties to come in. "What an odd thing," said Agathon. "Go and call him again and don't take no for an answer."
"No," I said, "let him alone. It's a way he has. He goes apart sometimes and stands still wherever he happens to be. He will come presently, I am sure; don't bother him, but let him be."