Rating: 1/5

Finished. 

And I have to vent. 

(So yes, unpopular review right here).

The ending was supposed to be touching. 

It was really lame. And just backwards. Backwards but called good. So it’s told with all of the feel good emotions, even though by rights, by reality, they shouldn’t be there.

The main character, we are told (both constantly and preachily) is a great mom, but the last half of the book she just ends up living in her memories, not making new ones or going to live with her adult kids (turning down a trip to Europe with her daughter). And when she dies and her children gather around, they wonder if she minded dying alone. The granddaughter replies that she hadn’t. Probably hadn’t even missed her children because she had her memories. 

We’re supposed to go “aww”.

I’m sorry. That’s just lame. Your memories are no substitute for your actual children. Continue making *new* memories with your children or you will die unhappy and alone. And because that is reality, you won’t be able to paint it differently. Like the author tries. 

So I dislike the ending. 

Also, throughout the story the author tried to fit every feeling every mother has felt/experienced into the book and it just didn’t jive. It seemed a little too hard to believe that her children (with the way they were raised) would all be that selfish and dismissive. The grandchildren more so. 

But hey, I guess if you only want to live in your memories, your children can only live in a future without you. 

But don’t say this is a sweet, touching, happy family ending. 

I also *really* don’t like it when authors tell you everything, and specifically tell you what to think. Just show me, and do a good job writing it well, and I’ll get your message (whether I agree with it is another matter). 

There weren’t many comments concerning God, but when there were some, they were mostly said through angry tears. And never resolved. 

Hmm. 

I liked the first sections of the book, and appreciated when the main character made the choice to go on, to face her challenges, and to choose a thriving life. Those moments were so commendable! 

So what happened?!?!? 

Sigh. 

Anyway, those are my thoughts, and I put them here though I know how unpopular they are.