Rating: 2/5

Charles Wallace saves the universe from the forces of evil. Dear Lord, I hated this book. I'm going with two stars because I do try to reserve a one-star rating for truly unreadable books. This wasn't necessarily bad; I just hated it. I hated the wooden dialogue. I hated the vaguely racist patina over the Native American portrayal. I hated the fact that everyone had the same flipping name. I hated that the author circumvented background exposition with awkward over-explaining conversations (or exclamations to the dog!) and letters. Most of all, I hated that the characters were completely useless as carriers of any individual talent or strength. Literally everything in this puzzle was handed to Charles Wallace and Meg. It might as well have been any rando off the street doing these Missions because they certainly required no initiative, and explicitly discouraged independent thinking. And it had to be that way because that's the way it Was. So if it Was, then why did someone even have to do it? And why did someone special have to do it? The dog really tipped it for me. Really, a random magic dog shows up on this night to pick up the remaining slack between what the unicorn and the powers that Be have determined will happen? Ugh. 

I came back to add more stuff I hated, because I hated it that much. I hated that it was apparently totally plausible for the President, 24 hours before nuclear meltdown, to call his occasional science advisor just to give him a heads-up about the end of the world. Like, how many people must be 2 or 3 degrees away from the President in this way? Did he literally sit and call every one of them? Maybe the world is about to end because he has a terrible hierarchy of priorities. I hated that NOTHING else in the world changed when Whatshername married Thegoodone instead of Thebadone. C'mon now. First of all, rudi-flipping-mentary time travel. Second, don't make the entire premise of your story the fact that everything is so interrelated and how one tiny change might wipe out the universe, and then make a HUGE change and report that the only difference in the timeline of history is that the dictator isn't evil anymore. Oh, and I so hated that Meg is nothing but dog-whisperer and baby-carrier. Meg is brilliant! And raised in a freaking female Nobel Prize-winning household. Not to say that she has to be a renowned scientist or anything, but it just would have been sweet to say what her non-house-keeping-baby-growing role is in her world. Or at least a short manifesto about feminist choices and the way she is living her feminism in this role. The end, for real this time.