Rating: 4/5

When life ever gets back to “normal,” I think one of the best things to come out of quarantine is that I have discovered Agatha Christie mysteries again. Last year was primarily a nonfiction reading year for me. I read a number of celebrity memoirs in between denser reads to clear my head. While I enjoy learning about celebrities away from the camera, my favorite genre to read in between heavier books has always been mysteries. The quick pace of determining whodunit keeps me on my toes and my brain working so that I don’t fall into the proverbial book slump. I just completed a non-fiction book, a rarity for me these days, so it was time for another mystery. A Pocket Full of Rye is the fourth Agatha Christie book i have read this year, but the first Miss Marple case. Needless to say, I was excited to reacquaint myself with the charming older woman. 

Miss Marple travels to Yew Lodge in Braydon Heath to assist Inspector Neele in solving the Fortescue murders. The third victim was one Gladys Martin who used to be Miss Marple’s housekeeper. Although Miss Marple is a sharp woman, she has been getting older and her nephew and niece have insisted that she keep a housekeeper to handle domestic chores. This would free up Miss Marple for her gardening and of course solving the murders that always seem to disrupt the life in St Mary Mead. Gladys Martin has been in Miss Marple’s service so the older woman felt responsible for bringing the girl’s murderer to justice. While Inspector Neele has a sharper mind than most of the Scotland Yard detectives featured in Christie’s books, he still needed Miss Marple to help him solve this peculiar case. An older woman like Miss Marple is unassuming and can talk to distraught family members in ways that the police cannot. What the family does not realize is that Miss Marple is of a sharp mind and often solves murders before the police have an idea as to what happens. 

Rex Fortescue is found murdered at his desk with a shirt pocket full of rye seeds. His wife Adele is found murdered in her library having tea. The third murder is that of Gladys Martin, who was found near a clothesline with a clothespin on her nose. In Miss Marple’s words, a crude thing to do. Immediately, what comes to her mind is the Mother Goose rhyme, “six pence, a pocket full of rye, four and twenty blackbirds found in a pie.” The murders fit the rhyme down to the King at his counting house with a pocket full of rye, the Queen found with honey, and the maid near a clothesline. Miss Marple alerts Inspector Neele that blackbirds must be involved in this case, and indeed they are. Neele is incredulous that a nursery rhyme would give revealing clues as to whodunit, but he examines the blackbird angle nonetheless. Now, to question all members of the Fortescue household and acquaintances until they discover who is responsible for these murders. 

In Poirot cases, Dame Christie omits an important clue until the end in order to keep readers guessing. Miss Marple is sharp as a tack and figures out all clues for herself well before the end of the book. The thing that makes her cases charming is that she figures immediately whodunit, even giving her opinions, usually the correct one, to the police, and it takes them awhile to catch up. Here, Inspector Neele kept getting held up with the rye in the pocket and the yew berry trees, which contain a fast working poison, on the Fortescue property. Miss Marple pieced together whodunit from her brief examination of Gladys Martin, and only needed to question the remaining members of the Fortescue household in order to verify her hunches. That is what makes Miss Marple a change of pace from Poirot, that she gets to the root of the matter and then goes back to her quiet life in St Mary Mead. Poirot examines every angle with his gray cells and continues to take on new cases as his reputation grows with each one. Although both detectives are among my favorite characters, I find myself enjoying the company of Miss Marple more than Poirot because she has a lifetime worth of wisdom and would be a lovely companion to invite to tea. 

A quick read, Miss Marple solved whodunit and life at both Yew Berry Lodge and St Mary Mead get back to normal. I am hoping that real life gets back to normal soon as well; however, reading Agatha Christie cases is never going to go out of style. After reading many cases of both Poirot and Miss Marple, I have yet to figure out whodunit before the detective unless the book is a reread. Mysteries keep me on my toes and allow me to use my gray cells even if the books are fast paced brain candy. Even if her books are easy reading, Christie’s two sleuths are timeless. Miss Marple is always refreshing to visit with because she is a charming lady, and I learn a lot from her character. Until another murder case that warrants solving finds Miss Marple in St Mary Mead, I will move on to my next book. 

3.75 stars