Rating: 5/5

Henry Miller was a major reason I became a writer. His exuberant, rambunctious style and huge love of just being alive, the raw edged description of his own (slightly fictional) character and that of his friends in Tropic of Cancer, life at the 'Villa Chaotica' as a cheerful poverty-artist, gave me permission to write in an imperfect way, which is the only way to create art. I'd been so intimidated by the polished novelists I'd read that it wasn't until I found in Miller a voice that made me say, "I can do that." He lets all the seams show.

So when I saw Jong, also a lover of the things of this earth, the body, truth telling and all, had written a book on Miller, had to grab it. 

She had met Henry when he wrote to her following publication of her 'Fear of Flying', which publication had been up to then treated rather gingerly by the literary establishment. He loved the book, he bought multiple copies and handed them out to all his friends, talked it up--and a literary friendship was born. 

And I found that Jong had exactly the same experience I had as a young writer, that Miller gives you the freedom to write. "Henry's story and my story have one thing above all in common: The search for the courage to be a writer. The courage to be a writer is, in a senses, the courage to be an individual, no matter what the consequences. 

"Doris Lessing points out in her introduction to a reissue of The Golden Notebook," Jong notes "that the 'artist as exemplar' is a relatively new protagonist for the novel, and wasn't the rule one hundred hears ago when heroes--there being few heroines--were more often explorer, clergymen, soldiers, empire builders. This may well be because the artist is seen as the only true individual left in an increasingly chained society. Both Henry's persona "Henry Miller" and the real historical Henry Miller spoke to this longing for freedom. He freed himself--and then he passed the gift along to us."

She also talks about being furious at Henry, because of his freedom--and I can remember this too. When a friend asks why she's having such trouble with Miller, she replies, "Because of his sexism, his narcissism, his jibes at Jews. And because he's so free... I work hard at my writing and he's such a slob. I rewrite and rewrite and he lets it all hang out. He's such a blageur and I try so hard to be honest. Everything is cake to him. He treats women horribly and doesn't seem to care. He turns on the people who help him. Even his suffering seems like fun."

"So I had unwittingly discovered the source of the Miller animosity, discovered it in myself... Miller is having too much fun. He seems unashamed of his failings. He lets all his warts show, and for this I envy him and hate him. For this I want to attack him, even thought I am in his debt. Is my chelousy of his freedom poisoning my affection? Does my reaction show why the happy man--that rarity--is not beloved by the general unhappy lot of manunkind (and womanunkind?)"

She has an assignment to write the book and kept pushing back the deadline.... why? "I hate miller," I told my friend. "I don't want to be his flame-keeper. I don't want to sere the patriarch. I have books of my own to write. Fuck Henry Miller's memory! So what if he's misunderstood--we're all misunderstood."

 "... But I was busy hating Miller--have I forgotten? Hating him for going to Paris, for living off women: June, Anais, Lepska, Eve, countless others. The life open to him was never open to me. The happy vagabond on his 'racing wheel', the clochard sleeping under the bridges of Paris; the psychopath of love fucking the wives of his hosts; the guiltless fucker, the schnorrer, the artist of the say touch, the free meal, the man who comes to dinner and eats the hostess.

"Who am I to identify with this bounder, this braggart, this blowhard? I, the A student, the PhD candidate, the scribbler of sonnets who then rebelled against academe and wrote impolite novels. I should have identified with Virginia Woolf or Emily Dickinson or Simone de Beauvoir. And of course I did. But there was something in the lives of literary women (except Colette, except George Sand) that smelled of the lamp. Our heroines had all been forced to choose between life and work and those who chose work were strange as women. And those who chose womanhood sometimes were forced to submerge the work. Or else they died in childbirth.... In short, I hate him because I love him. In short, I hate him because he's great enough to encompass the contradictions of life."

 I wasn't as interested in their mutually complimentary letters, or in the various controversies around. Miller, but earthy and passionate insights about Miller and the writing life, about joy and creativity and obsession, are well nworth its place on the writing shelf. I cannot imagine anyone reading this and. not wanting to at least try Tropic of Cancer. Now I want to go back to the unexpurgated Nin diary of her Miller years, Henry and June. 

There was much controversy about Miller in that time, there was a streak in the feminist movement that was in favor of censorship and kind of anti-sex--though there was always controversy about Miller because he was so uncensored to himself and the page--and Jong does him the return favor, debunking common misunderstandings