Rating: 4/5

A strange book to get into--Woiwode is a midwest product of the 1960s--graduating from Illinois (Urbana), he recounts how he got into writing, both poetry, short stories for the New Yorker, and novels. He does so frequently flashing forward to his efforts--more than ably assisted by his 14 year old son--to survive a blizzard and sub-sub zero winter storm on his farm in North Dakota. Once I got into the quasi-autobiography/present tense how to deal with the blizzard ping-pong, I began to enjoy the book. I would guess the author intended the "survival" through the storm to parallel his earlier "survival" as a fledgling want to be writer in New York. Through this oddly compelling journey--where the author was friends with people we now know ranging from Robert de Niro Jr to Norman Mailer and John Updike--Woiwode drops some beautiful images and even some occasional wisdom. For example, he is very aware when writing "that half the thought isn't in words, but an inner collusion of imagery and faith in intuition, only partly related to words. So I sit and try to translate my thoughts." While not by any mean a spiritual book, Woiwode also is unashamed to discuss some of marvels of his faith in God which have sustained him. So in the middle of his grousing and cynicism, his wife--who doubtless had had enough of listening to him asks him simply to pray. Writes Woiwode: "...sure, I'll pray, and lit into a prayer with such anger a hole indeed seemed to burn in the air. Then it opened to the presence I had forgotten, and I felt the ladder of Jacob's vision, with angels ascending and descending on it, descend on me, the Spirit pouring through me with such force that prayers for my wife and children...were pressed from me as never before in fifty years, and when I was spent and looked up I saw each of my family as if for the first time, transformed...Every person I hated or could not forgive appeared... I sensed the presence of each and knew who it was and was astonished at the smallness of my hate under the power passing through me." There are many other beautiful images--well worth reading although in my case, it took me well more than 100 pages before I found I could enjoy his honesty instead of resent what seemed at some level to be either name dropping or recondite knowledge only North Dakotan farmers would need to know. So for those who know something about the 1960's-1970's, like poetry, do not fear honesty about faith and "big questions", and have some respect for North Dakotan winters, this is a great book!