Rating: 2/5

There's still plenty of room out there for more decent gender relationships books with useful advice and not afraid to tell things like they are. This unfortunately was not one of them.

The book starts out promising enough. This discussion about nagging was genuinely interesting. I also liked the discussion of differing gender 'point scoring systems', even though I've heard it a few times in other places. The suggestion of each person scoring actions in their relationships for a set period of time then comparing notes also seemed like a decent idea.

There were also many moments of unintended amusement because the book was clearly a product of the late 90s/early 00s. It seemed like there was some joke about the Clinton-Lewinsky Scandal every 2 pages. Even better, I could just imagine so many of the people I know getting absolutely infuriated at all the non-politically correct ideas and language. "How dare they talk about gender as if its a fixed, binary concept?", "These suggestions of men and women viewing the world in different ways are soooooooooooo ignorant", "Women are more emotional? Triggered!", ect.

What I didn't like was the entire last half of the book. They literally had a quiz giving points to how attractive women are (with questions like how much skin they show or how often they wear heels), and then had that tell them if they are good at getting men, or 'just one of the boys'. That was genuinely stupid, and as a man, also incorrect. Then man quiz was similarly useless. I found the talk about retirement a little better, but pretty useless for myself because (1) I'm young (2) I don't base my identity off my job.

Also, a lot of the 'gender advice' they gave was very culturally specific. The biggest example of this was a strangely long and detailed section about why men prefer peeing standing up, which is something that doesn't apply to much of the world where men don't pee standing up. Which shows its not a gender based concept. The entire section about lying was similar.

All in all I was so turned off by the women attraction rating scale thing it lost 2 stars from 3 to 1. The Clinton jokes brought it up to 2. Much of this book is no longer true beyond a specific American culture from 15 years ago, but it does have a few ideas worth thinking about.