Rating: 5/5

"If I'm not for myself, who will be for me?

If not this way, how? And if not now, when?"

This is an amazing book, detailing the experiences and journey of a group of Jewish Partisans fighting behind the German Lines on the Russian Front. The book, written by Primo Levi, a Jewish concentration camp survivor, despite being a fictional work, is based around historical fact and that there were small groups or bands of Jewish Partisans who did disrupt the Nazis behind their lines, who worked independently from the Red Army. It is much more than a war book about Partisans however, the character development of the members of the group is descriptive and telling, and with the books main protagonist, Mendel (a Jewish Watchmender who ended up in the Red Army), we get to experience his disillusionment with his own religion, his loss of his family, his own crises of doubt about life and the friendships he strikes up with some of the Women members of his Partisan group and so on. The novel also tells a tale about the long term suffering and abuse that Jews had suffered, and this is cleverly brought into life with the various dialogue exchanges between Mendel and his band of 'partisankas'. This comes not only from Nazis either; in most places where they end up in White Russia, later on also in Poland, Germany and Italy, most of the people they encounter, either from other Partisan groups, local peasants etc, treat these Jewish Partisans with hostility, or at least initial misgivings and wariness. Anti-Semitism is rife wherever they end up, but (most of the time) the fact that they have a common enemy does break down barriers. 

If not now, when? is a tale of a journey. From Western Russia where the book begins in July 1943, we travel across parts of the Ukraine, into Poland, through Eastern Germany and then, finally Italy, where the books ends. The books chapters are dates, all chronicling, behind the scenes, the final years of the Second World War, and it evokes probably one of the most descriptive portrayals of the refugee situation and the chaos in Eastern Europe at the close of WW2. Everyone, all different nationalities are moving, some being held still in Lagers, or prison camps, but now under guard from the Red Army, most displaced, many without homes to go back too because they are ruined. Mendel and his band, who are called Gedalists after their leader, Gedaleh, are looking to reach their 'promised land', so they are travelling towards Italy to try and get to Israel, because Europe has killed them. They are living the Zionist dream, they see it as their homeland and this is what motivates them throughout their journey. Mendel becomes introspective however of his Faith, and his thoughts throughout the novel express his conflict.

I liked this book; it contains a depth that makes it quite a heavy read, and is an eye-opener, not only for understanding the partisans on the Eastern Front and how they were organised as well as how the Red Army tried to disband them immediately as they liberated areas, but also contains an element of hope; on their journey, they meet various people who don't judge them as Jews, but some actually try and help them and show an interest in their bedraggled selves. Primo Levi was an incredible humane writer, probably all the more so because he was a Jew and survived. 5 stars.