Rating: 5/5

4 good reads = 5 stars
(pre-2017, 2018, 2021, 2025)

𝟸𝟶𝟸𝟻: I'm re-reading old favorites and rewriting the reviews, making them more detailed. This is currently a free book on Amazon, an added bonus.

📚 Books #1 and #7 are my series' favorites; I own them both.

𝑨 𝑷𝑵𝑹 𝑴𝒚𝒔𝒕𝒆𝒓𝒚 𝒘𝒊𝒕𝒉 𝑹𝒐𝒎𝒂𝒏𝒄𝒆

𝗦𝗲𝘁 𝗶𝗻 𝗺𝘆 𝗵𝗼𝗺𝗲 𝘀𝘁𝗮𝘁𝗲｡

One of the best things about this book (series) is the paranormal mystery. I remembered some of the plot but couldn't recall if a certain character was good or bad, so I was drawn in again to find out. There are several possible villains. It's not a hard mystery to solve, but it was fun and kept my interest. The romance is just a subplot—instant attraction with no depth, equating sex with love. The story is told from the heroine's POV only. The hunky hero is basically her sexy sidekick, who we learn little about. Overall, it's an action-filled, easy read that's pure entertainment.

Strange things are going on in Miniwa, Wisconsin.
(There's a Manawa, WI―close enough.)

Plot in a Nutshell: A sarcastic cop teams up with a Native American professor to stop someone trying to create a werewolf army and take over the world, on the night of a Blue Moon. (The second full moon in the same month.) Several PG-13 sex scenes ensue. Insta-love happens for two lonely outcasts.

📕 𝗠𝗼𝗿𝗲 𝗕𝗼𝗼𝗸 𝗜𝗻𝗳𝗼𝗿𝗺𝗮𝘁𝗶𝗼𝗻 ⬇
(No Spoilers)

Jessie (26) is a loner who loves her job.
🇸‌🇭‌🇪‌:
🚔 has no family but her estranged girly mother.
🚔 is lonely, having never been loved.
🚔 is tall, has short hair and is full-figured.
🚔 is a tomboy who enjoys guns, hunting and swimming.
🚔 is insecure about herself—believing she's only okay-looking and socially inept.
🚔 hates woo-woo, only wanting facts. 

Jessie first meets Will Cadotte (age?) when she chases a wolf through the woods at night and finds him outside his cabin, naked. His muscular, buff body captivates her, and she can't look away.
🇭‌🇪‌:
🪶 belongs to the Grand Portage Wolf clan in MN.
🪶 is in WI to teach a college class.
🪶 is an expert in Native American totems.
🪶 learned Tai Chi to help him with his balance.
🪶 likes to walk around naked.
🪶 is insecure about himself―women want him for his looks but don't want to be seen with an Indian. He thinks Jessie is one of them, but she's only worried about the reaction she'll get for being with a hot guy. 

☹️ Jessie says "Faith is for fools." 
❤️ Will's response: "I'd rather be a fool than believe in nothing."

What starts everything: On the night of the first full moon, Jessie responds to an accident where Karen Larson hit a wolf, was bitten, and the wolf fled. She follows the blood trail into the woods, meeting Will. Later, she finds a black wolf totem at the scene. 

Visiting the college to learn more, she finds Will there and gives him the totem to research. Their chemistry is immediate. 

Karen, a teacher, becomes animalistic at her school, killing the principal and nearly a student. Jessie seeing her crazy behavior, senses something is terribly wrong. After the sheriff kills Karen, her body—and the principal's—mysteriously vanish from the morgue.

Edward Mandenauer arrives claiming to be from the DNR to kill the wolf, citing a new rabies strain. In truth, he's a Jäger-Sucher (hunter-searcher), and the leader of a secret special forces group who hunt the monsters created by Josef Mengele during Hitler's era.

︻┳═一 He tells Jessie about the werewolves, and they hunt them together.

👹 It's a nice change of pace to have the werewolves be evil, infected with a virus that turns them into demon-possessed monsters who feed on human flesh. Since there's no cure, they must be killed with silver.

Someone wants to be a wolf god: “There’s an old and obscure legend of the Ojibwe. The wolf god can be brought to life during a blue moon if the way is paved by an army of wolf men. And women.”

🐺 The wolf totem is needed for the ritual. 

  Possible Suspects:

▪️Will, the love interest. There are plenty of good reasons to suspect him.
▪️Sheriff Clyde Johnston, Jessie's boss who likes Clint Eastwood.
▪️Zee, a senior dispatcher, is a foul-mouthed, cigarette-smoking, hard-drinking close friend of Jessie.
▪️Cherry, the medical examiner's secretary, who doesn't like Jessie and vice-versa.

The exciting conclusion, with some surprises, wraps up a bit too quickly and easily. After the villain and their wolf army are defeated, Jessie joins the monster-hunting group—along with Will, her great love.

The series has a continuing story arc with different MCs in each book. More details about werewolves and the monster hunters are revealed as it progresses. 

❗ERROR: The Miniwa PD consisted of myself, the sheriff, and six other officers...

🚨 A police department is run by the "Chief of Police," not a sheriff.

10 F's