Rating: 3/5

I read this tale (and three sequels) during a happy and rather uncomplicated period in life. While I don't remember the details of the story, other than its setting in a far-distant, post-apocalyptic future, and the first stirrings toward unity of various splintered tribes, it reminded me of certain Edgar Rice Burroughs novels I'd enjoyed previously (this one for example), and it made for great escapism—again, not that I needed to escape anything. Reading it again now would be an interesting experience.

UPDATE:

I did decide to read The Breaking of Northwall again, and don't regret the time spent.

Aside from the general subject mentioned above, I recognized nothing from my prior exposure to the story aside from a place name, Innanigan (a city on the distant East Coast (probably in modern-day New Jersey)) and an epithet, "harzas," that's one of several used by trash-talking invaders from the north. (Those rascals no doubt return for a rematch in the sequels, because the word isn't used heavily enough in this volume to have made a lasting impression.)

In this projected future era, no names or expressions from our present time have survived. North America is sparsely populated by tribes that speak in different dialects, although communication among them is possible if they make an effort to speak slowly. Some are aware of ruins and understand there was at some point a "time of fire" that must have destroyed an earlier civilization. Others just presume life has always been this way—meaning, for example, the Sentani and the Shumai have always roamed the central grasslands, fighting enthusiastically when their paths crossed, and the Pelbar have always remained within their walled cities along a river that readers will recognize as the Mississippi. These three groups receive most of the attention in this volume, but an usually adventurous Pelbar named Jestak, the main character, has previously traveled north as far as the Bitter Sea (the Great Lakes), east to cities on the Atlantic Coast, and even out upon the ocean to an island, and so he has learned they are not alone. He's particularly inspired by the observation that all these far-flung, mostly hostile peoples clearly have the same root language, and he concludes that their distant ancestors must have been united.

The first part of the narrative involves an unusual amount of back reference to prior events, including Jestak's journeys. That begins on page 2, and it felt a little odd to me, as the story could definitely have included those adventures in real time. That, of course, would have made it much longer. I wonder if Paul O. Williams began writing it this way with the intention of squeezing everything into a single novel, and wrote sequels only when he realized that was not going to work.

At any rate, on his return home, Jestak's broad perspective made him unwelcome in his tribe's capital city, Pelbarigan, and he's forced to relocate to a somewhat more receptive upriver city called Northwall (possibly near our St. Louis?). En route he encounters Sentani, who're disposed to kill him until he convinces them of a personal alliance with some of their people (whom he had met on his earlier trip). Having gotten past their suspicions, he gradually builds an alliance between their tribe and, at least, the Northwall faction of the Pelbar. Later, he accomplishes the same feat with the more warlike Shumai. But there are nastier and yet more aggressive tribes encroaching from the west and the north. And infighting among the Pelbar does not help the cause. Clearly, at some point the author saw that there would have to be sequels. The long-range goal, however, is to begin reconstructing the legendary civilization of ancient times.

It's not a bad story. I confess to being a bit overwhelmed by the number of minor characters, and some of the bad guys are caricatures, but it provided relaxing reading while I was on a recent journey of my own.