Rating: 3/5

i picked this book up at a library sale and thus went into it with few expectations; this was probably for the best, as the few hopes i had for Rasputin's Revenge were let down.

the story is set in 1916 Russian and is centered around Auguste Lupin, the lovechild of Sherlock Holmes and Irene Adler. Despite this formidable pedigree, Lupin manages to display an impressive lack of intelligence while investigating a string of murders in the Russian court. the story is narrated by a low level former French spy, who's been sent to Russia with the weighty mission of talking the Tsar into remaining in the war; he soon discovers, however, that this is mainly a cover for his real task: playing Watson for his old friend Lupin.

my critiques:
the plot is built entirely on two highly implausible points, 1) that the Tsarina would ask a little-known private detective from Montenegro to investigate Russian political murders and 2) that someone so underqualified and devoid of diplomatic training as the narrator would be tasked with such a critical mission. still more improbable is that the man is immediately accepted as Alexei Romanov's tutor. i stand by the principle that historical fiction has the responsibility to be at least somewhat believable, and this was not that.

another problem i had was that Holmes' son, purportedly a genius, is astonishingly unclever; in the end it is Holmes himself who helps solve the case. the name Auguste Lupin (a conflation of Arsène Lupin and Auguste Dupin?) annoyed me too. Lupin is described as a large, heavy man whose chief interests are cooking, eating, and drinking beer, so that even in physicality he is unlike Holmes. what i'm saying, basically, is that if you must go against canon and give Holmes a progeny, at least make it one worthy of him.

much of the book consists of drinking, house parties, and conversation about an almost insultingly simplified version of the politics at the time. 1916 Russia was a notoriously troubled period of rioting, regicide, and poverty, yet almost none of this makes it into the story: Rasputin's death is mentioned second-hand in the last few pages, and the end of the Romanov line barely makes the epilogue

one of the few redeeming qualities of this book was the theory (strange but entertaining) that  Rasputin was the son of Moriarty and that he committed the murders in order to lure Lupin to Russia to take revenge for his father's death; another was the presence of Holmes and Watson toward the end of the book.

this is the second book of a duology, and despite its faults i liked this one well enough that someday i may read the first. 3 stars.