Rating: 4/5

Mary Wollstonecraft: A Vindication of the Rights of Woman

A brief introduction to a feminist classic. 

What is the Vindication?

A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (hence the Vindication) is the classic feminist text. It was written in 1792, and it has its roots in the Enlightenment. Broadly, its aim is to apply the ideas of rights and equality to women and not just to men. This article will briefly explore the origins of the work of Wollstonecraft by looking at John Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau, and then look at some of the themes which are present in the text.

The Roots of The Vindication

John Locke

John Locke (1632 – 1704) was a philosopher and political thinker (he was also a political economist, though he is not remembered for this). The most relevant aspect of his philosophy for the work of Wollstonecraft is his theory of empiricism, which was outlined in his work An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. This work argued that people are a blank slate (tabula rasa) at birth, and later develop as people, based upon their experiences.(1) 

Locke's political philosophy was based around the notion of the social contract. Locke was a firm critic of the nation of patriarchalism, an idea that had been put forward by thinkers such as Robert Filmer. Patriarchalism claimed that the ruler of a state was directly descended from Adam (and thus had the right to rule), that the people should not choose their rulers, and that rulers should act towards the people the way a father behaves towards his wife and children in a traditional marriage.(2) Locke, although God plays an important role in his argument, rejected the claim that kings have a divine right to rule based upon descent from Adam. (3) Locke instead used the device of the state of nature. Locke's state of nature was relatively peaceful, and people were able to own property. He argued that the state of nature has “inconveniences” due to each individual having the right to punish others who offend against the natural laws of God. Thus is makes sense for rational individuals to allow for a political power to arbitrate disputes. (4) Thus, power is not arbitrary, but built upon the will and consent of the people.

Jean Jacques Rousseau

Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712 – 1778) was an important 18th century political thinker. Rousseau's state of nature saw man as being amoral and animalesque rather than rational. Rousseau argued that when people come together in groups the rich can abuse the poor, and the poor can be tricked into a false “social contract” for security reasons. (5) Instead of this, in his work The Social Contract, Rousseau argued for a rational state based upon the idea of the “general will”, using direct democracy rather than representative government. (6)

However, Rousseau's nation of the citizen (citoyen) in such a state explicitly excluded women. Rousseau believed that women's role should be confined to the private sphere. In his work Emile, he laid out what he believed the ideal woman to be like: essentially a woman who conformed to traditional feminine roles. (7)

The Vindication

Reason and Virtue: Enlightenment Values

Wollstonecraft believed that human beings' value was based upon Reason and the cultivation of Virtue. 

“Consequently the perfection of our nature and capability of happiness, must be estimated by the degree of reason, virtue, and knowledge, that distinguish the individual, and direct the laws which bind society: and that from the exercise of reason, knowledge and virtue naturally flow, is equally undeniable, if mankind be viewed collectively.” (8)

Thus Wollstonecraft goes back to first principles, the principles of the Enlightenment, right at the beginning of her case. Reason and virtue are capacities that have to be developed by the individual.

The Role of God

Wollstonecraft is also explicit in appealing to God in her theory. She argues that women are equal to men based upon their equality in the eyes of God and the fact that both men and women have souls. They are thus able to both develop their reason and virtue. (9)

Class and Wollstonecraft

Wollstonecraft specifically says that she is aiming her theory at the middle-class (i.e. bourgeois) women of her era. Inheriting the Enlightenment dislike for the aristocracy (and by extension, arbitrary power), she uses them as an analogy to develop her point that women's education has a corroding effect. Because the aristocracy have inherited their wealth and have not had to work for it, they are like the badly educated women Wollstonecraft describes, obsessed with pleasure over virtue. Bourgeois women on the other hand, Wollstonecraft believes, have a genuine opportunity to be able to improve themselves. (10)

The Role of Education

Mary Wollstonecraft explicitly agrees with the theory laid out by John Locke that human beings are shaped by their environment and education. Rather that claiming, unlike Rousseau, that the fripperies of woman were natural, she blamed them on the society. She is a fierce critic of the education that is given to girls in her era. 

Girls were, rather than being taught to develop their reason, were simply taught how to gain a man. They were taught “a smattering of accomplishments” in order to entertain, rather than to develop the capacities of reason and virtue. They were kept inside rather than allowed to play outside, leading to women's physical weakness compared to men to be exaggerated. 

“Women are told from their infancy, and taught by the example of their mothers, that a little knowledge of human weakness, justly termed cunning, softness of temper, outward obedience, and a scrupulous attention to a puerile kind of propriety, will obtain for them the protection of man; and should they be beautiful, every thing else is needless, for, at least, twenty years of their lives.” (11)

The results of this education were clear to Wollstonecraft. Women were physically weak, obsessed with beauty and how to entertain and gain flattery from a man. If they read at all, it was facetious novels* rather than serious texts. Women's only power becomes based on manipulation, cunning and flattery, which undermines rather than promoting virtue. (12) 

Wollstonecraft had some rather radical ideas on education for the time period. She believed that day-schools should be provided to educate all children together. She believed both that boarding schools lead to vice, but also that home education meant that children could not develop properly as they lacked peers. Wollstonecraft even cuts across class divides a little, as she says that even working-class children could be educated up to the age of 9. (13)

However, Wollstonecraft claims that education is not a cure-all for the oppression of women. Society in general also plays an important role. 

*Wollstonecraft was actually a writer of novels herself, as an aside. 

Modesty, Love and Friendship

Wollstonecraft had very specific views on the ideas of love and friendship as well as modesty and chastity. She disliked an excessive focus on the surface appearance of things, and this can be shown by her views both on modesty and chastity, and her views on love and friendship. 

As regards chastity, Wollstonecraft argues that women have an overriding imperative to maintain the reputation of being chaste. If a woman is marked out as unchaste, then it is basically impossible for her to marry. However, the focus is upon maintaining the outside appearance of chastity, rather than actually cultivating modesty itself, which is a virtue. The focus on the idea of chastity means that women are likely to use whatever underhanded tricks they can to maintain their reputation, which is corrupting of the actual character and virtues of the individual. (14) 

Wollstonecraft believes that love is a fleeting thing. She believes that women who cultivate only their beauty, and men who focus only on beauty when determining a wife, are both going to lose out in the long run. As beauty fades, as the marriage progresses it is likely to become unhappy. Whereas, a marriage based upon a deeper bond of friendship is more likely to be able to be maintained over the long term, because both partners have a deeper respect for one another. Wollstonecraft also believed that women should not be reliant on marriage. (15)

Equality Versus Difference: The Dilemma

There is an important tension in the work of Wollstonecraft that has been present in feminism since: are women to be valued because they are the same as men, or because they are different from men, having the capacity for childbirth and motherhood?

Wollstonecraft displays both of these tendencies in her work. As already mentioned, she believes that women are equal to men, and that women, rather than being dependent on a man, could make their own living. She considers that (bourgeois) women who fritter away their time rather than developing their capacities through a work role are wasted. 

“How many women thus waste life away the prey of discontent, who might have practised as physicians, regulated a farm, managed a shop, and stood erect, supported by their own industry, instead of hanging their heads surcharged with the dew of sensibility...” (16)

However, she also stressed the importance of the role of motherhood for women. She believes that, to be an effective mother, women need a strong education and capacity to reason. She explicitly says that, weak, badly educated women make poor wives and mothers in comparison to an educated woman. 

“Would men but generously snap our chains, and be content with rational fellowship instead of slavish obedience, they would find us more observant daughters, more affectionate sisters, more faithful wives, more reasonable mothers—in a word, better citizens.” (ch 9)

Thus there is an ambiguity in the text here that has had an important role throughout the history of the feminist movement. 

[b]Notes[/b]

(1) J. Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, http://marxists.org/reference/subject...
(2) R. Filmer, Patriarcha, http://www.constitution.org/eng/patri...
(3) J. Locke, Second Treatise on Government, Chapter 1, http://marxists.org/reference/subject...
(4) Ibid, Chapter 3, http://marxists.org/reference/subject...
(5) “Rousseau”, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rou...
(6) J. J. Rousseau, The Social Contract, http://www.constitution.org/jjr/socon...
(7) http://www.iep.utm.edu/rousseau/#H5
(8) M. Wollstonecraft, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, Chapter 1, http://www.bartleby.com/144/1.html 
(9) Ibid, Chapter 2, http://www.bartleby.com/144/2.html
(10) Ibid, Introduction, http://www.bartleby.com/144/103.html 
(11) Ibid, Chapter 2.
(12) Ibid, Chapter 12, http://www.bartleby.com/144/12.html
(13) Ibid.
(14) Ibid, Chapters 7 &amp; 8.
(15) “Mary Wollstonecraft”, Stanford Dictionary of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/wol...
(16) Ibid, chapter 9, http://www.bartleby.com/144/9.html
(17) Ibid.