Rating: 5/5

The British playwright John Bowen is perhaps best known for his television plays, such as the folk-horror-inspired Robin Redbreast and creepy ghost stories like The Ice House. These dramas, plus the gently unsettling Edward Gorey illustration on the front cover of my copy of The Girls, will give you a feel for this novel’s off-kilter tone.

First published in 1986, The Girls is a savage gem in which the cosiness of life in an idyllic English village is destabilised by domestic horror. Think Barbara Pym crossed with Inside No. 9 and you’re pretty much there – maybe with a smidgen of Lolly Willowes or Barbara Comyns in the mix, just for good measure. I adored this surreal, dreamlike book and feel sure it will feature in my end-of-year highlights.

The story takes place in the mid-1970s, with much of the action unfolding over a sequence of heady summers, an atmosphere that greatly enhances the story’s unsettling combination of tones. Susan and Janet – the ‘girls’ of the novel’s title – share a cottage in a small village in the Cotswolds. They are partners in business and in life, devoting their time to producing a vast array of cheeses, jams and hand-embroidered smocks, which they sell in their local gift shop and at craft fairs across the country. 

The girls were an old-fashioned couple, as they still are. They had come together in the days when the Women’s Movement was at its most militant, and many a wife and mother was led into lesbianism by having her consciousness raised, but Susan had never heard of the Women’s Movement and Janet was not sure that she approved of what she had heard. Instead they fell innocently in love… (p. 24)

Interestingly, if the girls were two young men living together, making yogurt and sewing smocks, tongues would be wagging. But as it is, the villagers are very accepting of Sue and Jan, who have lived together in the cottage for the past seven years.

Early in the novel, a pedigree boar escapes while en route to service a local sow, setting the tone for this peculiar story, which is flecked with touches of the absurd. Naturally, the incident causes chaos for the villagers, not least for Jan and Sue when the animal enters their shop…

Blinded by smocking, the boar broke from the rack and cannoned off the chest-freezer, knocking over the cold cabinet. Elderflower Cooler mingled with the blood on his back, and the lemon juice must have stung his wounds, for his squealed again and continued to do so. Martin and the breeder appeared with corrugated iron. ‘You keep that bloody iron out of this shop,’ Janet shouted. She imagined, as in some comedy routine, the two men knocking each other over with sheets of corrugated iron, while the boar ran to and fro between their feet and the contents of the shop were destroyed. (p. 17)

The episode with the escaped pig prompts Sue to reflect on what she is doing with her life. It’s true that she and Jan have been building a shared existence together, but was it all just a way of retreating from the world, consuming the days as the years slip by? It’s difficult to say. Sue knows that Jan has enriched her life, awakening her emotionally and providing the security in which their love has blossomed. But are those structures and routines now becoming constraints, restricting the girls’ scope to evolve as individuals?

Against this backdrop of restlessness, Sue books a package holiday to Crete, giving her the space to do some soul-searching on her own while Jan stays in the village. Naturally, Jan is nervous about this development, but she realises that Sue, who is ten years her junior, needs the space to find herself.

Left to her own devices, Jan is plagued by nightmares in which Sue is either perishing at the hands of foreign criminals or having the time of her life without a second thought for Jan. Jealousy has never been a problem for Jan before, but in the lonely depths of night, her imagination runs wild.

To read the rest of my review, please visit:
https://jacquiwine.wordpress.com/2024...