Rating: 3/5

Earthbound follows Ellen and David Cooper to an isolated seaside cottage not far from the one where they spent their honeymoon twenty years earlier. Only now, their marriage is in a state of disrepair due to David's recent infidelities. Shortly after their arrival, David discovers that the derelict beach house is haunted by the beautiful spirit of Marianna, a nympho-ghost whose lust-filled depravity has doomed her not just to earth but to the very confines of the cottage. Unholy desires fill David with each unabated visitation by Marianna (who only appears whenever David’s wife is away). When David inevitably succumbs to Marianna’s temptations he resents the liaison and vows to be faithful to Ellen. However, his errant impulses and foolish skepticism cause him to disregard the warnings of the mysterious heiress on the hill who urges the couple to leave immediately… and David finds himself growing deeper in his carnal knowledge of Marianna’s ghost, even as their dalliances begin to literally sap away at his health and energy, leaving him powerless to stop himself.

Billed as “A Lover’s Ghost Story” and comprising few characters and a claustrophobic setting, Earthbound defies straightforward genre classification as it blends elements of horror and suspense in a tale of paranormal erotica. The story is more sexual than terrifying—though the sexual content is more restrained in language than you might expect. Sure, legendary author Richard Matheson injects some quality suspense into this rambling tale; however, he also veers into shameless bathos and outright titillation. And yet, one could reasonably argue that the sex scenes were as flat and lacking as the dialogue. On the other hand, Matheson deserves props for deftly exploring the complexities and unforeseen flaws of both relationships and the human mind, even if it comes across as heavy-handed and didactic in the epilogue. 

Earthbound is far from being his best work, though it is (somehow) hauntingly erotic and occasionally exciting. Any faithful readers looking for a Matheson tale that’s of the same masterpiece league as The Shrinking Man, The Beardless Warriors (my favorite Matheson novel, by far), and—to a lesser extent—Duel will likely want to skim over this meager addition to Matheson’s legacy.