Rating: 5/5

What a charming and funny story, and quite wise.

Charming.

I loved Harry Desire, his personality and his way of behaving. He was so Heyer-ish ;-) And the way the love story developed - lovely. I found here the scene that made me sigh very deep and made me want to be the heroine.

  
    'I find it very hard to lie,' he said. 'The truth is, I was holding your daughter in my arms and kissing her and I regret to say I forgot myself.'
'Where did this take place, sirrah? In the carriage?'
Clear as a bell, Lord Harry's voice seemed to ring through the drawnig-room.
'In my lodgings, Mr Armitage.'
Green eyes gleaming, Lord Sylvester made a quick move towards Lord Harry. Deirdre threw herself between them.
'It was all my fault,' she gasped. 'I flirted with him, quite shamefully. I led him on.'
Lord Harry dropped his hands lightly on her shoulders and pulled her against him.
Then he rested his chin on top of her head and surveyed the outraged company with amused eyes.
  

Funny.

Rev. Armitage's intrigues, Lady Godolphin's love life and her language blunder - made me laugh like in the two first parts of series. There were also many other funny situations, especially between sisters. There was also one precious poem (there were more poems, but this one was... ;-) )

  Love is the fart
Of every heart;
It pains a man when 'tis kept close;
And others doth offend, when 'tis let loose.

I found also very hilarious the way of discovering by Deirdre where the children come from.

Wise.

How often we are labeled as e.g. stupid or wise or nice or grumpy and then it stays with us often for the rest of our life, regardless if it is true. And we are trying constantly to deserve for this or fighting with this.

Another message: When woman/man marries she/he doesn't change suddenly, she/he doesn't mature all at once. It was showed well through the older, married sisters, Minerva and Annabelle.

What could I add? I have a very good time. And I can't wait to read about other sisters, especially about Diana and Frederica.