Rating: 3/5

Jan 20 ~~ review asap.
715pm ~~ I enjoyed my chapter-a-day read of War And Peace so much in 2025 that I decided to use the same format this year to work my way through some books I have been wanting to read at Project Gutenberg. My overall free time for reading has nearly disappeared since September of last year, so this easy challenge will help get at least a few titles completed and keep me from forgetting how to read. 

Freckles was my first choice. I will be reading two others by the same author, but I will explain why when I review the next book, A Girl Of The Limberlost. There is always a little back story, you know, but I am tired tonight and want to finish up quickly here instead of indulging in too much babbling.

Freckles was this author's first book, published in 1904. The title refers to a young man who appears in a timber camp in Indiana one day after running away from the farm he had been sent to from the orphanage where he had lived since he was a baby.

Even though the boy has only one hand, the camp boss is impressed by his attitude and offers Freckles the job of timber guard. He is to guard the trees in a certain section of the Limberlost forest/swamp so that no thieves can get in and cut down the valuable trees before the boss and his crew can get to them.

The rest of the story concerns all the adventures Freckles had during the following year. It was fairly fast-paced and generally quite exciting. The most puzzling part for me was how Freckles could love the swamp as much as he learned to love it and yet be totally accepting of the idea that the place would be destroyed as soon as the timber crew could get in there and start chopping down trees. 

Of course back then no one really cared about Nature; everyone thought only of getting as much money as they could from the trees that would be turned into furniture and other profitable items. Nobody cared what kind of desolation they left behind, as long as their pockets would be filled with cash. Naturally attitudes have changed since then. Or so they say. I don't believe it. The men who run big corporations will never be able to see beyond their pockets, Just look at what they are trying to do in Oak Flat Arizona. 

But let me get back to Freckles. The story flowed along with the snakes and timber thieves being dealt with whenever they showed up, but Freckles always struggled with a private demon that left him feeling less than everyone around him, even though his character was unbelievably pure, honest, and upright. 

I figured that at some point we would learn the whole story about why Freckles had been abandoned to a children's home as a new baby, and sure enough we did, in the last few chapters of the book. The part that made me roll my eyes more than once and say 'oh, yeah, right'. 

Even with that tidy but overly melodramatic tying of loose ends it was an entertaining story and left me looking forward to the author's second Limberlost book.