Rating: 5/5

Thomas Sowell’s “Preferential Policies: An International Perspective” is a fantastic analysis of the history of preferential policies in countries all over the world and their effects on preferred and non-preferred groups. He analyzes situations in as wide reaching places as India, Malaysia, the United States, Sri Lanka, Nigeria, and South Africa. Though this was written in 1990, it is just as relevant now as it was then. The agitation for preferential policies has escalated to even more extreme levels in the United States (where I am writing from) recently.

Sowell breaks up his initial analysis, consisting of detailed looks at one situation after another, into three categories: majority preferences in majority economies, majority preferences in minority economies, and minority preferences in majority economies. “Majority preferences in majority economies,” for example, means preferential policies for the majority group with political power in an economy dominated by the majority group. “Majority preferences in minority economy” means preferential policies for the majority group with political power in an economy dominated by a minority group. Sowell presents very similar patterns regardless of which of the three categories into which a preferential policy falls. Often, the preferred group recognizes that they are not able to compete with other groups. Possibly most importantly, Sowell shows with numerous examples how preferential policies tend to benefit most the elite of the preferred group while punishing most the marginal members of the non-preferred group. He also shows how preferential policies have tended to expand upon both the initially intended benefits and the initially intended beneficiaries to include more extreme preferences and many more “disadvantaged” groups. Finally, he demonstrates that preferential policies often harm both non-preferred and preferred groups, rather than simply transferring resources and benefits from the non-preferred group to the preferred group. The most obvious example of this is increased racial tensions and conflict, but it can also take the form of lesser achievement among the preferred group as they begin to feel entitled to particular jobs or stations in life.

Where Sowell really shines is his analysis and insight into the role of incentives from an economic lens, which he is so talented at doing. One of his explanations for the widespread emergence of preferential policies is that politicians see it as a way to garner short-term gains at a low initial cost. The short-term outlooks of most politicians looking toward their next reelection campaigns cause them to institute preferential policies. However, preferential policies have huge costs in the long run, which in the most extreme cases take the form of racial violence or even war. Rather than make long range investments in education, which may take 20 years to show any real gains, well beyond the outlook of the vast majority of politicians, preferential policies will pay immediate political dividends to the politician without any significant initial monetary cost. I also really liked his discussion of activists who claim to speak on behalf of a group despite the fact that a majority of that group does not identify with the activist's ideas. Agitators who call for preferential policies often come disproportionately from the middle class and from current college students and recent college graduates. They claim to speak on behalf of the entire group, but this often is not the case. These writings coalesce perfectly with the current situation in the United States, with Al Sharpton playing the role of the activist claiming to speak on behalf of the group and college students at the center of the agitation. I think we have also seen plenty of evidence that these groups have less incentive to perform and to try to compete with whites and Asians because they believe they are entitled to quality jobs due to their membership in a “disadvantaged” group, which is exactly what Sowell says tends to happen.

Though “Preferential Policies: An International Perspective” is short (185 pages of text in the edition I read), there is a ton of information here. Sowell is like no other with his ability to weave together examples from all over the world at different points in history to decipher patterns and tendencies. This analysis of preferential policies may be more important than ever in today’s political climate. I highly recommend this book.