Rating: 5/5

- spooilers - 

I cannot help myself but love this story. At first, it quite annoyed me and I was a little bit scared by its following. I thought, in some or another sequence, that it will end like Ibsen's piece of work. And I got scared because, however, I didn't want Candida to be separated from the lovely Morell.He was, for me, the only agreeable and dear character from this story and I have quite fancied with him - even though I cannot find a serious and real explanation for the matter. I have just loved the character, his personality, his being and his words - also, his love towards his wife that made me tremble with satisfaction and smile with content. 
I have despised Eugene from the bottom of my heart and soul when I thought he would be able to ruin this beautiful relationship, the home of two human beings that loved and respected each other. To tell the truth, this is the first time I encounter such beautiful harmony and such a perfect and lovely atmosphere between two people and maybe, only maybe - it's just me and my fancy towards harmony and homely happiness that makes me think like this and regard the matter as it is. Or maybe, there is a stunning feeling that flows from this relationship between those two characters.
Coming back to Eugene, I must say I despised him, but in the end he did not look as fearsome and ugly as he looked until then. His boyish attitude was long gone by then and I suppose that was the thing that did it. I loved Morell because he was a man, whatever that may mean, but Eugene was just a boy, a poet that naturally understood things. But this boyish poet, was not a man and by thinking he was right in everything and being quite right in many matters, he didn't see one essential spot, and that is the fact that, whatever Candida was, whatever he saw in her, whatever he thought of her or she thought of herself or whatever much the suffering may be - she was to love her husband forever, to cherish and respect him and to be with him for all their remaining lives on Earth. It may be that Candida loved Eugene as well, but in quite a different matter than she loved Morell, because she was mature, she was a woman, not a girl and if Eugene would have come to her when she was younger, she would have thrown herself away in his arms. But, being a woman, a wife and a mother, she couldn't engage herself in other relationship but with her own husband - and that fact, i deeply loved and admired.