Rating: 5/5

This book consists of two very good novellas. They do not include Campion, but they both have very clever plots with a surprise ending.

Wanted Someone Innocent

Gillian goes to a school reunion where Rita Raven (who was several years older) latched on to her claiming close friendship at school. Rita insists Gillie move in with her and she will pay her 300 pounds per year. Gillie loves the fancy house. She is sent to her room, and all at the party go elsewhere. Gillie has dinner alone and then wanders around the house. She finds a music room and plays the piano for about an hour before she realizes there is a young man there named Julian. He was wounded in the war in the far east. Soon a nurse comes in and he says Good Night. Gillie talks with Mrs. Munsen, who tells her that Julian is the master and was surprised that Rita hadn't told her about her husband, Julian. The next day the doctor tells her she is to be a companion for Colonel Fayre (Julian). 

When Gillie realizes she is in love with Julian, she knows she must leave. She tells Rita the next morning that she is leaving, and Rita insists she must stay until the next day. That evening she is to bring Julian his usual coffee as well as a tray for Rita. Gillie goes to the locked pantry to prepare the coffee and finds there is no light. She prepares the trays and puts Julian's pills in his cup. The butler takes the tray to Rita and she takes Julian's tray. He gives her an envelope with money, and she goes to bed, planning to leave the next day. The next morning Rita is found dead in the studio. Of course, Gillie is the main suspect. The police investigation is very thorough, and Gillie is afraid she will be arrested any minute. We finally find out at the end exactly what happened.

Last Act
This is another really good story. Margot Robert has just broken her engagement to Victor, the son of the woman who brought her up after her parents died. She has fallen in love with Victor's half brother, Denis. However, Zoff, the great actress who brought her up hates Denis. When Margot goes to see Zoff, she has just claimed that Denis had been trying to kill her. 

When Zoff is found dead with a handkerchief soaked in chloroform over her face. Shortly before she was discovered, Denis was seen leaving with the green bag in which she kept her jewelry. Margot runs to his home to have him come back, and the police follow her. Inspector Lee first assumes Denis has murdered Zoff, but after a long questioning session he isn't sure. There are other motives to kill her; Zoff was not an easy person to please. She has been fighting with Denis; her servant Felix wanted to go home to his dying father, but Zoff has said if he does he can't come back and will lose the inheritance she was leaving him and Felix has broken her favorite clock; Sir Kit wanted Zoff to leave the house he had loaned her because his son needed it.

Lee is getting nowhere in his investigation. Finally, in frustration, he decides to gather everyone in Zoff's bedroom to try to resolve what happened. New information comes out, and Lee finally knows what happened. It's a great ending!