Rating: 5/5

The Terrorists (1975) is the final entry in the ten-book crime series about Detective Martin Beck and his team, written by Maj Sjowall and Per Wahloo. The series was intended to be a kind of socio/cultural/political analysis of late sixties seventies Sweden, which had socialist leanings and a kind of political neutrality but was turned capitalist more and more every year, exacerbating already existing inequities. 

The authors use the device of a police procedural as a way of reflecting on society, through the lens of crime, and in this one the world outside Sweden impedes on this little country, as a reactionary US Senator (Ronald Reagan?) comes to the country, a fortune is spent to protect him as desperately poor people go unattended to. The (socialist) point is clear; capitalist societies do not care about anyone but the rich and powerful. As Rhea says,

“I think lots of people know perfectly well they're being cheated and betrayed, but most people are too scared or too comfortable to say anything. It doesn't help to protest or complain, either, because the people in power don't pay any attention. They don't care about anything except their own importance, they don't care about ordinary people.”

One mouthpiece for the political views of the authors is not Beck but Gunnvald Larsson, who detests the US Senator and tells you why. Another mouthpiece for the authors’ political views is Beck’s girlfriend, Rhea. Two principal things happen in this book. When a rich abusive pornographer who preys on teen girls and lures them through drugs to pornography is brutally killed, Rhea speaks for the authors here; the women and girls of the sixties and seventies--revered as flower children--were not served well by the Free Love movement. In this one drugs/crime/prostitution/pornography proliferate in Sweden and (usually young) girls become victims, their lives destroyed as men celebrate their freedom to have sex with anyone they want. And this is a point made in several of the books; women are the primary victims of capitalism. 

And (spoiler alert) one of these young women kills the prime minister in rage about the greedy rich. There’s a terrorist organization named Ulag that is also trying to kill the politicians, presaging the terrorists of the twenty-first century.

This is the third book I have read recently tying the destruction of women’s lives to the (broken) promises of films/Hollywood as a means to glamour and success. 

This is the very model for all police procedurals that follow it. Just superbly well done. While I have given only a couple of the individual books five stars, I will give this one five stars as my rating of the series as a whole. Goodbye Stockholm Serious Crime Unit: Lennart Kollberg, Fredrik Melander, Benny Skacke, Gunnvald Larsson, and sad sack Martin Beck, who says his three principles of crime work are for him "a systematic mind, common sense, and conscientiousness.” All in the end are burned out--hard-working, dedicated, but cynical and depressed. 

I like how it ends, too, as Kollberg plays a word game with his wife and Rhea and Beck, playing the letter x in the word "Marx." Perfect for the Marxist authors, Wahloo dying from cancer at 48, months before the book was finished.