Rating: 4/5

Firstly, I have never written such a long review before, so brace yourself. 

Secondly, this book is nothing short of a fascinating read, despite its flaws. 

It is important to mention that Jung was apparently fascinated by Einstein's theory of relativity and the idea that time and space are relative and only become factual when observed consciously, Schopenhauer's attempt at illustrating two modes of events, the first being causal chains and the second, and more relevant to Jung's idea of synchronicity, being the meaningful cross-connection (“...a subjective connection which exists only in relation to the individual who experiences it, and which is thus as subjective as his own dreams.”) and Lebniz's idea of pre-established harmony. 

Having that in mind, It is also important to say that Jung's term “synchronicity” is different from “synchronism” and means “the simultaneous occurrence of a certain psychic state with one or more external events which appear as meaningful parallels to the momentary subjective state.” 

From several experiments (the one conducted by Rhine, for example) Jung arrives at the idea that “chance” ideas “reveal the structure of that which produces them, namely the unconscious”, thus implying that meaningful coincidences rests on an archetypal foundation and are made meaningful by the activation of the collective unconscious. 

Based on his personal observations and with the help of experiments, Jung theorizes that the collective unconscious has in itself a sort of determinizm of events, a priori knowledge of them (which he likeness to Leibniz's pre-established harmony, meaning, an absolute synchronism of psychic and physical events) and in certain objective situations the unconscious (when it is strengthened) “sends” to the conscious (which is weakened, and with it, so are the common concepts of time and space) a sorf of “omen” in the form of a dream, premonition or else. Thus leading to the assumption that “Synchronistic phenomena (...) prove that a content perceived by an observer can, at the same time, be represented by an outside event, without any causal connection. From this it follows either that the psyche cannot be localized in space, or that space is relative to psyche. The same applies to the temporal determination of the psyche and the psychic relativity of time.”

Jung also dedicates a whole chapter on the forerunners of the idea of synchronicity, which I thoroughly enjoyed. It includes musings on the nature of the Tao, its “nothingness” and analysis of ideas expressed by Hippocrates, Plotinus, Pico della Mirandola, Agrippa von Nettesheim, Leibniz, Kepler and above all, Plato. 

And now, for the elephant in the room. Yes, Rhine's experiments are heavily doubted, there is no denying that and there is a lot of literature on the subject, if one is interested. As for Jung's own experiment, even he says that it is “too arbitrary” and “too clumsy”. But it is important to keep in mind that the subject considered is hard, if not impossible, to empirically prove because of the need of abaissement mental, which “tips the scales in favour of the unconscious” and is hard to produce in a strictly conducted experiment. I mostly read Jung as a philosopher, so I am not really that bothered by his not-so-clearly-observed-experiments. In spite of all objections, what Jung brings to the table, is a very novel idea and it is definitely worth considering. 

In the end, this book gave me a lot of food for thought and made me understand myself, how I view and understand the world, and what I believe in, a little bit more (isn't this what we all strive for, after all?) and I greatly appreciate that.