Rating: 5/5

Kidnapped became my default recommendation because of two reasons: 1. none of my friends has read it (not even heard of it) and 2. it is awesome. Let me be honest: I didn´t know this book existed, I acquired Kidnapped because it was on sale, it had a cool front cover design and I liked the back cover description which seemed just nice.
I wonder why this book is not as popular as other Robert Louis Stevenson’s work, I’m guessing it's because the novel is way too Scottish for any reader who happens to be, well... not Scottish. Scottishness aside, the novel is marvellous. 
I truly don’t know where to start. The story is as good as it can be, Stevenson delivers an adventurous tale with his magnificent narrative that combines friendship and survival in the midst of political intrigue; a terrific description that transports you to the 18th century Scotland's landscapes and people and all that, of course, with an excellent pace: I hated when I had to interrupt my reading.
What can I say about the characters but that I loved them? I really liked how they main characters interact with each other and with others, they are lovable and a little funny. There is something I truly enjoy when reading a book: to laugh now and then. Stevenson’s nails it again with his good humour, I had more than a couple of laughs while reading.
There should be more books like this. There are books that after reading them, the first thing you want to do is to grab a good book. After I read Kidnapped I didn’t even wanted to see my queue in fear my next reading wouldn’t be half as good as this one was.
After I recommend a book I’m always nervous and doubtful about if the reader will like it, and even worse, is the remorse of being the responsible for making someone read something that didn’t like (I hate when that happens to me). Yet, when I recommend this book I feel confident that if they don’t like it, is because they definitively don´t like either the sea or adventures or adventures in the sea or Stevenson's work or because they hate Scotland or... [insert as many other reasons as you want], but not because it is not a good book.

This review was also posted on my blog :)