Rating: 3/5

At my son's 4 month appointment, the pediatrician asked if I had any questions for her. Unable to distill all my confusion and angst on the topic into a single question, I just said, "Sleep." She sighed. 

This book was her top recommended resource, but much of what she said in terms of advice, and really, I think, my main gripe with this book, is that sleep is so individualized for each child, and indeed for each season of that child's life, that it is impossible to provide "A Step-by-Step Program for a Good Night's Sleep," as the chipper subtitle on the front of the book proclaims. 

If there was a step by step program in this book, I couldn't find it. I read the first 4 chapters and skimmed chapters 7, 8, and 11, which were the age-specific chapters for my son and a general overview of miscellaneous, other sleep problems (mostly for older kids, but I thought it was interesting to read about). I think chapter 4 was the most helpful in terms of concrete suggestions, but I was still left rather confused on what Dr. Weissbluth's "method," if he has one, was. An early bedtime, well-protected naps, and allowing the chance for baby to self soothe at night seem to be the main hallmarks, but the specifics of how to achieve those were pretty blurry. He seems to recommend a bit of everything, and so actually nothing at all. I will be trying to do an earlier bedtime and trying to move the first nap earlier, and if baby's sleep improves, I'll add an edit to this review. 

My pediatrician said she liked this book because of how it reframes crying at bedtime/night - you're not abandoning your child or neglecting him, but rather "actively encouraging the development of independence, providing opportunities for [him] to learn how to sleep alone, and showing respect for [his] ability to change [his] behavior" (p. 346 in the e-book). This was a helpful reframing for me and gives me the peace of mind to not rush to comfort my son when he starts fussing at bedtime/night, although we have yet to do a full "cry it out." 

Weissbluth shares a quote by another pediatrician, A. H. Parmelee Jr.: "Parents are never truly prepared for the degree to which the babies' sleep/wake patterns will dominate and completely disrupt their daily activities." I don't think anything in this book resonated with me more than this...