Rating: 3/5

Cornwall 1810-1811
Ten years has passed since we last saw Ross Poldark. 
After his duel with Monk Addlerly and Elizabeth's death, Ross felt discontented with Parliament and wanted to quit. Lord Falmouth wouldn't hear of it but they found reasons to send Ross abroad to do some information gathering. His missions have been dangerous and he longs to return to the arms of his loving Cornish wife yet his spirit is still a bit restless. The children have grown up and are trying to find their own directions in life. Romance is in the air as Jeremy and Clowance find themselves in love for the first time each. Jeremy seems to lack ambition though and Ross wonders what will become of his son. Then Jeremy rescues a stranger from the sea who will change their lives. 

Not much happens in this book. The dust jacket promises a mystery but that mystery is never fully revealed unless it's just not there. The story has romance novel elements, a LOT of #MeToo moments, a little action and a lot of history about steam power and the Industrial Revolution. Mostly we just play catch up with the characters. 

The new characters are sketched out but not fully fleshed yet. The title character is Stephen Carrington from Bristol ("Bristow"). He is a bit roguish and reckless. He reminds me of a younger Ross. Stephen falls in love with Clowance but he isn't good enough for her. Does she feel the same way? I wouldn't mind Stephen but I have a bad feeling about him based on the old Cornish rhyme quoted on the dust jacket. I don't like, from a modern perspective, how he takes advantage of Clowance. It's kind if #MeTooish at first but then later she takes more control over her body. I don't like this relationship at all.

Lady Harriet is an impoverished widow. She seems strong-willed and independent. I like how she deals with George's attentions and how she sees her brother's role in her life. Go widowhood! It rocks! WAY better than marriage!

Lord Edward Fitzmaurice is the younger son of a Duke. He becomes Clowance's third suitor. There's a young man from the village- the son of Jinny Carter who was married to Ross's friend Jim who died of jail fever after Ross busted him out of Launceston prison. Benjy isn't seen as good enough for Clowance in spite of being Ross and Demelza's godson. He's independent-minded, a bit of a loner and Clowance doesn't seem to return his affection. Second is Stephen Carrington and Lord Edward comes in third. He actually seems all right for a nobleman. His brother and Ross agree on the issue of parliamentary reform. Clowance could do a lot worse but I think Demelza would feel uncomfortable visiting her daughter if she married a nobleman. 

Miss Cuby Trevannion is the object of Jeremy's affections. She's bit harsh and cold but I believe her to have a warmer manner inside. She's playing a role with Jeremy in front of her family. She's young and her mother is strict. Her brother is awful. Really boorish and mean. He represents the fate of the landed gentry during the Industrial Revolution. 

Colonel Powys-Jones is an old lecher who wants Demelza. Every single time she goes into society she gets sexually harassed. She is not as naive as she used to be in her younger days and knows how to avoid being caught. 

In case you're wondering, here's what happened in the last 10 years since we left the Poldarks.

Ross has calmed down quite a lot now he's 50ish but not too old to have adventures. He spends most of the first half of the book in Portugual and London before returning to Cornwall. His boat building business is going well, banking business is successful, the mines are not doing super great but they can only get so much out of them. He's very much in love with Demelza and even romantic. Yet, he doesn't quite know what to do with the older children. He works it out at the end a bit. Ross didn't like Parliament where words mean more than actions. He went on a mission to Portugual, met GC and fought a minor battle to survive and return home to London.  He was eager to get home to his wife. She was anxious for his return as well and they were both waiting impatiently for the now nearly grown children to go to bed so they could um go to bed themselves. 

Ross went to the West Indies to inspect the condition of the British troops in Honduras but did not seem to meet Ned.

He had a chance to get back at the Warleggans and play the banking game but Demelza counsels him that the Warleggans have to live with whatever they've done. When Ross doesn't actually vote on whether to have his bank spread dirty rumors about Warleggans Bank, he puts it on Demelza saying she "instructed him" and now she's mad because she thinks next time something goes wrong between Ross and George, he'll blame her. 

Demelza is holding down the fort at home, content with her children and having enough money to be comfortable. She's more a woman of her own time than in the show. She's struggling to figure out how to be a middle aged matron and mother of a daughter of marriageable age. Caroline is worried Clowance will be stuck with a Cornish husband and the choices are slim. Demelza hates going into society, especially without Ross but something must be done. If Demelza had her own way, she and Ross would live happily ever after making love, running the farm and the mines and settling down as middle-aged gentry folk. The new baby is a girl, Isabella-Rose. She's described as "dainty" by Ross but comes across as a hooligan. The nanny does most of the work raising the child.

Jeremy is now 19 and did well in Truro Grammar School but lacks ambition, or so his parents think. He's actually secretly obsessed with steam power and has plans to build a steam carriage to run on roads. Sorry Jeremy, not in your lifetime, your sister's lifetime or anyone else's for that matter. Steam trains are a different sort of object and he's less interested in track-run vehicles. 
Jeremy falls in love with a well-born woman but is rejected because he isn't "good enough" (read: wealthy enough). History repeats itself. He even contemplates an affair with Daisy Kellew, a gentrywoman nearby who isn't quite good enough for him, according to his mother. Daisy is willing and ready to be kissed and probably would marry him but he decides he isn't interested in going that far. He is eager to kiss and fondle girls and seems to have had experience rolling in the hay with the village lasses. 

Clowance is now 16 and a fair beauty, tomboy. She ran away from boarding school just because she was bored. Papa Ross can't control her. She's just the right age for romance and very naive. Like her mother, she's fresh and innocent. I don't like her romantic plot at all. There's one scene I really really strongly objected to. 

The Enyses have two daughters, Sophie, a year younger than Bella and Meliora! They aren't in the book much but Caroline has regained her usual spirits. 

Geoffrey Charles is fighting with Wellington in Portugal when Ross shows up to gather information on the eve of a battle. He is old enough to inherit Trenwith but hasn't been home in years. Trenwith is falling into disrepair.

After Elizabeth's death George stopped caring about everything and anything. Uncle Cary had to save him from a few bad business decisions. George moved in with his parents bringing the children. He grew to love Elizabeth and acknowledges his role in their disagreements. Valentine is growing up to be a "peculiar" child but little Ursula is the apple of her grandmother's eye. Once his parents die, George moves to London and Truro, shutting up Trenwith except for a monthly visit and surprising the Harrys who are in charge.

George doesn't care about politics at first until the situation with the King starts getting confusing. He becomes a Whig again even if he doesn't agree with their politics because they think they'll be the ruling party once the old King dies. A chance meeting with Clowance in Trenwith awakens George's sexual desires (ew!) but not specifically her. He starts courting an impecunious younger widow, sister of a Duke and as conservative as he. She's either independent and uninterested or playing hard to get. I like Lady Harriet a lot. George is now more interested in the mills in Manchester. He doesn't care about the horrific conditions. That's commerce.

Valentine, now 17, finally appears at the end of Book 2. He's a sad disappointment after the spunky, bratty child of the show. He's at Eton and badly spoiled. His appearance is rather foppish and his manner is shocking. He got an Eaton chambermaid with child and doesn't seem to care. Valentine is used to having his father's money take care of all his problems. He's been raised a Warleggan and no indication that Ross is indeed his biodad even after the end of the previous book when George was holding newborn Ursula thinking all 3 children looked like their fathers. Valentine's looks though were described as changeable so it's still ambiguous.

Still, Valentine doesn't care about old feuds and is willing to socialize with the Polark youths. I say that's very good of him but I don't trust him around Clowance. Like her mother, she can't seem to go anywhere without men ogling her. George is thinking a future alliance for V who has no intentions of being caught and intends to sow his wild oats even after marriage.

Ursula at 11 is smarter and more trustworthy in terms of business than her brother. Is that because she's a true Warleggan? She hasn't made an appearance on her own yet.

Sam did marry Rosina, age 30, after converting her and 2 years courtship and 2 years engagement. No children but they raise cows and he works in the carpenter's shop Drake vacated when he married Morwenna.

Drake and Morwenna have one child- a girl NOT named Loveday. Loveday is a horse!

John Conan, called Conan in the book, is fat, stupid and doesn't seem to have any manners. Morwenna was right. He is too much a Whitworth. Lady Whitworth is "superannuated" and probably trying to marry her grandson off to someone.