Rating: 5/5

In a feat that I would have previously thought impossible, this book managed to be something that seemed to be the creation of two of my all-time favorite authors; David James Duncan and Gerald Durrell. It has the endlessly clever tangential stories, musings, and dialogue of Duncan’s The Brother’s K; it had a large part of the story’s focus being on exactly the type of eccentric characters you’d find in Durrell’s The Corfu Trilogy. All of this wrapped into beautiful descriptions of nature and the wonders found in the simpler joys in life like you find in Duncan’s The River Why. This was not my expectation when I began to read, but it was a wonderful surprise.

If this book doesn’t make you want to spend the rest of your life on a river by the mountains fly-fishing, than you must not have been reading carefully enough. 

Here are some of my favorite passages from the book...

“Books provided further evidence of their intimate connection to the Earth, to the natural world, to every living thing. In that room overflowing with books, they read and in so doing traveled to exotic lands, listened to symphonies, attended operas, lost themselves in the melodies of time. Nightly, they were pilgrims and the good news was that all their roads eventually joined, brought them back home, back to the banks of Starlight Creek.”

“Between them, the old men must have created hundreds of trout flies, insect mutants as bizarre and seductive as any ever to drop from a fly tier’s vise. With perhaps two exceptions, none of their titillating offerings ever stirred a trout’s interest, a fact that didn’t bother them at all. As long as there were fur and feathers and colored thread, there was hope and possibility and excitement-the chance of success. And they were two old men who thrived on chance.”

“Solitude was their profit, more valuable to them than a fat bank account, and they determined to spend it wisely and well.”

“Just as I knew that my life was changing, so too did I know at that moment that no matter what became of me, whether or not I caught a thousand trout or never another, nothing would ever quite compare to this trout, the way it hauled me so easily and humbly into its world, into the chaos that is the natural world, at once terrifying and thrilling.”