Rating: 2/5

Skip

Cannot agree with the praise this book has been heaped with. Whilst I see numerous reviews mentioning that its British Romanticism is fuelled by its time and place of when the book was published I don't think it can be accepted to have that overlook the enormous historical chasms Jan Morris simply chooses to ignore or hand wave. 

 Rather than take an appropriate overview (the word I'd like to use is 'historical') assessment Morris instead chose to wrap themself in brazen schmaltzy travelogue of historical anecdotes and often deliberately obfuscates or simply ignores swathes of history that don't align with this mawkishness. 

Take for example the section on the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Atrocities on both sides were largely known by the historiography of 1973. It was not a clean war by any means and numerous white and Indian violent unjustified reprisals make for difficult reading for any historian looking for a lens to justify said actions. Morris does not necessarily shy away from that - but in the calibre of quantity on the topic - consider the decisions taken in how it wants to shine it's light. Almost 40 straight pages are dedicated to the initial uprising, with particular focus taken to highlight the massacre of 120 British women and children at the siege of Cawnpore. It's a well written and dramatically staged passage. But then when we get to the reprisals post the siege of Delhi upon the return of British order we get a very basic play by play of almost hand wringing - going into a flowery choice of picking out eye witnesses stating how 'shocked' they were at the reprisals committed by their fellow British soldiers. This was a reprisal which even in 1973 has rough conservative estimates of almost 100,000 being killed (the number now stands at around that figure at a minimum with most historians estimating up to 800,000 Indian deaths, with the most dramatic estimates holding it at 10 million dead). Before even 10 pages weve jumped into an entire play by play of the discovery of the Nile expedition. From the potato famines to the Boer War this issue crops up time and time and TIME again. Resulting in the book becoming nothing much more in my opinion than a shocking unjustifiable sequence of decisions for a historian to take.

 Morris chose her topics carefully and with enormous bias. So the only way I could justify that the book holds historical value would be to consider it similar to how one could watch a film like The Battleship Potemkin or Birth of A Nation - considering it an insight into our historical writers controversial ignorance and accepting that they were not trying to be racist - but lived in racist times. I cannot agree that outside of that this book retains worthwhile value and I will not be continuing the series.