Rating: 3/5

The planet Krypton is dying, Jor-El and Lara send their newborn away in a space pod in hopes that he'll find a happier life on a planet where humans are still in touch with their morals and emotions unlike Krypton where science has evolved so far that people became disconnected from the world and each other. The space pod lands in a peaceful countryside on Earth, discovered by Jonathan and Martha Kent who adopt the mysterious alien baby and name him Clark Kent. Blessed with incredible strength, endurance and the ability to fly at extreme speeds, Clark learns from the love and kindness given to him from his adoptive parents and channels it into the desire to become the gentle guardian of mankind; adequately nicknamed Superman.

A simple and campy origin story for Superman, showing his early days as an easygoing teenager in the peaceful countryside, a young man working as a journalist in the city and a charming hero who takes down evildoers without lethal force. The dialogue can be a bit silly at times and the villains are cartoonishly one-dimensional in this iteration, but the interactions between Clark, his lovely and eccentric coworker Lois and his caring adoptive parents were all very well done. There's a chapter where Superman teams up with Batman in Gotham to stop a crazed jewel thief and their clashing morals make for an entertaining 'friendship' between them.

The final chapter was surprisingly emotional, having Clark confront his past as Superman which makes him realize that choosing the path of a superhero will force him to give up having normal relationships with people and other important things from his childhood that hurt to let go of. He also learns of his origins as a being from another world that can never hope to live a completely ordinary life. In spite of his conflicting emotions, Clark comes to terms with his identity as a man raised on Earth and grows up quite a bit in a short amount of time.

***

My Social Media

My YouTube Channel: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCPPs...

My Instagram Account: https://www.instagram.com/michael_sor...

My Wattpad Account: https://www.wattpad.com/user/Michael-...

My Twitter Account: https://twitter.com/SorbelloHorror

My Facebook Account: https://www.facebook.com/michael.sorb...