Rating: 1/5

This officially killed my M.C. Beaton phase at book #34. 

I don't think I've ever found a romance "hero" as despicable as I did this one. He returns from war to find himself not in love with the girl who waited for him, but still determined to marry her. Her much younger sister takes her place (because she knows her sister is in love with someone else) but he recognizes the swap prior to marrying her and still goes through with it. She balks a few times early-on about consummating their sudden marriage...and he loses his temper and starts ignoring her. Shortly after that, he starts up with a mistress--where he vents about his marriage. While on these business trips in London, he takes his mistress to society events, despite everyone knowing he's a newlywed--which I know was "done" during that period, but this is supposed to be a romance hero.

Meanwhile, his young wife is busy on his estate learning her way. She recognizes when he comes back from town that he's taken up with another woman and he shuts down the conversation. He sends his young wife home for Christmas and spends it with his mistress. This takes us to about 60% through the story which is where I quit because he was angry with his wife for making him feel guilty for having/visiting/taking up a mistress.

I don't know that I've ever read another Regency where the hero picks up a mistress after marriage, actively visits her, takes her around town (basically spitting in his wife's face), and then blames his wife for his own feelings of shame. I kept thinking that I'd misread something because I didn't see any other reviews mentioning it.

So, technically, I DNFed this one. Normally, I don't post ratings on books I don't finish, but I hated the hero in this book and adultery (especially like this) just icks me out. I'm going to go read some Amanda Quick to purge this one.

*flexes fingers* It was a good run, though. And I read a ton of good M.C. Beaton books. My faves were: A Governess of Distinction, Miss Fiona's Fancy, Lessons in Love, To Dream of Love, and The Scandalous Lady Wright.