Rating: 4/5

‘Without courage our love pales into mere dependency’ writes May. 

The essence of being human is that, in the brief moment we exist on this spinning planet, we can love some persons and some things, in spite of the fact that time and death will ultimately claim us all. By the creative act, however, we are able to reach beyond our own death. But why does creativity require courage? Because creativity provokes the jealousy of the gods, when we enter into a creative act, we seek to surpass our mortality with the creation of something eternal, thus an active battle with the gods is occurring. The creative artist and poet and saint must fight the gods of our society—the god of conformism as well as the gods of apathy, material success, and exploitative power.

What artists do is to reveal the underlying psychological and spiritual conditions of their relationship to their world: it is a search for the foundation of individuality that can withstand anti-human political developments and an attempt to reflect emotional and spiritual condition of human beings in that period of history. Artists have the power to reveal the underlying meaning of any period precisely because the essence of art is the powerful and alive encounter between the artist and his or her world. Thus, May writes that ‘creativity’ is the encounter of the intensively conscious human being with his or her world.

What I would consider an illuminating insight in this book is how exactly a breakthrough occurs in the search of a creative idea. The experience can be characterised as follows: (1) the illumination reveals itself suddenly; (2) the the insight may occur, and to some extent must occur, against what one has clung to consciously in one’s theories; (3) by the vividness of the incident and the whole scene that surrounds it; (4) by the brevity and consciseness of the insight, along with the experience of immediate certainty. Continuing with the practical conditions which is necessary for this experience are (5) hard work on the topic prior to the breakthrough; (6) a rest, in which the “unconscious work” has been given a chance to proceed on its own and after which the breakthrough may occur (which is a special case of the more general point); (7) and finally the necessity of alternating work and relaxation, with the insight often coming at the moment of the break between the two, or at least within the break.

A refreshing theory, emphasising the notion of the constructive use of solitude in our individual creative endeavours. If we are to experience insights from our unconscious, we need to be able to give ourselves to solitude.

For some reason the combinations the unconscious presents to us are also the most beautiful. There is elegance to it, the revelation is a flawless aesthetic encounter. New understandings surface not primarily due to their "rationally true" nature or practical utility, but rather because they possess a specific form—a form that holds beauty in its ability to fill in the gaps of an incomplete Gestalt. The form is exactly the way it should be. The creativity of the mind unveils such perfection and purity that it feels as a discovery of something that already existed. 

I recall the same phenomenon when I listen to certain compositions. Even though the composer created the piece, the creation is akin to the discovery of a star in a galaxy that has always been. Listen for example to Scriabin’s second piano sonata, Chopin’s fourth ballade or Brahms intermezzo in A major. This is why many artists feel that something holy is going on when they paint or compose, there is something in the act of creating which is like a religious revelation. 

Another beautiful fragment in the book of the courage of the artist in relation with his unavoidable self-doubt and anxiety is the following: ‘Creative people, as I see them, are distinguished by the fact that they can live with anxiety, even though a high price may be paid in terms of insecurity, sensitivity, and defenselessness for the gift of the “divine madness,” to borrow the term used by the classical Greeks. They do not run away from non-being, but by encountering and wrestling with it, force it to produce being. They knock on silence for an answering music; they pursue meaninglessness until they can force it to mean.’

But for me personally, the paramount part is the notion May makes concerning the creating in one’s self. What I share with May is a boundless believe in self-directing en self-forming. As Kierkegaard well said, the self is only that which it is in the process of becoming. And of course, this starts with Socrates’s famous dictum: ‘Know thyself’. The plethora of myths surrounding the reincarnation of individuals into various life forms, with their status determined by their actions in life, reflects the recognition within human experience that individuals bear some responsibility for their own actions. Sartre's assertion that we construct our identities through the myriad choices we make further emphasizes this idea. Thus, we must change our life and pursue passionate beauty to become a new more fulfilling form of ourselves and this is only achievable by actively seeking to create one’s self.

Another good point I agree with is May’s idea that limits are not only unavoidable in life (as opposed to the idea that human possibilities are unlimited), they are valuable. Creativity requires limits. The painter is bound by the frame of the painting, the director is confined by the expanse of the white canvas and the piano composer by 88 keys. A river is constituted by the tension between the flowing water and the banks. Art in the same way requires limits as a necessary factor in its birth. As Heraclitus said: ‘harmony consists of opposing tension, like that of the bow and the lyre.’ Therefore, it’s good to have limits. Never is form itself superseded so long as creativity endures. If form were to vanish, spontaneity would vanish with it.

Insights emerge not chiefly because they are “intellectually true” or even because they are helpful, but because they have a certain form, the form that is beautiful because it completes what is incomplete in us.

Thus, people are engaged in a passionate re-forming of their world by virtue of their interrelationship with it. This passion for form is a way of trying to find and constitute meaning in life. 

And this is what genuine creativity is.