Rating: 2/5

In the city of Aramanth, the lives of its citizens are ruled by a color-coded caste system of standardized tests. How well one does on the yearly “High Examination” determines what you do for work, where you live, and even what color clothing you wear. Those that test poorly find themselves consigned to the dismal one-room tenements and menial labor of the Grey district, while those who test well can eventually aspire to life in the mansions and illustrious careers of the White district. Free thinking and creativity are unheard of, but most of the city’s residents are content with their way of life. One family, however, is not. The Haths, Hanno and Ira, have raised their three children, the twins Kestrel and Bowman and baby Pinpin, to believe that there are more important things in life than moving up in society’s ranks. They teach their children the old stories that everyone else has forgotten, such as the legend of the strange, archaic structure that still stands in the middle of Aramanth, known as the Wind Singer. The tales go that once the Wing Singer made beautiful music that made everyone in Aramanth happy, and kept away evil. The Wind Singer’s “voice”, however, was lost long ago, causing the conditions in the city to deteriorate rapidly. When one day Kestrel rebels, tired of the endless rules, regulations and tests, and her entire family is put in jeopardy, she finds that the only way to save them and the entire city from their horrible fate is to find the Wind Singer’s voice and return it to its rightful place. Armed with only an old map, she and her brother Bowman, and their friend Mumpo, must set out on their quest, which will bring them face to face with a more sinister evil than any they could have imagined.

I picked this up from the library because I have been in kind of a slump as far as reading goes. I have a bunch of books that I’m in the middle of right now that I just can’t seem to slog through past a certain point. I wanted something fun that I could read quickly, and I figured this would be just the thing. While overall I thought this was a pretty good book, I did have some issues with it. The main thing I didn’t like about it was that it seemed, even for a YA book, to be very thinly fleshed out. I thought that the set-up for the kids’ big quest was very good, but once things got moving I felt like the author glossed over too much. After Kestrel, Bowman and Mumpo get started on their journey, they have various adventures, of course, but I felt like these were rushed through and there wasn’t enough detail given about the places they go and the people they meet on their journey. It’s like the author was too focused on getting them from point A to point B to tell us what was happening in-between. This frustrated me, because we’re given glimpses of a unique, interesting world outside the walls of Aramanth, and we’re told next to nothing about it. Also, I felt at the end that things were tied up just a little too neatly. Various problems were resolved too easily to be believable. This seemed to be a problem throughout the book. I didn’t like how most of the time things just conveniently fell into place. The characters would get into a scrape, and instead of finding a way out of it themselves, some miraculous solution would just fall into their laps. With those negative things aside, this book did have a pretty good message at the heart of it, and the characters were essentially likable and easy to root for. Probably the things that bothered me about this book wouldn’t bother a reader more in the age group it was intended for. Also, it did accomplish what I wanted it to. It passed an afternoon quite quickly and got me out of my slump of not being able to finish anything. I don’t think I’ll be reading the rest of the trilogy, though.