Rating: 5/5

“A trifle, a little, the likeness of a dream. And death comes as the end.” 
― Agatha Christie, Death Comes as the End

Edit --8/6/2024 -- revisited during ANOTHER storm. How I love this book! Review below but if ANYONE has any idea what the alternate ending was to be, PLEASE comment below.

EDIT..8/8/2020
Revisited during storm. Still adore it. First read when I was like eight or nine. 

Gave it to my dad during the storm when I was done. He'd never read it. He finished it in a night and LOVED it. And no, did not guess the culprit.

My review:

Why is does this book not have a solid 5 star average rating? Oh no..my bias is showing.

I first read this book as a child, after seeing my lovely Mamacita's copy. Through the years I revisit. Never loses its power.

Agatha Christie's "Death comes as the end" is the only one of her books that I feature on my "favorite books of all time list". It differs from many of her books in several ways.

First off..there is nothing..I repeat..nothing..cozy about this book. I first read it as a child and do not mind admitting it scared the heck out of me. Many of Christie's books have a cozy element to them. This does not.

Second this book is just as much Historical Fiction as a mystery. It takes place in Ancient Egypt. I grew up obsessed with books about Egypt and this one doesn't disappoint. Historical fiction buffs..you will be transported to Egypt via this book. The atmosphere and setting are top notch.

This book has some of the standard things..a murder..who did it..another murder. 

But this book is as much about the human element as the crime element..who we are, how we become the people we are, how does the world see us and is that view accurate? 

How will we grow and leave the past behind? I would so recommend Death comes as the end. It is interesting that I have read many an Agatha Christie book and while I liked some of them, none really got me involved as this book did. 

It is complex, deeply engaging both as Historical Fiction and as a mystery. Do not underestimate the deeply moving and Spiritual element to the story.

A definite five stars.