Rating: 3/5

This was the fifth of L. Frank Baum's fourteen Oz books that I have read with my son. We have not read all of the books in chronological order, though I don't think it makes much difference; though I may be wrong about this and it may account for some inconsistencies that we have noticed in the works. We were both surprised on this reading by the many contradictions and inconsistencies in Baum's writing. The last Oz book we read was Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz, the fourth work in the Oz series. In that work Baum makes it clear that those in Oz never age -- children remain children forever and adults remain adults. While we have not read the fifth and sixth books in the series yet (The Road to Oz and The Emerald City of Oz), in this, the seventh installment in the series (The Patchwork Girl of Oz), Baum writes of the Munchkin boy Ojo that he will, with the passing of years, grow to the size and stature of his uncle. Meanwhile, characters like Ozma (the girl ruler of Oz) never grow or age. 

Another example of inconsistencies: In both Ozma of Oz (the third Oz book) and Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz we find that animals, when they come from the real world to the fairy land of Oz, suddenly become anthropomorphized, attaining the ability to think/reason and speak (in the first, we can point to the example of Dorothy's chicken, Bilina, and in the latter to Dorothy's kitten, Eureka -- who also remains a kitten in the 7th book, i.e., she does not age or grow -- and her cousin Zeb's horse, Jim). Yet, while other animals, in the fairy land of Oz develop the ability to speak and reason Toto is never able to do so (not in the first book in the Oz series and not in this book, where Baum writes, "He can't talk, not being a fairy dog"). These and other minor inconsistencies in the books made for a very scrutinizing read. 

In this story, the reader accompanies Ojo the Unlucky Munchkin boy, the Glass Cat and the Patchwork Girl (the latter both creations of the Crooked Magician) on a journey to find five magic items in the wonderful Land of Oz to restore to life Ojo's Uncle Nunkie and the Crooked Magician's wife, Margolotte, who turn to marble when the Magician's Elixir of Petrification accidentally falls upon them. On his journey, Ojo meets many strange creatures and interesting characters, some new (the Woozy, the Hoppers and Horners, etc.) and some familiar (like the Scarecrow, Jack Pumpkinhead and Dorothy). As much as I tried to get lost in the fairyland of Oz, I couldn't get past many of the contradictions and I also found it difficult to ignore the oppressive nature of Baum's Oz -- nowhere clearer than in this book (though it is only the fifth of fourteen that I have read). 

In many ways Baum's Oz is not very different from the dystopian society painted by Huxley in A Brave New World or that of Orwell's 1984. Yet, there is no Winston Smith in this work to challenge the social order. Everything in Oz is accepted for what it is and society runs, thus, smoothly. As I delve deeper into Baum's magical world, I find myself ever more critical. The more one reads of the Oz books, it is easier to align with the dystopian revisionist version of the first Oz story as told by Gregory Maguire in his book "Wicked." Oz seems, the more one travels in it, a very oppressive land. Some examples: 

(1) Oz and the Natural Social Division of Labor Emile Durkheim, in a neo-Platonist fashion, makes the case in his 1893 book, The Division of Labour in Society that so long as a division of labor comes about naturally (based on peoples' natural talents), society will operate with few problems. There are some people who are naturally born to be servants and ditch diggers and others who are naturally born to be doctors and lawyers. Durkheim's analysis places white men in a favored position, using questionable science to support his views throughout. In this Oz work, the Crooked Magician creates a magic potion to bring to life the patchwork girl that his wife sewed together. The patchwork girl ("Scraps") is intended to be the servant of the magician's wife, Margolotte. In creating her servant, Margolotte first explains that she made the patchwork girl of many different colors of fabric so as to ensure that she will "never dare be rebellious or impudent, as servants are sometimes liable to be when they are made the same way their mistresses are." Munchkins favor the color blue; the Patchwork girl, however, is made of "so many unpopular colors" that Margolotte assumes she will never consider herself equal to her mistress, and thus never step out of her proper place. Later, in giving her brains, Margolotte explains that she "must be careful not to give her too much brains, and those she has must be fitted to the station she is to occupy in life. In other words, [as a servant] her brains mustn't be very good" and she mustn't "feel above her station." While Ojo interferes and adjusts the quantity and quality of brains that Margolotte has given the patchwork girl when her back is turned, certain implications are still made. And Scraps is reminded throughout that, despite her capacities for thinking and reasoning, that she is "personal property." While Scraps, for her thoughtfulness and helpfulness throughout is eventually granted freedom by Ozma and the Wizard, I am still not convinced that Oz is the wonderful place it is painted to be -- when servants are content so long as they are properly enabled with a feeble mind and not too much sense and so long as they feel subservient. In the next example (below) we see that the division of labor in Oz is not always "natural," however - it may also be forced or coerced to ensure that the needs of the society are met. 

(2) Ozma the Dictator In the book a case is made that the Emerald City is not only the best, but the most desirable place to live in all of the Land of Oz. Yet, not all people can live in the Emerald City even if they want to (which ties back to the division of labor and the needs of the society). As the Shaggy Man explains: "In this country, people live wherever our Ruler tells them to. It wouldn't do to have everyone live in the Emerald City, you know, for some must plow the land and raise grains and fruit and vegetables, while others chop wood in the forests, or fish in the rivers, or herd the sheep and the cattle." Others live in the city who want to "get back to the land," but don't because they are ordered otherwise by the kind and just girl ruler of Oz, who is attended to by humble servants and whose place in the social order is unchallenged. It seems to me that Thomas Paine would have ordered a revolt against the girl monarch had he entered the fairyland's borders. 

(3) Oz, the Surveillance State Not unlike the dystopian world found in Orwell's 1984, where Big Brother sees all, "nothing can be hidden" in Oz. Ozma, the girl ruler is in possession of a Magic Picture that allows her to watch the activities of any of her subjects. And if something happens to slip under her radar, it is not likely to slip under the "watchful eyes of the humble Wizard of Oz" or of Glinda the good witch. It's fortunate that everyone in Oz is so content with their positions; Ojo is only one of two to have ever been accused of breaking any of the laws of Ozma's kingdom. 

(4) Every law is a good law When Ojo is arrested for picking a six-leafed clover, an item that he must retrieve for the Crooked Magicians' magic potion, he questions the justness of such a law. Ozma explains that all laws exist for a reason and that in this case most people pick six-leafed clovers to practice magic, which is forbidden for all except for the Wizard and Glinda the good witch (as she knows they will practice only good magic and not black magic). Justifying the existence of all laws, Ozma explains: "I suppose a good many laws seem foolish to those people who do not understand them, but no law is ever made without some purpose. . . . in any even it is wrong to disobey a Law." I suppose Baum wasn't much for civil disobedience. In the ethics course that I teach one of the first lessons we go over is that just because something is protected by a law does not mean that it is necessarily morally/ethically justified; we discuss such examples as slavery, race-based drug laws, Jim Crow, the denial of voting rights to women, the laws of Nazi Germany, etc. And my son and I had this discussion after reading this chapter of the book. Baum here provides a noncritical "just-the-way-it-is" view for young readers, in my perspective. 

Another objection I had with this work was with Baum's treatment of music. The Magician's Elixir of Life accidentally spills upon his phonograph table, bringing that machine to life. The magician and all of the other characters that the phonograph encounters find it a very annoying device. As a lover of all kinds of music, I found Baum's discussions of music comical but also troubling. In one scene, the phonograph plays for the travelers a classical record and explains, "[C]lassical music is considered the best and most puzzling ever manufactured. You're supposed to like it, whether you do or not, and if you don't, the proper thing is to look as if you did." And it is a good thing Baum did not live long enough to see the birth of rock n' roll, because with his apparent distaste for even the popular music of his day, rock n' roll might have given him a heart attack. Discussing popular music, Baum writes at one point that it "Makes civilized folks wild folks. . . . [I]t's dangerous" and later explains that a popular song is "One that the feeble-minded can remember the words of and those ignorant of music can whistle or sing. . . . and the time is coming when it will take the place of all other songs." All of the characters in the book share a similar distaste for music, both classical and popular - the phonograph (whose part is a small one) is easily the most detested character in the book. 

So, with all of these faults why did I give the book three stars (well, 2.5 really)? Despite so many perceived flaws, I can't help but still be enchanted by the strange creations of Baum's imagination. And despite my views of Oz as a somewhat tyrannical land, it is also a land of possibilities. Scraps, intended to be a dull-minded servant, is granted freedom by the girl ruler of Oz (even if others are ordered by her where to live and what type of work to perform). Ojo the Unlucky is encouraged by the Tin Woodman to look on the bright side of life and to consider himself Ojo the Lucky -- that considering oneself lucky or unlucky is oftentimes a matter of perspective (there is a whole discourse on how the number 13 is often considered an unlucky number though many people fail to realize the many good things that may happen to them on the 13th day of the month), a point elaborated on earlier by the Shaggy Man, when he explains that so many "evils in life" are really optical illusions: "they seem to exist, and yet it's all seeming and not true." I also find myself aligning with Baum's sociological and humanistic views on criminal justice, believing that much crime is the result of unhappiness and want and that prisoners should be treated humanely (picking up on a subject also discussed in Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz). 

This is definitely not my favorite of the Oz books, but despite its many weaknesses it does possess some redeeming qualities.