Rating: 4/5

Taking up Volume Two of Lin Carter’s “Green Star” series, titled “When The Green Star Calls.” And of course now you will get the standard disclaimer. If you haven’t read Volume One of the series then you need to go back and start there. None of the books in this series can be read as stand-alones with the exception of the first adventure. But since the remainder of the series is dependent on the set-up and world-building contained in “Under The Green Star,” then it only makes sense to pick things up at the beginning. You can check out my review of the first volume here, if you so desire:

https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

I won’t burden you much with information about the author, Lin Carter. I’ve covered a bit of his historical significance as a writer and editor of pulp science-fiction and fantasy in other places, and you can glean most of what you need to know about him from his Wikipedia page, which can be found here:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lin_Carter

I will, however, reiterate my admiration for Carter’s abilities as a writer of pastiche, as his abilities to imitate other authors of fantastic fiction is almost unparallelled. The “Green Star” series was a bit of an anomaly for him in as much as it was not really a pastiche so much as an homage to Edgar Rice Burroughs. Though these books are certainly inspired by ERB’s “John Carter of Mars” series, they are definitely not a direct rip-off. Carter went to great lengths to develop a world that differentiated itself greatly from the “Mars” universe, though there are some obvious similarities that reveal the “Green Star” series to be something of a love letter from Carter to Burroughs. 

“When The Green Star Calls” picks up directly from where “Under The Green Star” left off. Our nameless (in his human incarnation) hero has returned to Earth, his astral form once again inhabiting his broken body. He dawdles for a time, having vowed never to return to the distant world of the Green Star. But of course he can’t stay away for too long, else we would not have a five-volume series to talk about, so with due formality our man decides to once again take the astral journey to that far-away and alien sun. Being unable to return to the first host body he inhabited, our traveler must figure out a way to take corporeal form or else be destined to float helplessly as a formless spirit. As fate would have it, he descends upon the planet of massive forests in time to witness a struggle for life. A young man in his late teens has been staked out to die, a giant scorpion advancing upon him menacingly. The boy is bitten, but ultimately saved by a strange figure who cuts him loose, flies him to safety in a strange craft, and then tends to his wounds. But the scorpion venom is strong, and the boy dies during the night, his spirit leaving the husk of his body behind as a convenient receptacle for the bodiless astral form of the nameless man from Earth……

Reborn into this new life as Karn the Hunter, our main character resumes his search for the love of his life, Niamh the Fair - Princess of Phaolon, whom we last saw riding away on a gigantic dragonfly at the end of the first book. His adventures take him from a lost city of the ancients all the way to Ardha, a rival city-state on the planet of clouds and trees. He eventually ends up a member of the Assassins Guild where he…...hold on…..you won’t get any more spoilers out of me. Suffice to say that this book, like the first, reads much like you would expect any respectable pulp novel to read. You pretty much get nonstop action on every page with occasional breaks for exposition. The story moves from adventure to adventure smoothly and swiftly, and ends all too soon after an economical 176 pages. 

I will add one amusing observation: Lin Carter had a devastatingly snarky sense of humor where his influences and contemporaries among fantastic fiction were concerned. In the first novel, his unnamed hero descends astrally upon Mars first, only to discover the remains of a long dead civilization. It was an obvious tribute to Edgar Rice Burroughs. In “Green Star Calls,” his adventurer travels to the moon in his astral form to find what can only be a stand-in for “The Monolith,” Arthur C. Clarke’s iconic and mysterious alien sentinel from “2001: A Space Odyssey.” I couldn’t help but chuckle as I realized that Carter was taking a bit of a piss at Clarke’s expense. You would, of course, never confuse Carter’s work with that of the Grand Master, so maybe Clarke had the last laugh in the end, but the whole thing still made me smile.

I am lucky enough to have a first edition DAW paperback with fabulous Luis Dominguez cover art and five extra full-page black &amp; white line illustrations. It’s the next best thing to an actual pulp magazine for my money. Don Wollheim put a lot of care and craftsmanship into his mass-market books, and it really shows. I would always take care to look for that little yellow square up in the top right-hand corner of the front cover, as it was a guarantee of quality for the discerning science-fiction and fantasy reader back in the day. That familiar little logo (DAW BOOKS = SF) with the sequential numbering system was a signpost to adventure. 

Carter’s writing style is a bit more lean and straightforward in this volume as compared to the first. It’s as if he stopped trying to CONSCIOUSLY pay homage to Edgar Rice Burroughs and just let the text speak for itself. That might be a sign that he was a bit more comfortable with the material and was more willing to let it stand on its own as a story. Carter also employs a neat trick of pacing whereby the central protagonist is abandoned for a time while the peripheral characters get a chance to take over the narrative. I thought that a refreshing change of pace and one that Carter almost never used in any other series or story. Everything ties up neatly at the end, but it was a neat trick of writing to see how the events in the tale looked from the different perspectives of each player. Carter also employs a bit of a dodge here whereby he writes an afterword claiming that the manuscripts for the “Green Star” stories have been entrusted to him by an unnamed yet very influential Connecticut family, and he is only acting in the role of editor for the unusual texts. This is a new angle for Carter, as the first installment was presented strictly as a straightforward homage with no embellishments. It’s a neat little deception, but unnecessary as far as I am concerned. 

Last but hardly least, I am remiss if I don’t mention that there really is no such thing as a “green star.” In astronomy, a green star is an optical illusion whereby bright red stars nearby can cause another star to “look” greenish in hue. The Antares system is a good example of this. I’m not sure whether or not Carter knew this to be the case, but he nonetheless stuck with his “Green Star” all the way to the end. 

These books touch my memory and my need for nostalgia in such a good way. My fondness for them may cause me to award a star too many here and there while reviewing, and for that you will have to forgive me. My inner teenager is still thrilled by this kind of storytelling, and my sincere hope is that YOUR inner teenager is a bit excited, too…..we can all grow old, but to hell with growing UP. Onwards to the third book in the series…..”By The Light Of The Green Star.”