Rating: 3/5

The biggest problem with this book , possibly, can't really be helped--it assumes the reader: a. knows a lot about Pym and her work and b. knows specifics about her many correspondents. For example, she has many letters with a Phillip Larkin, who turns out to be a major post WWII poet in Great Britain (and a fellow who was having affairs with three women at once in the 1970's.) Another interesting note about Larkin--apparently he an Pym correspond for fifteen years before they meet. 

One of the interesting things this bio reveals about Pym: In her book No Fond Return of Love, Pym has the heroine researching--even following--someone in order to learn more about him. Apparently, Pym actually did this with a neighbor of hers, whom she then put in a novel. 

One of the most notable issues her life is the way her work went out of print in the early 1960's--publishers no long saw it as commercial--but then is brought back to much acclaim in the late 1970's, just before she dies. A hardship of the writer/artist--the art comes when it comes which may or may not be when the people are ready for it. 

Some notable thoughts from Pym and her correspondents: 

BP: “Novel writing is a kind of private pleasure even if nothing comes of it in worldy terms.” 250

BP: “Still what does it matter really. . . fame is dust to ashes. . . ”246

Phillip Larkin bemoans those “sudden, stabbing memories of absurd or painful moments that one is suffused and excoriated by.” 231

Bob Smith: The comedy in her novels “demonstrates again and again the happiness and merriment that can be found in the daily round—that ‘purchase of a sponge cake’ about which Jane Austen felt it proper to write to Cassandra." 223

Phillip Larkin: About a new "cooker" and carpet: “Already the zestful glow that prompted their purchase is fading. With such gewgaws does one get one self through the New Year.” P. 192

BP: “This simple collecting was something, perhaps the only thing, she could do.”174

About Denton Welch: “How tedious the little details seem written down, yet it is always that littleness that seems to have, banked up behind it, great walls of fight and resistance. “ 173

As an anthropologist: “Not even the slightest expression of amusement or disapproval should ever be displayed at the description of ridiculous, impossible or disgusting features in custom, cult or legend." 169

BP: “Even at this moment something dreadful may be happening…somebody dying, languishing with hopeless love or quarrelling about the Church of South India in the Edgware Road…” 163

BP: We analyzed the circumstances as to why people had left St. Laurence’s parish “and came to the conclusion that they had been removed by Rome, Death and Umbrage…Umbrage, of course, removed the greatest number.” 153

“There was never any question of her having a ‘a career’ like [her sister] Hilary. Any job she took would have to leave a least part of her fmind free to get on with her real work which was writing.” 138