Rating: 4/5

I found this book in a library garbage bin back in the 90s and only now am I getting around to reading it. Honestly, I would have savored it more at a younger age, not being so jaded as I am with literature now. What struck me at first was the editor's forward. I had never heard of Zweig before cracking this book open, and lo and behold I discover that he was apparently a literary giant in German literature of the 1900s through his suicide in 1942, on par with Hesse, Mann and other continental greats. He's fallen into deep obscurity in the English speaking world, out of print for ages at the time that this edition was published in the late 80s, and still only available through fairly small run reprints on Amazon today.

He's had more influence on movie-makers than writers, it seems. It's not overly surprising. His books are richly detailed with physical description and action. Overly so, to arch-modernist's tastes. If anything, I would venture that Zweig is a writer who bridges the gap between the stylistics of 19th century literature and 20th century psychological modernism. He approaches the uncomfortable ideas of female sexuality, self-aware childhood immaturity and male obsession with a precise manner and forthright honesty, but in the loquacious yet lucid prose that was already dated as he was writing it. His stories are well plotted, and true to life, but are written in such a manner that you always see where he's taking you, and what exactly you're supposed to feel in response to the nicely tied up end. There is much nuance... but very very little ambiguity. Only one of his stories "Letter From an Unknown Woman" ends with a sense of open-endedness.

Mind you, I'm not being heavily critical about these things. Goodness knows that we could do with more clarity in prose, and less ambiguity in meaning and narrative in this day and age. I'm just explaining why he's so obscure in the English and American Lit world. He offers a look at the other branch of a bifurcating path of modernism. One that offers perhaps a critical outlook on the excesses of passion, but offers forgiveness instead of condemnation for human failure, written in a style that is easy and approachable. 

No, if I offer a criticism, it is because he spends so much time investigating an excess of emotion and obsession that it becomes rather one note, even in a collection of diverse stories. That and I do enjoy a little open-endedness. Leave the reader some ambiguity in the end. Still, and interesting read.