Rating: 1/5

When I bought this book I was really excitied: I am pretty fan of SC series, so i thought: damn, this looks good, I need to read this! But in about middle of book I realized what a crap is that, and literally forced myself to read to the end. Why? This the worst book I have ever read: plot is as deep as camel's spit at the desert. Characters are doing so unrealistic decisions without any, really any sense, their emotions are just pathetic: "what does this buttom do? oh no, it killed my brother, i have to warn everyone" and she forgot about him in few pages, just as others do. Story? What story? There is not such thing between covers. Every, EVERY event is explained in Mr. Bean's way; "Why? Magic." In that case, magic is Xel Naga (nigga?) psi powers, but this is like the same. Example: main character's brother dies - magic. Prostss fleet is informed about that from another part of galaxy - magic (Im deadly serious right now). Zerg are lured as well - magic. Protoss, zerg and even terran are annihilated inside Xel Naga's temple - magic. Gigantic moth (!) is created from bodies of zergs and protoss - magic. All terrans are ressurected and dead planet becomes jungle - magic. Sounds like fun? Not for me. Accually, its all the plot. Thats it, all story. Not much more is happening, just nothing important. Theres no more threads other than "imperial terrans are douchebags" and "protoss society is divided on classes, and thats bad". Important note: is this book interesting for fans? Answer is: no, not at all. Im the great fan of SC by myself as I mentioned: I have really much stuff from in-game community, as well as played both SC1(+brood war) and SC2. But still I dont see one good reaseon to buy this peace of junk. I would rather eat my own tongue while dancing with Justin Bieber at One Direction's concert than read this again. From other hand, there is one reason: you will know HOW NOT TO WRITE BOOKS. Rating 1/5 is far too high. Lucky it was on discount in library, around 5 PLN (about a little more than 1 euro). Orginally it was at price of 24 PLN i believe. Thats all. One final note why sense abandoned this book. Zergs are deadly machines spreading death and destruction among all life. Even Aiur - homeworld of protoss - was devastated by them, not mentioning hundreds of terrans worlds. Think about it: zerg&gt;protoss (mostly, look Aiur). Protoss = most powerful civilization in galaxy. Right? Right. But in one scene little farm village is under sige by zerg swarm. Few dozens colonist were armored only with farming tools, like knives, scytes, about two machines and two rockets coming from old missle launcher. And yet they slained few thousands(!) of zergs, succefully defending their homes against two waves of enemies. Bunch of villagers without any training, skill or weaponry vs swarm of most deadly creatures known to universe: 1:0. It was so pathetic, so unskilled, stupid and senseless story that my ears are hurting untill now.