Rating: 3/5

Arr, me matey!
I've finally downed the children's classic, Treasure Island.
Sadly, these pirates weren't nearly as sexy as I was expecting. Where were all the sweaty pirate abs I've come to expect from the plethora of trashy romance novels I've gobbled down over the years?
Not here, that's for damn sure.

 

And mainly because of the overabundance of bodice rippers on my bookshelf, I felt like I maybe needed to expand my maritime horizons, and it seemed that going with a classic sailor story wouldn't be a bad way to accomplish that goal.

Unsurprisingly, this is a pretty boring book by today's standards. And if this was what they gave kids to read back in the day, I'm no longer shocked that people found long walks and/or journaling about said long walks a valid form of entertainment. 

 

When I'm done churning this butter, should I whittle for a bit before we have a family sing-a-long around the fire?

Going to be totally honest, I don't understand the yearning for a simpler lifestyle, as this scenario sounds like my own personal version of Hell.

Alright! 
Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson and why you should read it.
It's short! &lt;--not as much of a time suck as Count of Monte Cristo
It's a classic! &lt;-- therefore, you will sound classy
It's got pirates! &lt;--remember: dirty rum-bloated pirates, not shirtless Fabio pirates
You can learn new drinking songs! &lt;--Yo ho ho and a bottle of Zima, bitches

That all sounds great.
But what is Treasure Island about, Anne?
The gist is that our young hero, Jim Hawkins, has the shittiest luck ever.
His dad dies and leaves a tweenage Jim and his mother with a ramshackle inn to run, complete with a scary drunken sailor (Billy Bones) who's not too keen on paying his tab as a tenant. 
He's what the kids these days call a scallywag.

Why does it matter that Bones is continually dodging rent?
Well, after Billy Bob meets his maker with the help of a few of his old sailing pals, Jim and his mother have to rifle through his things to get payment.
AND JIM FINDS A MAP. &lt;--to a place called Treasure Island
*choir vocalizes*

Back in the day, if you found a map, it was apparently adventure time. You and your neighbors would rent a ship, hire a sketchy crew, and set out for parts unknown full of high hopes that you'd be coming back with gold doubloons! The reality is that you'd be lucky to come back alive without scurvy or syphilis.
And dark thoughts like that are why I would have made a terrible pirate-adventurer...

The adults (of course) make some really bad decisions when it comes to securing an efficient crew. They have a competent captain, but instead of listening to him, they hire a fairly obvious villain as the cook and then proceed to take his advice over the captain's. This ensures they have quite a surly group of sailors to man the SS Mutiny. 
Who is this cook? 
Long John Silver. &lt;--yes, exactly like the sub-par seafood restaurant!
When your cook's name is synonymous with chewy shrimp poppers and diarrhea, you might want to rethink your hiring process. 

Luckily for all the grown-ups, Jim is a brave and hearty lad who manages to save the day! &lt;--not really
Ok, so this was written back when it was a big deal to keep your word. Like, if you promised your kidnappers that you wouldn't try to run for it, then you couldn't try to run for it because that would make you a liar. Which, for some unfathomable reason, was worth more than your life.
SWEAR TO GOD, THESE OLD-TIMEY PEOPLE WERE RIDICULOUS.

Naturally, there comes a point in the story where Jim needed to hop a fence and get the hell out of there, but wouldn't - because INTEGRITY. And I suppose we're meant to think he's a better person for it, but all I could think was that maybe Stevenson based his story around a child with special needs.
Except, no. Because the doctor agreed with Jim, so apparently in the days of yore, the good guys couldn't just win, they had to win by a set of idiotic rules.
Which is nuts! What are you teaching our kids, Robert!?

Looking someone dead in the eyes whilst giving a firm handshake and lying through your teeth is a fucking lifeskill that every child needs to have perfected by adulthood in order to survive.

But whatever. This is a fantasy, so it all works out for our heroes.
They return home with their honor intact, a good bit of wealth, no STDs, and only a little bit of PTSD that kicks in whenever they hear a parrot squawk. 

Read it. As far as classics go, you could do a lot worse than this one.

Michael Prichard - Narrator