Rating: 3/5

Perhaps the most striking thing about the two novellas collected here is the gap that exists between them. Mary was published in 1788, The Wrongs of Woman in 1798 – a ten-year lacuna in which everything changed for their author. When Mary came out, Mary Wollstonecraft was completely unknown, a struggling writer living alone and with almost no experience of close relationships outside her own family. By the time Wrongs of Woman was published, she had become a famous polemicist and social reformer, been closely involved with three different men, moved to Revolutionary Paris and back again, given birth to two daughters (one out of wedlock), and – not the least significant development – had died. It was a busy time for her.

Given all that, you expect to see a big development in ideas and style from one to the next – and you do. Mary is a slim philosophical fable about a woman stuck in an unhappy marriage. The set-up shows that Wollstonecraft was already concerned about the undesirability of marriage for women, though we see almost nothing of Mary's actual husband in the story, only hearing that ‘the sound of his name made her turn sick’. The focus is more on Mary's internal development, as she educates herself and struggles with her feelings for another man.

There is a lot of high-flown ‘sensibility’ in Mary, often with a rather Gothic overtone of melodrama (‘Shall I ever feel joy? Do all suffer like me?…I weep, a solitary wretch, and the hot tears scald my cheeks’, and so forth). Much of this intensity has a religious colouring, to do with looking forward to when the Lord Omnipotent will reign and wipe the tearful eye. Overall the story is not without interest for those curious about Wollstonecraft's development, but is otherwise a bit sick-making for modern tastes.

The year after Mary came out, the French Revolution happened, kick-starting Wollstonecraft's political engagement – first with the Vindication of the Rights of Men in 1790, and then more explosively with the Vindication of the Rights of Woman in 1792. At the end of that amazing book, she promised to write a follow-up detailing the legal obstacles that women faced in England. This was never actually completed in essay form, but you could certainly see The Wrongs of Woman as a fictional treatment of that subject.

So the Wrongs of Woman is to be considered as mirroring the Rights of Woman. Again, the set-up shows that it is a novel of ideas rather than of characters or events: the heroine, Maria, is exploited by a husband who marries her for her family's money, tries to pimp her out to friends, and finally has her committed to a madhouse. Along the way she meets several other women who are allowed to tell their own stories, each of them adding further examples of the way women are treated by patriarchal social and legal structures that consider women to be property.

The point is hammered home with pleasing directness. We are told of ‘the aggravated ills of life that her sex rendered almost inevitable’; she rails against ‘the institutions of society, which thus enabled men to tyrannize over women’. ‘Was not the world a vast prison, and women born slaves?’ Maria asks herself; and later, ‘Why was I not born a man, or why was I born at all?’

The religiosity of Mary, which was also a major element of the Rights of Woman (an unwelcome one in my view), is mostly absent here. I think the reason religion sits so uneasily with Wollstonecraft's writing is that it offers a kind of hope, and therefore a solution, to the social problems that animate her, by deferring their resolution to the afterlife. This gets in the way of her anger, and I much prefer her when she's righteously angry, which she definitely is throughout The Wrongs of Woman.

Above all, it is the situation of married women that is shown to be completely untenable. ‘Marriage had bastilled me for life,’ Maria says at one point (a timely phrasing for the 1790s). The pervasive double standard, by which men were expected to have their little dalliances and women were expected to be faithful and loving, is hacked apart with extreme violence – not least because a woman who leaves her husband, as Maria does, soon finds that she has no legal or social ground to stand on.

The situation of a woman separated from her husband, is undoubtedly very different from that of a man who has left his wife. He, with lordly dignity, has shaken off a clog; and the allowing her food and raiment, is thought sufficient to secure his reputation from taint. […] A woman, on the contrary, resigning what is termed her natural protector (though he never was so, but in name) is despised and shunned, for asserting the independence of mind distinctive of a rational being, and spurning at slavery.

By the time she wrote this, Wollstonecraft was living with William Godwin. He objected to marriage too, but they did it anyway when she got pregnant with her second child, for the sake of appearances. Much of The Wrongs of Woman takes the form of a letter written by the heroine to educate her daughter about what life is like, and Wollstonecraft must have been thinking a lot about such things as she brought up her first daughter, Fanny, who was only three when Wollstonecraft died. I found it heartbreaking to read some of these passages, knowing that Fanny would grow up to kill herself at 22 because her half-sister Mary (with whom Wollstonecraft was pregnant while writing this) had run off with Shelley. What a mess that family was.

But then, these were people struggling with some of the biggest issues of their time, and creating not a few of them. The Wrongs of Woman, though left unfinished at Wollstonecraft's death, is a worthy successor to the Rights of Woman, and makes you feel the raw frustration and fury that is the appropriate response to the inequalities she was targeting. Nowadays we're fortunate enough to be able to treat these things as intellectual or literary themes, but for her they were life and death.