Rating: 5/5

First published in South Africa in 1976, Albert Nolan’s Jesus before Christianity is a vivid portrait of the Jesus I know from the Gospels and a compelling call to follow that Jesus into the new humanity out of a world that is hell-bent for destruction. I especially like the chapters on healing, forgiveness, and faith in Jesus—and Nolan’s emphasis throughout the book on Jesus’ compassion.

Three chapters are a little difficult to follow unless you read them in their historical and political context—the struggle against South African apartheid. Those chapters are Chapter 11: “A New Time,” Chapter 15: “The Temptation to Violence,” and Chapter 16: “The Role of Suffering and Death.” It is helpful to read Jesus before Christianity in connection with a political manifesto from 1985, which Albert Nolan is believed to have had a hand in writing: Challenge to the Church: A Theological Comment on the Political Crisis in South Africa, better known as “the KAIROS Document.”

The KAIROS Document outlines a political philosophy that resonates with those of Mohandas Gandhi (assassinated January 30, 1948), Martin Luther King, Jr. (assassinated April 4, 1968), and Stephen Biko (“died in custody” September 12, 1977). Gandhi and King must have been two among many (including many young people in South Africa) whom Albert Nolan had in mind when he wrote “The Role of Suffering and Death.”

The KAIROS Document is a stark reminder of the evils we perpetually inflict on one another as we cling to the old humanity. It clearly lays out our urgent need of salvation and the insipid quality of a Christianity that does not follow the Jesus of the Gospels. But, whereas the focus in Jesus before Christianity is upon Jesus only, in the KAIROS Document, written nearly ten years later, the field of vision takes in the entire Bible. With that shift, we no longer have Jesus only, but Jesus in conversation with Moses and Elijah—that is, Jesus plus the Law plus the Prophets, as in Mark 9:2-8.

The KAIROS Document is a prophetic word. We disciples of Jesus do well to heed its call to faith in action through courageous compassion. And, as disciples of Jesus, we do well to stay focused on Jesus—the Jesus before Christianity.