Rating: 3/5

DAME AGATHA CHRISTIE AND HER PEERS
BOOK 59 - 1930
An improvement on Allingham's first Albert Campion story.
CAST - 4: Campion enters this second in the series very early in the story and takes the lead, as opposed to being a secondary character of sorts in "Crime at Black Dudley." He's very eccentric, sometimes silly, and even electrocutes a mouse in the opening chapter. (There is a reason.) The rector says of A.C., "If I know anything about Albert, he'll arrive on a broomstick." Judge Crowdy Lobbett is a 'dangerous old fellow' and is the intended victim of a series of attempts on his life: these attempts are called the "Misfire Murders of New York". The Lobbet family hop on a ship, the 'Elephantine' for England, hoping to escape the murder attempts. Then there is Ali Ferguson Barber, or "The Turk". Satsuma is a Japanese magician, although oddly very tall and dark-skinned. So what's up with that? Simister is either a person or group after the Judge. A Reverend Swithin Cush, a Mr Anthony Datchett, Palmist and others make for an unusual cast.
ATMOSPHERE - 4:A cruise ship, the village of Mystery Mile, an odd story about "Seven Whistlers", a maze, a Manor House (...hidden in the thick belt of elms...long, low, many-gabled...built around 1500...In the library, round the fireplace with the deep-set chimney seat, the squire and his sister were entertaining the rector...) , a blue suitcase full of children's books and more contribute to a unique atmosphere. I liked that Allingham provides to us a map of Mystery Mile.
CRIME - 4: Cush may or may not have killed himself. Nothing terribly unique there. But the Judge does find a method to absolutely disappear off the face of the earth after entering the aforementioned maze. Plus, more crimes occur.
INVESTIGATION - 2: A.C. is so odd some of his questions seem senseless. He can be funny, certainly, but his investigation is more of a send-up of the genre. Often, he just checks out of the picture. Allingham alludes to some kind of supernatural evil but there isn't a payoff. And late in the story we get this line: "Magersfontein Lugg an' me 'has been pals for some years." Oddity for the sake of odd. 
RESOLUTION - 2: Over-complicated for me. And, again, I had the feeling Allingham was indeed authoring a send-up. It's all a bit melodramatic. "Sounds like a bit o' the Decameron to me...without the fun as you might say." I didn't believe a character here would be familiar with Decameron stories and how some of them might have played out here.
SUMMARY - 3.2 stars overall. A much better novel than "Dudley". This mystery is a fast, fun read.