Rating: 3/5

Growing up in Hawaii I heard a lot about Captain Cook and his journeys and influence in my history classes. I've been to the place he died on the Big Island of Hawaii, but it was while I was visiting Anchorage, Alaska that I decided I needed to read a biography of Captain Cook. His travels were extensive. I'm glad I finally read a biography, but I wish this book had more maps and helped to outline and draw you into the relationships and people a little bit better. His life is fascinating, but I had a hard time getting through this book. I may look for another.

A few things that I found interesting include how well he did with his crew in avoiding scurvy, but eating correctly. I also thought the descriptions of their encounters with the natives were interesting. It's hard to imagine the life he led - with so many years away from his family and at sea, but he saw so many parts of the world it's quite remarkable. An interesting life that influenced many others!

Here are a few quotes that I liked:

"Besides being 'thoroughly equipped,' Cook exhibited an entirely new and refreshingly civilised attitude towards the natives of the lands he exposed to public view of the first time. To the Polynesians and Melanesians, the Aborigines of New Holland and Van Diemen's Land, the Indians of Vancouver and the Eskimos of Alaska, he presented the most tolerant aspect of Western man. He might, and did, claim their land for King George III, but those were his instructions, and in the context of his time his behavior and attitudes were remarkable for their gentleness and understanding. He was, in the judgment of Fanny Burney, whose brother sailed with Cook, 'the most moderate, humane, and gentle circumnavigator that ever went upon discoveries (p. 2).'"

"He had no knowledge of what his life would be like, only that it must be different from his old occupation. He was a young man who took things as they came and was ready for what life held for him. He also possessed the twin characteristics which would serve him well throughout his life - decisiveness and self-confidence (p. 4)."

"We landed at the place we left overnight, when about a hundred of the natives, all armed, came down on the opposite side of the river and drew themselves up in lines. Then with a regular jump from left to right and the reverse, they brandished their weapons, distorted their mouths, lolling up their tongues and turning up the whites of their eyes, the whole accompanied with a strong hoarse song, calculated in my opinion to cheer each other and intimidate their enemies, and may be called with propriety a dancing war song. It lasted three or four minutes (p. 116)."

"We can do no better today, except that we know what vast distances the Polynesians could sail, guided by the stars and the immense clouds that hang over these volcanic islands and sometimes identifiable for hundreds of miles: New Zealand to Tahiti is about 2,500 miles, the same distance as from Tahiti to Hawaii, or, eastwards to Easter Island; while the Tasman Sea between New Zealand and New South Wales is a mere 1,800 miles at its narrowest point (p. 124)."

"'We were at this period many thousand leagues from our native land, and on a barbarous coast where, if the ship were wrecked and we had escaped the perils of the sea, we should have fallen into the rapacious hands of savages (p. 147).'"

"The greeting, the embraces, the first exchange of words after three years' absence can only be imagined. No doubt the two elder boys were at home, aged seven and eight, bursting with questions and probably forgetful of the sad news Elizabeth had for her husband. For their young brother Joseph had died nearly three years earlier at the age of three months when his father had only reached Madeira. Cook had just known him as a little wrinkled infant in his cot. But his beloved daughter Elizabeth, named after her mother, he had known for over a year and could remember her crawling about the floors of the house. She had died only recently, while the Endeavour had been beating her way north from the Cape. No matter that Cook himself had lost so many brothers and sisters, these two deaths were hard to bear (p. 176)."

"Fresh fruits, vegetables, meat and fish were nearly always welcome, but many of the antiscorbutics, like sauerkraut, were loathed. Cook was unmoved by the tastes of his men. He simply imposed these foods on them under the threat of punishment (p. 199)."

"His conclusion which followed effectively put an end to the centuries of speculation, myth-making and even map-making which had amused, vexed, puzzled and infuriated geographers since classical Greek times when the world was known to be round, and renewed in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries with the voyages of Vasco da Gama and Ferdinand Magellan, who confirmed the earliest belief. Cook continued his thesis: 'The greatest part of this Southern Continent (supposing there is one) must lie with the Polar Circle where the sea is so pestered with ice that the land is thereby inaccessible. The risk on runs in exploring a coast in these unknown and icy seas, is so very great, that I can be bold to say that no man will ever venture [by sea] farther than I have done, and that the lands which may lie to the south will never be explored (p. 253).'"

"Cook claimed no credit for devising the diet which prevented scurvy; and others had experimented successfully with antiscorbutics before him. But his voyages were of such duration and distance, and of such world-wide fame, that it was now only a matter of time before every maritime nation followed his example. How many seaman's lives were saved as a result is incalculable. But the achievement was one of seafaring's great landmarks (p. 267)."

"British curiosity and ambitions now pointed towards the North rather than the South Pacific. They were not new and they were specific. Nor were they influenced by the revolution in the colonies of North America. It was, no less, the discovery and exploitation of a north-west passage between Canada and the pole, linking the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. A short route to the trade and riches of the East avoiding the two capes, Horn and Good Hope, would be of priceless value, so valuable that a prize of 20,000 pounds, to be shared among the ship's company, was offered (p. 268)."

"There is a memorial to Cook on the volcanic rocks where he fell. It is accurately placed close to the water and thus underlines the fact that by walking at his usual long-legged pace he could have reached the water, been dragged into the pinnace and have escaped death. A number of eyewitnesses testified that he sauntered rather than walked and appeared deliberately to challenge the Hawaiian warriors to attack him, while at the same time taking the precaution of placing his hands over his neck (p. 362)."