Rating: 2/5

Cool! I should love this - a book about expelling demons with lots of Bible quotes and exorcisms...

Ummmh? No. 

I definitely believe everything the Bible says about God, Demons and Angels, and Cosmic warfare from the spiritual realm. But I simply don't trust it being told by a charismatic emotional faith-healer from the 20th century ((August 1915 - September 2003). (who has most likely spent ZERO time in actual hospitals healing people and exorcising their demons of tooth-decay.) Pretty much every faith healer and exorcist only does their magic shenanigans in spiritual buildings surrounded by gullible people with heightened insecure emotions.

...except possibly the group of people i had to tolerate at my local christian coffee shop/book store... who continually kept casting-out each other's demons of tobacco ---- until they got bored and went outside for a smoke. I barely looked up from my book: this crap seldom amuses me anymore. Occasionally it's extremely funny though. (thank you Benny Hinn and his magic wizard coat -- yes! look it up on youtube. Benny Hinn and the mad lightsaber. I dare you.)

So, should we Expel demons like Derek Prince insists? Well, mostly no. God put them in our game for a reason. Probably to stir the pot so we don't just sit around smoking pot all day. Demons create false religions, toy around with some fortune tellers and New Age hippies, instigate a world domination on occasion (Hitler, Stalin, definitely North Korea and Saudi Arabia, Columbian drug lords? Or liberal democratic parties).
But do they crawl in our mouths and give us tooth decay and bad breath? I know if I was a demon i'd shoot for a higher priority career opportunity - hard to brag for an eternity that cavities and root canals were your life's work. (actually - if you're a dentist: this makes your job way more exciting and puts you on the frontlines of Cosmic Warfare. Maybe you should go to work dressed like Samurai tomorrow?)

I was hoping (and not expecting) this book to give us some serious scholarly Bible quotes and commentary about demons and their behavior. Mostly we get very emotional "Pentecostal" comprehensions from the Assembly of God charismania that's been tolerated since the Azusa Street stupidity of 1906. Hence - I learned nothing useful.

I did find out that Derek Prince thinks that demons are NOT fallen angels. He assumes we have angels, and then we have Daemons:
(page 91) "they are disembodied spirits of a pre-Adamic race that perished under some judgement by God not recorded in detail in scripture."

What the HELL? I guess that explains UFO's??? Or possibly vampires and werewolves.

Ephesians 6:12
For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places.

Derek quickly assumes that Evil In Heavenly Places is actually evil in HEAVEN. That's just kind of lazy. Especially when we have verses like 2 kings:
15When the servant of the man of God rose early in the morning and went out, behold, an army with horses and chariots was all around the city. And the servant said, “Alas, my master! What shall we do?” 16He said, “Do not be afraid, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.” 17Then Elisha prayed and said, “O LORD, please open his eyes that he may see.” So the LORD opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw, and behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha.

So what exactly IS the heavenly places? Best just to assume it's NOT the physical world we dwell in. Similar to this tale:

Job 1
6Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan also came among them. 7The LORD said to Satan, “From where have you come?” Satan answered the LORD and said, “From going to and fro on the earth, and from walking up and down on it.” 8And the LORD said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant Job...

Many Christians (even scholars???) assume that means the sons of God went up to heaven to present themselves. I don't think so. Sons of God could be a few different things (Is Adam a son of God?). Are angels REALLY Sons of God? More likely this is similar to Cain &amp; Abel in Genesis 4: 
 3In the course of time Cain brought to the LORD an offering of the fruit of the ground, 4and Abel also brought of the firstborn of his flock and of their fat portions. And the LORD had regard for Abel and his offering, 5but for Cain and his offering he had no regard. So Cain was very angry, and his face fell. 6The LORD said to Cain, “Why are you angry, and why has your face fallen?

They didn't go up to heaven to do that. No reason to assume the others did either - or that Satan has any access to heaven AT ALL. Yes, we gotta love this verse: Revelation 12.

7Now war arose in heaven, Michael and his angels fighting against the dragon. And the dragon and his angels fought back, 8but he was defeated, and there was no longer any place for them in heaven. 9And the great dragon was thrown down, that ancient serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world—he was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him. 

Always good to get your Bible facts from more than 1 verse or book. Let's go to Luke 10:18
And he (Jesus) said to them, “I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven."

And the New Testament and Old should always be inagreement: Isaiah 
Isaiah 14:12
"How you have fallen from heaven, O star of the morning, son of the dawn! You have been cut down to the earth, You who have weakened the nations!"

Maybe it's just me - but this FALLEN ANGEL theory seems right out of scripture. Many scriptures actually. How did Derek miss all of this? And he misses a lot more too.

Derek Prince says "I find it hard to believe that demons are fallen angels."

I find it hard to believe that demons AREN'T fallen angels. I'm pretty sure that if there's another player in the game - God would have told us.
_____________________________________

Do we need to go around casting out demons in this day and age? Not necessarily in my neighborhood (Unless you smoke near my local Charismatic coffee-shop). My theory is:
At one time there were 2 people on Earth =--- and maybe a billion demons? Or a few million? Maybe a lot less? Who knows. 
Now we have 7 billion people. Therefore the ratio of people to demons is severely altered. Especially if some people are hogging a legion or two all to themselves (probably some singer of a Swedish Metal band?). Either way: not a lot of demons on the internet or Youtube. Yes! I checked. Some amusing exorcists of course. I thought demons would have more interesting things to say? Especially since they've been around for a few thousand years. Oh well. If a demons talking: best to assume they are lying.

My take on demon "interaction" has always been that of the Arch-angel Michael: Jude 1
9But when the archangel Michael, contending with the devil, was disputing about the body of Moses, he did not presume to pronounce a blasphemous judgment, but said, “The Lord rebuke you.” 

Yep, if a demon (or Satan?) bothers you - simply say "NO." or "The Lord Rebuke You.". Don't have a lengthy conversation about theological or ethical matters of state. You COULD try and cast them into some pigs or chickens... but make sure it's a wimpy animal that fits on a BBQ - you wouldn't want it to turn around and eat you. Don't send them into a nearby pack of wolves or marching Elephants.

My first thought reading this book was: Where is Jesus in all this? 
That's why I gave this book 2 stars. Derek seems to truly love the Jesus of the bible. It's just that he's charismatically destructive about theology in general. Many of his Bible quotes are taken out of context and applied to his demon fighting ministry. He manages to find demons EVERYWHERE... and so do his followers. He's qualified to MAYBE teach sunday school to toddlers, but nothing seriously academic.

Having dealt with many Pentecostals and Charismatics, it's common to see that some people are desperate to be involved in a showy Spiritual Fight. Their very existence depends on them being high priority to Satan and demons. The Universe sits in the balance as their dentist is unsure about that bit of spinach stuck between their teeth.
________________________

Now to be fair:
I've heard John MacArthur (Anti-charismatic?) speak of his experience with demons and demon possessed people. I actually trust John's accounts. He almost never even bothers to bring this stuff up. He doesn't make a ministry of it, and he doesn't even bother to really write books about it. It's low on his priority list. And mine.

A problem with this book is: It speaks endlessly about demons (or Daemons?) and says almost nothing about angels. What does Derek think angels are up to? We Christians should have them covering our backs... and fighting off these tobacco and tooth-decaying indwellers. So where are all of Derek's angels?

Psalm 91
11For he will command his angels concerning you
to guard you in all your ways.

That is why I don't worry about demons. Angels know their job. We have ours - and I don't think it is necessarily the same job as those establishing the church back in Jerusalem in the 1st century. After the book of Acts Of The Apostles --- demon hunting seems to have slowed way down. Paul and Peter had other priorities. 
Our main job is still dealing with human beings and man's sin. Remember: God put demons in this game for a reason. He even uses them and allows them to do their thing. Their nature is set... We don't need their help in sinning --- we are AWESOME at it.

I do have a favorite bible verse about demons and their appearance: Revelation 16
"Then I saw three impure spirits that looked like frogs; they came out of the mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet."

Do demons look like frogs? Hmmm... aren't aliens said to be green/grey and look kinda like frogs? Probably just coincidence. 

_____________________________

Now we should deal with the Gospel according to Mark, it's demon claim: 

Mark 16.
 17"And these signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will cast out demons; they will speak in new tongues; 18they will pick up serpents with their hands; and if they drink any deadly poison, it will not hurt them; they will lay their hands on the sick, and they will recover.”

Jesus was speaking directly to the remaining eleven disciples. They were discussing THEIR MINISTRY. The top priority was establishing the foundation of the Christian Church. So we shouldn't necessarily assume demon casting is going to be a daily occurrence for the next 19 centuries. Personally: I'm speaking in a NEW tongue right now (there wasn't any English back then). Honestly, i've never heard of a missionary being given the gift of miraculously speaking in a foreign language since the Bible days ---- only insecure white people in suburban communities seem to ever present this gift. Weird and useless eh? The Bible shows us clearly that the Apostles spoke in foreign languages of their day Miraculously. I haven't heard of anyone REALLY doing it since. Every missionary claims to spend a few years learning native languages as needed. Hmmm...
Please walk into a hospital and lay your hands on the sick --- I'll wait. Prove me wrong.

To end on a funny note:
Nobody in the Bible is really afraid of demons. Most people simply find them annoying. Yet most are terrified by an Angel appearance: "Fear NOT." 
It's funny that Dante, charimatics, and Hollywood make us afraid of demons. As do some cultic churches. Probably Biblically best to just see them as annoying pests.

You can read this book - but be careful what you learn from it. There are some fruity exorcism stories... and almost Zero references or footnotes to validate anything.