Rating: 1/5

when this book opened with an epigraph from theodor herzl, i feel that was a warning i should have heeded - alas, i did not. even before chapter 22 (to be discussed), i thought this one was a mess of information with, for the longest time, no coherent thread of narrative beyond it's all about salt. also, this purports to be a world history but the focus is primarily on europe and the usa. of everywhere else, china gets the greatest look in but there's blank spots for west and central asia, and the pacific in general. much of it, though, is essentially just a list of all the different ways in which people used salt.

and then we get to chapter 22.

now, having ascertained that this author thought herzl appropriate for an epigraph, i did search for mentions of "israel" before starting so i kind of had an idea where this was going. chapter 22 itself, however, was just mask-off zionist. it's not just the erasure of palestine as a concept - the only mention is in context of the palestine potash company, created by a zionist settler by the way. kurlansky even goes so far as to refer to the dead sea in 12th century palestine as "what is now the "israeli" side of the dead sea" (my quotation marks), when the crusaders themselves would be calling it palestine - it's also the championing of zionists. herzl is a "visionary" and the terrorists who perpetuated the nakba are "resourceful adventurers". the arab league attacks poor ol' "israel" without provocation, the "idf" pays for injured veterans (with the aside that there are a lot of them - guess who there's more of mark! injured palestinians!) to visit the dead sea resorts. this isn't a chapter that ruined the book for me because i can hardly say i was enjoying it beforehand but it's not a chapter i liked reading to say the least.

there is one positive though, which is that now i can strike kurlansky from any list of nonfiction authors that are worth reading. you might even say he's definitely not worth his salt (ha).