Rating: 3/5

I would rate this more 3.5*
The day before her wedding the heroine, Stefanie, receives a letter from her fiance that he has fallen in love with her bridesmaid and best friend and that they are going away together. Stefanie is totally numb, she can't cry, can't feel and can't react. Noelle her bff was also engaged and due to be married shortly, so her fiance has been betrayed also. Quinn, Noelle's fiance was informed by a message on his answering machine. Obviously their fiance's were both rather weak characters who couldn't handle making their break-ups in person. Instead they did it by phone and letter and then ran away so as to avoid the fallout and the horrible experience of calling off a large wedding at the last moment.
In the days after the worst thing for the h was dealing with the pity of everyone in town. They acted as if someone had died, bringing food to the house and asking how she was doing. It being a small town where the h and her fiance and bff had all grown up there was no getting away from the constant expression of pity. Finally, the h takes a leave and goes to Melbourne to find a new job. She doesn't find a job but does run into Quinn, Noelle's fiance. He's bitter and angry. The breakup is going to have dire affects on his start up company. He had a big contract on line which will be the making of his company. Unfortunately it is a prerequisite that he be married. The job is on a small Island and they don't want single men coming and seducing the Island girls. Quinn decides that he and Stefanie should enter a marriage in name only. Stay married for the six months the job will last then he will pay her a bonus and they can dissolve the marriage. She will have a nice holiday on a tropical island, she'll get away from the scandal and when it's over she'll have money to take her time finding a job. The h finally agrees and they marry and go away.
Almost from the beginning there slowly develops a sexual attraction but they both resist and keep to their contract. However, after Stefanie receives word that Noelle and Bryan have married the h/H seem to capitulate into an intimate relationship and an agreement that they will have a real marriage. However, they never talk about their feelings. Of course the final result is a HEA.
I really like Daphne Clair's writing. There's a natural, realistic progression of shock, anger, sadness and acceptance. There's also a natural realistic progression of liking respect and desire.
There's no silly plot line of virginity or big misunderstandings. In the final analysis the h is most sad that her bff, since kindergarten is lost to her as a friend.