Rating: 4/5

I kinda wish I'd grown up with more of Cavanna's books. There are points where they're a little bit outdated - thus the one-star drop - but for something originally published in 1946, it's actually fairly progressive. 

I was pleased, for instance, that Julie's farmer father mentions going to the Democratic Convention in Philadelphia; it's a minor note in a very white middle-class book, but still gives a nice hint of the author's political and social leanings. Those come across in the story itself, and in Julie's journey of self-discovery.

This could've been a book about her falling in love, and while there is a love interest of sorts, his friendship is the part that matters most to Julie for 98% of the pages. She's more interested in other things: the prize-winning collie pup she helps raise, and the joy and fulfillment she finds as she develops her artistic skills and becomes more comfortable in her own skin. 

Julie starts off shy and awkward, not really knowing how to interact with the other girls in her class, who all seem to be growing up more rapidly than she is. Some of that's due to the fact that she's being raised by a single father, but Cavanna doesn't lean too heavily on the idea that Julie's actually lacking anything without a maternal influence. She has the memory of her mother, still, as a vibrant woman with an art degree and an immense amount of talent. Her mother is someone Julie aspires to be: a career woman, who can fend for herself and forge her own place in the world.

While there are some traditional bits about Julie handling all the cooking and cleaning (the "woman's work"), engaging in a little bit of fat-shaming, and learning the matter-of-fact truth that boys "don't like smart girls," there are a lot of strong messages about independence and self-assurance. 

Julie ends up "getting the guy" because she finally learns how to fully be herself, instead of fixating on how to dress and what to say. The opening chapters are entirely about an upcoming dance, and revolve around her excitement about acquiring The Perfect Dress. When she finally goes to another dance at the end of the book - this time with a date! - she barely pays attention to her dress and forgets her lipstick. She has other things to think about, and that's what ends up drawing people to her - guys, sure, but also a set of solid female friends, who turn out to have a lot more depth than Julie had initially given them credit for.

Except for Anne, of course, her former best friend - who's a perfectly nice girl, but who has no personal ambitions. She'll clearly get married straight out of high school and settle into the housewife role, and will likely be perfectly content doing so. Rather than envying her, as Julie had done at the beginning of the book, she sees the emptiness of this type of lifestyle - at least for her - and pities her friend. Julie can't imagine not having a purpose in life, or the passion to pursue an education and a career. 

I like the quiet realism of this story. When Julie begins developing her artistic skills by sketching the collie puppy they're boarding, she gets it in her head that she might be able to earn enough money to buy him if she sells some of her drawings. She sets up an elaborate plan to accomplish this, including skipping half a day of school and taking a train to a publishing house in Philadelphia. In another book, she might've been successful. In this one, the editor treated her kindly and encouraged her to go to art school and come back once she'd graduated. 

Any of Julie's accomplishments throughout the book feel truly earned, and reasonable for a still-young teenager. I liked, too, the little tidbit about Julie's father having dated someone before her mother - something Julie had never considered. That makes Julie's date to the dance feel more like a positive step in a much longer, larger life: she most likely won't date this particular boy forever, or grow up to marry him. That's not the important part. She's finding joy in her daily life, and making plans for the future. It's a very uplifting, encouraging story about a girl becoming a woman and deciding for herself what that will mean.

There are also some good messages about how friendships, and relationships with other people, actually work. Much of Julie's loneliness and isolation is self-imposed; because she convinces herself that people are judging or laughing at her, she retreats into a shell and eventually succeeds at driving everyone away. She assumes that people won't like her, and manages to make that come true by pushing them away first. 

It's nice that there aren't any villains or "mean girls" in this book. When Julie begins blossoming on her own and finding the things that make her happy, the girls she'd cut herself off from in the previous year welcome her back with open arms. People are often friendlier than they seem, and even the most beautiful, popular ones probably have insecurities of their own that they're hiding. It's a lesson I don't see a lot of fictional characters (...or even real people!) learning, so that's an element I particularly appreciated.

And, of course, I like that there's a dog. It's funny how much the collie bits remind me of Albert Payson Terhune's work - it's like Cavanna lifts his entire descriptive style at various points. That makes it a fun, comfortable reading experience for me, because while I didn't grow up with Cavanna's books, I did grow up reading all about Terhune's collies. It's nice to have them in a different context, with a girl who loves dogs, art, and all the possibilities stretching out in front of her.