Rating: 3/5

This text is a great introduction to the PRB. Below are my notes and comments on sections that I want to highlight for future use:

The PBR was started by a triad of young men that were like minded and willing to share time and talent in 1848-51. These three were Rossetti, Hunt and Millais. Of them, Rossetti has had the most lasting impact on the history of the PRB yet Hunt was the most consistent and constant over time. At the start of the PRB Millais was hailed by Ruskin as the heir to Turner. Ruskin tied to guide and facilitated Millais’ development. The young artist was not influenced much by Ruskin but he did take a fancy to Effie, Ruskin’s very young wife. Four years after meeting Effie, Millais and she ran off together and married. Before that betrayal, Ruskin work in The Times two very important letters publicly supporting the PRB in 1851. (Hilton text p68)

Hunt’s The Awakening Conscience was clearly conceived as a moralist image. Ruskin described it as an image where not a single thing in the room that when read correctly holds tragic meaning. Hunt described it in the following ways, “in scribbles I arranged the two figures to present the woman recalling the memory of her childish home, and breaking away from her gilded cage with a startled holy resolve, while her shallow companion still sings on, ignorantly intensifying her repentant purpose…The corn and vine are left unguarded by the slumbering cupid watchers, and the fruit is left to be preyed on by the thievish birds” (Hilton text 92). The painting hanging over the mantle is Woman Taken in Adultery. Hunt’s image works to disrupt the traditional pleasure principle by empowering the central woman.

Rossetti’s work is different than Hunt and Millais. Though Rossetti did not receive accolades in his time, his work has had a more lasting impact on the history of the movement. (Hilton text p94) Rossetti’s personal life had a direct influence on the aesthetics of his work.

For The Scapegoat, Hunt traveled to the Dead Sea, bought a goat and set up camp at Oosdoom. He worked on the image out in the open air, making observations from the animal. In the middle of the project the goat died. Hunt bought another poor beast and proceeded to complete the painting with the second goat.

John Ruskin extolled the advancement in color theory and practice made by Hunt in his painting Our English Coasts and Brown’s The Pretty Baa-Lambs both from 1852. They show color in the shadows (a precursor to Impressionism). These pieces are faithful observations of light and do not superimpose a system of tonal harmonies. Ruskin taught his students to paint color by looking through a white card with a whole cut out to allow for judging spot color against the card. Both he and Brown taught students to look and record. Brown would tell his drawing students to not “scuffle about” with random lines. (Hilton text p136-138)

Helen Rossetti describes her brother’s 1854 painting Found as “A young drover from the country, while driving a calf to market, recognizes in a fallen woman on the pavement, his former sweetheart. He tries to raise her from where she crouches on the ground, but with closed eyes she turns her face from him to the wall” (Hilton text p140). This is an illustration of the moralist tendency in early PBR painting. Millias’ The Awakening Conscience (1852) is another. The author Hilton comments that Found has a clear connection to the poem “Rosebell” by William Bell Scott, a fellow PRB painter and poet.

John Brett (illust. on p145) and Henry Wallis (illust. on p123) have interesting Stonebreaker paintings from ‘57 and ‘58 respectively. This is the same year as Millet’s The Gleaners and only 8 or 9 years after Courbet’s biting Stonebreakers. 

Brown’s The Last of England is both a tribute to Woolner leaving to live in Australia in 1852, but also shows emigration of the English to Australia which reached a high point in that same year. Brown made an effort to capture the light of a dull day at sea by painting in the open air on overcast days. (Hilton text 151-153)

William Morris started out in the PRB as a younger artists working with Rossetti in ‘57. Rossetti employed him to work on a famous project called the Oxford Murals. During that work Morris met Jane Burden and they married in ‘59. They would later have difficulties and separate but Jane would become the archetypal PRB “stunner” after the death of Lizzy Siddal (1862). Jane was the inspiration for the long thick-necked, big-eyed, full curvy lips and wavy hair (Hilton text 164-170).
 Rossetti’s Beata Beatrix, from ’63, is a memorial painting of Lizzy Siddal. She died in ’62 of an overdose of laudanum. The image show the haloed bird dropping a poppy into Lizzy’s hand at the moment of death. Her face is a mixture of ecstasy and release, much like we can see in Bernini’s St. Teresa. This image by Rossetti melds the real and the unreal, the sensuous and the ethereal. Lizzy and Rossetti had been lovers since the early ‘50’s, and creative partners throughout that decade, but began to have difficulties in the early ‘60’s. The usually suave ladies man that Rossetti was, became reclusive and more self-destructive. In the absence of Lizzy, Rossetti found his muse in Jane Morris. She became the model for much of his work throughout the ‘60’s (Hilton text 179-185).