Rating: 4/5

Published in 1979, but no less moving today. Reading "Deseret" I fell in love with Janet Dailey's writing all over again. Have several of her books. Hadn't read this one until now. Found it in the "Little Free Library," along with two others by Dailey. Finished it in one night. Like all of Dailey's work, I couldn't put it down. She knows just how to keep readers titillated. And, of course, she tugs those heartstrings just so. 

LaRaine's character development is interesting to experience. Dailey gives us a glimpse of who she is inside, her potential, almost from the start, but like so many, she hides behind a mask. She does what she's been taught, follows it through, even when it doesn't quite fit and as she realizes the brick wall is approaching. She's slowed down, but darned if she doesn't hit it like a speed bump in excess of 40 mph. And, she goes to the one source who doesn't treat her like the cold gold-digger others see. 

Travis is obviously scarred from a past brush with love gone wrong, but he takes her in anyway. But, makes her earn her keep, become a better person, tap the inner potential.

Felt he deserved to know how she got that way, an explanation of her upbringing, being pushed so hard her parents. But even without it, he gives her a chance. She takes it and as she sheds her mask like the make-up he tosses she too find a strong foundation and renovates her image just as she paints the house and remodels the kitchen and living room. And, she does the latter without his help... or at least starts out that way. It shows her commitment not only to improving herself, but working on a solid relationship built on love the same way she reupholsters the furniture without contribution. It leaves an indelible mark. Loved those visual expressions of her inner growth and renovation too. She even gets a new name to go with the new real her, a nickname — something no one has bothered to know her well enough to give her — and promise of a new last name.

My one grip was that her ex didn't pay for crossing the line. While I understand where he was coming from when he got her canned, I sure wish he'd have to pay for almost getting her arrested. That's a bit too far! Who said it was only a woman scorned?

"Deseret" tantalizes and keeps the reader interested without being overtly erotic. Don't get me wrong, I enjoy a good red, hot scorcher as much as anyone. This story didn't need it. It was just right as is.

The story is well written, well developed characters and plot. And it didn't have to be elaborate with tons of people and settings and riches, etc.... no billionaire here. Just plain old hard working folks... who happen to own a cattle farm.

And the editorial thumb print. So many "books" now, printed and electronic, lack that. Too many errors, content and flow issues, poor grammar, spelling, lack of originality and, in many cases, plausibility and just poor writing and plot in general in many of today's editions.... even from some experienced and favorite authors, including those from indie and traditional publishers. Thank you, thank you, thank you Janet Dailey and the editors. Saw only one small typo in the 186 page book, and then only a d at the end of a word where it's not needed. Pretty sure that got changed for any subsequent printings. Awesome job! "Deseret" stands the test of time. (Should come with a label warning tissues might be needed.)