Rating: 3/5

I bought, but didn't read, a copy of Get a Financial Life a couple of years ago, when I was on a Personal Finance and Financial Independence reading kick (books and blogs). In September, I started using the budgeting software You Need a Budget, which has brought Personal Finance back to the forefront of my mind and I've been thinking about and reevaluating my financial priorities (more on YNAB in a sec). I spotted Get a Financial Life on my bookshelf last week and picked it up just to skim and ended up reading the whole thing. The book covers the basics of Personal Finance and contains sound advice regarding: debt, retirement, investing, banking, buying a home, insurance, and taxes. Even though I already follow, or am aware of, a lot of the recommendations in the book, I still thought it was a worthwhile read. And I'm glad to have a copy so I can refer back to specific chapters or sections in the future. The latest revised edition was published in 2017, so it's not too outdated. Kobliner's tone is matter-of-fact and direct, which I personally appreciated. If you're looking for something more motivational, try Worth It: Your Life, Your Money, Your Terms instead. 

If there's one topic I wish Kobliner had discussed in more detail, it's budgeting. In Chapter 2: Taking Stock of Your Financial Life (Figuring Out Where You Are and Where You Want to Go), Kobliner discusses budgeting, goal setting, tracking your spending, some rules of thumb, her recommended filing system, etc. She recommends keeping a spending diary: "If you do this for only one month, you'll have a pretty clear picture of exactly where all your money goes." I've seen similar advice around the internet before, and I take issue with it for two reasons: [1] One month of spending data is just not going to give you a good overall picture of your spending habits and expenses. There are many variable expenses throughout the year that one month won't capture, like high electricity bills, annual subscriptions, car maintenance, etc. [2] Why would you waste a month tracking your spending, when you presumably have reams of spending data already captured in bank statements? I recently sat down with all my checking and credit card statements from 2019, categorized all the transactions (e.g. my dog, gas, groceries, etc.), summed each category to get annual totals, then divided by 12 to get monthly averages. Going through 24 statements took way less time than a 30-day spending diary would, and I got a lot more information to work with. It was also eye-opening because I realized I was spending much more on non-essentials (e.g. fast food, books, TV subscriptions) than I thought I was. Seeing the annual totals for some of those categories made me cringe with regret, because that’s money I could have used for travel or retirement savings. It also reminded me of a few infrequent expenses that I tend to forget about, like my car registration.

Tracking your spending is just Kobliner’s first step in figuring out where your money is going. The second step is creating a budget. Kobliner shares a budget worksheet in the book as well as a link to the budget calculator on her website. She also mentions the apps Mint and HelloWallet. I’ve never used Mint. I’ve read that it’s more helpful as a spending tracker than as a budget tool, but it’s free so it’s popular. I don’t know anything about HelloWallet, but Kobliner says it’s “a great tool that’s free if your employer provides it; otherwise, it will cost you $100 a year.” 

For some people, tracking their spending on Mint, or filling out a budget worksheet, or creating their own budget spreadsheet is enough for them to plan and meet their financial goals. I am not one of those people. Due to the pandemic, my spending and expenses have changed drastically. I also have a lot of financial goals that I haven’t planned for or prioritized, and I’ve been increasingly frustrated with my lack of progress on meeting them. This frustration is what led me to try You Need a Budget (YNAB). YNAB is a zero-based budgeting system and I have found it extremely helpful and I highly recommend it. I was a bit surprised that Kobliner doesn’t mention it in her book because it seems to be very popular and have a cult-like following. There’s a bit of a learning curve, but after a couple of weeks, it *clicked* and I am 100% behind their budgeting philosophy now. 

Some other apps that may be helpful, but Kobliner doesn’t mention, are Dave Ramsey’s EveryDollar, another zero-based budgeting app which is based on his cash envelope system; Personal Capital for retirement planning, tracking investments, etc.; and Undebt.it for paying off debt. There really are a multitude of budgeting systems and philosophies out there. I think that’s why I was disappointed with how little Kobliner discusses it. Her focus is more on tracking your spending (looking back) rather than actively budgeting (looking forward). Budget is a verb, not a noun - it should be an active and flexible process. I think for people in their 20’s and 30’s, understanding the importance of budgeting and finding a budgeting system that works for them should be a priority when setting up a "Financial Life." 

Kobliner's lack of emphasis on budgeting was a bit disappointing, but the book as a whole and the advice in it are still valuable.