Rating: 4/5

I read this to get a better understanding of mass indoctrination whether it be religion, Nazism, Stalinism, and more recent developments in our populist era, namely Trump. The author lists what he feels are the commonalities to all of these, whether it be Nazism, ISIS or the “moonies” or even a small religious movement like the Branch Davidians of David Koresh.

The author uses the word “mass movement”, whereas I would use the word “cult”; perhaps the word “cult” was not in vogue when this was written in 1950.

There were parts of his dissertation that I felt were off-base or irrelevant as when he speaks of colonialism. 

A recurring theme is that mass movements appeal to the frustrated. They find meaning in this holy cause – be it religious or secular (like Nazism). Individualism is lost in the mass movement. I have difficulties with this as the author kept emphasizing how one’s individualism was completely evaporated by the mass movement. There were, for example, differences in the behaviour of Germans under the sway of Nazism.

Page 16 (my book)

Faith in a holy cause is to a considerable extent a substitute for the lost faith in ourselves.

All mass movements are uncompromising. They have all the answers; deviationists are not tolerated.

And interestingly in a country with competing mass movements such as Germany in the early 1930’s, membership could change from one to another mass movement (i.e. communists could sway their allegiance and convert to the Nazi Party). The frustrated is on the lookout for any group with a holy cause.

Page 51
[Hitler] knew that the chief passion of the frustrated was to belong.

Page 79
Above all, he must never feel alone.

The mass movements require uncompromising devotion which creates suspicion.

Page 44 Matthew 10: 35-37
For I am come to set man at variance against his father, and daughters against her mother. And the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. And man’s foes shall be they of his own household. He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.

Page 153
It is the sacred duty of the true believer to be suspicious.

Returning army veterans can often be lured into mass movements, they are looking for structure and meaning – and many are “frustrated”.

Hate is a prime unifier in a mass movement. The present is vilified as decadent. Also, reason and logic are deprecated. There is only one truth – a doctrine.

Page 101

If a doctrine is not unintelligible, it has to be vague; and if neither intelligible nor vague, it has to be unverifiable.

All mass movements require a leader – Hitler being a prime example. Hitler was the original leader and led Germany into “action” (other mass movements have successor leaders like Stalin after Lenin). “Action” is another fundamental of a mass movement. But “action” can lead to a state of normality. “Action” requires more individual participation. The author did not fully explain this contradiction.

Also, there were vast differences between Hitler who was worshipped and adored and Stalin, who may have been worshipped, but certainly not fawned over like Hitler, fear is more appropriate when describing Stalin.

A considerable portion of this book worked and did remind me of George Orwell’s “1984”. It illustrates very well the commonality of mass movements – whether they be political or religious. Their doctrines leave no room for dissension. This is short book, clearly written, and well worth reading.