Rating: 5/5

An absolutely fascinating book --- this was recommended to me by one of my fellow believers at my parish. I am glad that I got this one. 

It's fascinating because it examines the teachings of Chinese sage, Lao Tzu, founder of Taoism, against the teachings of Orthodox Christianity, and an astonishing parallel evolution of the many of the tenets between the two is found.

Orthodox Christianity is neither religious fundamentalist (believing that all teachings outside one's own traditions are automatically wrong) nor religious syncretistic (believing that all teachings and traditions are equal). Nevertheless, as this book shows, while many pagan philosophers and thinkers wandered in ignorance of a knowledge of God, yet they earnestly sought the Truth beloved of God, and, in such pursuit, achieved a partial knowledge of spiritual truths and principles touching on knowing the nature of God. 

In such a way, this book shows this parallel agreement on the Truth both arrived at in Christianity and by Lao Tzu. Many of the teachings of Lao Tzu are uncannily close, if not identical, to Christianity. 

The first portion of the book is a series of aphorisms, developed by the author, a Chinese Orthodox monk, relating the teachings of Christianity with those of Lao Tzu --- accompanying them, in the back of the book is a commentary further expounding on these in greater detail. I found both the aphoristic poems and commentary very interesting and profound. 

The second portion is more analytical, discussing in further how Christ is the personification of the Tao (the Way), yearned especially for in the East. Indeed, while the Chinese were seeking the Tao, early Christians self-described themselves as followers of The Way. 

The next portion is a relation of teachings of the asceticism of Orthodox Christianity with practices of Taoism towards the same end --- achieving a knowledge of The Way, building spiritual strength, and growing closer to God --- there are a number of interesting parallelisms between "The Philokalia", that great Orthodox work on how to live the Christian life --- and sayings of Lao Tzu and Taoist sages who followed him. 

Finally, there is an Appendix detailing the history of Orthodox Christianity in China that I found very interesting.

Adding to the book's presentation are, throughout it, are lovely prints of Chinese art and calligraphy that complement the text.

Overall, an amazing book --- I recommend this book for Christians of all traditions interested in learning commonalities between Christianity and Chinese philosophy as well as how to apply this to growing closer to God.