Rating: 4/5

Last week, when I finished Andrew Klavan's memoir, 
  The Great Good Thing
, I decided I was probably going to have to read everything he's written. This will mean picking up the pace, as I've burned up a decade casually getting through only nine of his titles. 

So I grabbed The Animal Hour almost at random.

One of its main characters is Nancy Kincaid, apparently a ditsy office assistant who shows up for work one morning to discover that nobody recognizes her. Confused, she leaves the building, whereupon her day starts going downhill fast. She's the only one mentioned in the book's synopsis, but about half of the chapters concern Oliver Perkins, an unsuccessful poet living on the fringes, and other people in his life. He's equally important to the unfolding narrative, and might be easier to relate to given that there's greater opportunity to observe his everyday existence (being hungover, worrying about a fragile grandmother, feeling responsible for a drug-addicted younger brother) before the day also becomes weird for him.

I understand another reader's comment that this story made her feel dirty. The response is similar to what one might experience on picking up a log or a rock and seeing the writhing grubs and whatnot living underneath it. Klavan's fiction often deals with a side of life we prefer not to think about, but that any police officer knows all too well. As it's expressed here, these characters experience "a journey down into the dark," there to find "a fearsome creature. The Other; the self whom, above everything, you wish not to be." So the discovery that's so repulsive is not really something external, under a rock, but something within—within the protagonists, potentially within anyone.

The best sentence of the book: "Death slithered through the crowd like a silverfish."

Death in this context is a person in costume, but the nightmarish Halloween parade that dominates the concluding chapters, and its mass of enthusiastic spectators, is I think the author's representation of a society that takes a perverse delight in flirting with its darkest side, and making unhappiness all the more inevitable.