Rating: 4/5

There are some problems with this book, but I thought this book had a number of strengths. I was looking for an historical overview of this period inside Cambodia, and this book does a good job of that. I have not been able to find many options, and I had this one in my library already. I came away with a really good understanding of what happened inside Cambodia between 1975 and 1979 when the Vietnamese took Phnom Penh, and that is what I was going for.

Kiernan is considered an authority on this subject, as he has spent extensive time in Cambodia and interviewed hundreds of survivors of the stated time period. Much of this book is based on his interviews. The book could really, really, use some editing. He spends so much time going person by person and interview by interview and it gets old. Many are saying similar things. It isn't organized very well. There are a few chapters that rely heavily on these interviews, and while important for the record, it doesn't lend itself to being very readable. 

Outside of this complaint, I really liked this book. I got the information I was looking for. The following is my overview.

In the early 70s the Khmer Rouge grew a base of supporters in rural Cambodia. Originally supported by Vietnam and China, they later broke with Vietnam. The US carpet bombing of Cambodia certainly helped the Khmer Rouge gain support, and they said Lon Nol was working with the US. By 1975 they made it to Phnom Penh and took over. But there were organization problems from the beginning. Groups from different areas made it to Phnom Penh and weren't on the same page. In particular, the group from the East was less violent and cruel, and this characteristic persisted about the East throughout the reign of the Khmer Rouge, at least on a relative basis. 

The Khmer Rouge immediately started evacuating Phnom Penh people to the countryside to work in cooperatives with the peasants already there. The people from cities like Phnom Penh became known as "new people", while poor people already from the villages were "base people". At least until 1978 or so, base people had it better, in general, than new people. Anyone who previously was a teacher or police officer or the like was poorly treated and often killed. Everyone was worked nearly and often to death. Their job was to grow more rice in Cambodia than was really possible, and that is what most people spent all their time doing. The largest minority, the Muslim Chams, were certainly targeted, though all religion was banned. 

Pol Pot rose to the top of Angkar, the Organization, or CPK (Communist Party of Kampuchea). Cambodia was known as Democratic Kampuchea (DK). They were never extremely well organized it seems. They were constantly looking for spies and accused thousands at least of being such. Eventually they started to crumble. The seemed to kill so many leaders throughout the organization for perceived disloyalty or any other number of probably false reasons, it seems no wonder they fell apart. The biggest mistake ended up being the decision to attack Vietnam.

The Khmer Krom refers to Khmers living in southern Vietnam, Cochinchina, which historically belonged to Cambodia at some time. Angkar decided to reconquer this area from Vietnam. Hun Sen was stationed in Eastern Cambodia, an area which never fell perfectly in line with Angkar. He and a group of Khmer Rouge leaders, including So Phim, rebelled, and gained the support of Vietnam. At the end of 1978, Vietnam decided to send a large force and expel the Khmer Rouge, and were able to do so very quickly. They surely saved the lives of tens of thousands by getting rid of the regime. 

Kiernan puts the death toll between 1975 and 1979 around 1.5 million people, many from outright murder, and many from starvation and disease. He tells many horrific stories throughout the book of murders that took place, including the infamous Tuol Sleng prison. He ends the book here, though the story of Pol Pot is far from over, though from here out relegated to the periphery as a new Vietnam-backed communist regime took over.