It was at school that we were given an excerpt of Arabian Sands to read, a passage detailing the peoples who had lurked on the fringes of Arabia Felix without actually controlling it, coming across the book at the town library I borrowed it and read on.

Wilfred Thesiger travelled backwards and forwards across the Empty Quarter of southern Arabia in the late 1940s and early 50s. With the subsequent discovery and extraction of oil this is now a record of a vanished world.

Coming from a privileged British background (his father had been ambassador to Abyssinia, and one of Thesiger's early experiences was seeing the Abyssinian army jogging off to battle an insurgent,) as a young man he travelled ion the inhospitable Danakil depression, and after the Second World War travelled across the Empty Quarter of southern Arabia repeatedly, in between other adventures. he was an alien in the deserts of Arabia. His access to some areas was restricted, if I remember correctly the then Sultan of Oman was hostile to non-Muslims travelling on his territory.

Thesiger's focus was on exploration which meant spending time in the desert with a small number of guides rather than on ethnography and his views reflect his reading and his general attitudes about civilisation (he's more sympathetic to the hard lives lived in extreme circumstances). But it remains an entertaining book featuring Thesiger's wonder at the hardiness of his companions as they struggle over the dunes on a diet of rice and raisins utterly dependant on the health of their camels to survive.

Worth contrasting with his book The Marsh Arabs. Thesiger's autobiography The Life of my Choice puts his journey in the context of his life - it is worth remembering that between trips to the Empty Quarter he was also sending time in the Kurdish regions and in the marshes of southern Iraq. 

It is geography as hardship and hardship as the purest form of adventure. Travel as penance maybe, certainly not about destinations. The charm and good humour of his companions a constant amazement to Thesiger as they stagger over sand dunes and dream of feasting on roast camel hump and they watch uneasy as their male camels are socially obliged to perform stud services to the point of their own exhaustion, in accordance with the strict etiquette of the Empty Quarter - a law of manners that aims to resist feuding to reasonable limits and ensure the survival of people, as far as possible, in an uninhabitable region.