Rating: 4/5

American Anti-hero: Ulysses S. Grant. A review of his memoirs.

 The story of America’s first anti-hero ended as it began, in poverty. At the tail end of his life, however, Ulysses S. Grant possessed something that he did not have before: one of the most intriguing life stories in American history. To the men of his own time, Ulysses S. Grant was the most famous, celebrated and respected American of his generation. Crowds of people swarmed the streets to cheer for him wherever he went. During his world tour, twenty thousand working Englishmen went out into the streets to cheer for the General of Freedom, the one who had single handedly defeated the armies of slavery and set free thousands of men, women and children. However, Grant’s legacy has in time become the most tarnished, with Americans often believing him to be a drunkard, an ill-kept shadow of a president that is nothing more than a blemish on the nation’s resume of leaders. His book proves that this he was not, and that it was not merely doggedness and persistence that allowed him to be the hero of the Civil War and savior of the Union, but also his towering intellect and genius strategic sense. This book is not merely his story, but a relevant account of the most tumultuous time in American history, coming from the man who played the most pivotal role in it, a man whose legacy has perhaps unjustly been tarnished by time. 
	

 As in almost every memoir, the early chapters of Grant’s autobiography make for some of the most interesting reading. The entire first chapter is dedicated to recounting Grant’s ancestry, and it is interesting to note that he places great importance in how “American” his family is. Most of the family descriptions pertain to his father’s side of the family, as his mother’s family did not keep records of ancestry. True to his military background, his book covers little more than his military years, with the narrative ending shortly after the surrender of General Lee’s army. Also interesting to note is that Grant never wanted to attend the academy at West Point, as he deemed the 
academics “too demanding” and “he could not bear the idea of failing”. Grant opposed the Mexican War, only partaking in it because of his duty as a recent West Point graduate; he regarded it “among the most unjust ever waged by a stronger nation against a weaker one”. Moreover, he maintains that the American Civil War was an outgrowth of the Mexican War, more specifically the annexation of more southern states and the spread of slavery that this action represented. He goes as far as to deem the Mexican war a “transgression” in the part of the United States, and calling the Civil War “fair punishment” that the United States deserved. 
	
 One of the more interesting aspects of the book is Grant’s ability to write about the War’s most important men in such a personal way. It is good that he is seemingly very objective, and that for every fault he finds in a rival he can also find virtue. As might be expected, he has many words for both Lincoln and Sherman, and his glowing review of Sherman’s virtues on and off the battlefield has made me want to pick up Sherman’s memoirs as well. Even though his words for Lincoln and Sherman are interesting and illuminating (after all, readers do not often get primary sources as relevant as those that Grant offers), it is his words for the war’s lesser known, but perhaps equally important, military men that makes this book stand out. Grant’s sketches of his comrades are concise and they offer more insight into the men’s personality than perhaps many full-length autobiographies could. Of President Taylor, a General at the time, he says: “No soldier 
could face either danger or responsibility more calmly than he. These are qualities more rarely found than genius or physical courage.” And on his mentor from West Point, General C.F Smith, he said: “His death was a severe loss to our western army. His personal courage was unquestioned, his judgment and professional acquirements were unsurpassed, and he had the confidence of those he commanded as well as those over him”. In my opinion, it is moments in the book like these; where Grant’s beautifully spare writing makes the men, whom we previously only knew from battle plans and history textbooks, take life and become real to the reader that makes this book, in my opinion, far and away the best autobiography I have ever read. 
	
 Although primarily a beautiful narrative of a man’s rise from obscurity into military heroism, Grant’s Memoirs is arguably the most essential book for someone who is seeking to be a student of the Civil War. His insight, coupled with his towering intellect, strategic sense and spare, concise writing make this book an unparalleled read. The book’s relevance, however, does not come from its aesthetic qualities. It comes from having been written by the most celebrated, respected American of his generation, a true military genius who was there when the events depicted happened, and he tells us what he saw exactly how he saw it. Sometimes genius can’t be explained, and sometimes the reader doesn’t understand some of the nuances of the battles, but we are not expected to do so. Grant is the genius; the reader is merely along for the ride. Grant was picked by Lincoln as his General because he was a fighter. He was not prone to heroics, but neither was he prone to cowardice. He confined himself to saying as little as possible in front of his men, and he was known for not speaking unless he had something to say. In his Memoirs, he found his voice and a story worth telling, and he told it the only way he knew how: in a concise, precise manner that left nothing out yet did not embellish, a Magnus Opus of the military genre that takes us on a tour de force through his life and to the farthest corners of his mind.