Rating: 4/5

Excellent set of lectures/essays on the topic of how to interpret meaning from text.

The ideas here are interesting and clear. It might be one of my favorite pieces of semiotics.

Eco discusses how there is more than one avenue to approach texts. Usually, he says, people look either for the Author's Meaning or for the Reader's Meaning, but there is a third path, which is the Text's Meaning. Even as he was building his case, I was nodding my head eagerly.

It's pretty common people will recite "death of the author" at you when discussing textual meaning. This is usually done dismissively. The person often wants to remove everything that would get in the way of their own interpretation. Eco suggests that just because the author should have little or no influence on the meaning of the text doesn't mean you get carte blanche to interpret it however you like.

There is, he says, no way to make rules for how a text should be interpreted, but there is, within the text itself, usually enough information to show how not to. And I think this distinction is incredibly important. If you follow the clues of the text like a detective, you are doing interpretation. But if you start making associations that have no "economy," as he puts it, then you are just bringing your own creations into the text, and that is overinterpretation.

For example, in Patch Adams, there's a famous scene where he wears a clown's nose. In the context of the movie, and with all of the other clues, it would be safe to assume the nose itself represents laughter or joy. It might be okay to assume that as a facial ornament, joy is something we can choose to wear, choose to put on. This might seem like a soft interpretation, but the text would point to it. However, an over-interpreter might point out that the clown nose is red, and red is the color of anger, the color of the bull's cape, and from there start thinking of a bunch of other associations. They may be onto something when they make associations with red, but not all associations are valid 100% of the time. Clown nose is red, and red means angry, so Patch Adams is mad? The text would not support Robin Williams as an angry clown just because his nose is red.

The third Eco lecture is probably the weakest, but no less fun. It talks about the extents to which the author should be involved in an interpretation. It makes its point fairly quickly, and then is mostly anecdotal examples. The examples are worthwhile if you've read Eco's novels, but as substance for the lecture it mostly fills time.

My personal idea on author involvement sits close to Eco's, although I think he leaves some room for clarity. Really, authorship is context. They say the author is dead, but we learn a lot from our dead. If I see the phrase "I am a homo" and it can either have been written by evolutionary scientist Richard Dawkins or infamously gay comedian Bruce Vilanch, suddenly the author matters quite a bit. (Eco makes a similar example with the word "gay" in the essays.) Resistant folks may say, "well, the context of who those people are is different than them trying to assert their own meanings as author," to which I say that's true, but that's not what typically happens when people try to claim the death of the author. They typically resists all information about the author. "Who cares what Chuck Palahniuk is about, the movie speaks for itself!" But that's needlessly dismissive. If a text being made in 1939 Germany can be interpreted based on its temporal and spatial context, then so too can it be interpreted by the temporality and spatiality of its author. It's all context.

Eco does, however, move forward on this idea as the author-become-reader, and this is also very cool for me to see on paper as a person who often works this way himself. After the text is written, the author may read it and try to interpret it as a reader might, following the text. And, of course, the author has a sort of "creator's bias," but if they can read the text and point to ideas in it the same as the reader, why dismiss them? I often find myself chiming in on different interpretations of things I helped make. To me, my role as author is dead and gone, and now I'm just a reader who happens to have priveleged information regarding the creation process.

It's a great read, really... and I didn't even touch the stuff on hermeneutics!