Rating: 5/5

Title: Count!
Author: Denise Fleming
Genre: Juvenile Literature
Theme: Counting Book

Summary: This book goes through the numbers in order from 1-10, and then 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50. Each number has its own animal and depending on the number that is how many animals are on the page.

Opening Sentence: Hello, gnu! 1. One. gnu.

Review #1:
CLCD
Susie Wilde (Children's Literature) 
Board books provide an affordable answer for parents who want their children to enjoy books. These books generally have thick pages that facilitate page turning and have plastic-coatings to protect them from the wear and tear of active baby life. Well-known concepts books are also appearing in this format, and little ones will love the graphically bold Count! 1997 (orig. 1992), Holt, $6.95. Ages 2 to 5. 
(PUBLISHER: H. Holt (New York:), PUBLISHED: 1995 c1992.)
http://www.clcd.com.ezaccess.librarie...

Review #2:
Horn Book
Fleming, Denise Count!
 32 pp. Holt ISBN 0-8050-1595-7 
(3) PS series. Brightly colored animals - one gnu, two zebras, three crocodiles, and so on up to ten and then by tens to fifty - cavort across the pages of this counting book. The short sentences encourage children to move along with the animals: 'Bounce, kangaroos! / Stretch, giraffes!' Made by painting with paper pulp, the illustrations can be seen easily from a distance. 
Preschool; Counting books; Animals
http://www.hornbookguide.com.ezaccess...

Response to Professional Reviews: I strongly agree with these reviews. I think that the author did a great job with making this book very eye appealing with the different size fonts, colors, and animals. I like how she painted the book rather than just throw pictures of the animals. I definitely agree that this is an in your face book, and I think that is should be, especially for children. It is very clear and bold, which helps children follow along and helps them engage with the book.

Literary Elements: The book uses a lot of Molly Bang’s principles. The book follows the idea of sharp edges to add more contrast. The book also has very easy words for children to follow and understand.

Instructional Application
Mini Lesson: I can use this book for a counting lesson and I can also tie in the animals to go along with the number. I have broken the class up and have the kids be different numbers and they can also be the animals as well. We can learn the numbers and also learn the animals and the sound that the animals make. This book can be used for many different subjects, not just counting.
Read Aloud: Just like the ABC book, this book can also be read aloud as a group. This book can help students count. They can say the number and then they can also say the animal and count how many animals are on each page.