Rating: 4/5

A Gulag story. Beautiful modulation and pacing. Reminds me of Vasily Grossman’s Stalingrad in its soft peddling of the Soviet nightmare. That is, hobbled by the censor but still readable. Yet Solzhenitsyn seems intent upon addressing this idea and thus disarming it.

“You're wrong, old man." Tsezar was saying, good-naturedly. "Objectively, you will have to admit that Eisenstein is a genius. Surely you can't deny that Ivan the Terrible is a work of genius? The dance of the masked oprichniki! The scene in the cathedral!"

Kh-123's spoon stopped short of his mouth. "Bogus" he said angrily. "So much art in it that it ceases
to be art. Pepper and poppy seed instead of good honest
bread. And the political motive behind it is utterly
loathsome--an attempt to justify a tyrannical individual.
An insult to the memory of three generations of the Russian intelligentsia!” (He was eating his gruel without savoring it. It wouldn't do him any good.)

"But would it have got past the censor if he'd handled
it differently?"

"Oh well, if that's what matters... Only don't call him
a genius--call him a toady, a dog carrying out his master's
orders. A genius doesn't adjust his treatment of a theme
to a tyrant's taste." (p. 85)

But, oh, I’m wrong, since in the second half of the book Solzhenitsyn addresses the following Soviet crimes.
(1) Stalin’s absurd collectivization plan and the extermination of the kulaks; (2) construction of the White Sea Canal with prison labor; (3) the capricious manner in which sentences for the Gulag were handed out, having absolutely no basis in truth but created simply for the purposes of exiling perceived enemies. (Ivan Denisovich was given ten years for being a German spy — he wasn’t; he had simply been briefly captured — yet on his repatriation he was made to sign a confession acknowledging his treachery.) (4) prison life in Siberian exile; (5) The Great Terror, a series of show trials in Moscow in the 1930s which Stalin used to purge (have shot) fellow Bolsheviks