Rating: 5/5

If I could give this book more than 5 stars I would. As someone relatively new to gardening (of the non-vegetable variety), this book has provided me with a well-detailed guide on perennial garden design, installation, and maintenance, as well as plant selection. I am utterly thrilled at having found this book and cannot recommend it highly enough.

My husband and I purchased our first house a little over a year ago and with it came an over planted tropical mess of a front yard and a blank canvas of a backyard. For the past year, I have been scouring websites, gardening blogs and other books trying to find a good source of both starter information and more detailed expert advice to help walk me through changing these into fairly low-maintenance gardens that better fits my husband and my own preferences. I really haven't been able to find a source that has everything in one place. Some sources are far too advanced, while others are too basic and most don't go into enough detail on exactly why and how you need to do certain things. I've been relying on reading new bits of information from one source and then having to look up the techniques or plants that they mention from new/additional sources in order to have a full understanding of the topic. It has been exhausting and overwhelming trying to keep everything straight, especially as I am essentially teaching myself how to do this and I do not personally know any local seasoned gardeners which I can ask for advice or help from. Tracy Disabato-Aust's book The Well-Tended Perennial Garden is exactly the book I have been looking for. 

To start, this book is exceptionally thorough. The first 130 pages cover designing, planting and maintaining your garden. For each of these, she does a really nice job breaking down each topic and she does it in a way that I think would be understandable and enjoyable to both new and seasoned gardeners. She covers the basics of a topic and then if more detail is needed, it is usually explained further in the book either in a chapter specifically covering that topic in more detail or in the Encyclopedia documenting that topic in relation to specific plants. 

I was pleased to find that Pruning --something that has always confused and intimidated me-- is covered extensively in this book with nearly 50 pages devoted to the topic. That's not including the individual pruning recommendations which are listed for each plant in her Perennial Encyclopedia. I found the illustrations in this section really helpful and I liked how she covered not only deadheading but also pinching, disbudding, thinning, and dead-leafing. She doesn't just go over these topics in general but also goes into detail in relation to different plant types and the different times of year you should do this for each plant type and what kind of seeding will happen if you decide not to do this. I found her suggestions of staggering the pruning of different sections of the same plant type in order to create a layered effect really interesting.

The wonderfully detailed Encyclopedia of Perennials section is 250+ pages long; covering the look, size, light requirements, blooming period, growing zone, and specific pruning and care recommendations for a large number of plants. Almost every single plant listed is accompanied by a gorgeous photograph at the plants' peak growing/blooming period. The only thing I would change out of this whole book would be to add some more images to the section on grasses. For some reason, this is the only part of the book where the majority of species listed do not have an image - perhaps because many look so similar? I have found in general that the amount of care information that she had listed for each plant far exceeds that which you would find on nursery websites for specific plants. This has made it really convenient to start making a list of usable plants. I've already covered this section in post-it notes for potential plants which we can use in our garden. Also she includes a lot of care information which is clearly based off of her own experiences growing that exact plant. You can really tell that she has been doing this for quite some time now and has she has included many of the things she has learned from trial and error. 

Ending the book, DiSabato has compiled helpful lists which reference plants which share similar levels of maintenance. For example, she has lists for Perennials that don't need deadheading, Perennials that tolerate dry soil, Perennials that don't respond well to pinching, Perennials that require maintenance in the Summer, etc. The most helpful section to me is where she has listed common maintenance requirements based upon the month of the year. This is something I have tried to find on various websites that could help me keep an eye out for gardening tasks which I might overlook since I am still new to gardening. Most require you to pay some sort of fee but honestly, I'm happy enough to reference this book. 

And lastly, one of my favorite things about this book is that it is filled with beautiful photographs and illustrations. I think every single spread has at least one photograph or illustration. In addition to helping demonstrate the things that she is talking about it also helps break up the book from having too much copy. At no point did I feel like I was reading something super text heavy which I find with nonfiction books can really make a book drag. I read the entire book cover to cover with the exception of the Encyclopedia plants outside of my growing zone (9b) over the span of two afternoons. 

Someone on a random forum mentioned this book in passing and I am so glad that I looked it up. I read the third edition of this book which was published in 2017. I haven't read any of the other previous versions so I can't compare the differences for someone who might already own it and is considering buying the updated version. I'm also fairly new to gardening from a landscaping perspective so I can't tell you if this book is all it's cracked up to be for someone who might already know the basics and is looking for something more extensive. I am hoping to revise this review after I've actually had time to try designing and planting my own garden based off of the information in this book.