As many of my generation were, I was a fan of this movie and only recently became aware of the fact that it was a book first. I was pleasantly surprised to find how comfortable and engaging the prose is and I felt like it gave a more nuanced and complex viewpoint of the story. 

The book is written by Fred Waitzkin, Josh’s father who is portrayed by Joe Montegna in the film. While Montegna’s performance is great, as usual, the movie really does a disservice to Waitzkin, who is much more engaged with chess than the viewers get from the screenplay. In the book, he writes about being drawn to chess after being captivated by the Fischer-Spassky match of 1972. While he wasn’t a player on the level his son would reach, in the movie he is portrayed as basically knowing how the pieces move and the basic rules. In reality, his knowledge is far greater. He has actually written an entire book on Kasparov, one I’m planning on checking out. 

My favorite part of the book was left out of the film altogether. In 1985, Fred, Josh and his coach Bruce Pandolfini traveled to the Soviet Union so that Fred could cover the world championship match between Kasparov and Karpov. While in Russia, they try to track down a Soviet grandmaster who had been placed under house arrest for wanting to emigrate from the country. There are moments of this endeavor that almost read like a spy novel as father and son try to keep out of the scrutiny of the KGB, all while trying to gain access to the championship match and while trying to help Josh develop his chess skills. 

I get that for the purposes of a movie, things have to be simplified and shrunk down and this was just one aspect that fell by the wayside. I’m not going to say that this changes my view of the movie. It’s just a reminder that whenever you have a film inspired by real events, it’s always good to keep in mind that in the interests of making an exciting story on film, reality often gets a bit distorted. Searching For Bobby Fischer is a great movie. So don’t go to the book if you are looking for the same thing. But the book is a fascinating read. Some great observations on the challenges and pressures faced by child prodigies. Of the challenges and pressures faced by being a parent of a prodigy. It also provides an interesting glimpse at the world of chess and the variety of different personalities that are drawn to the game. 

I do wish that at some point, Waitzkin had written an updated epilogue of sorts to this book. Many might be unaware, but Josh no longer plays chess, in fact he made the decision to walk away from it at a pretty young age and since then has been actively involved in competitive martial arts. It would be interesting to see his fathers perspective on that stage of their lives.