Rating: 3/5

Okay If a Bit Anachronistic and Slow

As somebody who came to Regency romances from the work of Georgette Heyer, it's tempting to think that writing one is easy: Take one initially cool but secretly passionate nobleman, a smart innocent young lady of good breeding, add a bunch of usually humorous complications during her London Season, blend in dialogue and scenery from Jane Austen, bake until golden brown and delicious! Unfortunately, as too many authors attempting to follow in Heyer's footsteps have proven, there's an art and artistry to writing a good regency that few can match, a blend of assiduous research of the period, and a feel for the attitudes and mores of the time, that seem to escape even good historical writers. Brenda Hiatt comes a lot closer than most, and largely doesn't embarrass herself, but there is a certain ingredient missing the keeps her work from reaching the lofty heights of VENETIA, THE GRAND SOPHY, or even ARABELLA which this novel most closely resembles.

There's also, as my title for this review points out, the anachronisms. Not so much in things like clothing or style, but choices for men and women of the minor aristocracy which these stories are about. Gabriella, like her father before her and her young brother, are veterinarians, and her father had promised Brie (Gabriella's nickname) she would become his partner once she came of age - 

Wait? WHAT?!?!?

Let's unpack that bit of intelligence, given to us in Plot-Point Conversation in Chapter One: 

- Gabriel Gordon, Gabriella's father, the younger son of a Viscount and thus a Right Honorable (who would inherit if his older brother died without issue), works as a veterinarian - in Regency England, at a time when human doctors were largely considered skilled tradesmen on the order of a silversmith (anathema to any member of the gentry or nobility - the term "shop-stained" comes to mind), let alone the "animal midwifery" of a veterinary practice. 

- Mr. Gordon (he wouldn't be considered "Dr. Gordon" back then unless he was a Physician who worked on humans) offered to take his younger daughter on as partner in his veterinary practice - his 
  daughter
, who by the conventions of the time was usually expected to marry well enough to improve the family's fortunes. If the family was well-educated but not wealthy enough to afford a good dowry, then the daughter might alternately take employment in a "suitable profession for a Lady of Quality" - Tutor, Governess, or Lady's Companion, 
  not
 working with animals like a common tradesman! 

Note the "man" as the end of that word - few women of any class in this time period, or any until very recently, worked a trade. Some women of the trade or merchant class might have worked alongside their father or husband at his trade and done well enough to de facto run the business, but nobody in that time period would have ever trusted a woman who openly ran it on her own. She would have had to use her father, husband, brother or son as the business's "official" male face. 

This happened rather a lot until the last half the 20th Century - my best friend's mother caused quite a scandal in the early 1960s when she stepped away from her father's importing business to open her own interior decorating one.

Our heroine has a beautiful, spoiled, self-centered sister, Angela, who married a nobleman and generously offered

to give Brie her long-overdue London Season - which she doesn't want anyway, wanting to live in Gloucestershire among the animals and world of elements. Nonetheless, at her mother's insistence, she agrees to go to London, sure she'll never find a husband, and will be able to return home where she feels safe and comfortable. Stopping at an inn on the road to London, she spies an abused horse which is the property of the Duke of Ravenham, finds him preparing for a seduction, and tears into him about his treatment of animals! What she doesn't know (though we find out almost immediately) is the Duke purchased the horse from a tinker 
  he
 caught abusing it, since he's a much an animal-lover as she is - of course, since she's dressed casually he assumes 
  she
 is just a serving-wench with no understanding of the proper way to treat her betters, rather than A Woman of Quality and Breeding! 

Yes, the Eyerolls Will Come Thick &amp; Fast...

Once arriving in London, Brie embarrasses her status-conscious sister with talk of working for her late Father's veterinary practice 

Maybe I, or the Author, Exaggerate That 'Woman of Quality &amp; Breeding' Part

and her gowns are hopelessly out-of-fashion. But that's okay, because her Brother-in-Law, Lord Platt, is a drunk and a gambler and Angela (a flirt with a long string of admirers!) suspects cheating on her, to boot!

Anywho… There's a bet Ravenham loses which results in his having to introduce Gabriella into the Ton (London Polite Society), which is how they end up getting thrown together; there's the reveal where she discovers the Warm Animal Lover Under the Stickler Aristocrat; there's a villainous reprobate to provide The Misunderstanding -

It's been a while, but I once went into a screed in a review about how much I 
  hate
 The Misunderstanding as a romance plot twist: You know, where the Heroine/Hero misunderstands something s/he saw or heard, assumes the worst of the Man/Woman s/he's Starting to Fall in Love With, so the Woman/Man, heartbroken, vanishes for a time until The Truth Is Uncovered, Apologies, Declarations of True Love, HEA.

  

Tom Jones  is Where I Encountered This Trope For the First Time, But Since It's Played For Laughs There It Obviously Predates the Novel By a Long Chalk!

Because it's a Regency Romance, of course it all ends Happily Ever After, but the character and behavior of the older sister Angela, the betrayal of Brie's emotions by both her and Ravenham, and other nastier elements of the story artlessly added left a bit of a sour taste in my mouth - not enough to rate this as below average, but just enough to think when 
  
 Heyer died, they broke the mold. 
_____
(My thanks to Alicia Rasley's monograph, "Doctors in the Regency", available at the Romance Writers of America's The Beau Monde website.)