Rating: 4/5

To Guy Pringle nothing out side of Guy Pringle is especially important. To his new wife, Harriet, after a fast romance and being whisked off to Romania just in time for Europe to live , front row in the the Phoney War, there are things happening or at least might happen, but they are remote, as is her new husband.

And so with the so slow moving, English to its last cuppa tea, Fortunes of War trilogy by Olivia Manning. The notes on the book insist that this is autobiographical but one has to wonder to just what degree?
Against the fact that nothing happens, besides war, invasions, threats of invasions, another invasion the occasional assassination, program, local death and resurrection of fascism, collapse of the economy, taking with it the fun of café society, the steady arrival of war’s refugees, and the shredding of one, it used to be the Tsars, Sable winter coat. But all of this business is remote, somewhere over there, and hardly as important as the loss of a cat. Ok Now, a trigger warning, a cat dies; off page. And a lot of horses are underfed, also a lot of people, but I think the trigger warnings do not count human misery. 

Our newly weds live around the work of the husband, a university lecturer who is paid for by “The Organiztion” which could not have sounded as arch when the books were written. Their mission seems to be little more than to prove that England is there, along side of its friends even if friends, with or without England are helpless against the soon to be arriving German Army. Hey kids, lets put on a Play, Shakespeare of course!

That Guy is at once deliberately oblivious to his wife, her needs and worries, the facts of what is happening just out side of his classroom, or eating places, and a total dupe to the dream of Communism seeing Communist Russia as a protector and a happy example of what the future should be… Non spoiler alert, we and Ms. Manning know better. At yet Harriet tells us over and over that there is much good in the man. We can conclude that she is really telling all of this to herself, but she is insightful enough that she does make a case.

Around this couple is a vast array of people, almost none of whom would any reader want to spend over 900 pages watching and listening too. In this I include ‘Poor Yaki, Russian émigré Prince Yakimov. All digestive system and ego, a man of the most transient loyalties, no real dis loyalties and who is the sincere follower of whoever stands him to the kind of food to which he is accustomed. Think Falstaff, with zero warrior or leadership skills.

And yet, and Yet. Author Olivia Manning manages all these wrong-footed, self-centered people, all this waiting for the war to get real and so many pages of so little, and I could Not Stop Reading. The woman writes well. Fore knowledge of the actual history means that there can only be trivial events in a list of spoilers. I wanted to read every word. Real people lived through the real Phony War not in the paragraph a history book might give to these months. The Pringles and associates lived it one day at a time. One rumor, one change in the political context one less degree of personal safety. Then the war reaches Bucharest, just in time for them to fee to the safety of Greece. Greece? Safety? Umm Waiter, more Raki, Retsina, or whatever it is that Yaki is drinking, please.