Rating: 5/5

CITY OF BEADS is #2 in the TubbyPalooza series, and it's another doozie. I wandered through New Orleans several times in my misspent youth and loved everything about it. And these books bring back, in glowing flavor, the food - man, I miss the food! There is nothing anywhere else like it, and it's everywhere down there. But just wandering along with the story through those lovely old streets is a trip. Reading this series I can see and smell it again. On my bucket list, but I'm moving it up. And City of Beads has a lot of other treats for us - this is a fine tale, told very well, and the folks involved are well-defined and for the most part likable. 

Lawyer Tubby Dubonnet has an ex-wife and three growing daughters to maintain as well as his own home and office and life. With the eldest girl Debbie entering college and the old house needing repairs, money is going to be tight for a time. And then comes a job with the new mob-controlled casino and it seems straight-forward enough. They want to open some food and alcohol stalls on the decking outside around the River-side casino and need to make sure they are covered with state licensing for food and alcohol sales outside of the building. The pay is remarkable. Not to mention the hot chick who is assistant to the manager he will work under. He has other possibly volunteer cases - working with his oldest daughter Debbie's environmental group about the water pollution in the river, some originating at the city dock, and trying to settle the estate of an old friend, Potter Aucoin, who was an importer and distributor of vegetable oil in a leased building and property, also on the city dock. The coroner is sure Potter was killed by a blow to his head - before he was dropped into the barge full of peanut oil. He had no oil in his lungs. Not something you want to think about but it might help his wife handle the death in a better way. All pretty innocent work. What can go wrong?

A great deal. Other people begin to die in strange and ominous ways. Before long, Tubby is running for his very life and very afraid for his daughter Debbie as well. But even a man fearing his own extinction has to eat... 
REVIEWED on February 22, 2025, at Goodreads, AmazonSmile, and BookBiub.