Rating: 3/5

This series has been on my To Be Read list for a few years. My interest in boats and sailing together with my love of historical fiction prompted me to finally start reading on the anniversary of my first year of living on a boat, travelling around the world. I wasn't sure what to expect exactly, I try not to read blurbs and it had been a while since I had seen the hollywood movie Master and Commander and trust, as with most adaptions, it doesn't really give you an indication of what the book will read like. I found the writing style to my liking, but I had a hell of a time with the terminology. Not just the boating and navigation and weaponry, but also a little with ye old english.

The story and characters are set up quite well, we get an overview of Jack Aubrey's career background and are introduced to two key other players, James Dillon and Stephen Maturin. I loved the growing antagonism between James and Jack and this created an element of mystery and anticipation of how things might end in book one. I'm not afraid of possible spoilers here, obviously Jack Aubrey has big story to be told, there are a number of books to follow, so I was patient with the setup of the dynamics between the crew. Stephen and James on the other hand seem to have an almost [plutonic] love at first sight. They commit to each other almost without thinking anything through and have a respectful and trusting relationship throughout the first book. 

With respect to the war strategies, naval components of the story, I will leave to be reviewed by those in the know, who can comment on the accuracy of the ships descriptions, the attack and defence strategies. I look forward to reading one a month until this series is finished. At least from the title of the series, I know that Jack and Stephen will be constants throughout.

Notes on the Audiobook:
When you read a book that everyman and his dog has already read and the whole world thinks is the ants pants in nautical storytelling, there's a certain expectation that you will 'get-it' once you start reading. Well, this was not the case for me, I had a lot of trouble with the language, terminology and pronunciations of the words. I found an audiobook version and this helped immensely, not just with the reading, but because the narrator was just fantastic and helped me to enjoy the book so much more.