Rating: 4/5

The trouble was not cruelty on her part, for she remained as good-natured as ever; it was as if a wind of madness were blowing ever more strongly through the closed bedroom. Lust deranged their brains and plunged them into the delirious fantasies of the flesh. The old pious terrors of their sleepless nights now turned into a thirst for bestiality, a mania for walking on all fours, growling and biting.

It's easy to see how controversial and shocking this book must have been on publication in 1880, not least for the way in which it side-steps more sentimental versions of the love-lorn courtesan such as we see in Violetta from La Dame aux camélias and immortalised in La Traviata. Nana is quite different. 

The daughter of Gervaise, the poor laundress from L'Assommoir, she is a child of the Parisian streets: uneducated, vulgar, yearning for the glittering luxury and material possessions that attract her through the rich shop windows. She is also beautiful - magisterially, almost supernaturally beautiful - and endowed with a kind of sexual charisma that drives men mad. Propelled from the theatre stage into the bedrooms of Parisian men, Nana feeds their frenzy as 'the Golden Fly' while also corrupting and being corrupted through the symbiotic co-dependency that results.

Zola's research, as usual, is immaculate and the portraits of the world of the theatre, the press, and the demi-monde is fascinating of itself. Great set pieces include the opening night of a hit show (and it's easy to trace the significance of that lampooning tableau of Venus and Mars caught in Vulcan's net through the story to follow), and a chapter where all of Paris is at the races. This is not a book for readers who need to like characters in order to enjoy a book: everyone is mired in self-interest, and the connections between power, sex and money are front and centre of the text. 

For all that, Nana herself is the closest thing to the anti-heroine of this tale: she is selfish and sometimes venial, greedy for luxury and things... but what else can she be as the product of her society? She is also good-natured and sometimes kind; she takes a kind of child-like pleasure in her own beauty and she is under no delusions that she is a good stage performer. She exploits all men but she can also be kind to them; but when she herself takes pleasure, it's with a woman. 

Surprisingly, rereading this made me think of Undine Spragg from Wharton's The Custom of the Country - though made wealthy through legitimate marriage, Undine, too, is never able to find contentment, constantly searching for the next triumph, the next diamond necklace, the next priceless painting to adorn her fashionable walls. Each woman, Nana and Undine, seeks to fill an undefined and little understood yearning with material objects, and can't understand why that hunger is never appeased. 

Gratifyingly grubby, scathing and quite explicit in its exposure of the moral climate of the Second Empire, this is both coolly analytical and quite a page-turner.