Rating: 4/5

The thing is, it's such a bizarre book, and unpleasant, but so thought-provoking. Jeffrey Eugenides proclaims in the forward that there's nothing like it (though I think Edward Scissorhands, which came out a few years before Mr. Robinson, has quite a bit of the same energy, if considerably sweeter). Antrim has taken the quotidian world and just twisted it a tiny, tiny bit, enough to set it askew, with bits spinning off into insanity. So everything feels familiar (at least if you've lived in the US suburbs, to which all of this is very particular). It's depressing and stifling, a world of bland housing developments with aspirational street names, hobbies, and sad neighborhood infidelities. At the same time, everything's really, really off in suburbia, represented in the background by literal storms on the horizon and the steady rise of putrid waters in sinks and cellars, and foregrounded in, among other things, the neighbors' aggressive paranoia and creative defensive solutions. The same is true for the narrator, who sees himself, his feelings, and all of his actions as wholly sensible, describing them calmly and with some enthusiasm and pride, while we, reading along, clearly see how warped he is. While Eugenides finds Mr. Robinson sympathetic, I found him grotesque from the start, making the book hard to read and harder to enjoy. That said, the tiny twisting is ingeniously done. It's a very effective version of dystopia, a chilling jovial, suburban version where what's normal has been allowed to slide just beyond where we are now, into something cheerfully nightmarish (asking us, of course, if we're already there). And Mr. Robinson, too, is cheerfully nightmarish, a monster who sees himself as a savior within the confines of his community. A major theme of the book is education, but here, education, books, learning, and teaching are misused and abused; Antrim seems to be saying that the whole architecture of knowledge and thought can be as destructive as it is instructive or productive. The book, though short, speaks to a lot. There are bits that give pause about the normalcy, the banality, of war. Mr. Robinson presents his perverse and even horrifying sexual thoughts as unexceptional, understandable proclivities. Humans' connections to nature are investigated and challenged. Ultimately, I didn't enjoy reading this book (it's stomach-churning, it's like realizing you've been swimming in a pool with a dead thing at the bottom), but it's amazingly effective, making us as readers question what we accept as normal. It kept reminding me of a time I visited a colleague's house. He was showing me around with great pride, but I had to step carefully, because there were dog droppings everywhere - not just outside on the pavement leading to the house, where they were profuse, but inside the house as well. He chuckled at them and then blithely went on, pointing out the home's delights; this book felt like an amplification of that.