Rating: 5/5

We may well oppose Plato's philosophy, but no one will deny the exceptional power with which he exteriorized it. And right in the heart of this sublime work, the characters of the first alphabet with vowels shine like never before in the dialogue devoted to love that is "The Banquet."
The festive atmosphere in which the discussion takes place gives the reader a feeling of freshness and lightness as he witnesses a debate on some of the most severe and profound subjects, such as love, the meaning of life, Beauty, and the Good. Moreover, as it has been so aptly said, "In vino veritas." For each of the guests (except for Socrates, whose spirit is always the freest), the nature unbound by the wine will express itself there in all frankness and with more flexibility and ingenuity than it would usually do.
In the continuity of the Apology, Plato presents a perfectly chaste Socrates at his Banquet who in no way corrupts youth. On the contrary, the interruption of the discussion by Alcibiades makes it possible to show all the falsity of this accusation made against Socrates at his trial since the latter, disdaining even the body of the prettiest of young men in Athens, never pretends to seduce young people, only to make them give birth to their best spiritual and moral possibilities.
On the level of the speech, Plato also realizes in his reader the same maieutic phenomenon that Socrates practiced in the streets of his city. He knows that no one can rise to morality if presented directly, but that by skillfully enticing the reader with aesthetic and light speeches, the love of Good will come to crown it all naturally. His apparent eulogy of the Dionysiac is thus gradually transformed into, and indeed becomes, a complete triumph of Apollonian principles.
What an admirable success this Banquet!
Plato remains, moreover, the only author of Antiquity whose entire work has come down to us (to the extent that we put aside the hypotheses on an esoteric work that he would have distributed only among the walls of the Academy).
A true star in the sky of philosophy, but also of morality and art, Plato remains eternally present from the moment he dictated or wrote his dialogues himself, passing through the many hands of copyists and translators, then through printing presses to digital formats, from around 380 BC until today, almost 2500 years later, it continues to serve as magnificently as a landmark in the spiritual and human horizon.