Rating: 5/5

The continuing saga of the Poldarks of Cornwall just got even more complex and involved in the 3rd installment of Jeremy Poldark and I loved it! Picking up right where book 2 left off, Ross and Demelza are suffering a great loss and Ross finds himself in the midst of a trial being accused of inciting a riot when two ships ran aground and the local folks rush to salvage the wrecks. He is near bankruptcy and his future looks very bleak with the mine closure and his rival, George Warleggan breathing down his back constantly looking for ways to bring Ross down. On top of all of this, the Poldarks - Ross &amp; Demelza, Francis &amp; Elizabeth, Verity - are still struggling to work through various issues and personal slights and snubs from the past. Our power couple goes through a rough patch as most couples who are in love do and find themselves not able to communicate properly causing much unnecessary anguish and anxiety. 

Resentment and bitterness and old grudges were dead things that rotted the hands that grasped them.

Dwight Enys, the eligible bachelor doctor demonstrates his heart for helping the poor and destitute folks of the community. We get a look at the struggles with medicine at this time and just how difficult it was to help those who were sick due to lack of supplies or poor sanitary conditions. Dwight meets one of my favorite characters, the alluring and tantalizing Caroline Penvenen and her little pug, Horace. She add lots of spice to the mix as she makes an impression on Dwight.

After supper he sat for a while in his bedroom reading a medical book, but the willful Miss Penvenen and her doings kept intervening. She existed at the corner of his eye, in the depths of his ear, in the back of his mind.

As I get deeper and deeper into the story, I am growing so much more attached to these people that I have to keep reading. These books have been so much fun to read and I know it’s really an 18th century soap opera at its finest, but I don’t care. I will keep rooting for my favorites and keep hoping the villains get their due. I already know how it ends, as I’ve seen the PBS series, but I’m really happy that I’ve taken the time to go back and enjoy the lives of my favorite Cornish family in written form.

Some of my favorite quotations:

It was one of the few comforting factors in Demelza’s excursions into society, this faculty she had of pleasing men. She did not see it yet as power, only as a buttress to faltering courage.

About Ross - He was a man of moods, yet he was her constant, something unchanging, infinitely reliable, the pivot of her life. There could never be anyone else. Without him she would not be more than half alive.

There are no permanent things, only fleeting moments of warmth and companionship, precious stationary seconds in a flicker of troubled days.

About Demelza Maybe it’s because I’m from common stock, but I want the home about me: candles burning, curtains drawn, warmth, tea, friendship, love. Those are what matter to me.