Rating: 5/5

Second Read:

This is not technicaly the second book, but it caught my eye because its one of the few that I don't have in the crime line edition. I searched high and low to see if I could buy one and took a flyer on one without a cover picture and the wrong publication date in the listing. It's a good condition copy though so I read that edition instead of the very old, and falling apart one I also have. This is also one of my favorites.

For being early in the Nero Wolfe body of work it is astoundingly well written. I've got favorite authors and it is often not hard to see their skill growth from early novels to later ones. Stout had been writing for magazines (not the pulps he was proud to say) and only turned to mysteries after a number of other successful novels. Dramas, often with the theme of rational man conflicted by passionate emotions. Flavors of this can be found in the Nero Wolfe books too. Nero is, of course, the most rational of men, and Archie similarly passionate. 

The reason this book is one of my favorites is the presence of a woman in the New York brownstone home of Wolfe. A client but one that he is worried will be killed if she shows herself on the street. It starts well enough, with Nero establishing a routine that will both keep her out of public view, but also mostly out of his view. But soon enough that routine falls apart as the events of the mystery are unfolded until at the end the entire household is in an uproar. The end effect of this unease gives the reader a profound feeling of relief when the mystery is unfoled in classic Wolfe style and everyone knows they can go their own ways and the brownstone will return to long standing peaceful routines.

I started #4, The Red Box by mistake and when it referenced a Rubber Band case I realized I was reading them out of order. So I put that one down and picked up The Rubber Band instead. 

Stout begins to hit the familiar rhythms of Nero Wolfe stories. Archie is made much smarter in this one than he was in book 2. In order to preserve the mystery exposure until Nero can make his final pronouncement Stout has Archie off doing other things while Nero learns something important. As cheesy as that sounds it works well because of the strenght of the characters and they unique flavor that each one of them bring to the story.

One of the conventions of all the stories is the unique voices Nero and Archie both have. With no other context hints I'll bet fans can pick out which person said what given exemplar lines of dialog. Nero is always pompus and erudite. Archie is always blunt and wry. The other characters also have their own voices too, but it's the strenght of the characterizations of Nero and Archie that makes these stories work.

Now... on to really read #4