Rating: 3/5

Reading this book was both fascinating and frustrating. 2.75 ⭐️ rounded up to 3⭐️ for GoodReads

One of the things that needs to be clear to the reader before starting, is that this work was a PhD dissertation turned into a book. Why is it important? Because the intended audience of a dissertation and a trad-published book are not the same. A dissertation is to be read by peers with extensive knowledge of the topic/era discussed. A trad-published book, on the other hand, should be assumed that it can be picked up by any random Joe who might stumble upon it in a library or bookstore. 

With this in mind, sometimes this book can be hard to understand if you do not have extensive knowledge of the time period. In my studies and work, I am used to reading academic papers and work, so I didn't find the tables, and other statistical aspects, hard to grasp. But for someone who has no prior experience, this might be complicated. The hard part for me was that there was very little introduction to societal/cultural settings for the random reader.

I picked up this book out of curiosity, being a non-American, I probably know even less about that time period. Unfortunately, Karlsen assumes that the reader HAS to know, and dives straight into her analysis. You can piece together things here and there in the different chapters. After all, Karlsen argument is that the Witch Trials can very much be explained through religious, economic, and political aspects of society at the time. However, her arguments feels, at times, like it's going in circles.

I also had some issues with her arguments particularly when discussing Tituba, the indigenous woman from Barbados who was a slave. She is the only occurrence mentioned by Karlsen of a non-white being accused of witchcraft and does not try to examine how her arguments just didn't apply to people who do not fit the mold created by Karlsen. These weaknesses in her arguments were also present when she discussed males accused of witchcraft. While she underlines the double standard between the propensity of males to be trialed as opposed to women, or for trialed men to be found guilty as opposed to women. She does not seem to apply the same standards to them.

Overall, this book was interesting but lacked the accessibility that trad-published books should have. Adding an extra chapter on context, I think, would have made it so much better. Moreover, the structure could have been reworked into shorter chapters as opposed to the 40+ pages chapters that can be highly intimidating for non-academic readers.