Rating: 5/5

The 1979 science-fiction novel “Jesus on Mars” by the wonderful Philip Jose Farmer is set in 2015. One of the biggest differences with the real 2015 is that Farmer did not foresee the collapse of communism, therefore many communist countries are still around in his 2015, while in today's reality communism is limited to a sad shortlist of pretty sad governments (aside from China, but nobody with open eyes would say that today's China represents "communism").

So, what about this bizarre title? 

Well, the novel is actually about ... Jesus. On Mars. Yes. Sounds trashy, right? 

Hold on, because this is not trash!

Let me try to recap: four Earth astronauts – Orme (Christian) Bronski (Jew) Shirazi (Muslim) and Danton (atheist) - are sent to Mars to explore a mysterious artifact, that looks like it could be part of a spaceship. 

They are soon “captured” by an alien race called Krsh, living below the Martian surface. 

After not long, they realize that this vibrant alien Krsh society is made of some aliens and some terrestrials who were picked up by the aliens in 50 AD. 

All of them, aliens included, are Orthodox Jews and Jesus Christ lives among them, in an glowing orb that hangs above them.

Bonkers enough yet? 

Well, the great thing about this novel is that, as ridiculous as the concept sounds, it’s actually written with great intelligence, wit, and with a solid understanding of monotheistic religions, especially Christianity and Judaism.

The references to proper theological tropes and religious history are many, although they never sound forced in. 

I’ll just add that, this being science-fiction, obviously the author’s preference ends up being for science, rather than for religion (as if the two were in conflict, which is wrong but almost no one understands that today). But the way Farmer weaved the religious topics into the adventurous SF plot is one of the best I’ve ever found in a SF book. 

If you’re interested in this sub-sub-genre, another great SF book that handles religious ideas with incredible style is “To open the sky” by Robert Silverberg.