Rating: 5/5

Wonderful, inspiring book by a down to earth guy who loved Jim Morrison a little too much!

Having been a lifelong Doors fan and having already read all the standard books, I assumed that this book was just going to be keyboard player Ray Manzarek's personal love letter to his friend Jim. I figured all it would be was a tribute to Jim's genius, and lots of feel-good stories that would put their relationship in a positive light. And I got that. But I got more. Much more. 

The irony is, Ray is on every human level a much more admirable character than Jim. The best part of this book is actually not when Ray is glorifying Jim and the Doors, but when he describes his own uniquely American journey.

I never knew before that Ray grew up in Chicago, or that his parents were tough, blue-collar Polish immigrants who encouraged him as an athlete, a musician, and a student. Where Jim Morrison was famous for insisting that "both my parents are dead" Ray does an amazing job of showing how his parents gave him the confidence and moral charcter to achieve fame but not be destroyed by it. 

For me the first few chapters of this book -- the Chicago chapters -- are the high point of the story. Ray brings his boyhood back to life. He shows what it was like in the days when working class white kids actually shared Chicago's South Side with blacks just arrived from the South. And he shows how learning classical piano did nothing to prevent young Ray from learning to master the blues as a young rocker.

The story goes downhill when Jim comes into the picture at UCLA. Ray's hero-worship is often unintentionally funny ("Jim looked like a movie star. I just knew he was gonna be president some day!") but also terribly sad. Ray is quite insightful about the hidden class conflicts, i.e. that Jim as a wealthy WASP had an allure and mystery that no Polish Catholic boy could ever match. Yet the irony that hangs over the whole book is that Ray is actually a far more admirable man than his "hero" Jim. 

LIGHT MY FIRE is a Doors classic -- even if Ray Manzarek is actually more interesting than the band he served so well.