Rating: 3/5

This is a true crime study of a dysfunctional though wealthy family who imploded in 1995 (when the book was first published). To outsiders, Doctor Debra Green was a devoted mother to three very smart and talented children and had a happy marriage to successful cardiologist Mike Farrah. Yet the reasons for her withdrawal from her career were more to do with her personality defects than a wish to be a full-time mother. She could not cope with even minor frustrations, often resorted to drugs or alcohol, and lashed out in furious fits of temper in which she would swear and abuse others, especially her husband. She also spoke inappropriately to the two eldest children, treating them as confidants and encouraging them to disrespect and finally to hate their father.

As a result of this he eventually turned to another woman who was also in an unhappy marriage, although in her case, her husband, also in the medical profession, was clinically depressed but refusing to seek treatment. Unfortunately the discovery of the affair tipped Debra over the edge, into attempted murder by a particularly nasty method and finally all out murder in a fit of rage. Naturally, she afterwards would accept no blame and even eventually accused the other woman.

Quite an interesting study, though the description of the two Kansas Cities at the beginning was needlessly complicated and confusing to a British reader. It took a while, but it eventually became clear that the city is built on two banks of the Missouri River, and one part is in the state of Kansas while the other part is in Missouri. The tragedy occurred in a prosperous part of the Kansas side, though I'm still unclear as to whether that's the north or south side. I also am not sure how the author was able to quote Debra verbatim when she wasn't able to even take in pencil and paper when allowed to see her for two four-hour interviews. She apparently dictated into a tape recorder immediately after each session, but to me that would be a phenomenal level of recollection. A minor irritation is that all the many photographs of the people involved in the case are printed on the actual pages in one section, instead of as plates, and are extremely faint in the reprint I obtained from the library.

Overall I would rate this at 3 stars.