Rating: 4/5

First glance at the book cover and I thought it was science fiction and '79 was the name of an aircraft that would crash on an undiscovered island, and the passengers would survive, and stuff like that. But, hell, no! It is what they call a "financial thriller". 
It begins with Bill Hitchcock, a successful banker, who is now in his place in California in 1984, and he's "putting on paper an account of what really happened in 1979".
The story is primarily set in Saudi Arabia and Iran, with a mild touch of America, Switzerland, and some other countries. It was actually written in 1976 and was published in 1977, but it somehow predicts the crash of the entire world, especially the Middle East and the US, as a result of a chain of evil decisions. 
This novel mostly revolves around finance, oil, politicians, and war, which might sort of slow you down, especially when it comes to numbers, calculations and some banking expressions. However, Erdman goes on with the plot so smoothly that at some point you think you are a middle-aged, retired banker reading your own diary!
Bill is hired by the Saudis to come to the rescue of their sinking ship of economy. And he goes for it rather passionately. Though he tries to sound cynic, he accepts it almost immediately, and continues the job till the very last minute. He meets different people and makes different moves that, all in all, pave the way for each of the steps he'd take next.
He is smart, but a little juvenile, if you ask me, when having extramarital affairs, though experienced in "the field" for more than 20 years or so. And now that he's divorced, the love he seeks for seems as childish. It happens too fast and too naively. So, don't expect a true romance here.
But, deeper into the story, what fascinated me was the allure of both Yamani, and the Shah of Iran. Their negotiation skills, their magnificent self-esteem and prudence. The power and wealth they were born in/with! However devilish, however fiendish, some people are born natural leaders.
But what really frightens me is the fact that how an individual can simply decide the destiny of a nation, or, at a larger scale, of the world, simply because he can!
I give this book 4/5 stars for it proved once again that politicians are like diapers, they must be changed often for the same reason.
At the end, I highly recommend it, especially if you are into this genre. It was worth every second I spent reading it.