Rating: 4/5

“I remember how my father held the last one by his feet so that blood would run to his head, but nothing happened. He died with his head caved in. All their heads sunk in after serious bouts of diarrhea; once diarrhea begins there’s no salvation. They all died before their first birthday.
Children die of dehydration only when they’re very little, since their bones are very soft, and if you’re not careful, they get diarrhea and the forehead sinks in.
Children go to heaven. That’s what the priest used to say. And we never worried. We always believed that.
Our only concern was that they might die suddenly, without having been baptized. Then it would be really bad.” 

“That business of intelligence has something to do with nutrition.” 

"What's important is to be aware that one is poor, that only that way will we become strong enough to claim, to demand that which we have a right to. Everything else is a farce. What we must always insist on is the rights of the poor. Machetes don’t move by themselves.”

“To respect one's neighbor was really to respect the landowner. And to respect the landowner was to conform to his whimsy. If there were no beans to eat after working on the plantation, it was because
the landowner couldn't manage, the landowner was suffering losses. If there were no hammocks to sleep in, it was because the harvest had not left the landowner enough time to provide them. And there we were without food, waiting for the afternoon or the evening to go home to eat, a whole day without eating; or we'd go to sleep under the pepetos trees in the coffee fields. The torture they put us through: anxiety and restlessness. Who had made the rich so evil?
The whole night we talked like this, both of us wrapped up in the same Guatemalan blanket.”

“There isn’t enough money to buy even a balm. That’s why it’s better to prefer home remedies, such as chicken fat, iguana lard, snake powders, guarumo leaves or fox lard. In sum, all those things that give children some relief, even though they say it’s better to get away from the custom of using things that are not from the drugstore. Well, in any event, there aren’t doctors around here. I, at least, and I thank the Lord, don’t know about doctors; I don’t know what they’re like. And they say there are rich folk that don’t know, or don’t want to know them doctors either, can you believe that? They say that even in the big cities with all them lights, still some people believe in the stars, yet they don’t send the medicine or the lights to us.”

“Poverty more than anything forces one to clarify a lot about life, but I was never able to understand a whole bunch of stuff. What we’ve got isn’t rebelliousness but awareness.”