Rating: 5/5

I hate self-help books. I find them preachy, and I find them privileged. They give me the shivers and they annoy me so I stopped reading them years ago ('the art of not giving a fuck' is what really sealed the deal for me). So read this review knowing that I hate self-help books and that I would never shelf this book under that category. 

Women Who Run With The Wolves did not change my life, like self-help books love to promise. It didn't change my life because it didn't tell me anything I didn't already know - and I mean that in the absolute best way possible. This book felt like a soul-call, a reminder of the ancient knowing that lives inside all of us. This book didn't change my life, but this book called me home. I have been struggling with a lot of collective female rage and trauma these past years. That feels weird to share here because it is deeply personal, but it's true: sometimes the suffering of all women throughout history and throughout the world today bears down on me so heavily I don't know what to do with myself. This book healed part of that wound for me. The pages wrapped me in their arms and said 'you are right to feel this way. You are right to question. You are right to feel angry. You are right to want to kick of your shoes, run barefoot through the trees and scream in internal rage from the top of a mountain'. 

If you ever felt that urge, you need to read this book. If you never felt that urge, you may feel it after reading this book. Or you may think 'wow, this sounds like the preaching of a cult', and quickly run the other way - I wouldn't blame you. But this book doesn't try to teach you something, it doesn't tell you what you need to be or how to live your life. It is rather an ode to women, an ode to wisdom, an ode to spirituality, an ode to nature, an ode to life and death and the cycles we live through. There is poetry in its wisdom, and it feels like lovingly being carried by the hands of generations of wise and wild women from all over the world.

It took me eleven months to finish this. This is not the type of book you read in one go and be done with it. This is a book to savour, to put away for a while, to come back to, to question, to underline, to ponder. It is dense, it is difficult, sometimes it is repetitive. If you feel the need to put it away for a few weeks or months, do so, and wait for its call again. 

“The doors to the world of the wild Self are few but precious. If you have a deep scar, that is a door, if you have an old, old story, that is a door. If you love the sky and the water so much you almost cannot bear it, that is a door. If you yearn for a deeper life, a full life, a sane life, that is a door.”