Rating: 5/5

Yes I did just give five stars to a war novel. What has gotten into me?

I loved this book. That's quite something, coming from a person of notoriously squishy sensibilities whose last encounter with what you might call a war novel was a required reading of The Killer Angels in tenth grade.

The writing was beautiful and poignant, the plot hooked me, the characters moved me, the well-researched historical details fascinated me. None of the characters is a wanton, laughing killer, as I think I'd feared I'd find in a war novel; in their own ways, they all recognize the gravity, terror, and tragedy of the war, but without being whiny or unrealistically philosophical. The relationship between Tania and Vasily is genuinely romantic - and it's the historical real deal, not something the author threw in, Hollywood-style. (Indeed, I've read that the movie added a love triangle - as if, "we're in the middle of wartime Stalingrad being hunted by a Nazi supersniper" isn't enough tension for the relationship.)

Interestingly - especially given that the author is a Jewish guy whose parents both served in WWII - none of the Nazis is shown as tied in any way to the specifically Nazi atrocities. There are no concentration camp scenes, no cold-blooded shooting of civilians outside the field of battle (except for in Tania's flashback to her grandparents' deaths), and almost no mention of Jews or Hitler's philosophy. Indeed, most of the few mentions of Hitler refer to him as the commander of the military forces, no more. All this, combined with the horrors of battle, made me really feel sorry for Nikki, the twenty-year-old German soldier who just wants to be back home on his dairy farm.

I loved the descriptions of the bombed-out Stalingrad, jagged and honeycombed and swarming with soldiers. The details of how the two armies worked - like the commissars who kept the Russian army toeing the Communist Party line, using newsletters, loudspeakers, and guns - also intrigued me.

There was a lot to like here. Don't read it if you can't handle some death and gore, but neither is gratuitous, and there's a lot more to the story than that. A fabulous book.