Rating: 4/5

I read this approximately 15-18 years ago after I met with Cynthia White Wolf Parker. Who was a well known speaker on the Native American experience in the early 20th Century. She had been born of White parentage only to be kidnapped by a Native American tribe in TX where her family had lived. She was located and returned by the gov't. to her parents but if I recall correctly she was kidnapped again and remained. She married a man within that tribe. 

I being fascinated by the people's who were once residents of FL. Though I graduated and was a "Florida Seminole", I learned next to nothing in High School and zilch in College. I started digging. Most of the tribes that once resided in Florida were either decimated in the various wars when Florida was a Spanish and later American colony, those who remained merged to preserve their way of life and survival. Little material has been published in the last forty or so years, this one is one that I was able to locate. I had no idea what I would learn. 

My memory isn't to hot, after a traumatic brain injury but I do remember a few highlights. As the slaves of the planters and landowners fled slavery's cruelty, some came south. The native people's were willing to allow them to participate in the community with some limitations. They were never considered equal. They were allowed to marry Seminole women particularly if there was a shortage of men from battle losses and participated in many ways, they were never fully assimilated. Many of these black Seminoles moved to Central Texas after slavery was ended. Years later when U.S. government awarded monies to tribe members compensation in a suit brought against the government for failure to honor a treatie(s?). Those who were part of the black Seminole group were denied the funds received by the tribe! To say that animosity and hostility grew among these members who were never fully equal is an understatement. I was deeply troubled by this arrangement and wonder who those involved sleep at night.