Rating: 4/5

I will also do a video review here at my channel: http://www.youtube.com/magicofbooks

"The Loving Cup" is book ten in Winston Graham's "Poldark" series. The war with Napoleon is coming to an end, and the lives of the Poldark and Warleggan children are just beginning. Coming to haunt Jeremy Poldark is a small cup, forcing him to think about the mistakes of his past and what kind of future he wants.

SPOILERS! We warned: the further I get into this series, the more spoilers I'm going to incorporate into my reviews. SPOILERS below.

Book 10 was so good! This particular book felt a lot like some of my favorites in the series before the big 10 year time jump. There's lots of drama. There's some shocking twists. Everybody is getting married it felt like. And that damn loving cup! I'm still upset with you Jeremy! So I'm just going to go into some of my random observations:

1. After I was pretty pleased that Clowance and Stephen broke up, Winston Graham pulls a fast one on me and has then get back together after Stephen gets severely sick and then proceed to get married. You know, I don't totally dislike Stephen, but he's made some pretty awful mistakes in the past and I have just never felt like he was the right choice for Clowance who needs someone a bit more stable and reliable.

2. More marriage! Cuby and Jeremy finally get married in the final pages of this novel. I'm curious where that's going. Will it work? Will it last? I'm worried about Cuby having regrets.

3. Shocking marriage! Valentine and Selina Pope! Where the hell did that one come from? I tell you what though, I freaking loved the twist though. The chapter where George and Valentine fight was seriously one of the best chapters in this book. So dramatic and intense. George totally loses his cool. And poor Ursula listening to the whole thing in another bedroom, not sure what's even going on.

4. The coach robbery still has an effect. Well, I sure hope it does! I was worried Graham would brush it aside, but it's a very big deal. Some of the notes that were stolen were left out of the newspaper article with the ploy of drawing out the robbers. George uses this as an attempt to try and lure out the robbers through a party and by inviting Arthur Williams Rose to the party since he'd be able to identify the robbers. By total coincidence, he just happens to die and Jeremy and Stephen skate right by that incident without even realizing what they've escaped. And I really loved the function of the loving cup throughout the novel. It's the one item that was stolen that nobody knows what to do with it, and it remains this omen, especially to Jeremy, and especially after Demelza starts putting some oddities together and begins to suspect what her son has done. The chapter with Demelza going down the rotting ladder where the stolen goods are was so intense! I was worried she was going to fall or die.

5. I loved the amount of Geoffrey Charles in this book. Since the time jump we've barely gotten any time with him, so I loved spending some quality time with him and getting to know his new wife.

6. Finally, a confrontation between Morwenna and her estranged son John Conan. I was just thankful to have a bit more of Drake and Morwenna in this book. I liked hearing her point of view, her continuing struggles despite Ossie being long dead and John Conan was just a reminder of those struggles.

Overall, really loved this book! There was just a lot about it that reminded me of some of my other favorite books in this series. These books are at their best when it's focusing on a lot of characters, there's lots of plot going on, and everything kind of ties in together in interesting ways. I only have two books left with the entire series and I'm anxious to know what's going to happen and what new craziness Winston Graham is going to give me.