Rating: 3/5

"'Consider, dear madam, I was famishing: wonder not that I became a wolf!'"

This book is comprised of two separate stories and I will give a brief review of each separately &lt;3 and then calculate the mean in order to exhibit 1) total fact and 2) my A+ in first year Statistics from 2023

Mary, A Fiction:

This one.....Mary Wollstonecraft, (English) mother of feminism, I'm so sorry this was the rougher one of the two novellas for the book to begin with crying emoji. It's a quick read theoretically since it's not long at all...but yo... Wollstonecraft's writing style is something that I needed to get used to, but it's not the part I struggled with. I just wasn't really compelled by the story itself or the protagonist. As a novel of sensibility, I get that the female protagonist is meant to be physically and mentally fragile, susceptible to intense emotion, and selfless to a fault. I also respect how Wollstonecraft somewhat challenges these assertions by introducing the importance of female education and being generally anti-(forced)marriage. But maybe novels of sensibility just aren't my thing, because I was truly fighting to get through this. 

It might also be because I was lowkey going through an existential crisis while I was reading this that I had nooooo motivation. 

I am giving Mary a two. Her character made my brain numb and indifferent and that makes me sad :( 

The Wrongs of Woman, or Maria:

I had been set on not reading Maria at all because, like I said, I was in a very detached headspace and did not have a good time with Mary. However, I found Maria to be a lot more engaging character-wise and writing-wise.

The biggest point of difference between the two stories is the overall tone. They are both heavily character-driven, but whereas Mary, both the story and the protagonist, feels like a wilted trampled flower, Maria is striking and jarring and more multifaceted. 

Maria leans more into the psychological and philosophical; as such, the asylum setting is very fitting and sets the tone of the story well. As its alternative title suggests—The Wrongs of Woman—this novel centres the oppressive conditions and resulting flaws of being a woman in the late 1700s. And the valid critiques against the novel's imperfect female characters (especially the tragic Jemima) untimely serve as criticism of the patriarchal society that creates such unfavourable circumstances for women. From a Romantic-era standpoint, Wollstonecraft acknowledges that women are as depraved as men push them to be (and of course, depravity mostly refers to sexual promiscuity [including for survival]). There is certainly more nuance to this in the novella, but this is the basic, recurring idea. Since I can see all of what Wollstonecraft criticizes about sexism and the patriarchy (though it wouldn't have been called that) being considered radical even now in the big 2025, ohhhhhhh I can only imagine how CRAZY it was back then. I can truly feel the passion of the author.

Going back to the madhouse setting, again I am so fascinated by the comparison between imprisonment and marriage/the restrictions placed upon wives. Or, more generally speaking, the restrictions placed on women. The atmosphere of the novel is pretty strong throughout, with the themes of the novel amplifying the suffocating setting. Having only finished Godwin's Caleb Williams shortly before reading this, I was extra tuned in to the exploration of evasion and the defiance of authority. 

Lastly, it's very fitting that as I write this, it is Mother's Day, because my favourite aspect of the narrative is Maria's being a mother and the fact that she is writing this story with the intent of her child (a DAUGHTER naturally) reading it and learning from it. I think knowing that this is Maria's motivation to record and discuss the darkest parts of her life adds soooo much meaning. Wollstonecraft unfortunately passed away before she was able to complete the story, but the vague outlines for the various possible endings are provided. As one can expect from the subject matter of her writing, Wollstonecraft does not shy away from telling grim stories since life for Maria especially isn't all peaches cream. BUTTT guys the ending that is most developed is much less devastating than the others and is therefore CANON TO ME. But yes, we all know I love stories about motherhood so I was very moved by Maria's words.

Since I am giving Maria a three, that means the average star rating for this book as a whole is 2.5. I was really close to officially logging this at 2, but I will round up to 3 because Wollstonecraft truly was a revolutionary. Happy Mother's Day &lt;3