Rating: 2/5

(Skip to the summary if you want to avoid spoilers, or if the review is too long) 

The story was interesting enough and it did grip me at times, I did find it fascinating to think about what would happen if a plague like that was discovered and spreading fast. 
However the characters were quite unlikeable which ruined the story for me - it seems as if we are meant to find the main doctor cool, but he disregards his daughter too much at the beginning for me to start liking him.. and he’s dating a 19 year old girl (Adelaide), closer to his daughters age, he even mentions how she’s still a kid herself. 

The other character, Ivor (I think?) is sleeping with his step daughter, he compares her to her mother as well, which is just wrong. I skipped the sex scenes because I felt uncomfortable imagining it. 

It seems as if the male characters are written to be “badass” and “cool” but I personally don’t see how anyone could admire them.
The women were written without any depth, and at least four of them had their breasts described upon first introduction.

As soon as Adelaide leaves the doctor she gets r*ped. Not only was this horrible to read because of the detail added to this scene, so much so that I had to skip it, but the underlying message is also detrimental. As if women can’t make it alone without a man protecting them, or as if she deserved it for leaving? 
I don’t think it’s bad to write about the dark things that happen in the world, but I don’t think the detail was necessary. 

The language surrounding the black characters was disturbing at times.. and the portrayal was even worse than women. The black characters were portrayed mostly as servants and looters. It made it hard to read. 

The ending didn’t make much sense, I don’t understand why the rats would start attacking and eating the living when there were plenty of dead bodies outside for them, and if NYC was all dead by the end, then why wouldn’t they have invaded food stores or walked the streets… and why did the doctor and co even leave so soon rather than waiting it out a day or so, for the rats to all catch the plague and die too.

When he left Adelaide to get eaten by them I realised how truly disregarded the female characters were. As soon as he meets a hotter young girl, Adelaide becomes nothing to him. I didn’t expect a heroic rescue from him but he didn’t even care or have any after thoughts about it.
And telling his daughter right at the end that everything was going to be okay when he was dying, and soon after she would be left alone to deal with the pain of the plague and eventually die. He could have gave her some words of comfort. 

Summary (or tldr);

Story was interesting and could have been a good read, but the character writing ruined it for me. I didn’t care about any of them. The women characters had no importance at all, and the book had misogynistic undertones and questionable wording surrounding the black characters. I am now thinking to give away my other books by Graham Masterton before reading them.

I don’t know what the quote “God, he’s good” by Stephan King was from, as it seems to be put on all GM’s books, but I can guess that SK wouldn’t have said this about Plague.