Rating: 3/5

He also showed me his favourite sheep, a woolly ram whose corkscrew horns indicated his descent from wild moufflons. Some young shepherd boys sauntered over to say hello, and respectfully called me Agha, a man's title. I thought about hte line between distrust and caution, and how I prefer to trust people than to expect the worst, believing that in general one has a choice over whether one brings out the good or the bad in people.

The village shortly after it would be Kizil Ka. I dismounted to collect a pocketful of stones (for retaliation), and decided to try going through the village on foot, which might look less aggressive. Though the dogs could be a problem, and I left my stirrups ready for quick mounting.
It was a fairly successful idea, but I could tell that Keyif was being peppered by small stones because he pranced along fast. I smiled and greeted the elder villagers, it was only the urchins and youths who threw stones.

Dusk brought a sandstorm; a Baluchi passed leading camels laden with bits of root for firewood; most of my fellow passengers were Baluchi and Afghan, with only five Pakistani townies. I allied myself with their three married women. On every long bus journey I make an ally of some suitable person or couple. As a woman, it saves trouble.

At the café where I had supper the waiter had some Lake Van cats, white furred, with one green eye and one brown eye. [...] The other special breed of Van cat is the swimming cat, with coffee and white fur. It enjoys swimming and will go chasing the small herrings in the lake, catching them with its claws. But this breed is growing rare and I had to ask around a lot before someone could show me one.

Trabzon's male dance team looked incongruously like hell's angels with black clothes and boots, silver chains, and daggers.

What I liked about Sema was her fresh open mind and common sense. In the apartment lift I met covered women showing only their eyes, and modern women who are materialistic and fashion-conscious; Sema is neither. She loves nature and is close to the land. Her work in the agricultural department takes her to villages to try and organise crop management and stock-breeding programmes. She doesn't think that Turkish women work harder than men or that they are suppressed and exploited. She doesn't see it that way.

Another visitor to this area had been Dame Freya Stark. Louise had met her a couple of times, and so had I in England. One piece of her philosophy that impressed me was when she said, 'The great and almost only comfort about being a woman is that one can always pretend to be more stupid than one is and no one will be surprised.' This is a technique which has helped me out of a number of tight corners in different parts of the world from China to Africa, but it seemed not always to be working in Iran where the Revolutionary Guards tended to be even more stupid themselves!

My strongest impression of the refugee village was that this was no poverty-stricken place of hardship and suffering; the children looked well-nourished and healthy. There were a surprising number of men around, and from those I spoke to I gathered that they go into Afghanistan to fight for a period then retire here to heal their wounds or recover their energy.
The depressing thing was to see a superb collection of mobile medical units, including a mobile X-ray unit and operating theatre, being employed merely as overflow wards for lack of Pakistani expertise in making use of them. What a waste of foreign aid.

A wife cannot play tennis with her husband, unless the court is private and not overlooked by public buildings. Iranian women who resisted covering up risked having acid sprayed in their faces.

This well is sufficient for a bit of irrigation, primarily for lucerne and pistachio nut trees. Issa stopped to check their fruit and he pointed out how much more the low bushy trees yield than the tall ones. Herds of sheep were being milked. The ewes' udders are tied up in cloth bags during the day so that their weaned lambs cannot suckle. After the women have taken enough, the lambs have their turn.

As we were leaving, we stopped to greet a man who had recently arrived herding his sheep from the mountains. He was setting up his alacheckh beside the village. An alachekh is a tent. When travellers in Central Asia brought back the word yurt they mistook its meaning. Yurt means the ground on which the alachekh is pitched.

An hour later we reached Sarihan, a Seljuk caravanserai dating from 1250, and one of the finest still surviving, though probably not the largest. There used to be caravanserais at fifty-kilometre intervals all along the ancient trade routes; any place whose name ends -han contained one.

A big family, their daughters gave me a lesson in Persian dancing, disregarding the fact that this is illegal. Music is also banned, so we kept the volume low in case any of the neighbours reported us to the Revolutionary Guards

Most other people on the bus were Baluchi, the semi-nomadic tribe whose territory covers much of south-east Iran and western Pakistan. The Baluchis' origins don't seem to be recorded, except for phrases like 'they have no ancient literature, are very ignorant and pride themselves on this ignorance.' Also as 'greedy, conceited, unwilling, and unreasonable as a camel. But they're honest, very moral, living up to their own code of honour, and they treat their women as equals.' Like other tribeswomen, these were not wearing the chadoor.

The scent of citrus trees revived my senses and my body recovered after a cold shower and a drink of iced date juice. The juice is not made from teh dates themselves but from the flower of the male tree.