Rating: 4/5

The Beatles are my favorite band and I went through a period of obsession with them during my high school years, which had tapered off for a while although I'll always love them. This was the perfect book to return to at age 25 when I hadn't read or thought much about them in several years. What I loved immediately about this book was it's honesty and portrayal of The Beatles as real, flawed people. All too often I had seen them caricatured as the cutesy, loveable mop tops, so it was refreshing to read this book which confirmed many of the rumors that I previously had only heard vague hints of. I think for some people this would destroy the "fantasy" of them but I am in favor of that, although I may be biased because there's probably nothing new I could learn that would make me love The Beatles any less.

The best part of this book, in my opinion, is the anecdotes. Some are hilarious, some are shocking, all of them are interesting to read. I couldn't put the book down--it was like reading a fast paced fiction novel with favorite characters who I already knew and loved. "Truth is stranger than fiction" would apply to many of the events early in The Beatles career, especially during their touring days. Another high point of this book for me was it's focus on Brian Epstein and Cynthia Lennon, so often put on the sidelines in other publications about The Beatles but both incredibly fascinating people who I learned so much about. Of course I had always respected Brian Epstein in an abstract way, but after this book I feel a stronger emotional connection to thinking about what he was like as his own person. 

About halfway through the book I could not deny my growing frustration with it's neglect of George, Ringo, and even Paul, which would only grow stronger the more I read. In fact, the author's stark honesty doesn't always cast them in the best light either and I think he could have done more to remedy that or make the book appear less biased. John is definitely treated as the most interesting Beatle in this book, and his faults are often tempered with portrayals of his redeeming qualities, but the author does not extend that courtesy to the other three. And I definitely don't mind reading that much about John, but I thought this book was out of balance--I feel motivated to read the biography of George I have sitting at home now. 

My only other complaint about this book is that the lengthy descriptions of legal proceedings and "money issues" can get dry and boring after a while (although initially it's pretty shocking what kind of messes they got into). Other than that, I would recommend this book to any Beatles fan. To revisit one of my old favorite stories as an adult and to learn so much new information made it an incredibly interesting and exciting read.