Rating: 4/5

This second installment of the Mulla Nasrudin Corpus contains over 160 miniature tales -- jokes, anecdotes -- which are teaching-stories in the Sufi tradition. The volume demonstrates something of the use of humour in Sufi learning situations. These stories of the 'wise fool' Nasrudin sometimes help us see our own behaviour in startling relief, and sometimes help us in overcoming assumptions that impede learning (eg. the tale 'The Reason'). They are also very amusing and well-written, delightful as entertainment. 

DETAILS:

Author: Idries Shah, a noted traveller and writer about the Sufis. Illustrated by: Richard Williams and Errol LeCain.
London: Penguin Compass, no-date; first published 1968. 
221 pgs.

The Idries Shah Foundation has just released a new edition of this book: see https://idriesshahfoundation.org/book...

This book is a wonderful collection of 165 Mulla tales, many of them accompanied by delightful cartoon illustrations. (These pictures are absent from some editions.)

 Here are some samples:

 The Announcement

 Nasrudin stood up in the market-place and started to address the throng.
 'O people! Do you want knowledge without difficulties, truth without falsehood, attainment without effort, progress without sacrifice?'
 Very soon a large crowd gathered, everyone shouting: 'Yes, yes!'
 'Excellent!' said the Mulla. 'I only wanted to know. You may rely upon me to tell you all about it if I ever discover any such thing.'

 The School

 One of the boys at the Mulla's school asked:
 'Which was the greatest achievement, that of the man who conquered an empire, the man who could have but did not, or the man who prevented another from doing so?'
 'I don't know about any of that,' said the Mulla, 'but I do know a more difficult task than any of those.'
 'What is that?' 
 'Trying to teach you to see things as they really are.'

 Let it be wheat

 A neighbour asked Mulla Nasrudin to stand by him in a case of disputed possession of some grain.
 'Did you see the transaction?' the judge asked Nasrudin.
 'Yes, I distinctly saw the sacks of barley change hands.' 
 'But this case is concerned with sacks of wheat [italics], not barley!'
 'That is irrelevant. I am here to say that my friend is right. As a false witness surely I can say anything without its being held against me?'

 The Nasrudin stories can work almost like a photo or blueprint of what the mind is doing in different situations -- a photo of ourselves caught in action. The stories can show us to ourselves, which can help us change unproductive behaviours, assumptions, or thinking-patterns. We may like them as jokes, but by reflecting on them one can begin to see different levels of meaning in the same story. Here are some further samples:

 Tie up below!

 The Mulla was aboard ship when a terrible storm blew up. All hands were ordered aloft to furl the sails and lash them to the masts.
 Nasrudin ran to the captain, yelling:
 'Fools! Anyone can see that the ship moves from below -- and your men are trying to bind it up from above!'

 Ask me another

 'According to the general opinion of the uninitiated,' mused Nasrudin, as he walked along the road, 'dervishes are mad. According to the sages, however, they are the true masters of the world. I would like to test one, and myself, to make sure.'
 Then he saw a tall figure, robed like an Akldan dervish -- reputed to be exceptionally enlightened men -- coming towards him. 
 'Friend,' said the Mulla, 'I want to perform an experiment, to test your powers of psychic penetration, and also my sanity.'
 'Proceed,' said the Akldan.
 Nasrudin made a sudden sweeping motion with his arm, then clenched his fist. 'What have I in my hand?'
 'A horse, chariot and driver,' said the Akldan immediately.
 'That's no real test,' -- Nasrudin was petulant -- 'because you saw me pick them up.'

 I believe you are right!

 The Mulla was made a magistrate. During his first case the plaintiff argued so persuasively that he exclaimed:
 'I believe that you are right!'
 The clerk of the Court begged him to restrain himself, for the defendant had not been heard yet.
 Nasrudin was so carried away by the eloquence of the defendant that he cried out as soon as the man had finished his evidence:
 'I believe you are right!'
 The clerk of the court could not allow this.
 'Your honour, they cannot both be right.'
 'I believe you are right!' said Nasrudin. 

 'I believe you are right!' struck me as, on one level, relevant to the different claims of proselytizing religions, each of which appears "right" from within its assumptions; and to the possibility that a person can be convinced of the "truth" of different, contradictory beliefs by rhetorical persuasion (a tool of brainwashing).

 Head and heels

 'When you die, Mulla,' asked a friend, 'how would you like to be buried?'
 'Head downwards. If, as people believe, we are right way up in this world, I want to try being upside-down in the next.'

 For more information about Mulla Nasrudin, you can visit https://ninedonkeys.wordpress.com/about/ and http://www.ishk.net/mulla_nasrudin.html.