Rating: 2/5

My brain is melting out of my ears right now. How can I find an author alternately enthralling and boring?

The original cover art by Pino Daeni is lush, gorgeous and painterly. There's a tournament, a hot guy, a chick with lots of nice jewelry, it looks action packed and romantic. I often stared at it as a child, thinking it would be the coolest book ever, but I would glance through the book and be put off by the subject matter. Reader, I'm glad I did, because young me would have HATED this book.

Suffice to say, this artwork does not represent the book faithfully. 

So this book is about this French courtier/politician named Alphonse and an English lady named Barbara who is headstrong yet very canny. They marry and deal with the Second Baron's War. If you're like me, who had no idea what the Second Baron's war was, it was a civil war in 13th century England where several noblemen rebelled against King John's son Henry III, because, like his dad, he was a shitty ruler. The lead rebel nobleman tried to enact reforms. But this didn't go anywhere, because you can't just ignore/badger/imprison the king, even if he does completely suck-- since this is the middle ages we're talking about, and rich nobles thought he was appointed by God. (A lot of poorer folks were less convinced of this apparently, but they weren't able to do anything about it yet.) 

Anyway. If you don't care about any of this, don't read this book. It takes two semi-interesting characters and then puts them in this sub-Dorothy Dunnett medieval talking heads CSPAN historical drama. Gellis has done some amazing work, but she does much better with a tighter focus on the hero and heroine. I kept losing interest-- I would often put the book down and do something, anything else-- because a lot of the story revolves around what nobleman supports who and what about the king or the prince and not to mention all the troop movements, and God, I just did not care. Gellis excels at thrilling adventure, atmosphere and action sequences, but there wasn't much here. It was just... the hero and heroine deal with a historical event. That's decent enough basis for a historical novel, but still, it's up to the author to make it emotional enough and gripping for the reader-- to try to get the reader to care. I did not. I finished it because I hoped the ending would be as exciting as the ending of The Rope Dancer or Enchanted Fire, but the rebellion is just put down, the bad guy runs off, and the hero and heroine sort out their relationship. 

*yawns* 

This is not going to put me off Gellis, because I've read more good books by her than bad, yet TL;DR: I still don't give a shit about this typical kings-and-knights bog standard view of medieval history. There's cool and interesting stories about the medieval era, but holy shit this is not one of them. 

I leave you guys with a Monty Python sketch, one which is actually based on a real medieval republic that existed in Germany at the time.