Rating: 4/5

Ah... Gods. They're as ridiculous and humorous as they are brutal and cruel, which is part of what appeals to me so much. This is rightly considered a classic and while Neil Gaiman still holds the throne for the most entertaining rendering of Norse Mythology, I greatly enjoyed this. 

The Children of Odin was first published a hundred (!) years ago, so yes, the language isn't the most contemporary and catchy, but Colum carefully leads us through fifteen beloved tales from the gods and goddesses of Asgard. We meet Odin, the All Father on his hunt for wisdom, we learn how Thor received his mighty hammer and how Loki keeps coming up with ideas of how to get into the most trouble possible. 

It's way darker than Neil Gaiman's retelling. Column's stories are mostly devoid of humour and I found the rather sober way of telling the story harder to focus on. I have to admit I had to reread several passages because my mind was drifting – something I probably can't blame Column for. Overall, I was surprised by how nonchalantly he portrayed Loki's mischievous demise, who over the course of the novel started to move into pretty sinister areas of morality. We don't really get to look into their heads, though and in his case specifically it would have been so interesting to find out about what's driving him. 

Overall, these stories are so rich and creative. You will recognise a lot of familiar tales in these, as these stories have clearly inspired tons of things that came after, from other beloved authors like Tolkien to other fairy tales and sagas. There were also a lot of themes interesting to think about, such as the roles power, wisdom and knowledge play in our existences and what we do to possess them. 

I think this would be a great starting point for those curious about Norse Mythology, as the stories are portioned into small bite-sized chapters and told in a linear manner. I've been familiar with most of these, but clearly am still a far shot from being bored by them.