Rating: 1/5

DOES A ‘NEW GENERATION OF WOMEN’ REJECT ‘FEMINISM’? SOME CONTROVERSIAL IDEAS

Author and journalist Rene Denfeld wrote in the Introduction to this 1995 book, “For women of my generation, feminism is our birthright… We are the first generation to grow up expecting equal opportunity and equal education, as well as the freedom to express our sexuality… Given, then, this huge debt we owe feminism, why do so many women my age refuse to join the women’s movement? Why do we adamantly reject the feminist label? While … American women of all ages overwhelmingly support feminist ideas… they largely avoid calling themselves feminists and in many ways have abandoned the movement---even though most feel that there is still work to be done.” (Pg. 1-2) 

She argues, “The fact is that feminism has changed---dramatically… the movement for the most part has taken a radical change in direction. It has become bogged down in an extremist moral and spiritual crusade that has little to do with women’s lives… It has … substituted a worldview that speaks to the very few, while alienating the many.” (Pg. 5)

She continues, “There are, in essence, two different women’s movements alive today. One is a cultural movement… expressed in the independent actions of thousands of feminist-thinking women who fight for equality in their lives… But this movement lives primarily in the hearts and minds of women: It isn’t organized, and most of its members don’t call themselves feminists. That’s because that word refers to the OTHER women’s movement---the organized, ideological form of feminism represented by groups such as NOW, women’s studies courses, and feminist leaders. It is this organized women’s movement---which defines the feminist label---that is the focus of this book.” (Pg. 5-6)

She summarizes, “Today’s feminists are remarkably similar to Victorians in significant ways, and not only in their vision of sexuality… One of the most powerful trends in New Victorianism is what can be called the feminist antiphallic campaign. Today’s feminists have created an overarching theory that blames male sexuality for the world’s woes. In short, they believe that heterosexual intercourse---as an inherently invasive and oppressive act---is the root cause of all oppression. This theory is … taught to women’s studies students, and promoted in organizations such as local chapters of NOW. It is behind much of the antimale sentiment in the movement, and at its logical end calls for separatism---the cessation of all intercourse between women and men.” (Pg. 11)

She proposes, “We must … return to a movement that addresses women’s concerns while respecting their personal lives and empowering their choices; a movement that prioritizes issues as women themselves prioritize them: child care, political parity, economic opportunity, abortion rights, and birth control; a movement that espouses the feminist ideal that our mothers taught us: that women can and should be equal and in full partnership with men, working together, both free from restraining sex roles… We must return to a movement that, quite simply, represents the majority of women.” (Pg. 20-21)

She asserts, “manhating and antiheterosexuality are firmly entrenched and loudly espoused in today’s movement.” (Pg. 26) She states, “there are critical flaws in the argument that lesbian issues should be given top priority among feminists. For one, many lesbian rights center on issues of gay discrimination, not gender discrimination… many lesbian issues don’t intersect with women’s rights overall. For example, fighting for gay marriages benefits homosexuals, but fighting for equal job opportunities and health-care benefits BOTH gay and straight women… To make lesbian rights a major priority seems... similar to arguing that gay rights should be the top priority of the NAACP because some blacks are gay.” (Pg. 43)

She acknowledges, “Teaching women how to avoid assault is a good idea… But these valuable precautionary ideas are overshadowed by the current feminist agenda… Rarely is it acknowledged that women might WANT to have sex. In victim mythology, the idea alone is an affront. The assumption is that they don’t.” (Pg. 86) 

She argues, “In the feminist definition of porn, it seems that anything that acknowledges women have sex---from lesbian erotica to pictures of pregnant women---is considered evil. Probably the ultimate irony in this is just how many of their own works qualify. Several of Andrea Dworkin’s books, for example, are extremely pornographic.” (Pg. 102) Later, she adds, “current feminists… want us to believe that the exposure of our bodies degrades us, and incites male lust; they want to censor expression of our sexuality because, once again, we are truly the sated wantons… who are to blame for rape. They want us to… ‘veil’ ourselves once more---in silence and shame.” (Pg. 123)

She observes, “The question is not whether goddess followers are entitled to worship what they please---of course they are. The question is whether feminism should be synonymous with a religious doctrine… [that] demands they partake in rituals and worship—many women decline to [do so].” (Pg. 133) Later, she adds, “The vision of a golden age is critical to the promotion of goddess worship by feminists: Put women in charge and the world will exist in peaceful harmony. But credible archaeologists beg to differ with the idealized past.” (Pg. 140)

She asserts, “Feminist scholarship on the patriarchy may not have originated as a conspiracy theory, but… it certainly sounds like one today… current feminists portray our world as one great spiderweb of interconnected plots, all threads held by a faceless enemy whose sole goal is to suppress women.’ (Pg. 156)

She states, “as it entered into the eighties, Ms. [magazine] became stuck in a rut… in 1989, Ms. was resurrected by Robin Morgan and Gloria Steinem. Today this once-inclusive mainstream magazine is a truly fringe publication, catering only to the most ideologically pure feminists… often obtuse with academic feminist jargon.” (Pg. 192)

She summarizes, “We still need a women’s movement… to achieve complete equality between the sexes. Feminists of the second wave did a tremendous service for … women of my generation… What we don’t need is what feminism stands for today.” (Pg. 211) She continues, “women in their thirties and older also name child care, parental leave, health care, job opportunities, and reproductive rights as feminist priorities. These are issues… that are going to shape our children’s world... None of the issues expounded by the New Victorians---from censoring porn to overthrowing a vague patriarchy---promise to improve society concretely for future generations. They are diversions.” (Pg. 252)

Denfeld identifies some problems with the ‘mainstream’ feminist movement that may contribute to its lack of appeal to some women. But much of her critiques are themselves expressed in rather ‘extreme’ language, which greatly lessens the impact of her book.