Rating: 5/5

Many years ago we visited Thomas Hardy country in Dorset, England and I bought Wessex Tales, seven short stories that Hardy wrote about his native county. The book holds special memories for me of the summer day that we visited the cottage where Hardy was born in 1840 in Higher Bockhampton, Dorset, and where he wrote Under the Greenwood Tree and Far From the Madding Crowd. For me it was a literary pilgrimage to the shrine of one of my favorite authors.

Hardy fictionalized Dorset County as Wessex in this group of seven short stories. Wessex also became the setting for most of his novels. These tales are based on stories and folklore of his native Dorset in the early 1800s to about 1830, a generation before Hardy was born. Hardy was afraid that the folklore, history and tales that had been passed down for generations were disappearing and set about preserving them in several volumes of short stories. 

Alternately macabre (The Withered Arm), humorous (The Three Strangers), sadly fatalistic (Fellow-Townsmen), and tragic (The Melancholy Hussar of the German Legion), these tales are all strongly connected to Hardy's love of his native Dorset. 

I loved the humorous tale of the rum smugglers in The Distracted Preacher and could feel the excitement of Lizzy as she encouraged the preacher to accompany her on a smuggling expedition. "I'm sure you will enjoy it! Everybody does who tries it," said Lizzy, and indeed, smuggling was not only the excitement, but the lifeblood of the town. "My father did it, and so did my grandfather and almost everybody in Nether-Moynton lives by it and life would be so dull if it wasn't for that, that I should not care to live at all," she elaborates. By the time Hardy was born, there was no more rum smuggling, it having been taken over by a criminal element and strongly quashed by the government. 

Hardy, ever faithful to his beloved Dorset, knew and wrote about his county fervently, forever preserving its folklore and history in the characters who lived in Wessex (however much he constrained them with circumstance and timing). I was excited to come upon this book once again and not only enjoy Hardy's engaging tales, but also relive the time we visited Dorset and the cottage where he was born. 

Following is a picture and information about Thomas Hardy's cottage: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_...