Rating: 5/5

If you wish to be an ogre, then it is very important that you not only be bullied mercilessly, but that you react by choosing someone completely unsuitable as a role model. This is what happens to Abel Tiffauges, the son of an auto mechanic, who despite his height is treated like dirt at a Catholic school and ends by inheriting his father's garage.

Along the way, he develops some strange ideas regarding children. While he is not a pederast and never even attempts to initiate any overt molestation. Yet he is falsely accused by a little girl to whom he has given rides in his car of rape. Just when he is about to be adjudged as guilty of crime, a sympathetic judge frees him providing he joins the army. It is only days before the German invasion of France, and the Phony War is about to turn into a real shooting war.

Before long, Abel is captured by the Germans and sent to a prison camp in East Prussia, where he develops a reputation as a trusted, hard-working prisoner. Because of his ability with motor vehicles, he is transferred to Goering's giant hunting lodge at Rominten, and from there to the napola of Kaltenborn, where he becomes an assistant to a racial theorist named Otto Blaettchen.

These napolas are short for National Political Academies, where German youth are trained to become SS officers. As always, Tiffauges enters into the spirit of the institution and even takes over Blaettchen's position when the latter is transferred to the Eastern Front. In the end, Tiffauges is so successful in finding prototypically Aryan-looking recruits that he develops a fearsome reputation in the Prussian hinterland:This warning is addressed to all mothers in the areas of Gehlenburg, Sensburg, Loetzen and Lyck!

BEWARE OF THE OGRE OF KALTENBORN!

He is after your children. He roves through our country stealing children. If you have any, never forget the Ogre—he never forgets them! Don't let them go out alone. Teach them to run away and hide if they see a giant on a blue horse with a pack of black hounds. If he comes to see you, don't yield to his threats, don't be taken in by his promises. All mothers should be guided by one certainty: If the Ogre takes your child, you will NEVER see him again!At the napola, the boys (and girls) are raised in a military discipline heavily laden with the ersatz symbolism of a quasi-fictitious Teutonic past. 

What eventually happens, of course, is that the Russians invade on their way to take Berlin. The ending of Michel Tournier's The Ogre is exceedingly strange, and not altogether successful. 

The book does, however, show how one on the borders of evil can still be strangely innocent, while contributing to the overall evils of National Socialism. 

The Ogre is probably one of the best French novels of the second half of the Twentieth Century. Tournier succeeds in keeping the reader enthralled from the first page to the last.