Rating: 5/5

I recently read the book "Everyone Loves Our Town", an oral history of Grunge music. I was never a huge fan, but it sounded interesting. While I read it, I thought to myself, "I wish there was a book like this about Britpop." Well...duh. But I'm American, so you need to cut me some slack. 
I was studying abroad in Scotland in the spring of 1990, so I feel like I was present for a tiny bit of the movement. You could tell something was brewing. When I walked down the streets of Edinburgh, every song that spilled out of the shops seemed to be The Happy Mondays' Step On, or sounded just like it. The lads walking down the street all wore a uniform of psychedelic paisley shirts, baggy jeans and big suede shoes in jewel colors. Their hair was intricate mops of curls. They all looked like they should be in bands and walked with a strut like the music was playing just for them. There was excitement in the air. 
This book confirmed several things for me:
I've pulled out my old cassettes, and most of the music still sounds amazing. The Stone Roses still makes me want to dance wildly, Ned's Atomic Dustbin still sound like they have something extremely important and urgent to say in every song, Inspiral Carpets is still wistfully gorgeous, and the Happy Mondays, well, still good for a laugh. 
I heart Blur forever n' ever. (insert fangirl squeal here)
I've always liked Oasis' music, but didn't really warm to the band's members. Too scowly and mean looking. All eyebrows and parkas. They didn't seem like nice people, and this book really confirms it. 
Heroin sucks. That's stating the obvious, but the Grunge book and this one really show how damaging it was to so many careers and lives at the time. Imagine what some of these bands could have accomplished had they not been so drug addled.
What I learned:
I liked reading about bands that got little or no attention in the US, like Menswear and Suede. I've gone on Youtube to watch some Suede videos, and they are...wow....something else.
Justine Frischmann has an oversharing problem.
British politics can be sort of dull. Again, excuse the American, but if you are not that familiar with the people and situations, those sections sort of drag. My only complaint with the book, but really, it's just cultural.
I've found a new appreciation for Blur's This is a Low. I'd never paid it much attention, but finding out about the inspiration for the song was really interesting.
Altogether a great read. Still my all time favorite era of music.