Rating: 5/5

A SHORT OVERVIEW OF WICCA AND MAGICK

Scott Douglas Cunningham (1956-1993) was an American author of books on Wicca and other alternative religious subjects; he was a member of the Serpent Stone Family, and received his Third Degree Initiation as a member of that coven.

He wrote in the introductory ‘Note’ section of this 1988 book, “This book first appeared as a 32-page pamphlet published by Llewellyn in 1987 under the title ‘The Truth About Witchcraft’… I wasn’t credited with writing it… I decided that I’d write a larger version of it… In this greatly expanded book we’ll look at the reality of folk magic and Wicca---known to the outside world as Witchcraft. Its purpose is not to proselytize but to discount centuries of negative propaganda and to shed some light on these still obscure subjects. It’s my hope that [this book] will do its part in halting at least some of the persecution, which continues today.”

He says in the Introduction, “Wiccans are women and men of every profession, cultural background, and religious upbringing. For many of them Wicca is the only religion they’ve found that encourages love for the Earth and its inhabitants (human, animal, and vegetable), and that promotes the practice of folk magic to transform their lives into positive experiences. Women, especially, are drawn to it because of its acceptance of the feminine aspect of Divinity---the Goddess. For Wiccans, theirs is the only religion that allows a truly intimate link with Deity.” (Pg. 5)

He explains, “Folk magic isn’t ‘the Devil’s work.’ It isn’t Satanism. It doesn’t involve living sacrifices. It doesn’t consist of talking to spirits or bondage to demons. It isn’t dark, dangerous, evil or supernatural. Folk magic isn’t anti-Christian, anti-religion or anti-anything. Folk magic is pro-life, pro-love, pro-healing. It is a tool with which people transform their lives. It is a relationship with the Earth.” (Pg. 15)

He adds, “Spells are designed to release personal power within the magician. It is this energy---along with natural objects such as crystals, herbs, oils, incense and the like---that powers the spell, that gets it moving. How does it work? We can’t fully explain it yet, but the following theory seems valid: There is a power in the universe. It is the power of life. This is the inexplicable force behind the wonders that early humans encountered… all that is manifest---is a product of this power. Humans have given the names of ‘God’ and ‘Goddess’ to this energy source. It is that which is worshipped in every religion in various forms.” (Pg. 19-20) 

He adds, “Once the energy has been freed from its material forms, it is no longer bound by physical laws. The folk magician can move it ten feet or ten thousand miles to do its work. The folk magician’s knowledge and experience---not the distance involved---determines the spell’s effectiveness.” (Pg. 22) He continues, “The method by which the power changes its target is either determined by the magician during the ritual or is left up to circumstances at the time of its arrival. Exactly HOW this change takes place cannot be explained---at least not yet.” (Pg. 22-23)

He advises, “If magicians perform effective magic, it follows that they must ensure the proper use of this power… Even folk magicians with no religious or spiritual feelings---for folk magic isn’t truly religious in nature---sense responsibility in wielding this power.” (Pg. 39)

He explains, “Folk magic is but half of what is termed Witchcraft. The other half is the religion known as Wicca. There are at least five major ways in which Wicca differs from other religions. These are: *Worship of the Goddess and God *Reverence for the Earth *Acceptance of magic *Acceptance of reincarnation *Lack of proselytizing activities.” (Pg. 62) He acknowledges, “Not all traditions agree in whole with thee five points. Many others would add several more. And indeed, one of the major divisions within Wicca is the prominence of the Goddess in worship… some Wiccans… devote their religious and magical activities exclusively to the Goddess. For others, the balance of BOTH the Goddess and God is seen to be ideal for religious workings… Some traditions insist that that the human soul always incarnates in the same sex; i.e., if you’re female in this life, then you always were and always will be female.” (Pg. 86-87)

He points out, “Many Wiccans begin their year with Samhain (October 31st)… Samhain is linked with the coming of winter and ancient hunting rituals. This date will be recognized in the United States as Hallowe’en or Hallows Eve, a night on which adults and children dress in costume and attend parties, and newspapers blazon stories about Witches, curses, and ghosts across their pages. These are folk memories of the old European customs that were played out at this time of the year. Wiccans usually ignore such occurrences, for this is a sacred night.” (Pg. 116)

He notes, “Folk magic… is governed by one basic dictum: harm none… Wicca follows the same rule, though it is often differently worded: ‘An it harm none, do what you will.’ …This phrase is almost universally known to English-speaking Wiccans. Its origins remain shadowy. Many feel that it … was based on the magical motto of ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley: ‘Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the law. Love is the law; love under will.’ … Sure, Wiccans get angry. They may get into fist fights or toss a drink in an obnoxious man’s face. But they’d rather cut off their right arm before ‘hexing’ or ‘cursing’ another human being.” (Pg. 125-126)

He asserts, “A few---not many, but a few---Wiccan traditions do utilize sex for its mystical and magical properties and to alter consciousness. But such rites---as rare as they are---are only performed in private between two consenting adults. Ritual sex is never engaged in before other Wiccans or anyone else. Coven orgies are nonexistent. Wicca is not a swing club; Sabbats and Esbats aren’t excuses to have sex.” (Pg. 130)

He argues, “What most people don’t understand is that there are sexual elements in every religion, even in Christianity. The Bible is filled with rapes and ritual intercourse… Most of the sexual aspects of Christianity have, of course, been covered up with confusing translations, or have been conveniently left out of the authorized versions of the Bible. But they are there.” (Pg. 131)

He points out, “What has been termed the ‘New Age’ has arrived. In some ways it’s a high-tech echo of the occult renaissance that occurred from 1966 to 1974 in the United States and Great Britain. Powerful marketing campaigns are bringing age-old tools such as tarot decks, rune-stones, and crystals to millions of new and interested customers… Magicians and Wiccans are drawn to ‘Old Age’ tools and rituals. They don’t necessarily channel entities. To many of them, the New Age is a watered-down version of ancient magical and spiritual processes which use the mechanized tools of the computer age. Many particularly decry the rising prices of such things as stones and herbs, as interest in them increases.” (Pg. 150-151)

He concludes, “Perhaps the current wave will awaken the majority of persons to the spiritual reality of the physical world. Perhaps it will enhance the desire to preserve our planet by halting mindless, blind development and the misuse of life-threatening technology such as nuclear power. In the New Age achieves nothing else, it will have done its work.” (Pg. 153)

This book will be of keen interest to those seeking a brief overview of Wicca and Witchcraft.