Rating: 5/5

Certainly one of the very greatest works of political philosophy, in some ways better than Democracy in America. Tocqueville was fascinated by the phenomenon of social equality after centuries of feudalism, and he goes so far as to say that the outward political revolutions and charters of the new post Enlightenment order were already essentially complete, as social conditions, before these revolutions ever took place. The preparation for the French Revolution was simply that "men (notice: men) were more nearly alike then they had ever been before." Hence they simply outgrew their feudal institutions, or already had outgrown them, and that this process was complete under the ancien regime, not under the revolutionary government. The political revolts and events historians associte with the revolution are simply not that important, because the event was overdetermined. If it had not happened this way it would have happened some other way, hence any given way though sufficient is hardly necessary to the political philosopher. It's a daring thesis. It may even be true. It may even continue to be true and predictive, as Democracy in America was, and is. The more people are the same, the more arbitrary political and economic differences and privileges appear and the more easy they are to strike down with a coup de main to the system, from wherever quarter or circumstance that blow may come. Tocqueville expresses the view that essentially the political stage of the revolution was an act of pique by the new equal man, a proto-middle class man, against such arbitrary privilege of the aristocracy, long since degenerated into inbred fops. The American revolution? Simply the pique of the colonists who already considered themselves Englishmen and were shocked to find out they were not. Rejection always precedes anger and revenge. What can we learn today from this important and oh, so delightfully dangerous, wicked book? (And there are so few truly dangerous books!) Perhaps our own aristocracy of merit, our meritocracy-without-merit in other words is finally ready to fall. The one crucial lynchpin is: do people see those possessors of letters behind their names and privileged positions in the institutional structure as truly deserving--the ongoing mystique and fascination that sustained the old feudal aristocracy for centuries--or will that meritocracy be revealed as profoundly regressive and unfair, or worse, will the meritocrats simply be unmasked as no smarter or better than anyone else. Tocqueville suggests that just such a failure of legitimacy inevitably follows the realization of a profoundly equal social condition, suddenly unmasked in this way. If only there were some way to do this convincingly for all to see, the political and economic reforms and all the rest would be easy to accomplish. Really exciting stuff to be recommended to all young revolutionaries!