Rating: 4/5

Not As I Remembered It 66 Years Ago.

I read this as a child, and I cried. It may have been the first real novel that I had ever read, as I was actually6 into reading comic books at that age.

My brother was reading The Grapes of Wrath at that same time and was asking our mother if it were true about the dust bowl and depression and what the people went through. It was, she said.

My father had given my older brother a collection of John Steinbeck books, so the reason we chose him to read. I grew to love Steinbeck, but I am not so sure about this book now. It was just too sad for me as a child of ten or so.

I remember as a child I would lose all my dogs to death, and the baby lamb that my step dad brought home. I sat there with the lamb in my lap as it was dying, and I asked God, Why? I got no answer. A few years later I began to feel that every animal I ever loved died. And, well, they still do. 

This book was not what I remember4ed, but I really had no idea what I remembered as it was too long ago. I also didn’t remember that this book was four stories. It was about Jody’s growing up years. I was glad for this, as I liked two of the other stories better. Only they were all too short. I was also glad that I did not cry this time.

I really loved the story about the old pisano, Gitano, who showed up on the ranch saying that he was born there and desired to die there. 

Jody asked him questions about the mountains to the west of the farm that was situated near Salina, CA. Jody only knew that they lead to the ocean. Gitano had only adventured there once but only remembered that it was quiet. 

Jody wanted to hike the mountains, and that is what I would have done since I spent my youth hiking the hills in our small town of Paso Robles, CA and going to the river with my dogs, whichever one I had at the time. Jody didn’t venture out, and I wonder if that was because he had a strict father, a father I was glad to not have had. Yet, my own father was mean, but my mom divorced when I was 8. I had free range of the town, the hills, and the river after that.

Then Jody’s grandfather came to visit, and I would have loved that story to go on as well as the one about the pisano. It was not to be. As soon as his grandfather arrived, problems broke out in the family, well, only with Jody’s dad, and it was not going to be a nice visit, except that Jody wanted to learn from him. He wanted to know about his trip out to California by wagon train, as he had been the wagaon train master. 

All in all, it seemed like everything was dying around Jody, mostly by his own hands, such as horn toads, snakes, mice, etc. It left me with a feeling that I didn’t wish to hear anymore. Kids can be so cruel at times, and it made me to remember how my boyfriend (first husband) and I put a mouse in a flashlight, but when we took it out he was almost dead. I think he survived. I hate memories like that, or when we shot frogs at the river with a b-b gun. How cruel. I wonder what my mom would have said if she had known. I know if I had had kids, I would hope that I would have taught them to not harm animals.

I would not have liked farm life, unless we were just raising food crops. And it seems like the older I get the less I like harming anything unless it is poisonous snake or spider or anything that is about to harm me. But real life isn’t so easy on a person, and it certainly wasn’t easy on Jody.
Notes: I loved this when I was young, so I am keeping the 4 or 5 stars. I would only give it three stars today.
RerRead June 26, 2019