Rating: 3/5

review of 
E. E. “Doc” Smith’s The Skylark of Space 
by tENTATIVELY, a cONVENIENCE - September 29, 2023 

For no particularly good reason that I can remember I never had much interest in E. E. “Doc” Smith. Maybe it seemed to me that he was one of those hack SF writers who wrote cheesy stuff that I wdn’t find any important ideas or visions in. THEN, I read Lee Server’s entry about him in Encyclopedia of Pulp Fiction Writers &amp; I got more interested in him b/c he’s credited as the 1st space opera writer. Now, I don’t even have any enthusiasm for space opera either given that it really isn’t removed enuf from soap opera. In other words, once again, cheesy - but Server’s enthusiasm prompted me to get this, the 1st bk of the 1st of the space opera serials. I pretty much liked the 1st half of this. Early on, the protagonist is one I’m sympathetic to: 

“Each taste of knowledge whetted his appretite for more. Books! Books! More and more he devoured them; finding in them meat for the hunger that filled him, answers to the questions that haunted him.” - p 10 

Later on, there’s a rich guy w/ an Asian manservant, something that strikes me as a staple of early 20th century American literature. To quote from my recent review of 
Achmed Abdullah's The Bungalow on the Roof: 

“What is it about early 20th century white mystery writers that compelled them so to have the protagonist employ a fiercely loyal Chinese manservant willing to kill for him? 

“”Mongol, too, in his virtues; chiefly in his steely loyalty. 

“””Ain't no damn thing I wouldn't do for ye!" he would often tell Elliot in his Bowery English, curiously flavored with Chinese sing-song. "Betcha life!" 

“”He would add, rather ceremoniously, in stilted Cantonese: 

““”I lou fou sing—may the star of good fortune protect you!"" - p 79” 

- https://www.goodreads.com/review/edit... 

Back to The Skylark of Space: 

“The door was opened hastily by Crane’s Japanese servant, whose face lit up on seeing the visitor. 

“”Hello, Shiro. Is the honorable son of Heaven up yet?” 

“”Yes, sir, but he is at present in his bath.” 

“”Tell him to snap it up, please. Tell him I’ve got a thing on the fire that’ll break him right off at the ankles.” 

“Bowing the guest to a chair in the library, Shiro hurried away. Returning shortly, he placed before Seaton the Post, the Herald, and a jar of Seaton’s favorite brand of tobacco, and said, with his unfailing bow, “Mr. Crane will appear in less than one moment, sir.”” - p 15 

At 1st, I was relieved that the Japanese manservant wasn’t presented as speaking in stereotypical fractured English. Alas, it’s not much later when Shiro no longer evidences standard English grammar. 

“Shiro broke the tension by bowing until his head almost touched the floor. “Sirs and lady, I impel myself to state this to be wonder extreme. If permitting I shall delightful luxuriate in preparation suitable refreshment.”” - p 49 

Otherwise, one of the things in favor of this bk from my POV is Smith’s use of vernacular: 

“Dorothy said, “I skipped practice today, Dick, on account of traipsing out there after you two geniuses. Could you stand it to have me play at you for a half an hour?” 

“”Don’t fish, Dottie Dimple. You know there’s nothing I’d like better. But if you want me to beg you I’ll be glad to. Please—PUH-LEEZE—oh, fair and musicianly damsel, fill ye circumambient atmosphere with thy tuneful notes.”” - p 28 

Well, ok, “vernacular” isn’t completely accurate - perhaps “playful vernacular” wd be better. 

Earlier 20th century SF has details that wdn’t fly once the SF writers started taking themselves more seriously. 

“He lit a cigarette and sat at ease at the computer. He sat there, smoking and computing, for over an hour. He then changed, very slightly, the angle of the engine.” - p 68 

The thing is, he’s in a spacecraft where the air is recycled. Um, won’t that pollute it? &amp; what about the word “computer”? I was under the impression that didn’t exist yet. 

Still in the spacecraft, 

“Dorothy, Peggy and Crane were at breakfast; Seaton joined them. They ate the gayest, most carefree meal they had had since leaving earth. Some of the worst bruises still showed a little, but under the influence of the potent if painful amylophene, all soreness, stiffness, and pain had disappeared.” - p 82 

Amylophene is mentioned more than once. Was it a new ‘wonder drug’ in 1928 when the bk was written? As far as I can tell, it’s a fictional invention of Smith’s. 

Our astronauts reach another planet in their quest to get the copper they need to return to earth. 

“They descended rapidly, over a large city set in the middle of a vast, level, beautifully planted plain. As they watched, the city vanished and became a mountain summit, with valleys falling away on all sides as far as the eye could reach. 

“”Huh! I never saw a mirage like that before!” Seaton exclaimed. “But we’ll land if we have to swim!” 

“The ship landed gently upon the summitt, its occupants more than half expecting the mountain to disappear beneath them. Nothing happened, however, and the five clustered in the lock, wondering whether or not to disembark. They could see no sign of life; but each felt the presence of a vast, invisible something. 

“Suddenly a man materialized in the air before them; a man identical with Seaton in every detail, down to the smudge of grease under one eye and the exact design of his Hawaiian sport shirt.” - p 89 

Of course, this being from the era it’s from, I didn’t expect realism - but cigarettes &amp; Hawaiian shirts? So, you see, the bk starts deteriorating after the space opera starts kicking in w/ the romance &amp; the monsters &amp; the speaking in English &amp; all the rest. 

“The monster started darting away from something, which the observers in the Skylark saw for the fist time—a fleet of small airships in full flight away from the scene of battle. Fast as they were, the animal was covering three miles to their one. 

“”We can’t stand for anything like that!” Seaton cried, as he threw on power and the Skylark leaped ahead. “When I yank him away, Mart, sock him with a Mark Ten!”” - p 96 

Having just landed on a planet new to them, they see what appears to be a conflict between powerful non-humanoids &amp; apparent humanoid ships. ‘Naturally’, they immediately take the side of the apparent humanoids, despite not really having any idea of what’s going on, &amp; slaughter the non-humanoids. I don’t think many SF writers these days wd go for something so simple-minded. As they spend more time on the planet, they learn about religion there. 

“”As well as I can explain it, it’s a very peculiar mixture, partly theology, partly Darwinian evolution or its Osnomian equivalent, and partly pure pragmatism or economic determinism. They believe in a supreme being, the First Cause being its nearest English equivalent. They recognize the existence of an immortal and unknowable life-principle, or soul. They believe that the First Cause has laid down the survival of the fittest as the fundamental law, which belief accounts for their perfect physiques. . . .” 

“”Perfect physiques! Why, they’re as weak as children!” Dorothy exclaimed. 

“”That’s because of the low gravity,” Seaton explained.” - p 126 

The 2 couples get married w/ alotof hoopla on one the planets where they’re being hosted. This was where the novel deteriorated into romance a bit too much for my liking. 

“The men heard, or rather felt, a low intense vibration, like a silent wave of sound, a vibration which smote upon the eardrums as no possible sound could smite, a vibration that racked the joints and turtured the nerves as though the whole body were being disintegrated. So sudden and terrible was the effect that Seaton uttered an involuntary yelp of surprise and pain as he once more fled to the safety of space. 

“”What the devil was that?” DuQuesne demanded. “Can they generate and project infra-sound?”” - p 149 

NOW, that’s one of the more precocious parts of the novel from my POV. I didn’t learn about infrasound until I read something by William S. Burroughs about it. That wd’ve been in the ’70s. Then, in the early ‘80s, I met the wife of a British infrasound researcher. He’d locked in her in a small room &amp; subjected her to infrasound before he let her out again. They got divorced. SO, mention of infrasound in 1928 makes it seem that Smith must’ve been on top of the technology of the time. 

All, in all, this bk was ok. I’m not in any hurry to read anything else by him again but I’m not totally against it.