Rating: 4/5

Retired Belgian detective Hercule Poirot returns to dazzle in another Agatha Christie mystery. Having been contemplating retirement, Poirot chooses to take twelve final cases in line with the mythical labours of his namesake. Now, in a story that is a bunch of short stories strung together, Poirot tackles many cases in an effort to show off his mettle.

While attending a dinner party, a guest feels the work of Belgian detective Hercule Poirot parallels the efforts of his namesake, Hercules. Poirot is less than amused, but it gets him thinking. He has been wanting to retire once and for all, soaking up the sun and enjoying the tranquility that no more cases would have to offer. However, he wants to go out with a bang and chooses to emulate the twelve labours of Hercules by picking cases that fit the bill, at least metaphorically. With that in mind, Poirot begins the hunt and tries to show how each could be easily compared to the great god’s work.

The cases are quick and require little effort at times. From a lost dog to locating a devious murderer and even solving the case of religious cult members, Poirot weaves his way around Europe in hopes of accomplishing his task before too long. Now, ready to retire, he must decide how he will end it all and what the future holds for him. Christie keeps things on point with this piece, which serves more as a collection of short pieces than one, single case.

My recent binge of the Hercule Poirot stories has provided to be a great experience, contrasting between some of the longer and more arduous reads I have had on my list. Agatha Christie does not let the reader down, showing that she can write full novels and short stories with ease. This one was a mish-mash and made it harder to see an overall narrative flow or character development, but I enjoyed the mysteries embedded within each piece. Still, the end result is the same; Poirot dazzles and keeps the reader on their toes throughout the experience. Like Poirot, I have decided to hang this series up for a while, focusing one some other summer projects. That said I will be back to continue my own labours of Hercule Poirot!

Kudos, Madam Christie, for another great collection.

Love/hate the review? An ever-growing collection of others appears at: 
http://pecheyponderings.wordpress.com/