Rating: 4/5

The ABC of technique
1. The prime difficulty: What is my subject?
a) A subject is always trying to merge itself into the great mass of associated facts
b) Subject: that group of associated facts and ideas which leave no questions unanswered within the presentation even though many questions could be asked outside of it
c) Fashioning a subject is life working with clay.
2. “I have all of my material”-but have you?
a) A final search of material needs to be performed
b) The is for new information that was written while you were researching
3. The practical imagination at work
a) You must create a system of order as you research
b) Take notes on uniform size paper
c) Write down author, title, and page number for all research
d) Never write of both sides of anything
4. A note is first a thought
a) Do not copy information word for word
b) Paraphrase by putting it into your own words
c) This makes an effort of thought and it allows you to remember the material better
5. Knowledge for whom?
a) The report-maker never knows exactly whom he is addressing
b) He must write as if he were addressing the entire scholarly community
6. Hard labor makes royal roads
a) Writing means rewriting
b) No one can write a passable first draft
B. Verification
1. How the mind seeks truth
a) The researcher must make some decision and make it convincing not only to himself but to others. 
b) The steps by which he performs this task constitute verification.
2. Collation, or matching copies with sources
a) One of the fundamental ways of verifying facts is collation or bringing together.
3. Rumor, legend, fraud
a) The first step is to trace the tale to its origin
b) Not all discrepancies signalize a myth or a fraud
4. Falsification on the increase
a) New modes of communication and entertainment in the last 50 years have created numerous pseudo-historical programs
b) This weakens the standards of evidence and truth telling
c) The overlap between cheap journalism and history writing has been detrimental to the public mind
5. Attribution, or putting a name to a source
a) The historian arrives at truth through probability
b) One type of difficulty that a researcher overcomes by looking for cumulative indirect proof is that of identifying unsigned contributions in periodicals
6. Explication, or worming secrets out of a manuscript
a) Manuscripts often come in huge unsorted masses
b) They must be forced to tell the exact story that the author intended 
7. Disentanglement, or undoing the knots in facts
a) Printed sources are full of errors that have to be resolved
8. Clarification, or destroying myths
a) The myth that there was much belief that the end of the world was coming in 1000AD
b) It is unhistorical to read back our habits into a past era (Whig)
9. Identification, or asserting worth through authorship
a) Frank Anderson spent 35 years tracing who the anonymous author of “The diary of a public man” was.
b) To look for evidence is something that one has to take for granted in scientific research
C. Handling Ideas
1. Fact and idea: an elusive distinction
a) Facts rarely occur free from interpretation or ideas.
b) The only pure facts are those that express a conventional relation in conventional terms (X happened on Y date, or A shot B)
c) Idea: an image inference or suggestion that goes beyond the data namable in conventional terms.
d) History is made up of facts merged with ideas
2. Large ideas as facts of history
a) This distinction between fact and idea does not cover large ideas
b) Large ideas like the idea of evolution is a fact because it occurred
3. Technical terms, all or none
a) Every ordinary word can become a technical term
4. The technique of self criticism
a) The reader is always more sensitive to the expressed meaning that the author . 
b) The author sees intended meaning
5. Historians’ and reporters’ fallacies, how to avoid them
a) In handling ideas we must watch for fallacies that words mask
b) Reductive Fallacy: this reduces diversity to 1 thing
c) Tautology: hidden repetition
d) Misplaced Literalism: ex. Lord Acton does not say “Power corrupts”, he says “Power tends to corrupt”
6. The scholar and the great ideas on record
a) Collingwood sought to re-think all history
D. Truth, causes, and conditions
1. The types of evidence
a) Records (intentional transmitters of fact): written, oral, works of art
b) Relics (unintended transmitters of fact): letters, language, artifacts
c) No piece of evidence can be used in the state that it was found. It must undergo the critical method in the researcher’s mind
2. Probability the guide
a) The historical method ascertains the truth by means of common sense
3. Clio and the doctors
a) There is a tendency among readers to believe the expert opinion of doctors
4. Assertion v. Suggestion
a) Proof demands decisive evidence which means evidence that confirms one view and excludes its rivals
b) Truth rests not on possibility nor on plausibility but on probability
5. Facing the doubtful in all reports
a) Every observers knowledge of an event contains some exact and some erroneous knowledge
b) A capable researcher can learn more about the past than a past contemporary did
6. Subjective and objective: the right meanings
a) Four reasons for trusting history: documents, critically testing evidence, probability, and that the notion of an absolute past is a delusion
b) All history rests on subjective impressions
c) Subjective and biased are not synonyms
d) An objective judgment is one made by testing in all ways possible one’s subjective impressions, so as to arrive at a knowledge of objects
7. Knowledge of fact and knowledge of causes
8. Of cause and measurement
a) Every attempt to reduce causes to one paramount cause and several contributory causes ends in self-stultification
II. Writing, Speaking, and Publishing
A. Organizing: Paragraph, Chapter, and Part
1. The function of form and of forms
a) Form is what organizes the facts of the past
b) We know the contents only through its form
c) Methods of organization
(1) Chronology: fault--mixes events great and small without emphasis
(2) Topical: This is repetitious and tedious
(3) Combination: This is the best approach
2. The steps in organizing
a) The combination of topic and time calls for transition (word, sentence, paragraph, section)
3. Composing by instinct or outline
a) Use whatever method is best for you
b) Composition errors
(1) The lack of proper order of narrative events
(2) Steering around in a circle--prose that does not move forward
4. The short piece and the paragraph
a) It is possible to shrink all of this advice down into a short piece but not a paragraph
B. Plain words: The war on jargon and cliché
1. Keep conscious and weigh your words
a) Revise, tinker, and alter
b) All words must be given strict attention
c) Be aware of ever word written
2. The state of language today
a) Some speak of a degeneration of language
b) Evidence for this is jargon, neologisms (ex. parent-ing, audioanamatronic)
3. Be strict about signposts
a) There is a continual misuse of definite and indefinite article
4. Picture all verbal images
a) The failure to detect incoherent imagery in our writing leads to the concealment of all or part of our meaning
5. Decide which images are alive: images should be alive and compatible
6. Jargon: its origin and poisonous effects
a) It means special meaning for a trade or art (this is not incorrect)
b) What is incorrect is pseudo-jargon. Words that are not definite or fixed in meaning. Ex. area for subject. Concept for notion
7. Learn to live without jargon or cliché
a) Jargon and cliché denote a failure of courage, an emotional weakness [240] this is excessively over-dramatic
8. Give up omnibus words and dressing gowns (other enemies to proper words)
a) Omnibus words: Certain adjectives that writers of textbooks have made habitual--ex. bitter attack
b) Adverbial dressing gowns: Ex. unnecessary adverbs--wholly unjustifiable, fully recognize
c) Long words
9. Observe idioms and unwritten laws
a) A thesaurus is good for inspiration
10. Do all you can to reduce confusion
a) Avoid acronyms
C. Clear sentences: Emphasis, Tone, and Rhythm
1. Live sentences for lively thoughts
a) No satisfactory definition of a sentence has ever been given
b) Think of a sentence as an organism possessing a skeleton, muscles, and skin
2. Five legged sheep and other monsters
a) The first rule of sentence making--bring as close together as possible the parts that go together in a sentence. “The wind blew across the desert and whistled where the corpse lay”
b) The second rule is: The antecedents of pronouns must always be unmistakable
3. Modern prose: Its virtues and vices
a) Prose cannot reproduce speech--it is two separate things
b) The ease with which thought can be gathered from words is in inverse ration to their combined length
4. Marking with care for the reader
a) Punctuate as little as possible
b) Do not use exclamation marks!
5. Carpentry or cabinet making?
a) A well-made sentence is not born, it can only be the result of much planning, fitting. 
b) It is compared to a cabinetmakers work
6. The sound of the sense
a) The only way to judge the tone of your own reading is to put it aside and respond to it later
D. The arts of quoting and translating
1. Three recurrent tasks
a) Quoting, citing, translating
b) Two forms of quoting--original and translating
2. The philosophy of quoting
a) One view (old) is not to quote but give your own thoughts
b) Quotations should be kept short and they should be merged into the text
c) Nearly 15% of all quotes contain errors
3. The mechanics of quotation
4. What is quotable under fair use
a) Around 500 to 1000 words
5. Difficulties and dangers of translation
a) Just because you know 2 languages does not mean that you know how to translate
b) First rule of translation: The translator must understand the precise meaning of the word
6. Dictionaries and false friends
a) Second rule of translation: You must go beyond the immediate dictionary definition of the word
b) False friends are roadblocks to translation
7. Literalism and paraphrase
a) All good translation is paraphrase