Rating: 4/5

“Dinosaur in the hay stack” is a busy book, but one that imparts knowledge and insight while remains entertaining. This seems to me one of Gould’s more varied collections of essays on science with an attempt at mixing science, history, and literature; a thorough geek-out.
 The first essay, for example, delves into the details of the anomaly of how millennium years are not truly marking the millennia. This is all apparently due to the negligence of a sixth century Monk, Dionysius Exiguus (Dennis the shorty), who did not set the year of Christ’s birth as year zero. In his ecclesiastically commissioned calendar, year 1AD followed 1BC with no zeros in between! So, the year 2001 is the beginning of the 21st century. 
Another delightful essay is ‘the late birth of a flat earth.’ Here it is shown that a lot of "shade" that is literally thrown on the Dark Ages is bunk. One such claim is that they thought the earth is flat. This is shown to be a fabrication of historians of the late 19th century. Then, as now, there were a bunch of crazy people who made such claims, but nobody really paid them any attention or respect in the scholarly and scientific circles.
 In particular, the story of Columbus and the fear of falling off the edge of the earth is totally apocryphal. When Columbus proposed the journey to the Indies through a western route, the commission that reviewed his proposal (including the clergy) mostly opposed him because they (correctly) interjected that Columbus is underestimating the size of the globe. He thought Japan was roughly 2000 miles from the coast of Spain, the correct figure is more like 12000 miles! The rest is history; Columbus, getting lucky in several respects, landed on the wrong continent because of poor math. 
 I briefly mention some of my other favorites in this series:
 The right-handed vs. left-handed seashells.
 The excellent critique of Hollywood’s one-trick-pony scripts when it comes to depictions of science and scientists (Jurassic Park as the main example here, but perhaps if Gould were alive he would have written on the fear and loathing of AI in our time)
 Edgar A. Poe’s unfairly derided "conchologists hand book".