Rating: 4/5

“When your stomach is full you don’t smell blood.”

So many of her stories speak to how we can live such propinquity and yet lead completely divergent lives; holding different values, morals, and most clearly here - conclusions and assumptions about ourselves and each other. 
South Africa made this law, but people made it real of their own volition. These stories speak to this: within marriages, workplaces, neighborhoods, families.

South Africa is unrivaled in its sweeping physical beauty, dance and music (Vusi!). It is a place so rich with life; I remember the hippo that blocked our driveway one morning, and the green mamba snake (eating a gecko) who greeted us in KwaZulu Natal, the sunbirds, the hilarious monkeys who destroyed my laundry.

But also I think, it is a country unrivaled in its ability to break my heart. How many ways this could have gone differently - for the majority black population whose economic lives have worsened in the last 30 years, and for the remaining bits of wild nature still alive - the birds, the South Atlantic Right Whales, the cheetahs. They have all been the victims of outrageous theft.

My favorite story was Keeping Fit. A deft piece of writing that whipped me back and forth, as well as the protagonist, and left him with - well, maybe - an entirely new view on the value of life, not just human life.

Another was Amnesty, the last story in the book. A freedom fighter is released from The Island (Robben Island) and finally returns to his waiting mother, wife and daughter (who does not remember him). He is distant, but kind, Very Busy and Important. They are tenant farmers, hardscrabble, barely surviving, day-to-day.
He arrives with great fanfare and attention. It's quite lovely for a minute.
He is angry, amongst other inequities, that his mother and wife have to work the 'Boer’s land'.
He soon leaves, staying long enough to impregnate her again. He’s important, you see and has things to do in this changing country (he really does). Her life - of course returns to pre-release rhythms. Her thoughts: 

“It’s the Boer’s farm but that’s not true, it belongs to nobody. The cattle don’t know that anyone says he owns it, the sheep - they are grey stones, and then they become a thick grey snake moving - don’t know. Our huts and the old mulberry tree and the little brown mat of earth that my mother dug over yesterday, way down there, and way over there the clump of trees round the chimneys and the shiny thing that is the TV mast of the farmhouse --they are nothing, on the back of this earth. It could twitch them away like a dog does a fly.”

 “The child remembered the photo: she said That’s not him. I’m sitting here where I came often when he was on the Island. I came to get away from the others, to wait by myself.
I'm watching the rat, it's losing itself, its shape, eating the sky, and I’m waiting.”

This is a brilliant book, published in 1991; apartheid still in place but beginning to crack. The stories are wide ranging and from many viewpoints. If you’re interested in South Africa, or planning a trip, this is highly recommended.