Rating: 5/5

I protest! I protest because I was led to believe that this tale is a true one (that’s of course what my heated imagination wanted to tell after plunging myself head along in it). I protest because the author chose this unfortunate word in the title ‘the last…’! I protest that I have been completely seduced by this remarkable historical narrative. I protest that I protest! 

 

I am wondering if this makes me be a redskin, considering this outrageous exhibition of protest! I think I am. I just don’t remember what my name used to be. Sad, very sad :(

 

I have read this novel with my heart constantly leaping straight to my throat. I protest for this too! How can a reading take place in such uncomfortable state of being? I felt all the time like I was being chased by some terrifying savages and so I ought to employ all the means to save my life. My life seemingly hasn’t been so precious to me like it has felt whilst having immersed myself so absurdly and without any protest (though again I protest for my failing to protest) unto the pages of this book. 

 

Ok. I admit that there is a lot of obscurity and confusion in some trying, very desperate scenes of the narrative, but this hasn’t spoiled a bit my mounting admiration and excitement while turning the pages, with an ardour that caused some mental burning too. It was wonderful how it was depicted the great diversity of the Indian traditions, the Indian themselves as warriors and their remarkable qualities, as individuals but also as part of the tribes they were assumed to live. 

 

Ok. There is a lot of war scenes – that is colonial wars of North America, and troubles caused by the war over land, over authority, over the people, conflict begun because of the palefaces coming from over the Eastern big sea, which nowadays is called an ocean. 

 

Ok. We all know or at least pretend to acknowledge that the redskins – the American Indians – were the possessors of their country, first occupied by the Europeans in this portion of the continent (north-eastern America), consequently the first dispossessed, and there is no surprise on the seemingly inevitable fate of all these people. I feel there is enough historical truth in this picture.

 

Ok. There is a whole lot of wilderness in which the incidents of the narrated legend occurred. My mind was simply overwhelmed trying to picture all that area, though nowadays the red man has entirely deserted it. But then we live at so far away distance, both in time and place…

 

Ah. I am at a loss to say who attracted me more: Uncas or Hawk-eye. Without them there wouldn’t have been anything but just another common book. For my own satisfaction I even think that lately I have reserved for myself this sort of silent, heartfelt laugh, same as Hawk-eye used to do. 

 

Ahh, and the end of the novel…that was the last straw put on the fire. I have read the last Chapter twice. I just felt that maybe this repetition will diminish a bit the deep impression that was engraved on my mind. Of course, it didn’t bring anything in my aid and I was left to feel together with the participants in their very trying moment. But I was not alone, either. I was there with Hawk-eye and Chingachgook, myself grasping for their united hands and bowing my head to feel what is coming like a rapid mountain river. That was very beautiful. 

 

Now that the novel is finished, I am to rejoice, hopefully, that there are other works by the same author that I could tackle. Still, I cannot help feeling that I would have been so delighted to read this tale in my early youth. There is a lot that could affect a reader at such a sensible age. The sense of adventure, the sense of qualities to be respected and even the sense that the history of that long past can be made so fresh again, of course for the purpose of knowledge, but with the remark that one has to have a very strong heart, calm mind and immovable composure, as for myself I couldn’t help struggling with pangs even more acute than any that my ‘fears’ had excited during the read. Against my will there is a melancholy feeling that still lingers over my mind, as all the images and events I have witnessed during the read remained deeply impressed on my memory. I guess I am not alone :)