Rating: 2/5

After approximately 1/3 of this long, long, long novel:

This moves at the pace of a snail! It is repetitive. It is wordy. A long novel is great - but it must keep your attention every bit of the way. This one doesn't. 

I haven't given up yet. 

***********************

On completion: 
I struggled through all 34 hours and 16 minutes of this audiobook. I like long books, yet this remained a struggle through most of it. Why? The writing. It is repetitive. Words and phrases are repeated continually. If a character says "no", here in this book they say “no, no, no”. For a while I sat down and copied all the repetitive lines:

"No, no, no
Yes, yes, yes
Why was it, why was it....oh God?!
He must think, think, think.....
Thinking, thinking.....
And maybe....who knows?!
For fear, for fear
Darling, precious, baby
That might mean, that might mean, what might that not mean?!
Always watching, watching
If only, if only....."

Not only words are repeated c-o-n-t-i-n-u-a-l-l-y, but also ideas thoughts and subject matter. After an hour of listening my husband would enter the room and ask what had happened. My response? Nothing yet; the same thing is still being discussed! This way of writing makes the speed of the novel extremely slow! It is this that destroyed the novel for me. It does have content. Important content!

Themes focused upon are religious salvation, one's social standing, politics, capital punishment, adultery, murder, guilt, court proceedings and judicial biases, the importance of education. Interesting themes. The book certainly does show you clearly why what happens happens and why Clyde, the central character, ends up in the mess that he ends up in. Is it his fault, the mess he ends up in? No, not really. I will tell you what I think the book makes stunningly clear - what happens to Clyde could so easily happen to you. I mean YOU! Me too. One misstep, and down you go. 

Please readers, don't judge the book by the movie. That is relatively short! Here you have to trudge through a million lines. 

On completion I went to Wiki and discovered that this story is based on a true crime story! I feel that those chapters that focus on the crime sequence are the best of the whole novel. 

The audiobook I listened to is read by Dan John Miller. His execution is good. He switches tone, just as the lines of the book's text do. Jeez, when he gave us the baby-talk lines of Sandra Finchley, he drove me nuts. But those are the lines that Dreiser puts in the novel. He executes them well, not poorly. 

The whole story revolves around Clyde, poor naive Clyde, who cannot make up his mind who he loves! Roberta or Sandra, and the two different worlds they come from!