Rating: 3/5

Okay. So, I can't really say that I've read this book. I read it in grabs and perhaps two long runs over more than five years. I was surprised how much seemed to stay familiar over that time, so that I was never confused as to what was going on. The problem I had is that Gardner might have been. This book is a chunk at just shy of 600 dense pages. 
Digression: I was introduced to Gardner in college by Nancy Milford, who was his friend or compatriot. It was her recommendation that kept him in my mind all these years. I read October Light years ago and it remains a favorite. 
This was the last book he was to publish during his lifetime. He was killed in a motorcycle accident at age 49, some months after this was published. 
Okay, the book. There are some astonishing, typical Gardner passages, where he really is writing with the agility and lightness I associate with him. He does wander and seems to be trying to load weight into the book, the main character of the title is a philosophy professor. There's a run at the end, the last 60 pages, where we check in with various characters, and I get the sense that he was just wrapping things up hoping for the Graces to deliver an end worthy of the journey. 
Sometimes just getting home is a relief as it was here. 
The times we live in. This book would likely be shredded by many contemporary readers after not so many pages. An older white male, boozy, careening around with a hooker, and another professor, has the the cancel me-type markers on it to get dismissed despite the strength of prose and remarkable sentences and uses on punctuation. Gardner was a pro's pro in terms of craft. It's not very fair to use current standards to whip a forty-year-old book, is it? It's a portrait, a story, not a billboard for justice. 
There's a lot about ghosts, a plot about Mormons, martini drinking, pipe smoking, which all read as things that certain generations would need to be warned about, but this book really needs a translation, a wire-brush to knock off the cultural rust and lyric dust to find what Gardner was trying to get at. 
Personal and sentimental stuff. The language of the book sounds like someone who had never heard rock n' roll, which might be the case, and that formal language seems a bit stiff, though probably better than a massive embrace of "hey, man, that's not cool," etc. I bought this book when I first moved to Seattle in '97 at a bookstore up on 15th that was in a house. I was happy to find a hardcover first edition in such good shape and at a reasonable price. I'll put this on my shelf next to the others I bought there and at Powell's, with the idea to read The Sunlight Dialogues or Nickel Mountain next. It's no crime to write a book like this, and it strikes me as a record of his fine, bright mind trying to make sense of things in a great way. We all think of ourselves and our narrative arcs, but that his was lopped off as it was, has me contemplating what he might have done. Perhaps his ghost will find me in a dream and fill my bedroom with pipe smoke, reproach me for being a lazy reader, but in a kind way, before leaving, purposely not telling me what he might have done.