Rating: 5/5

This story, is about the life of the United States Army General, Tommy Franks, and how he ascended from the rank of Second Lieutenant all the way up to being the Commander In Chief of the United States Central Command. As an autobiography, Tommy Ray Franks is the main character in this book. However, many of the significant characters include, Cathryn Jane Carley Franks, General Norman Schwarzkopf, King Abdullah II of Jordan, Crown Prince Abdullah II of Saudi Arabia, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan, and Sheik Mohammed Bin Zayed, Military Chief of Staff of the United Arab Emirates, as well as many others. The story, American Soldier, covers Tommy Franks' military career, beginning as a second Lieutenant in the Vietnam War, to being a Brigadier General in the Persian Gulf War, and on to being a four star general and Commander in Chief of the United States Central Command in the War in Afghanistan, and the Iraq War. As a commander, Franks faced many problems during his military career, such as trying to be popular with his troops, while at the same time, trying to stay within the limits of Army regulations. As a general officer, Franks has visited many countries in order to keep up support for the ongoing War on Terror. My favorite character, is Tommy Franks.
 
 I couldn't really relate to the characters in the story. I mean, the achievements that I have made, pale in comparison to the achievements of Tommy Franks. It's no small thing to be given command of the United States Central Command. 
 
 I believe this is an extraordinary book. I believe this, because, like the recently published Autobiography, American Sniper, written by Navy SEAL Chris Kyle, the deadliest sniper in U.S. military history, it combines the sense of duty to God, Country and Family that many Americans feel. They also give detailed stories around true American heroes and their accomplishments. I don't really know if I did have one favorite part in this story, in my opinion, the entire book is a masterpiece. What Franks did really well, was being able to achieve so much, with very little resources at his disposal.
 
 I would recommend this novel to another person. I would recommend it because I believe that a lot of people do need to read this and understand that our freedoms, that so many of us take for granted everyday, do not come cheap. We are free because of brave men and women like Tommy Franks and Chris Kyle who answered their country's call, and fought so that we could wake up each day being able to live our lives freely, and safely. I believe that most everyone, especially those who are planning to join the military, would love this book.