Rating: 5/5

This—along with Mortal Stakes, Looking for Rachel Wallace, and Ceremony—is one of the best of the first dozen Spenser books, written in Robert B. Parker's finest period. Like the others, it deals with America's shifting values, and how a macho but moral hero—our Spenser—must make ambiguous ethical choices in order to preserve and foster what little good he can.

Patty Giacomin hires Spenser to find her teenage son, who has been abducted by his father Mel. Son Paul is little more than a pawn in this separated couples' soon-to-be vicious divorce, but when Spenser tries to talk with Paul he finds the situation is even worse. Patty and Mel, equally cold, selfish and neglectful, have “raised” a son who not only cannot choose between his parents, but who has developed so little sense of self-worth that he has no preferences and cannot choose at all. How can Spenser give Paul independence and help him choose a life for himself?

Why, blackmail the parents, of course!

Before he can find discover the proper method, Spenser must negotiate a murky sea filled with suspicious insurance claims, cryptic trips to Manhattan, a few negligible thugs and one serious gangster. But, when it comes to the gangster, Spenser has Hawk by his side.

Speaking of Hawk: although an interesting and entertaining foil for Spenser, he often functions—as he does here—as a variety of “magic negro,” a super bad-ass who performs certain necessary but disgraceful acts of violence, acts of which our hero is morally incapable. Hawk does the dirtiest of the dirty work so that Spenser can still look like a hero. (When I first read the book, thirty-five years ago, I didn't notice this sort of thing. But I notice it now.) 

The middle section of the novel, where Spenser constructs a “manhood school” in the Maine woods is filled with some good macho Hemingway prose as well as a lot of tenderness and irony. Not the least of the ironies is the fact that, when Spenser's “school” has been successful, and Paul has developed preferences and desires, he chooses a distinctly non-macho passion—one to which Spenser is indifferent and which his father Mel positively hates.

A thoroughly enjoyable entertainment that gives the reader a lot to think about too.