Rating: 5/5

Personal Response
I thought this was a really good book because there was a lot of non stop action. You never really knew what was going to happen next. This was one of those book where you would start reading and not want to stop reading it.

Plot Summary
This book was about a young boy named Huckleberry Finn. He and his friend Tom Sawyer found a treasure and they put all the money they earned in the towns bank. Huck was adopted by a widow and was living the normal life. Huck's father found out that Huck had found the treasure and took Huck captive. His father was keeping him captive until he gave him the money for liquor. Huck dug a hole to get out of his father's cabin and made it look like he was murdered. Huck took a canoe and went out to a island. While he was on the island he found Jim, who was a slave that Huck new from the widow's house. Apparently he ran away because people were thinking he was the one who killed Huck. Huck told Jim how he faked his death after escaping his father's cabin. Huck and Jim decided they would just hop on there raft and start heading down river. After heading down river for a while they came across a steamship that was sinking. Huck decided to go aboard the steamship where he found thieves. Jim stayed back to keep a look out for anyone else. When they went to go back to there raft it was gone. They decided they would take the thieves boat instead. They hopped in and there was a bunch of loot that they had stolen. After awhile of boating they stumbled across their raft. A few days later Huck and Jim met two men who claimed that they were royalty. Huck just went along with it because Jim believed them. The two men decided they would scam people by performing a show of one of them just jumping around and hollering. The townspeople were not happy when they realized that they just got scammed. Before the towns people could catch them the two men slipped away and they started heading down river again. They stumbled upon a little boy who was going to deliver a message to a family. It turns out that the family had a lot of money in there house and the brothers of the man who died were supposed to receive but it was hidden. The two men decided they were going to act like the brothers and steal the money for themselves. Huck didn't let that happen and put the money somewhere safe where only the daughter knew where it was. Huck ran back to the raft only to find that Jim had gone missing. He traveled to the next town and found out where Jim was. He went to the place where Jim was and the family thought he was his best friend Tom Sawyer. Huck decided to act like Tom so he could rescue Jim. Huck decided to go into town, but on his way in he met Tom on the road. Tom was shocked to see Huck because he thought he was dead. Huck told Tom everything and told him he was playing as Tom. Tom decided to act like his own brother Sid. After a few days they came up with a plan and broke Jim out of his hut. The men that were guarding the hut started shooting and one of the bullets hit Tom. Huck, Jim, and Tom went out to an island to hide. Huck left to go find a doctor to remove the bullet. Huck got the doctor but the doctor said he didn't trust the canoe with two people so he would go by himself. The doctor was gone for a couple days and Huck went back to the house to sleep. A couple days later the doctor came back and Jim was in shackles. Tom was okay just tired. Jim got caught because the doctor needed help so he helped him The doctor brought him back then they tied him up. When Tom woke up he started talking about how him and Huck broke Jim out and told the whole story. They found out that Huck wasn't Tom and Tom wasn't Sid. Tom told them who he was and who Huck was. So Huck went back to his old town.

Characterization
Huck started as a young boy who didn't want to live the normal life. He didn't want to wear fancy clothes or have proper manners. He just wanted to live how he wanted to. In dirty clothes and not a care in the world. He would sneak out to go hang out with his friends at night. When he was captive he used his head on how to escape. After he got out he decided to fake his death so he could live how he wanted to. He meet one of his friends and they had a big adventure on the river and he was starting to mature. Then after he had his big adventure he decided he would give the normal life another try.

Recommendation
I would recommend this book to kids who like adventure and exploration. This would be a good book for middle school and high schoolers because its long and has a good story line. This is also a good book if you like some pictures while you read.