Rating: 2/5

This work provides lots of information. I learned quite a bit about the kind of Catholicism that initially flourished in Ireland. The Irish became Catholic but kept married priests. Abbots, not bishops, ruled the Irish church. As one of the only Catholic countries not conquered by Rome, it preserved Western culture. Irish monks preserved, studied and copied many Greek and Latin manuscripts. Irish priests, trained in Irish monasteries, were sought after all over Europe during Medieval times. But with the arrival of the Anglo-Normans, diocesan bishoprics were imposed and the Irish monasteries withered.

I also learned about the Viking attacks. Despite their ferocity, the Viking attacks never terminated any of the Irish kingdoms. The Vikings came usually without women and, finding Irish women irresistible, were soon absorbed into the gene pool.

This work is a companion piece to a PBS series. It is not a scholarly work. (There are no footnotes, for example.) This book is in the breezy style of a reporter's journal--a record of interviews and trips to see castles, battlefields and archaeological digs. Clearly a lot of reading and preparation went into the project, but most of that scholarship was left on the cutting room floor. The book introduces us to historians and archaeologists whose findings often are cited to question the many legends and myths the Irish hold onto about their past. However, the scholars who hold opposing views are rarely introduced.

 This work presents much information and goes to great lengths to separate fact from fiction. The chief myth involves the Celtic origin of the Irish--a fable that dates back to the 19th century writers who believed the Irish people deserved a cultural identity established in the deep past. By A.D. 100 Ireland was a Celtic-speaking island, but archaeology does not support the notion of a Celtic invasion around 500 B.C.

 If you have to decide between the documentary film series and the book, I would recommend viewing the film version.