Rating: 3/5

THE ‘LEFT BEHIND’ AUTHOR CRITIQUES MID- AND POST-TRIB VIEWPOINTS

[NOTE: This book was originally published under the title, ‘No Fear of the Storm.’]

Timothy F. "Tim" LaHaye (1926-2016) was a minister and (with wife Beverly) conservative activist, who founded Christian Heritage College (now San Diego Christian College), and helped establish the Institute for Creation Research; but he was best known in his latter days for being the coauthor (and "idea man," if not the one who actually pens the books) of the 'Left Behind' Series, as well as other books such as: The End Times Controversy, No Fear of the Storm, Charting the End Times Prophecy Study Guide, Spirit-Controlled Temperament, etc. 

He wrote in the Introduction to this 1998 book about the Premill, Pre-Trib perspective, “This concept… was clearly taught … as early as A.D. 376 and in America as early as 1784, long before John [Nelson] Darby was born. Mr. Darby may rightly be accused of popularizing the concept … but he certainly did not invent it. Yet for some reason, this concept … has been under savage attack during the last sixty years by those who refuse to take prophecy literally… Unfortunately, they have been amazingly successful in causing many innocent victims to abandon their expectation of rapture in their lifetime… in 1992, I invited a number of the leading prophecy scholars, writers and teachers of the pre-Trib view … to meet me for three days in Dallas, Texas, for in-depth discussions on prophecy… We all agreed that a permanent group was needed, so we formed the PreTrib Research Center (PTRC)… For six years this group has met faithfully for three days annually to consider all the attacks on our position, to study its scriptural basis, and to provide biblical answers to the questions against it…” (Pg 11-14) Later, he adds, “After carefully studying … both sides of the issue, I am convinced there is no reason to abandon this comforting view. The new attacks … are simply unconvincing.” (Pg. 22)

He notes, “God’s prophetic clock is beginning to move again and people… show a renewed interest in Bible prophecy. And that doesn’t include the ‘millennial fever’ that many foresee … as we approach the twenty-first century…” (Pg. 25)

He acknowledges, “The apostles and the church of the first three centuries whole-heartedly expected that Christ would return for His church during their lifetime… Second-century churches were under such severe persecution that they considered themselves already in the Tribulation…” (Pg. 31)

He states, “when Christ calls his living saints to be with Him, millions of people will suddenly vanish from the earth… The world will somehow have to come to terms with MILLIONS of missing Christians. The ensuing outcry of sorrow, loss, and confusion will make the rapture a well-publicized event, dominating the media for weeks and weeks. If I am right that all babies under the age of accountability are innocent of personal sin… then youngsters … to the age of personal accountability (only God knows the date) will vanish with the Christians… The absence of millions of people will occupy the minds of those left behind until the events of the Tribulation begin and the revelation of the Antichrist… will crowd thoughts of Rapture out of their minds.” (Pg. 40-41)

He recounts, “a popular argument against the pre-Tribulation theory … is that it was invented by John Darby in the last century (1828) and was never seen or mentioned… for almost nineteen centuries of church history. That argument is simply not true!... it was discovered that the Reverend Morgan Edwards saw it back in 1742… in his book ‘Millennium, Last Days Novelties,’ written in 1788. Although he saw only a three and a half year tribulation, he definitely saw the rapture occur BEFORE the tribulation… he claimed he had written the same thing as early as 1742.” (Pg. 42-43)

He argues, “Those who believe that Christ will appear in the middle or at the end of the Tribulation must account for the missing church in Revelation chapters 6-18… How else can we explain that the church, the major player in … chapters 1 through 3… is mentioned specifically seventeen times but does not appear once chapters 6 through 18, which describe in detail the events of the seven-year Tribulation period? That stunning silence can easily be explained by those who believe in rapture before Tribulation.” (Pg. 53)

He states, “It is a sad commentary on the church that in its twenty-century history, only five centuries have featured imminency. But those have been the most consecrated, soul-winning, missionary-minded, and spiritually productive days of the church. Frankly, one of my objections to the mid- and post-Trib theories is their destruction of imminency. For if Christ cannot come at any moment, these views cannot instruct us to look for His return.” (Pg. 71)

He notes, “One objection to the pre-Tribulation rapture is that no one passage of Scripture teaches the two aspects of His Second Coming separated by the Tribulation. This is true. But then, no one passage teaches a post-Tribulation of mid-Tribulation rapture, either. (And no passage teaches against it.) Our task is to carefully study all the second-coming passages to see if they are talking about the same event.” (Pg. 75)

Of Marvin Rosenthal’s book ‘The Pre-Wrath Rapture of the Church,’ he comments, “He seems to have the happy ability to interpret Scripture texts as he wishes, then claim dogmatically and with certitude that they prove his point.” (Pg. 114)

Of Dave MacPherson’s books, he states, “I read MacPherson’s books when they first came out and was impressed with his gifted writing style. Since then I have read much on both sides and have concluded that Mr. MacPherson’s theories are both unproven and unconvincing and cannot be substantiated by the facts.” (Pg. 119) He adds, “As I have read the documentation, studied Margaret’s vision, and validated for myself that it does not say what MacPherson claims it does, I have had to ask myself, Why does he do it? Why would an obviously intelligent person waste twenty or more years of his life trying to tear down a concept that has been such a blessing to millions of believers? He certainly has nothing better to offer in its place! Post-Tribulationism is a doomsday concept.” (Pg. 134)

Of Robert L. Pierce, author of ‘The Rapture Cult,’ he says, “Pierce, an activist in the John Birch Society and a student of the conspiracy theory… Using the venom-inspired distortions of history the MacPherson presented as truth, Pierce… appl[ied] them to the ‘great conspiracy,’ all without one scintilla of fact. I think I am well qualified to answer Pierce’s attack. I myself have been a forty-five year student of the satanically-inspired, centuries-old conspiracy… to destroy every vestige of Christianity within our society and establish a new world order. Having read at least fifty books on the Illuminati, I am convinced that it exists… To suggest, however, that the conspiracy used the biblical concept of a pre-Tribulation rapture is ridiculous… I would hope that the John birch Society would dissociate itself from a book that has so little fact to support it…” (Pg. 138) He also recounts, “I often spoke at [John Birch] society training seminars, knew Mr. [Robert] Welch and shared Christ personally with him … before he died…” (Pg. 147)

He says, “It may come as a surprise to most pre-Trib students that the post-Trib position (in its most primitive form) is the oldest point of view. Naturally, post-Trib believers insist that their system should be believed… because it is a part of ‘historic Christianity.’ But … while history is important, it does not provide an absolute basis on which to formulate doctrine… Pre-Millennialism… is not believed today because it was the predominant view of the church for three centuries. It is accepted by the evangelical church because it best fits the teachings of Scripture…” (Pg. 197)

In an Appendix, he states, “I doubt a person would arrive at an a-Millennial or post-Millennial position simply by reading the Bible literally. Instead, a system of interpretation or theology must first be applied to explain away the many promises of the future kingdom age… Both a-Millennialism and post-Millennialism require that systems of belief be imposed on the text of Scripture in order to reach certain conclusions about end-time events. In that respect they are like Christian Science… The same can be said for Jehovah’s Witnesses… and most of the cults.” (Pg. 223)

This is actually an effective defense of LaHaye’s position, and a critique of opposing views.