Rating: 1/5

On the surface, the Shivers series looks like just another Goosebumps imitator. But M.D. Spenser has real writing talent, and puts it to use in The Enchanted Attic. Eleven-year-old Nicole is miserable when her family moves to a broken-down mansion in rural Massachusetts. Her father, a journalist, was offered a job at the Boston Globe newspaper, but Nicole wishes he'd turned down the extra money so they could stay in Virginia. The musty old mansion her family lives in now doesn't put out a welcoming vibe; when Nicole tries to sleep in her bedroom the first night, creepy sounds keep her on edge. Is there anything good about her new life in Massachusetts?

 Nicole's seven-year-old sister Casey adapts better, as usual, but Nicole becomes interested in the sprawling mansion after stumbling into an old study filled with antique books. Nicole loves reading. Browsing the dusty shelves, she accidentally triggers a secret passage to open, a dark tunnel thick with cobwebs. Though fearful by nature, Nicole wants to explore the passage herself rather than inform her parents. With Casey by her side and a flashlight to pierce the darkness, Nicole follows the route upwards to a rough wooden door. It's locked, and far too heavy for the girls to barge open. This might be the end of their adventure, but then Nicole starts to hear phantom music drifting down from the attic most nights. Her parents never hear it, but the haunting music terrifies Nicole as she lies in bed. What—or who—is playing music behind that locked door? The only way to solve her problem is for Nicole to get the door open and discover the paranormal secret behind this house, a tragedy dating back more than a century. Can Nicole handle the sad, frightening truth?

 The Enchanted Attic enjoys a brisk start. Only a few pages in, Nicole is uncovering secrets in the mansion's old study. The reason I'm only rating it one and a half stars is that the story logic doesn't hold up as the plot climaxes and then coasts to a conclusion. This isn't a bad juvenile horror book, though; not as richly layered as most in R.L. Stine's Goosebumps franchise, but decent reading for kids who want a good scare and don't mind plot holes. I would read the Shivers series again.