Rating: 5/5

Stop I’ve been putting off finishing this for a while and was stuck at 12% before I got back into it today…. The rest of the 88% FLEW BY I am so enamored by this story. (Candace da flexed her vernacular bc the amount of words I was looking up while reading was insane ty babes)

Okay so at first I didn’t know what to feel and wasn’t really digging the fmc or even the mmc 😭😭 and I was lowkey hate-reading it for the shits n giggles BUT GUYS 34% of the way in I was LOCKED IN babes. It reminded me of the buccaneers show on Apple TV solely because of the whole American visiting England thing, not really in terms of story. Speaking of, the plot absolutely cleaaared…. This is one of those books that have really good plot with the smut coming secondary, like sometimes I felt like the seggsy was not really needed (coming from ME - that’s wild, anyway…) 

One thing I will say is that the fmc Alexandra went through some really (what should be) traumatic shit but came out of it completely mentally unscathed. This was definitely a sunshine x grumpy, but she was literally a goldfish. And I don’t even mean that in a bad bad way, she was super sweet and gave golden retriever energy but I just feel like it might have added a bit more depth to her character had she been a bit more emotionally tortured by her circumstances and didn’t just let it slide. (LIKE NANCY, i totally get where she was coming from, if I was deliberately hit in the head 2 times within a week and a half you bet ur ass I’d be complaining about wanting to go back home tf 😭) and what weirded me out about Sebastian (the mmc) was the fact that his priorities were always a bit tilted… for lack of a better term - towards Alexandra. What do you mean you’re gonna drop everything and come to my aid while the guy who did this to me is running away?!? GET HIS ASS! We need him for information!!! maybe I’m just a little pragmatic for thinking that way lmfao 

I’ve never read a book with this concept before so maybe that’s why I liked it so much, but I have read the whole “long lost family member” spiel but I don’t think I’ve ever seen one being executed this way. I actually really loved the mystery aspect and usually I can see the twists coming BUT OMFG I was not expecting MOST of the drama omg. there was a part where I literally paused, sat up, yelled WHATT, and then went back and the next line was literally my reaction but on paper I was weak 😭 AND THE END!,!! I WASNT EXPECTING THAT?.???

you can check out the notes and highlights for the tea, but for now I’m gonna get the next book in the series, EVEN THOUGH I can’t wait for the brothers story I already know who he is and just based on the 3 pages we had him for istg I know he’s gonna be my favorite 

Literally another 5/5 stars, it had so many memorable scenes (hot air balloon/carriage ride 😉 etc)I would definitely reread it 

I had a playlist loop these songs for like 6 hours but I think it really sets the vibe:
BABY IM HOME - odetari
Gods Game - dove cameron
Make You Mine - Madison Beer
Prayer1 - April27
Computer Love - Balenescu Quartet
I LOVE YOU HOE - odetari
The Buccaneers - AVAWAVES