Rating: 3/5

At the beginning of the book, the authors place the Anasazi worldview within a larger context. Like ancient belief systems elsewhere, the cosmos is seen as circular and cyclical. It represented perfection and eternal recurrence. “The circular kiva of the Pueblo,” they write, “the Hogan of the Navajo, the dome of the Indian stupa, Tibetan chorten, and even the dome of St. Peter’s mimic the celestial sphere.” This “regularity” of the heavens contrasted with “the uncertain chaos of the land beneath” and the kiva, the authors write, “may have been a place to achieve harmony with the larger world.”

Understanding the operation of “the heavens” created an extensive prehistoric astronomy that, the authors say, is reflected in the settlement patterns and building design. They describe the field research that develops this thesis for several of the Anasasi settlements. The descriptions veer often into technical descriptions that I found difficult to follow.

The book mentions that “in the San Juan Basin of nearly a thousand years ago, all roads led to Chaco Canyon. These roadways were 30 feed wide (on average) and were often “edged with low walls” and “ran in remarkably straight lines radiating outward from Chaco Canyon.” I believe there are similar roadways in the Mayan settlements on the Yucatán Peninsula and wonder if there's a connection.

The places discussed in this book are not "just native American sites" where "some" Indians lived, which unfortunately, and really badly, is how they are regarded in American (USA) history teaching. These sites are part of a vast and rich network of "cosmic cities." They were not only marketplaces, fortresses and administrative hubs, but "ceremonial centers" that were anchored in the movements of the heavens that, in turn, had direct relevance to the needs and fears of daily life. "The organization of the ceremonial centers," the authors write, "appears to have been inspired by a way of thinking that has been called 'cosmo-magical,' in which builders perceived a relationship between the celestial order above them and the biological rhythms of life. The two realms were seen as parallel in structure and synchronized in time. The cosmic city was aligned with the cosmos. Its streets and structures were often carefully oriented to the cardinal directions. The pattern of life within the city in its festivals and celebrations resonated with the movements of sun, moon, planets, and stars. The goal, either intuitively felt or officially imposed [sic] was a synchronization of individual human life with the larger universe. Such a goal, that of harmony between the individual and the larger cosmos, is evident in the lives of the Pueblo people as well as in the structures built by their ancestors." 

These sites are a window into the fundamentals of human nature: they evolved from within, pre-Western contact; they are the products of universal need and fear; they are about natives attempting to make themselves right with cosmic power that could make or break them. And, despite the extensive variation in cultural expression, doesn't this reflect the essence of all religious impulses, everywhere? 

First read: 2016. This review was edited 4-2-2022, after a re-reading of the book.