Rating: 3/5

I picked this up thinking it was a novel (the front cover suggests a quaint story of sleepy English village life). Instead, I found a work of non-fiction albeit with elements of fiction in some aspects of the presentation. In many ways, it's like a documentary but in book form. Ronald Blythe essentially interviewed Suffolk farming folk in the mid to late sixties and wrote down what they said. For all I know, he may have simply transcribed what they said word for word; but as I say, there is a definite feeling of creative license being employed here (Akenfied itself is a fictitious place and there is drama based on the book which further embellished the piece). I'm not sure what the objective was here for Blythe, to simply record the voices and experiences of a people who were quite noticeably dying out as modernity continued to march on. Maybe nothing more than that. Anyway, we get some facts and statistics along the way, dates, events, historical changes, then we get the thoughts of individual villagers and the various farm workers, people who have jobs that no longer exist (thatcher, bell ringer, malting worker, farrier, wheelwright, saddler, gravedigger etc). Plus a great many people who were directly or indirectly affected by the two world wars (and a few eccentrics thrown in for good measure too). 

This is a book which records not only a time and a place that is gone but also a place even further back in time which only the very elderly residents can now recall. Blythe seems to recognise that we are losing something, a way of life, a variety of traditions, and before it dies off entirely it ought to be captured, remembered, discussed, before all tangible traces of it (the people) have long vanished. As such the book always feels very sad, romantic, with a theme of hardship and melancholy running through it. England, (Western civilisation itself) has left behind a way of life that has existed for centuries and is being forgotten too easily. Each of the characters give their insights and opinions, some fascinating, some parochial, but it's all in service of a desperately pitiable past, both romanticised or despised, which is leaving us. I found it hard not to sympathise with the general sense of sorrow which comes from the speakers. One of the prominent themes, of course, is religion.

Gregory Gladwell 44 blacksmith
I have a tendency to be like Charles Bradlaugh, who was a Suffolk man. I am not an atheist but I have strong views about politics and the Church. Bradlaugh wasn't against Church, he was against the set-up. I'm against the set-up. But I think it was an extremely good thing that religion should be accepted as the saviour pf civilisation. So I think it right that it should be carried on, If you forsake religion, it's back to the savages. This is what is happening now.
Meanwhile there is a great deal of debate about marriage and children, the need to rush into such matters less urgent than it was in the old days, the responsibilities of so many children a daunting prospect for the young of the day (there is some brief mention of the transformative development of the contraceptive pill but this issue is mostly viewed from an angle of cultural change). 

Terry Lloyd 21 pig farmer
The village girls like to get married very young but the boys don't. Many of the boys don't want to marry until they are about thirty, although plenty of them have to long before then. I have a friend whose girl made all the running before they were wed, now he has to beg for it.
Similarly, the book doesn't shy away from the less pleasant aspects of the past either. One of the most fascinating chapters comes towards the end of the book and concerns the law and its relationship with the villagers and farm workers. Here we discover various disturbing stories including one of a group of boys who have been molested by a man with some degree of learning difficulties and they need to get one of the boys to admit to what happened in order to convict him. Despite his reticence (due to the shameful nature of it), they eventually convince him to speak. But it's all rather parochial and tolerated -- as though this is just what life consists of and we should address it accordingly. In this casual vein, we get a rather chilling account from the woman tasked with dealing with the legalities of the people's relationships and how best to deal with them when it comes to children. 

Mrs Annersley 55 magistrate
There was more incest in the past and it was always fathers and daughters, never brothers and sisters. It happened when mother had too many children, or when mother was ill, or when mother was dead. And very often it didn't matter a bit. The daughter usually proved to be very fond of the father and there would be no sign of upset in the family. No, I think it was quite an understood thing that a daughter would take on the father when the mother was ill or dead. 
Yikes! You will often hear conservatives tell you that we had better morals in the past because of religion but I'm not sure that argument is very convincing when more closely scrutinised. Today things look bad but that's probably because we're actively looking for unacceptable behaviours in a way that wasn't previously done. That being said, I sympathise with the general themes of the book, the lament of a simpler time when life had more certainty, greater boundaries, and a general sense of purpose. It would be silly to ignore the bad aspects of the past entirely but nonetheless I believe we have indeed lost something of value, a greater communal environment certainly, a world that is confined and limited (often for our own benefit). People find it counter-intuitive to acknowledge this, to want less choice, less freedom, less opportunity, but the truth is such things can often provide a greater degree of stability and significantly higher opportunities for contentment. 

The whole book is a fascinating look at a time that (even when the book was published) was fading away. We now have another additional 60 years to add on to that ever increasing distance. These people are far away from us now, almost caricatures and myths, and I think it's worth occasionally thinking of them with some degree of respect and nostalgia. It's worth remembering the world we had, what we have gained and lost. Reading some of the interviews is enlightening to say the least. Some are more interesting than others and the book certainly doesn't possess any kind of plot or chronological progress. I would not describe it as a page turner but it's certainly a unique perspective into the past and definitely worth a look. 

An eye opening document of a world that is long gone yet still disturbingly within reach.