Rating: 4/5

“[Darwin’s] view is not fully our present view. The evidence he cited has been transformed by … changing cultural commitments,” says Harvard professor Janet Browne in the introduction to this edition of The Descent of Man. She and her liberal establishment elites are welcome to their own opinions, but I’ll thank her to leave the rest of us out of it. “There can be no denying the impact of his work in providing a biological backing for notions of racial superiority, reproductive constraints, gendered typologies, and class distinctions.” Amen, Dr. Browne. 

I’m surprised this book hasn’t been blacklisted for wrong think, and perhaps it’s only Darwin’s name cachet with the “I fucking love science” crowd of fedora-wearing neckbeard leftists that has saved his work from the bonfires. This is a racialist text. He’s not shy about calling other cultures savage. The biological differences between races and sexes, which cannot even be spoken of in the current year, are the backbone of this work. Naturally, Darwin’s view of evolution is lacking, because such essential aspects as genetics and endocrinology had yet to be discovered in his time, and he had to lean on discredited theories like pangenesis to fill in the blanks. However, you’ll learn far less from a politically correct modern text that is up to date scientifically but severely constrained ideologically. Race and sex are real. The evidence Darwin presents makes that very clear. 

Despite the title, this book doesn’t focus on mankind. Its complete title, The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, makes that more apparent. There is lengthy and at times tiresome discourse on sexual dimorphism among insects, birds, and beasts. Following up from his explanation of natural selection in The Origin of Species, here Darwin puts forth his theory of sexual selection which complements and complicates it. He also makes the then-bold claim that humans are part of the animal kingdom and related to apes, which stirred up immense controversy. Consequently, our species is not somehow immune from the laws of nature. We evolved and are continuing to do so. Different evolutionary paths have led to the emergence of distinct varieties of Homo sapiens (races) and to differences between the sexes. Denial of this reality is at the core of the dysfunction and insanity of our modern world.