Rating: 5/5

When I was a teenager, I thought Oscar Wilde was the absolute bomb. His works were witty and anti-establishment enough that my English language class always voted to make one of his masterpieces a quarterly focus. The goths loved him, the nerds loved him, everyone loved him. We must have driven our poor teacher crazy. I decided to test my youthful biases to see if Wilde is still who I thought he seemed to be. Perhaps, like some other authors who have not fared as well, Oscar Wilde would unroll in a more tired fashion now that I am much older. Not a chance. While I’m not as thrilled as I once was, he still comes through as the Master Wit.

The book begins with the THE BALLAD OF READING GAOL and that memorable, all men kill the thing they love verse. It still resonates today. That lament is followed by various poems, which didn’t stand the test of time as I thought they would. No worries, because THE PICTURE OF DORIAN GRAY is up next and if anything, it’s even chillier than I remember it to be. Now that years of experience have filtered through my life, the main character’s vanity and self-obsession seem very relevant for today’s society. 

He knew that he had tarnished himself, filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he had been an evil influence to others and had experienced a terrible joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own it had been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to shame.

LADY WINDERMERE’S FAN still rolls along, although not in the way I remember. This one was more dated but still lively and witty. SALOME, however, seems far more vibrant, more alive. I don’t think it affected me as much in my youth as it does now, again a reflection of experience gained. A WOMAN OF NO IMPORTANCE, another upper-class drawing room play, still does nothing for me. Tried but failed, again, to appreciate it. Neither did I enjoy, AN IDEAL HUSBAND, which seemed to distract me, I don’t know why.

But THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST is still a masterpiece. I thought I would tire of yet another play (I’m not one for the stage), but I laughed and laughed all over again. It’s almost perfect and still a joy to read. The remaining pieces in the book are essays and various writings. 

This 1927 publication, replete with soft leather binding, still has my bookplate with my teenage signature inside. It’s a reminder of how printed books are always a connection to the past. I believe I found the copy in a secondhand shop somewhere while out shopping with my family. It has been in my possession for decades and will still be there when I take my last breath. I hope it eventually goes to a good home who will appreciate the genius of Oscar Wilde and the craftmanship of old paper books.

Book Season = Year Round (wisdom and reverence)