Rating: 4/5

Ailis, the only heir to the clan MacFarlane, and betrothed to the repugnant Donald MacCordy, finds herself captive to Alexander MacDubh, a handsome man whose clan has been engaged in a bloody feud with both the MacCordys and MacFarlanes. Once he realizes who he has in his grasp, Alexander decides to exact some revenge on his enemies by ravishing Ailis and sending her home, shamed. He knows that Ailis' uncle is a proud, harsh man, and he'll be shamed and furious to receive Ailis back absent her chastity. Alexander knows, too, that Donald still needs the alliance with the MacFarlanes and he needs her dowry, so he'll still wed her, but he'll know that Alexander had her first and it will eat at him. Alexander also knows that both of these men can be violent and cruel, so he must know that Ailis will suffer profound abuse just because she was a tool used for his vengeance.

The author hopes to excuse Alexander by telling us that he suffered the betrayal of an unfaithful stepmother and crazy 2nd wife who killed his only daughter. So he hates and distrusts women in general. Alexander's brother attempts to remind him that Ailis was only a child when her father murdered theirs, and that she has nothing to do with their feud against the MacCordy's. Alexander acknowledges all this, but still won't reconsider. It's perhaps even worse that some half-strangled remnant of decency in him nips at his conscience even while he continues on his course. It's even more reprehensible when he's faced with the irrefutable fact that this girl is a kind, decent, moral human being who has been the sole bastion of kindness to his bastard niece and nephews in a hostile home, and he STILL can't be persuaded not to force himself on her, ruin her, and hand her back to the brutality of her kin and betrothed. I loathed the hero, but because of it, my emotions were powerfully engaged, and I really wanted to see how the author would redeem this SOB by the end. 

For her part, Ailis hates her uncle and her betrothed, and so she makes up her mind that if she has to choose who will be the man to make a woman of her, she'd rather it be the handsome Alexander, even tho she knows that he's only going to use her for his vengeance, even though she knows he fully intends to ravish her and shame her and send her home to be abused. Donald would be intentionally hurtful (he's depicted as cruel, as if there's some important contrast between the physical harm he'd do and the life-wrecking harm Alexander intends). So Ailis she makes up her mind to accept her lot and try to enjoy what she can, while she can, before she's sent home to be a victim (as if she's not currently a victim). That's another effort, I think, to excuse Alexander's choices. The heroine sees him as a lesser evil so apparently his cruelties are OK so long as she gets some pleasure before he hands her over to men who he knows will hurt or possibly even kill her because of what he's done. I was frustrated here, too, because I hate it when the heroine is so easily seduced that a few well-placed touches and she's beyond caring what it does to her dignity, her power over her own life and body. I keep wondering why heroines in these books are such slaves to their own passions that even their own self-interests and human dignity are unimportant. I can't relate. But that, too, is compelling. Frustrating, but compelling. 

I have to say that every little feminist bone in my body was offended by all this but I kept turning pages. Maybe this is why the alpha jerk hero is such a powerful draw for some readers. I wanted to see things sort themselves out, and without going into detail, though I wasn't entirely satisfied (I really need to see "heroes" like this suffer some pangs of remorse for the harm they intended, and make some effort to make amends before I'm entirely satisfied, and that doesn't happen here), the relationship is redeemed enough that I was rooting for the couple by the end. 

The story loses a star because the hero is a horrible man and, while the heroine does stand up for herself somewhat she still tolerates way more than she should. Despite it all, I loved the humor salted into the story and I cried over the heroine's problems more than once. And that earns the story at least a B+.

 Hannah Howell has won a new reader. I'll be buying the rest of her historicals the next time my library is depleted.