Rating: 4/5

This book was very informative. It approaches a discussion of socialism from a unique perspective of focusing on the biographies of influential leaders, such as Robert Owns, Engels, Marx, Lenin, Mussolini, Attlee, and Mao, who were involved in promoting socialism. Muravchik traces the two hundred year history of socialism and shows that any leader or society who tried to implement full socialism in the government and economy fell into ruin and starvation. 

All of the socialist societies had to adapt capitalist tendencies in their economies to survive, which were completely against the original tenets of the socialism set forth by its original creators,such as Hess and Marx. Even the kibbutz that scholars and socialists have held up as examples that socialism can work (I remember reading about those in school)are starting to break down. The only small social communes that have been able to be relatively successful are those that revolve around religion, which ironically is something that most socialist leaders oppose.

Another interesting fact that I noticed was that many of the big thinkers of socialism were not "of the people" or the proletariat. They had no real connection with the people who they said they were trying to help. Many were not works or had not worked for very long in their life. They more often belonged to the class of the bourgeoisie than the proletariat and were often frustrated with the proletariats for not seeing their vision as clearly as they did. The proletariats they noticed were only interested in socialism during periods of social unrest which could lead to revolutions and the overthrows of government. 

Many of the socialists capitalized on this social unrest (some even tried to start revolutions or fan the unrest, even if it meant violence and death, which some saw as a necessary price). Once carried in office by revolution, many socialist leaders were either placed in the position of have to resort to violence and oppression to continue to implement the full socialist dream of trying to obtain heaven on earth or would sacrifice certain aspects of true socialism in order to keep the country afloat. This sometimes meant sometimes changing socialism to the point where some doubted it could really be called "socialism."