Rating: 4/5

In July of 2002, I received the following email:

	Mr. Stratton, we’ll be publishing the first Italian edition of THE DREAMER which will feature additional articles and info about the history of American comics and creators. Do we have your permission to quote info and excerpts from your article “the annotated THE DREAMER”?

It would make our work more complete.

“That’s fine,” I replied. “You have my permission.”

I received a copy of Il Sognatore several months later. It was kind of weird having a book in which pretty much the only thing I could read was my own name—under “Ringraziamente”.

A group cruise to Italy in 2020, delayed until 2023, meant more time than expected to prep some rudimentary Italian. Now that the trip is done and I’d like to maintain what I know—and perhaps even improve—it seemed a good time to pull this off the egoboo shelf. (I’ve also been watching a lot of Roberto Rossellini and Federico Fellini lately.)

The illustrations appear to be faithfully reproduced; the lettering is replaced with a less handwritten style. If I’m reading the credits correctly in the English version, Eisner himself lettered the original. The word balloons are maintained, the text inside them replaced. If you’ve ever watched a foreign movie with subtitles, often the translation is significantly smaller or larger than the original and that does happen here. Combined with the use of bolded text to replace Eisner’s larger intimation of yelling, there is occasionally lot of white space around the text inside the balloons.

I’m looking right now at “…What have you got in mind?” translated to “…Cos’ha in mente?” for example. Smaller text and fewer letters means a large balloon with a comparatively minuscule text inside it. On the next page, Reynard Fox’s thought balloon changes from hand-lettered arced text to the same horizontal text as all of the spoken words. This does change the perception of the characters’ lines.

The book is slightly smaller than the original. It’s probably shrunk by about ½ horizontally and about ¾ of an inch vertically, but this is something I only noticed now that I’m comparing the two right next to each other. (Since this was partly to improve my Italian, I did not consult the English version while reading it.)

As far as I can tell with my rudimentary Italian the translations are all very well done. For an Italian interested in “uno spaccato unico del mondo del cartooning americano alla fine degli anni Trenta” (a unique perspective on the world of American cartooning at the end of the thirties—interesting how different languages have different capitalization customs) it should be a great read.

What this edition has that the original doesn’t is an overview of how the various fictional characters in Eisner’s semi-autobiographical work line up with the real people Eisner worked with in the era. Each entry contains, on the left, a panel featuring that character (or, in the case of Tijuana Bibles, that thing) and, on the right, a photo of the real person. Underneath, there is a very useful attribution of the photo and a paragraph describing the significance of the character.

Some of this was fascinating, such as that Tijuana Bibles often gave an incorrect publishing location, since they were illegal. Or that Detective Comics was the first comic book dedicated to a single genre (“…la prima testata a fumetti dedicata a un unico genere”).

The descriptions were also very even-handed while still providing personal tidbits. For example,

	Tutti i protagonisti dell’epoca concordano nel ritenere Victor Fox una persona da cui stare alla larga. Eppure, questo ragioniere divenuto editore ha lanciato… non pochi personaggi… in particolare Blue Beetle… secondo eroe dei comic book, dopo Superman.

That is, “everyone from the era agrees in calling Victor Fox someone to be avoided. And yet, this accountant-cum-publisher launched no small number of characters, in particular, Blue Beetle, the second comic book hero after Superman.”

There’s also a new introduction by Eisner for this Italian edition. While it doesn’t specifically address the connections his story has with real life, he does mention that the book is called “The Dreamer” because Jerry Iger really did call him that when talking about the management of the company and Eisner’s own future plans.

	Intitolai il volume Il Sognatore perché era così che mi chiamava il mio socio Iger quando discutevamo della gestione dell’ufficio e del mio futuro.