Rating: 5/5

The Batman of today can be traced back to this book. Before Frank Miller’s “Dark Knight Returns” Batman was a joke; the comics were weak with Batman and Robin doing the same thing week in week out, it’s no coincidence that there are few books worth reading before Miller’s work - all the great Batman “must-reads” (The Killing Joke, Year One, The Long Hallowe’en, Hush, Dark Victory) follow this interpretation of the character. And it could largely be attributed to the phenomenal success of the campy 60s Adam West TV series. Batman was colourful, ironic, he smiled a lot, he unquestioningly had a child sidekick who wore scaly green underwear. Nobody took this character seriously. Enter Frank Miller. 

Up until then Miller had built a career at Marvel with his remarkable Daredevil run, adding to the canon with a character of his own - Elektra - and writing one of the landmark Daredevil books “Born Again”. Following this was a creator owned project that meshed genres and art stylings - Ronin. And then he was offered the Dark Knight. Following this book, a dark and gritty interpretation of an intense, disturbed and disturbing Bruce Wayne haunted by the past and restless when away from his alter ego, unable to live in the light and craving the darkness for relief - there came the plethora of Batman books listed above along with a defining dark vision of Batman in Tim Burton’s 1989 film. Batman had been given his balls back. The Dark Knight had truly returned. 

Miller did it by strangely showing an old man, far past the years when he was able to carry off the acrobatics and feats that the Batman deserves, and puts him back in the tights - forces him back - and he is grateful for it. Bruce Wayne lives in a Gotham riddled with crime, roving gangs, one featuring prominently named the Mutants, do what they like unpunished while the cowl remains in the cave, in the past. He refuses it because of what happened to his young protege, Jason Todd... 

But something primal calls to him from the shadows. Urging him back to the life he left behind, promising him … a good death. Faced with the impossibility that old villains he put away are now being released - Two Face, Joker - he becomes the Dark Knight one final time despite knowing that masked vigilantes are no longer wanted in this America and that he will have to defy a demi-god if he continues his suicidal plan. And he must. 

I’m not a fanboy so blinded with the reputation of this book that I can’t see the many flaws it has. There are many and here they are: why would Superman work solely for America in the Cold War - isn’t he above petty human squabbles? And what threat could make him do what the President of the USA wants? He’s Superman! And speaking of the Cold War, this book is really dated and showing its age, year by year. The Cold War subtext is bad enough, but the bad 80s hairdo, the punkish outfits of the Mutants? You couldn’t come up with a more 80s presentation to these side characters if you tried. 

Then there’s Batman himself. He uses guns throughout. That in itself should raise alarm bells in the true Batman reader’s heart. Then there’s the reason Batman ceased being Batman altogether - the death of Jason Todd - yet when a new Robin presents herself, Carrie Kelly, he has no qualms in “enlisting” her (he calls her “soldier” throughout) and putting her in the firing line despite being 13 years old! So I guess Jason’s death didn’t mean that much after all...? And speaking of the new Robin, she’s really boring as a character - if you think the few lines she speaks while staring blankly at Batman in the book constitute a character. 

Then there are the story elements that are just derivative and pointless. Why is the Mutant Leader allowed to be alone with the Mayor of Gotham? Why is Joker allowed to appear on talk shows and why do people even believe such a heinous character be allowed back into society? Stop giving him chances, he’s never going to change! The constant talking heads on TV narrative device really bugged me this time around - which is another dated element to the book - and oftentimes felt like they were repeating what had just happened in the last panel. It’s distracting and doesn’t add much to the story. 

And I hate to say it but the drawing style is pretty bad. It’s scratchy, many of the characters just look fat - Joker for some reason looks inflatable in a suit - and there’s one full page spread of Batman heading to fight the Mutant Leader that made me laugh it looked so silly. Basically a fat Batman minces outwards on his tippy toes with his hands bunched clumsily and a silly smile adorns his face. 

I could go on but you get the point (Selina Kyle runs a brothel!?!), the book isn’t perfect, and that’s not even mentioning the lack of a plot. The book is divided into four parts that could easily be labelled: Book 1 - Two Face, Book 2 - Mutant Leader, Book 3 - Joker, Book 4 - Superman. And yet. And yet for all its flaws, why is it still worth reading? Why is Dark Knight Returns the one Batman book anyone interested in Batman should read? 

First and foremost - the writing. There are so many quotable lines in the book and I’m only going to list a few to give you a flavour of Miller’s interpretation of Batman: “This would be a good death... but not good enough.”; “He’s young. He’ll probably walk again.” ;“You’re going to tell me everything you know, sooner or later. If it’s later, I won’t mind.”; “I hit the engine. She responds like it was yesterday. It is yesterday.”; “I listen for as long as I can stomach it... then I let them know I’m here.”. 

It’s in the execution - he has Batman fight Joker for the final time in the Tunnel of Love in a fairground - how perfect is that? I won’t tell you what happens but it’s as perfect a death scene as you could imagine between the two. “I waste one second with a good-bye”. Miller also includes a brilliant line about Two-Face: “The scars go deep. Too deep. I close by eyes and listen. Not fooled by sight, I see him... as he is. I see him. I see a reflection.” Couple this with the final look at Two Face and it’s heartbreaking. 

Batman’s own transformation is subtle but there. He starts wearing the bright blue outfit of the Adam West years and as the story continues he adopts a grey outfit until he’s wearing black. Batman is going from the colourful character to the Dark Knight, Miller is transforming the character slowly and re-making him for a new audience. And what a choice to have Batman face off for his final battle against Superman! Who wouldn’t want to read that fight? Its such an excellent scene where you know there can only be one outcome - Batman is just a man after all while Superman is basically a God - but each time I read it I think at a certain point “He’s going to do it! He’s got him on the ropes!” before the final panel. Miller is that good a writer that he makes you believe a mortal could defeat a god despite knowing the outcome. A mortal fighting a god, defying time and death itself - this is an insight into the character of Batman that no-one ever achieved before. 

I know I railed against the artwork earlier but there are some incredible pages here. Batman and Robin against the Gotham skyline? Batman holding an Army General draped in an American flag holding a smoking gun. The legendary image of the silhouetted Dark Knight against a stormy lightning bolt background? The rendering of that fatal night when Bruce’s parents were murdered is done in silent panels across two pages told from Bruce’s perspective, close ups of the gun, and his mother’s pearls. It’s as near perfect a retelling of Batman’s origin story as has ever been told and is flawless in it’s presentation here. 

“The Dark Knight Returns” is a masterpiece because it changed the tone of the character and how he was perceived from that point on. Miller looked at other Batman stories, reached deep into the darkness and pulled out the spirit of the Dark Knight for all to see, slapping it between the pages of this book. “This is Batman” he says with this book. Whatever your opinion on this book, it’s bold, strong artistic stance is undeniable. And it’s influence is present in so much of what followed, particularly in the Chris Nolan films. The Batmobile in this book is much like the Tumbler in Nolan’s trilogy. The tone of the mirthless Caped Crusader would become the standard template for the character - the Adam West Batman interpretation would be disregarded completely. The book looks at Bruce Wayne’s psychology and what being something like Batman would do to a man, an approach that has been much mimicked in numerous books and stories. 

The book is held up as the best Batman book because it was the first Batman book that made everyone sit up and realise that they’d been doing everything wrong up til then. This book marks a change in how this character was perceived by everyone and leads right up to the Dark Knight of today, no longer a joke but an enthralling anti-hero with layers and layers to his story that has so many books yet to reveal it. And while with each passing year, and for me each re-reading of the book, I feel the impact of the book is less and less felt, the story seeming less indestructible than before, the book becoming less the masterpiece, the flaws more noticeable - it continues to survive, much like the Batman in the book, despite the years, despite it’s age, it still packs a punch and like the Dark Knight it refuses to go down without giving out a few good shots. That’s why this remains the one Batman book everyone must read. It reminds the reader that the Dark Knight hasn’t returned, but that he never left, he was just waiting for Frank Miller to introduce him to the rest of us. 

“This will be a good life... good enough”.