Rating: 4/5

What’s On, Watson? Don‘t let’s Haste T’ings!

Admittedly, I should learn to act my age and refrain from indulging in facetious puns but in this collection of Poirot’s Early Cases, Christie’s leanings towards Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson as her literary models are so obvious that I couldn’t help it. You have it all there: Poirot and Hastings share rooms, they are being coddled by a reticent landlady, they are often in league with Inspector Japp from Scotland Yard, who, of course, cannot hold a candle to Poirot, Hastings has taken up the honourable task of being Poirot’s chronicler, and sometimes there are even references to earlier cases we never hear more of – a narrative device Sir Arthur Conan Doyle seemed to have taken great delight in. And yet, as in Murder on the Links, in one of these stories Poirot claims that it takes more to be a successful detective than knowing all kinds of cigarette ashes and tracing down every footprint – and that is psychology. As if Homes hadn’t known that!

The short story collection Poirot’s Early Cases was published in the UK in 1974 and it contains tales that were written between 1923, two years after Poirot’s original appearance in Christie’s first detective novel The Mysterious Affair at Styles, and 1935 and published in various periodicals. Here is a catalogue of the stories included in the British edition:

The Affair at the Victory Ball. Poirot solves the murder of an English nobleman at a masked ball. If you ask me, the whole story is not very convincing.

The Adventure of the Clapham Cook. Where is Mrs. Todd’s cook? Good servants are so hard to find, and that is why Mrs. Todd decides to hire the famous Belgian detective to hunt down the cook, who left and sent for her box without a word of notice. Not only is there a gruesome mystery behind a seemingly trivial affair – in the vein of Arthur Conan Doyle – but Poirot also gets taken down a peg or two for scoffing at Mrs. Todd’s suggestion that he should be interested in such a case. After all, a good cook is worth as much to a middle-class matron as precious jewels are to a duchess, n’est-ce pas?

The Cornish Mystery. When Poirot is asked by Mrs. Pengelley to come down to Cornwall and find out whether her husband wants to poison her, he at first does not really see the urgency of the situation. All he can do is avenge the good lady’s death.

The Adventure of Johnnie Waverly. The kidnapping of a child under the eyes of the police taxes Poirot’s little grey cells at first but then he comes to the conclusion that one cannot always trust one’s own eyes.

The Double Clue. A case of stolen jewels brings Poirot into first contact with the Russian countess Vera Rossakoff. One of the later clues will be re-used in Murder on the Orient Express.

The King of Clubs. A shady blackmailer is killed, and Poirot finds the person responsible with the help of a card missing from a stack. One might say this is a mystery hinging very much on coincidence but still the ingeniousness of the intrigue will recompense you for having to stretch a point.

The Lemesurier Inheritance. Is it an old family curse, or are there mortal hands at work? Like in Sherlock Holmes’s case of the Hound of the Baskervilles, Poirot applies his fearful intellect to this very question that haunts the venerable family of the Lemesuriers – but the solution was slightly disappointing for me.

The Lost Mine. Poirot investigates the death of a Chinese businessman. If there is a dud in this collection, we have it got here.

The Plymouth Express. Young Mrs. Carrington is found murdered on a train, after she has ordered her maid to leave the train and wait for her at a particular station. Did Mrs. Carrington, who was in an unhappy marriage, meet a murderous suitor, or does Poirot have to look at things from quite another angle and apply … psychology?

The Chocolate Box. When Hastings asks Poirot if he ever failed in one of his investigations, this is the story the great Belgian sleuth comes up with. Not much of a failure, really, but still a case of misapplied deduction.

The Submarine Plans. Something similar happened to Sherlock Holmes but whenever Poirot is on a case, you have to brace yourself for a real twist in the tale. You certainly have to here.

The Third Floor Flat. When two young men want to help their adorée get into her flat after a night out – the poor girl lost her latchkey –, they try to enter the flat via the coal lift, but end up in a strange apartment where they find a dead woman. Luckily, Poirot is one of the tenants, and he readily offers his help. The writing is brilliant, and the idea is striking but to my taste, there is too much coincidence involved.

Double Sin. On a trip, Poirot and Hastings make the acquaintance of a young and naive girl named Mary Durrant, who carries extremely valuable artifacts for her aunt, a seller of antiques. Unfortunately, Mary’s suitcase is pried open and the artifacts are stolen. Whereas Hastings is all too ready to take up arms for a damsel in distress, Poirot once again listens to the psychologist in himself.

The Market Basing Mystery. A recluse is murdered in his house, or is it suicide? Inspector Japp only wanted to have a day out with Poirot and Hastings but the three men are in for a busman’s holiday.

Wasps’ Nest. Poirot visits an old friend of his to warn him of an impending murder. This is a calm, but chillingly dramatic tale and easily one of the most memorable in the entire collection.

The Veiled Lady. Do you remember how Holmes outwitted the woman, Irene Adler, by using what Poirot holds to be one of the major assets of a detective, namely psychology? In this case, Poirot does a similar thing, but here the matter is even more complicated. Of course, the veiled lady is not Poirot’s female nemesis – that place being taken by Vera Rossakoff.

Problem at Sea. An odious wife and a henpecked husband in a golden cage. Still, when the wife is found murdered in her cabin, the husband has a watertight alibi. However, Poirot is not at sea for long.

”How Does Your Garden Grow?” Poirot has done it again: A lady, suspecting that someone is trying to kill her, applies to him for help but he is late. All he can do is vindicate her murder, and that he certainly does.

Although I infinitely prefer Christie’s novels to her short stories, there is no denying that she manages to sketch her characters and lay out the plot despite the limitations as to length quite admirably. Another thing that will strike the reader of these stories – although some of them are rather contrived and others are just too sketchy – is the incredible fecundity of Christie’s imagination. In short, this collection of short stories is nearly as entertaining as Poirot’s most famous major cases.