Rating: 5/5

Horror is my favorite genre. Adding in something supernatural, not human, makes it even better. I had a great time reading In The Woods.

The very title, In The Woods, is scary. I can’t think of anything good coming out of there, and something very very bad does in this book.

Evil was born into the world a long, long time ago. A foul bargain was struck. One brother was rewarded, one condemned, and payment was made.

When the brothers clashed on the battlefield, a fiend from Hell was unleashed. To stay the beast, another bargain was struck. Again, payment was made. One beast is tasked with guarding the remains of the other. Deep in a forest, it keeps it’s vigil.

One day, many many years in the future, two firemen are out hunting and stumble upon a grave deep in the woods. They know a serial killer is stalking the people of their town, so they dig up the grave, sure they’ll find one of the killer’s victims. Instead, they find the bones of a beast, something that shouldn’t, couldn’t be. Now they’ve awakened the guardian, and luck is on their side when they escape it’s wrath. Or do they?

The beginning takes place long in the past and introduces the beast. Then you move into the present when the creature is unleashed again.

It gets creepy really quick. Something is leaving gifts for Alex, one of the firemen that survived the encounter in the woods. A bloody torso here, part of a shoulder there. Kind of like when a barn cat brings you the mice it kills. Such a pleasant surprise it is. My cat used to leave the feet and the tail by my bed. It was so gross when I’d get out of bed and step on the tiny body parts. I can only imagine how gruesome and terrifying it would be to find human body parts.

Soon the whole town is in danger. Don’t forget there’s also a serial killer out there, stalking his next kill too. The author ratchet’s up the suspense and thrills.

Alex goes from victim to suspect and the local chief of police has got his killer. Once he focuses on Alex, he looks no further. This could be big for him. Get his name in the papers, get him elected to a higher office. He’s such a jerk, you love to hate him.

Poor Alex. How can he prove he’s not the killer? Can he stay alive long enough to do that? Why is the beast following him, leaving his bloody gifts?

From the very beginning, I ate this book up, tearing through it, rubbing my hands together in glee. Creatures, a serial killer, suspense, thrills, terror. All things I love to read about.

I loved this bloody book and can’t wait for the movie!

I received this book for my honest review.