Rating: 4/5

I am really the perfect audience for this book, definitely my kind of thing. I am a (retired) psychologist who reads a lot of biography/ memoir. I have led workshops on "Gardening as a Spiritual Path." But I was a bit disappointed. I bought the book because of the Quaker in the title. I am a Quaker and I love reading books by Quaker writers. But there's very little Quakerism in it. It's in three main sections. The first is the practical spirituality of the barn, of caring for animals, cleaning up shit. The second is Buddhist spirituality. She goes and spends time (at least six months, maybe a year?) in a Zen center in France. So I thought OK, the last section will be the Quaker part. But it barely was. Mostly it was back to the barn. There is little bits of Quakerism here and there. And then she and her SO go to be pastors in some little Quaker church in Maine. Of course my branch of Quakerism is Meetings that have no paid minister. And then she says almost nothing about that experience. Her "thing" is to find spiritual lessons wherever she goes, in everything even cleaning shit. But there were no lessons to be learned from ministering to a group of Quakers (who in my experience are very spiritual, dedicated people)??!

And the book is a little irritating because she borrows so freely other people's words (always properly attributed and footnoted). A major part of the Buddhist section is transcribing her notes from Thich Nhat Hanh's dharma talks (basically Zen sermons). They are good notes and good talks. But if I want to read Thich Nhat Hanh (I do), I will read his books (I have). It seemed a little over done. And the whole book was so stuffed full of quotes from various people that it read a little bit like one of those student papers researched on Google and then pulled together in ways to avoid plagiarism. 

But otherwise her writing is good and she does a lot of interesting thinking on a variety of topics in spirituality. Four stars indicates it is a good book, just not a perfect one.