Rating: 5/5

A beautiful, beautiful book. Very short and simply told, this biography by Nouwen interweaves the life of his friend Adam, who was severely handicapped and died in his mid-thirties, with the life of Jesus. The chapters reflect these parallels: 

Adam's Hidden Life
Adam's Desert
Adam's Public Life
Adam's Way
Adam's Passion
Adam's Death
Adam's Wake and Burial
Adam's Resurrection
Adam's Spirit

The chapter on Adam's Passion—when he became seriously ill and lost what little ability and agency he'd had—moved me the most. Nouwen defines passion as suffering that we undergo and that is done to us, the opposite of action or the things we choose to do. "Adam's whole life was passion, a life of suffering, in which he underwent everything that was done for him, to him, with him, and around him," he writes. Jesus, too, had a season of passion, and I'd never thought to compare these two parts of his life the way Nouwen does: "But at Gethsemane—the Garden of Olives—all this action came to a sudden end. There Jesus was handed over by one of his own disciples to undergo suffering. From that moment on he could no longer do anything; everything was done to him. … He was only acted upon. It was pure passion." 

In their passions, both Adam and Jesus unveil for us the truth about our lives and the hope of how to live them in the face of such finitude: 

"The truth is that a very large, if not the largest, part of our lives is passion. Although we all want to act on our own, to be independent and self-sufficient, we are for long periods of time dependent on other people's decisions. Not only when we are young and inexperienced or when we are old and needy but also when we are strong and self-reliant. Substantial parts of our success, wealth, health, and relationships are influenced by events and circumstances over which we have little or no control. ... That, to me, is the final significance of Adam's passion: a radical call to accept the truth of our lives and to choose to give our love when we are strong and to receive the love of others when we are weak, always with tranquility and generosity."

I will be thinking about those words for a long time. 

This book pulls together strong personal and academic interests of mine, and it does so in the format that is the most moving and convicting for me: through the flesh-and-blood story of a man with deep physical limitations. 

I resonate with Nouwen: "My many words, spoken or written, always tempted me to go up into lofty ideas and perspectives without keeping in touch with the dailiness and beauty of ordinary life." And so, like Nouwen, I need a teacher like Adam: "Adam didn't allow this. It was as if he said to me, 'Not only do you have a body like I do, Henri, but you are your body. Don't let your words become separated from your flesh. Your words must become and remain your flesh.'”

Highly recommended for anyone who wants to know what it could be to live as, in the words of the subtitle, "God's beloved."