Rating: 5/5

Written 25 years after the Apollo 11 moon landing, this is a highly readable history of the U.S. space program from the perspective of men who lived that history.

The book begins, appropriately enough, with a minute-by-minute account of the moon landing in its last moments. The authors transport you expertly into the control room in Houston as the employees watch the fuel tanks in the lunar lander empty and draw perilously close to an abortion of the mission. When Eagle landed and Neil Armstrong uttered his famous quote, “The eagle has landed,” the lander had some 16 seconds of fuel left which Armstrong could use specifically for the landing. He manually flew the lander away from a boulder—strewn area where the computer would have landed them.

From that hair-raising chapter, we move back in time to the establishment of a U.S. army-controlled rocket center in Huntsville, Alabama. So vivid is the writing we seem to hear as we read the warbly beeps of Sputnik that shocked and terrified America. Shortly thereafter, Americans attempted their first satellite launch and failed miserably at it. They eventually get it right in 1958, but there’s a sense that the U.S. is behind, and there’s a fear that it may always be. 

There’s a fast-paced chapter on test pilots who became astronauts. It looks at the contribution of test pilots in the space program. You’ll read with fascination about a storm landing Alan Shepard did on an aircraft carrier when he had less-than five minutes of fuel left. 

Chapter four details the announcement of the original Mercury Seven astronauts. Additional chapters focus on the training they endured and the publicity they dealt with. Many of us think of doxing as a new problem, but a photographer snapped a picture by the mailbox of one of the astronauts, and the entire nation had his address as a result. This was accidental, which makes it something other than doxing, but Americans deluged the poor family with mail once the address went public.

You ride along with a triumphant Alan Shepard in chapter nine, and it’s an exhilarating experience. The book guides you through the Gemini program including Neil Armstrong’s near tragedy when his ship lost control. A lesser pilot would have lost consciousness and died.

The chapters on the Apollo 1 fire and its aftermath are vivid and memorable. 

It’s true that authors have written whole books about various segments of the history of manned spaceflight, this one does a nice job of digesting and comprehensively encapsulating that history. Apollo 8 gets a chapter as does Apollo 13. Again, authors have crafted whole books about Apollo 13, but these guys are adept at giving you what you need to know and keeping the story interesting. Read this chapter to learn how one subcontractor sent another a bill for $400,000 for towing services. Who says bean counters have no sense of humor!

Alan Shepard’s return to the moon gets an extremely detailed treatment, but what the heck; it’s his book. Why not? You watch with sadness as the authors detail NASA’s descent from innovator to bureaucrats intent on covering butts and just keeping the old 9 to 5.

There’s a chapter on the Apollo Soyuz docking mission, and I enjoyed that one because I knew so little of the event and paid so little attention to it as the self-absorbed teenager I was that year.

Deke Slayton’s mental meanderings in the concluding chapter bored me a bit, but you might find them poetic and worth reading.

I realize I’ve pointed out early in this review that this is a highly readable book. I wish I had a less clumsy way to reemphasize that for you. This isn’t a litany of confusing names and dates. It puts a human face on the space program in ways that few other books achieve. The chapters are solid but not overly long. They give you what you need to know without bogging you down. Perhaps you suspect the viability of a nearly 30-year-old book? I don’t know how to respond to your concern other than to say if you kick this to the curb assuming newer books will contain better information, you’ll miss a gripping nonfiction experience that might have enriched your life.