Rating: 5/5

In 1929 Freud wrote that The Brothers Karamazov was “the most magnificent novel ever written”. Well, it’s possible he had not got round to reading Ulysses yet (copies were hard to get until 1934) and of course he never did get the opportunity to read the work of Dan Brown or J K Rowling, but even so, this gives you the idea of this novel’s impact on the brains of its readers. 

A SUMMARY OF THE BROTHERS KARAMAZOV

The major themes are

Comedy
Tragedy
Psychology
Politics
Theology
Life
Death
Drinking
Borrowing money

THIS NOVEL IS A SHAPESHIFTING BEAST

For chapters at a time this novel is about children. For most of the last half this novel is like a Richard Price police procedural (Clockers, Freedomland, Lush Life) and also like a great courtroom drama with verbatim closing speeches. Elsewhere it’s a detailed debate about monastic life and the intricacies of the Christian message. The rest of the time it’s an intense psychodrama between seven or eight major characters. In one chapter (“An Ailing Little Foot”) Dosto prefigures Molly Bloom’s stream of conscious. Got to say, this guy Dosto was not a one trick pony, not by a country mile. 

SOME POINTS ABOUT 19TH CENTURY RUSSIA

Only peasants and servants work, leaving the rest of the people time to talk a lot

People are really ill quite often. This might be connected to the high alcohol consumption or the poor medical facilities

It is clear that the concept of interrupting someone had not yet been introduced into Russia at this point. So everyone is able to spout forth about anything they like, rambling on with multiple digressions for ten pages, and none of the other people in the room will say “oy, shut it, sunshine, we’ve heard enough from you, let somebody else have a go”. No one will say this. Eventually the speaker collapses to the floor from lack of oxygen and the next character will launch into their ten page rant. 

THE NARRATOR IS A MAJOR CHARACTER

He is a bumbling old fart who lives in the little town where all this happens. He says he has gone round talking to people to get all this story straight. He continually says things like
The details I do not know – I have heard only that…

I myself have not read the will

This arrival [of Ivan] which was so fateful and which was to serve as the origin of so many consequences for me long afterwards, the rest of my life, almost…

And on P 573 he says 

Today’s item in the newspaper Rumours was entitled “From Skotoprigonyevsk” (alas, that is the name of our town, I have been concealing it all this time). 

THERE ARE ZINGERS

You probably thought Dosto was a bit gloomy but this is often a comic novel, yes really. For instance Dmitri says

Who doesn’t wish for his father’s death ? …Everyone wants his father dead

And the narrator himself comes out with

The two were some sort of enemies in love with each other

And Ivan says stuff like

When I think of what I would do to the man who first invented God! Stringing him up on the bitter asp would be too good for him. 

THERE IS A MACGUFFIN

There is an amount of 3000 roubles that Dmitri borrows from his current squeeze, and readers had better get used to the phrase 3000 roubles popping up about three times on every other page of this 900 page novel. Because you see, totally co-incidentally, the dead father was robbed of this exact sum also. It can get slightly tiresome, I admit that. We never hear the last of it.

SOME BLURB WRITERS SHOULD BE STOPPED BEFORE THEY BLURB ANY MORE

The blurb on the back of my Penguin copy says

The murder of brutal landowner Fyodor Karamazov changes the lives of his sons blah blah blah

This is likely to get readers all het up and their anticipation of a juicy whodunnit may turn to irritation because the murder doesn’t happen until page 508. This is not Dosto’s fault. 

ALL KARAMAZOV BROTHERS RATED

4. Alexei 
a.k.a. Alyosha, Alyoshka, Alyoshenka, Alyoshechka, Alexeichik, Lyosha, Lyoshenka

This is the holy joe, novice monk, all round too good to be true guy, but he doesn’t seem to have much vim, zip, pazzaz or get up and go about him. You wouldn’t want to be stuck in a lift with him. Not good boyfriend material.

3. Dmitri (a.k.a. Mitya, Mitka, Mitenka, Mitri) 

This is the roister-doistering swaggering loudmouth uber-romantic aggravating jerk who because of his ability to drink ox-stunning amounts of hard liquor and then do the Argentinian tango or the Viennese waltz at the drop of a samovar is a wow with the ladies but you better be expecting to pay for his exhausting company because he never has a bean. Except that on the two occasions he does have a bean (3000 beans!) you will have the best time ever! Definitely not good boyfriend material.

2. Pavel Fyodorovich Smerdyakov (aka the lackey)

The unacknowledged bastard of Big Daddy Fyodor who is kept around as a skivvy and although he has brains because he’s epileptic and an unacknowledged bastard is never given any education and therefore becomes an autodidact with a full tank of bloodcurdling homicidal suppressed rage. He’s completely boring until he starts talking then whooahhhhh. Really not good boyfriend material.

1.	Ivan (a.k.a. Vanya, Vanka, Vanechka) 

Obvious star of the show, the full-on atheist and progressive thinker – he’s given two entire chapters of brilliant ranting against religion – Rebellion and The Grand Inquisitor and every time he slams into the room and starts sneering the quality of the conversation is going to increase. Also probably not good boyfriend material. 

NICE BIT OF DOSTO META HUMOUR

Dmitri gets to make a good joke :

Eh gentlemen, why pick on such little things : how, when and why, and precisely this much money and not that much, and all that claptrap… if you keep on, it’ll take you three volumes and an epilogue to cram it all in.