Rating: 5/5

In writing The Four Immigrants Manga: A Japanese Experience in San Francisco, 1904-1924 artist and cartoonist Henry Yoshitaka Kiyama was writing for his fellow first generation Japanese American immigrants. This is made clear by the very helpful intro and end notes by translator Frederick L. Schodt. Because the term graphic novel is highly popular Mr Schodt attempts to make the case that the collected volume can be thought of as an early or foundational graphic novel. It is an early Manga. These were written as comic strips, intended for daily publication and no more a novel than the adventures of Little Orphan Annie, if published in one book make them into a graphic novel. 

And that is the end of my critical remarks. Overall, The Four Immigrants is an odd mix of comedic and serious. The main characters can be clownish, but they are classic strangers in a strange land, America.

That the intended audience was Japanese immigrants is proven by the fact that the originals were written in a mix of Japanese and American. A combination unlikely to be understood except by his fellow immigrants. Mr. Schodt does a yeoman job in not only translating the strips, but using different type faces for the English and Japanese portions of the spoken text. From other reviews we are advised that some puns and other word games may not translate well, but it was never a problem to understand what was being said.

There is something of a Laurel and Hardy comedy that underlies the daily life of these newly arriving Japanese immigrants. We watch them stumble and attempt to accommodate largely oblivious Americans. The newcomers progress from student- workers seeking better jobs, marriages and even land owning. This is not to say that every section is comedic, but they tend to have something of a “what a fine mess you got me into this time” view of life. 
Americans, our home, habits and quirks are looked at from the point of view of people who want to be Americans, but cannot help but misunderstand what is not always logical about who we are. It is a POV many Americans never have to consider. It was not the intention of the artist/writer to have us read these panels, but they remain illuminating aspects of the immigrant experience.

Kiyama was an artist with skills beyond the fine drawing in The Four Immigrants. The strips were part of his efforts to use his art and experience to earn his way. Ultimately, he returned to Japan and had success as a graphic artist. Shodt shares with us some of that work.

Our characters survive the San Francisco Earthquake, bank failures, dishonest employers and increasing hostile laws designed to make America “safe” from arriving Japanese. This last fact is American racism and became part of why Japan would, a generation later, expand their World War II, by attacking Pearl Harbor. 

The Four Immigrants Manga : A Japanese Experience in San Francisco, 1904-1924 is an unintended and for that reason more honest opportunity to see ourselves as others saw us. Alternately light and never more than passingly grim it is highly recommended.