Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars
Thirteen stories, all them different though some of them share characters and a common background. 
Beach 2: Two couples meet for some holidays in the beach. Only one of them is not a couple but just friends, and the other one is less of a couple than what they themselves believe. 
Enticing. Really. Sexual tension transpires in a really smooth way, not even a kiss or a clear word about it, just through smiles and lingering gazes… 
Stormed and Taken in Prague An American goes to Prague to look for something different, and he finds all the strong emotions he was looking for, and then some more…
Wow! Dark, twisted, painful and moving. Interesting.
His Paper Doll Richie makes a voodoo doll as a token of good luck, but it will never work, will it?
This is one of the brightest tales in the lot. Do not let it fool you. It’s going to get darker. Really darker. 
The resurrectionist : Young Wallace finds the perfect revenge after his uncle Heath death.
Macabre. Distressing. A very twisted way of finding justice at the end.
Path of Corruption: Life in New Orleans has more dangers lurking beneath its alluring nightlife than what student Preston may ever have expected, and following beautiful hustler Brandon may prove the right path to discover all them
This had slight Lovecraft reminiscence, with its long forgotten gods, secrets beneath the city and dangerous, forbidden rituals.
Vespers Life in a fraternity in college is not so different from the life in a monastery in the past, at least not for Saul, and the young acolytes are so tempting…
A really distressing story, left me wondering what Saul was going to do next…
Left Alone David has a rendezvous with his lover Jarred once a year, when Jarred comes back from the see to kiss his lover once more…
When love is stronger than death, letting go is impossible.
Cries Beneath the Plaster: Joseph makes his living with his macabre sculptures… Until the day he realises there is a price you have to pay if you play with blood…
Distressing.
Finn’s Night: An old gambler finds a new marker in young Huck… But he may also have found a new love.
Another beautiful story, set in the times when the Mississippi was the place for a gambler to make a living. 
Resemblances: Dave’s dreams are full of a strange young man he imagined time ago… but maybe he’s not as unreal as he once thought
This is the first story of the Fallen, a place where magic and reality mix in a strange way, creating somehow a distressing atmosphere which transpires through the events, providing them with a dreamlike reality.
Tea Time with Corn Dolly: Corn Dolly is an Afflicted, one of the strange inhabitants of the Fallen who suffer from strange conditions. But does not mean she cannot fall in love…
Sad. So sad. 
The Anthvoke: Marie follows her beloved Jess to the Fallen, not wanting to lose her. But the Fallen has its way of changing people, and little by little Jess becomes somebody Marie does not recognise any more…
Another beautiful and distressing love story set in the twisted reality of the Fallen.
Hair Like Fire, Blood Like Silk: In his first night at the Fallen, Zane is saved from starving when he meets Saj… But Zane can mean Saj’s perdition…
As in all the Fallen tales, the atmosphere is unique and distressing… And love stories are always twisted and painful.

The stories collected in Trysts are strange, twisted, gloomy but undeniably emotional and moving. They are beautifully written and leave you with in a bittersweet mood. All in all, this is unique collection of love/pain stories where the beautiful and the ugly are masterfully mixed, leaving behind the impression of having had one of those vivid absinthe dreams the poets talk about… Excellent book.