Rating: 3/5

This was the first Anne Perry book that I've read and since finishing it I have discovered that it is book 20 of her series following Charlotte and Thomas Pitt. It reads well as a stand alone book and other than deeper knowledge of Thomas (Charlotte was on vacation for the entirety of this book), I don't think more context is needed to enjoy this read. 

I do find that the description in the blurb is slightly misleading. From the blurb I thought the book would be more mystery focused and have more interesting people introduced as potential criminals, but that was not the case. In the beginning based on the interactions of Pitt and Tellman, I thought this book would be a murder mystery with some casual misogyny on the side of the sake of "historical accuracy." However, I pleasantly discovered that the characters are well developed and emotionally complex, making them fun to engage with regardless of whether or not you agreed with everything they believed. Themes of women's expression and censorship are handled in a way that feel both accurate for the time as well as satisfying for the modern reader, perhaps with the exception of the ending that I found quite abrupt and incohesive with the rest of the book (which is why the score is a 3 instead of a 4). 

The murder plot that follows Thomas Pitt is mild and unengaging in terms of giving the reader enough information to create solid theories before the information is spelled out for them. The discussion of censorship Pitt's chapters bring up are boring and the argument isn't made until the very last chapter, in which the murderer is revealed and the motivations are bland. Pitt takes a backburner position to the more interesting plotline that follows his mother-in-law, Caroline, and explores her relationship to her own mother-in-law, her husband, and herself. Perry writes these women with a severe complexity without the need for a tidy redemption arc that makes them painfully and extraordinarily human. As they are challenged to understand what brings about change and if change should even be brought about, the reader is similarly challenged. Censorship is a poignant topic of political relevance in any era and the answer isn't simple. Half Moon Street explores this in characters that suffer the consequences of being too far on either side of the argument. 

tldr; if you want to read about an interesting murder case as it unfolds, skip this one. If you want to read a fascinating character study of two women struggling with their inner demons and outward composure appropriate for the time (mid to late 1800s) with a soft side of murder mystery, then this book is worth a read.