Rating: 4/5

Two verdant buddies hit the road in this volume of Denny O'Neil and Neal Adams's 1970 Green Lantern run (Collected here is Green Lantern #76-82). 

During a visit to Green Arrow's home of Star City (replete with violent criminals as every comic book city is), Green Lantern decides to mete out some ring-powered justice against a couple of petty crooks intimidating a trembling fat man. Having saved the day GL runs into Green Arrow who says, "what the hell, man? You just saved that crooked fat landlord from the helpless tenants that he's evicting so he can build a new parking lot".

Cue identity crisis for the dim Green Lantern: Huh? If man break rule, man is guilty. Landlord no break law. Landlord no guilty. But wait..?!? Landlord is asshole! Who do I punish now?

Thankfully, Hal Jordan (GL) has a fiery friend in Oliver Queen (GA), who understands that the power of the lantern hasn't exactly supercharged Hal's sense of morality.

"Listen... Forget about chasing around the galaxy!... And remember America... It's a good country... beautiful, fertile, and terribly sick!", Oliver Queen proclaims as he and Hal set off on a road trip across America, a la J. Steinbeck and Charley, in pursuit of the real spirit of the country.

This aptly political set of comic issues, written during the boiling early 70's, echoes and clangs eerily in our present decade. Political violence and polarization have skyrocketed with nary an end in sight. With our two titular characters, Green Lantern is beginning to realize that the world isn't all black and white, while Green Arrow and his hotheaded radical nature seems to be always straddling the edge of going a bit too far for what he deems to be right.

Travelling through mining towns (Issue #77 reminded me of the 1914 Ludlow Massacre) and Indian reservations in a green pickup truck (naturally), the two heroes try to fight corruption yet they often end up on different sides of the issue, coming to the only natural conclusion that "sooner or later, humanity must stop hitting... killing... which lead to hatred and bloodshed".

Four green stars out of five (knocked off a point since the final three issues of the volume were not part of the road trip and dealt more with Green Lantern off-earth tribulations).