Rating: 5/5

“The mind is like a house, with many rooms. And some people’s houses have lots of junk in them. But our minds are very clever - we can keep some parts of our minds tidy by pushing the junk into other rooms. The meditation process is one of clearing. We need to clear the junk from the other rooms we don’t use, to pull it out, look at it. And it can get very messy for a while. But if we don’t do it we don’t ever get clear. I think you are just starting, Jimmy.”

This was our latest pick for The Scottish book club and it did not disappoint. It has proudly mate it into the Scottish hall of fame for me! 

This is the story of Jimmy, Anne Maries dad. A Glaswegian painter and decorator, brother, husband, dad and genuinely fun loving typical West Coast fella. Someone that the world didn’t take very seriously very often. Anne Marie opens the book by saying “Ma Da’s a nutter. Radio rental.” Which sums up the way everyone sees him.

So when Jimmy starts on the path of spiritual awakening, taking up meditation at the local Buddhist centre everyone assumes this is a joke. A phase. Something that won’t last. And when it does last the family tries to come to terms with the change in Jimmy; and the change it brings about in their own life too. 

This book is about so more than Jimmy and Buddhism for me though. It shows how people change throughout their life and how priorities change and coping mechanisms can be very different. For Jimmy and Liz, settling down very young it’s only natural that they lose each other for a while as they try and figure out who they actually wish to be. And it shows how men from the West coast are not taken seriously when they try to be more sensitive and in tune with their own feelings and thoughts. Jimmy’s awakening is not the “manly” way.

It’s also not just about Jimmy. But about Anne Marie’s and her mother Liz; who stole the show for me. Coming from a broken home myself, Liz and Jimmy reminded me of my own parents and how it must have been for them; marrying young and then changing in different ways. For Liz, she was always known as a mother and a wife. And through Jimmy’s awakening she has one of her own- albeit entirely different. 

A very personal book for me that wasn’t too heavy on the subject matter. But with beautiful hidden messages throughout. I miss this family already.