Rating: 4/5

In 1937 Betty MacDonald was diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis, and this is an engrossing memoir about the nine months she spent in a state-funded sanatorium near Seattle. Despite the many miseries she describes, this is written with a great deal of humor.

One of the treatments for tuberculosis was complete and utter bed rest, and she spent her first three months in perpetually cold rooms surrounded by coughing, gasping strangers, forbidden books or music or conversation or an extra blanket or trips to the bathroom. Patients were expected to be obedient and deferential and grateful, and were threatened with expulsion for any violations. Visitation was extremely limited: particularly her children were only allowed to visit once a month for 10 minutes, and couldn't touch her.

(I'm not sure if the relentless cold or the lack of books would be more detrimental to my health. One female patient notes bitterly that the men on bedrest were allowed to read.)

MacDonald describes in great detail the deliberately impersonal treatment and the utter tyranny of the medical staff (if the nurse says you can't have hot water, you can't have it) but appreciates that they restored her health. The food was good and plentiful, however, since they were trying to fatten up underweight TB patients. It worked, and by the end of her stay, when she was finally allowed to read, MacDonald was “only interested in stories about large plump women with tuberculosis”. 

She draws a vivid picture of the life at the sanatorium, which was “rife with gossip and rumors…. always about poor little patients who were mistreated by the staff.” She writes hilariously about her fellow patients: “Being suddenly thrust with perfect strangers and forced to live with them without any privacy at all for twenty-four-hour period after twenty-four-hour period is as much a problem in adjustment as a planned marriage…. From my stay at The Pines I learned that a stiff test for friendship is: ‘Would she be pleasant to have t.b. with?’”

MacDonald's first memoir, The Egg and I, was tainted by the racist remarks she made about Native Americans, but here she displays nothing of the same attitude concerning the non-white patients she met in the sanatorium.