Rating: 5/5

One day in my American Lit. I was posed with a dilemma. I had to choose my semester novel. I knew one thing and one thing only;I needed to choose something that interested my in order to hold my attention. Being from Northwest Montana I love hunting, fishing, hiking etc.,so immediately when I read the back of Pete Fromm's adventurous story it was as if Indian Creek Chronicles was destined for me.

 Indian Creek Chronicles captures the mind of any wilderness loving person, young or old. From Pete Fromm's point of view, he retells his winter of isolation living on Indian Creek in Idaho. He is sent out by the Idaho Fish and Game to ensure the safe hatch of millions of salmon eggs. Living in a canvas tent, Fromm faces the icy grips of hunger and cold, but comes out victorious when he successfully hunts down and kills countless animals to supplement his winter diet. Through his battles with nature Fromm discovers his true self, and discovers what life is about. When spring comes Fromm is victorious, even though he entered the wilderness with little knowledge and meager rations, he survives and emerges a new person with a new perspective on life.

 While reading the book the reader discovers many things that can apply to any ones life. Also, nature is not for the faint hearted. Fromm discovers this when he nearly slides of a cliff, but at the last second catches himself in the snow, saving himself from certain death. Fromm also discovers loneliness and how depressing it can be. Finally, Fromm learns that friendship is a strong bond that everyone needs. He discovers this with him and his dog Boone, who was his main company the entire winter. Also Fromm's friend Rader visits him countless times, raising Fromm's spirits, but also making him homesick more than anything.

 All in all, this was a fantastic book. I would recommend this book to anyone who likes reading about the great outdoors, and adventure. Also, I would recommend this book to anyone who has read Into the Wild, or Walden. This honest tale of an inexperienced, under rationed college student, surviving Idaho's brutal, relentless winter captured me from the beginning. The story's fast pace kept me from setting the book down until it was finished. Fromm's adventure was exhilarating.