Rating: 5/5

33 (well-documented) wives (undoubtedly there were many more). Seven of them were older than Joseph; of those, two were within 5 years of his age (Lucinda Pendleton and Eliza R. Snow). The remaining 26 wives were younger than him--some much younger; the last of them died in 1913 (Mary Elizabeth Rollins). 11 were married to someone else at the time he proposed and married them.

Among the younger women who were single, a clear pattern emerges: they were typically young girls invited into the Smith home as servants or helpers, or they were the daughter of a close friend of Joseph's. Among those women who were married, a typical situation was one in which Joseph sent their husband on a mission, during which he proposed and married the wife.

In most or all cases, Joseph referenced his ecclesiastical authority and made promises to these women that are hard to square with current LDS theology--promises of eternal salvation for them and their families in exchange for this one act of marrying him.

It is hard to tell what exactly Joseph's marriages were about--though we know many or most of them were consummated. Indeed, that seems to be the main thing happening, since Joseph never actually lived with or provided for any of his wives for any significant amount of time (except Emma). Some of them had other husbands to stay with; the young ones lived with parents or older siblings. Compton notes the irony that Joseph introduced polygamy to Mormonism but never actually experienced the practicalities of real-life polygamy.

After Joseph died, of course, his many widows were married off to Church leaders--mainly Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. Then these women really experienced polygamy, which was little more than single motherhood and near starvation in most cases, making the trek to Utah on their own or with the help of a brother or father, then making do in those poverty-stricken early years of Utah settlement. Brigham was stingy with his wives, even once he had amassed considerable wealth, and Heber was worse. Neither husband spent much time with most wives. As Compton notes, "An interview with one's husband was an event to note in the diary" (329), yet many of the wives of Brigham and Heber managed to become pregnant repeatedly despite being unable to have enough time to discuss practical concerns and basic provisions for children with their husbands. In other words, these relationships basically consisted of Brigham or Heber stopping by for procreation every once in awhile, and that was about it. Compton describes one heartbreaking letter written from Emily Partridge to Brigham Young, begging to be given to another man who might have time and ability to help her provide (417). Brigham did not consent.

If you don't want to read the whole book, just read three chapters: Zina Huntington, Emily Partridge, and Helen Mar Kimball. Those will illustrate the key dimensions of the issue. Zina illustrates the polyandry angle--her pitiable husband Jacob always loving her but being sidelined by first Joseph then Brigham--sent on mission after mission. Emily's chapter paints a truly depressing and pitiful picture; her life, like many of the others, was one tragedy after another, borne alone. Helen is the youngest known wife, and her story illustrates the power of the prophetic mantle over the minds of the Saints.

The only conclusion to be drawn is that practical polygamy--which Joseph never lived--was a disastrous social experiment that crushed women, emotionally and materially, and impoverished children.

Read this book! It's good. The notes are inconveniently placed at the very end of the book, but you will get through it.