Rating: 3/5

What is reader's block? Coined a day or two after Goodreads went online, it is sister to "writer's block," but afflicts would-be book readers who rather than being unable to focus on putting words on a page, struggle to read one. I've caught a case of reader's block for the first time, having abandoned three novels recently and really just being polite to the most recent, the children's classic The Wonderful Wizard of Oz by L. Frank Baum. I finished this one, published in 1900, which is like saying you finished breakfast and expecting a reward (tacos for lunch maybe). 

I came to the book after decades of enjoyment of MGM's classic film from 1939, which up until I was 12, viewers had to wait anxiously until February to watch on CBS, or in a repertory theater if you had one in your town. In addition to adding musical numbers and some of the most extraordinary special effects introduced in a movie, The Wizard of Oz ends halfway through Baum's story but makes up for it by developing its characters, particularly Dorothy (Judy Garland) who wants nothing more than to flee home with her dog Toto, until she can't get back.

Baum's book is written from the point of view of Dorothy, or from a child, and is not embellished with the irony of a Lewis Carroll or J.M. Barrie. Many of his ideas are wondrous-- Dorothy's friends in Oz, four witches (two good, two bad), winged monkeys, a humbug wizard, talking field mice, an Emerald City so bright you need special glasses to enter it--and enchanted the child within me. Baum writes as if he's telling a bedtime story to a child and skirts through plot. And there was a cyclone and Dorothy went into the sky and her house landed on a witch and these Munchkins appeared and ... 

Thirteen sequels followed this book and I'd have to say my interest could probably be satisfied reading the Wikipedia page to browse the other ideas Baum came up with (I like the vain secondary villain Princess Langwidere from Ozma of Oz who keeps a collection of thirty living, exchangeable heads in a cabinet). Come to think of it, the text reads a lot like a Wikipedia entry and shouldn't take much more time to comb through, a blessing for parents needing something imaginative to read to their kids before put down.

My amazement for the film The Wizard of Oz is that long after all the actors, filmmakers and soundstages it was produced in are gone forever, this work of art lives on to amaze new generations. There's no duplicating it either. Nothing from the pops or hisses on the soundtrack to the film stock to the affectations the cast use when they speak could be reproduced today if someone had the resources to try it. Fairuza Balk did a magnificent job imitating Garland's dialect in a much overlooked sequel of sorts from Walt Disney Pictures in 1985, Return To Oz.