Rating: 4/5

Some of these stories I had already read in a previous volume of short stories, others were new to me. Here is a short summary of each of the eighteen stories including the length of the audio version:

1. The Adventure of Johnnie Waverly – Length: 26 minutes. Johnnie Waverly, the son of a country squire and his wife (daughter of a major steel producer) is kidnapped for ransom. Poirot reassures them that their son will be well cared for by the kidnappers as he is their “goose that lays the golden eggs.” Poirot unravels this mystery to a surprising conclusion.

2. Double Sin - Length - 47minutes. This one was different in that Hercule Poirot sets out to prevent a murder.

3. The Submarine Plans - Length: 30 minutes. A story of intrigue. Lord Alloway approaches Poirot saying, “We have had a most serious loss. The plans of the new Z [pronounced zed] type of submarine have been stolen.”

4. The Cornish Mystery - Length: 30 minutes. A good story with an interesting plot. A wife approaches Poirot stating that her husband is poisoning her.

5. The Market Basing Mystery - Length: 20 minutes. This story features Inspector Jap and we learn that he is an avid botanist in his spare time. Jap, Poirot and Hastings are on a weekend getaway together in a market town in the country. Upon being offered seconds at breakfast, Poirot responds, “One must not so replenish the stomach that the brain refuses to function.” They may be miles from anywhere having a break from murder, however a case that is just too intriguing to pass up finds its way to them.

6. Problems at Sea - Length: 35 minutes. Poirot is on a Mediterranean cruise when a thoroughly unlikeable self-indulgent passenger is murdered. A talking doll features.

7. How Does Your Garden Grow? Length: 33 minutes. An elderly lady reaches out to Poirot for assistance via letter. Poirot arrives at her home to discover that she has been poisoned. He discovers the means in her well-maintained garden.

8. The Lost Mine - Length: 20 minutes. When Hastings suggests a speculative investment Poirot recounts the tale of how he was rewarded with shares in a mine for unraveling a mystery. His final advice to Hastings, “When investing money, keep, I beg of you, Hastings, strictly to the conservative.”

9. The King of Clubs - Length: 28 minutes. “The place was somewhat overloaded with gimcrack ornaments [gaudy souvenirs], and a good many family portraits of surpassing ugliness adorned the walls.” Lovely quote from Poirot: “family strength is a marvelous thing.”

10. The Affair at the Victory Ball - Length: 33 minutes. This is a classic locked room mystery, which I enjoyed very much.

11. The Wasp’s Nest - Length: 20 minutes. Poirot drops in on a friend and explains that he is investigating a murder before it happens. A discussion on the different methods for removing a wasp’s nest ensues. There is a sting in the tale.

12. The Chocolate Box - Length: 32 minutes. This story begins by a cozy fireside with warm drinks on a wild weather evening. Poirot and Hastings reminisce and Poirot recounts “the story of a failure.” 

13. The Adventure of the Clapham Cook - Length: 30 minutes. Poirot decides to take a day of leisure after finding no case to tempt him into action. Then, there is a ring on the doorbell and his day is turned upside down by an insistent lady who takes Poirot down a peg or two rendering him speechless, then causing him to laugh! She is indignant when he tries to dismiss her and states, “A good cook's a good cook. And when you lose her, it's as much to you as pearls are to some fine lady.” 

As you have guessed, Poirot takes on the case, which turns out to be quite complicated and at the end Poirot says, “Remember Hastings if you are going into exile, a good cook may be of more comfort than a pretty face.”

14. The Double Clue - Length - 19 minutes. A jewelry collector asks Poirot to investigate the loss of some rubies and an emerald necklace. There are four suspects “the Russian countess, the English grand dame, the South African millionaire, and Mr. Bernard Parker.”

15. The Third-Floor Flat - Length: 41 minutes. This story begins with a group of young people waiting for Pat to find her front door key and let them into her flat. “With a deepening frown she rummaged wildly in the silken trifle she called an evening bag.” When she doesn’t find her key, one of the young men agrees to use the coal lift to access her flat and let the others in. However, he enters the wrong flat and discovers a body…..

16. The Le Mesurier Inheritance - Length: 26 minutes. The “brass hat” referred to in this story is a high-ranking officer in the armed forces. This story features a family curse, and a serial killer. It is quite engrossing with a chilling conclusion.

17. The Veiled Lady - Length: 20 minutes. Poirot is frustrated by the lack of interesting cases when a heavily veiled lady arrives at his door asking for his help in thwarting a blackmailer. Appearances can be deceptive and the case is other than it seems. Inspector Jap and a Chinese puzzle box feature.

18. The Plymouth Express - The Plymouth Express. Length: 29 minutes. This story features Inspector Jap and opens at the beginning of a train journey. “A moment later a cry rang out into the night and the great train came to an unwilling halt in obedience to the imperative jerking of the communications cord.” A body is discovered, and jewels are missing.

Two characters worth mentioning are Red Narky, an infamous jewel robber and Grace Kidd, his accomplice. Eventually, the elusive Grace Kidd is captured by Poirot. Inspector Jap will get the credit, however Poirot concludes that while Jap gets the kid[d], he, Poirot gets his goat.