Rating: 4/5

Mr. Benson is without question an iconic work of fiction. I’ve seen the book reviewed as a must have for anyone interested in BDSM and as the blurb mentions, has become a cultural symbol. The paperback is on many, many keeper shelves and remains a classic, much discussed story. What’s interesting is that Mr. Benson doesn’t actually try to be a story based in reality or a how to for BDSM fans. Instead the story delves into the ultimate fantasy and the psychological impact of heavy slavery and sadomasochism. The writing is raunchy, raw and delights in being stroke fiction while also offering a pretty cheesy and flat out bad mystery. Yet none of that matters for those that read this because the intimate look at the emotional, physical and mental desires of hard core BDSM participants remains fascinating. You don’t read this for a well crafted story per se – you read this for the glimpse into the heads of those who desire, crave, and fantasize about BDSM. Some may recognize their own desires within while others may understand the subculture better.

Jamie is a cute twink cruising gay bars looking for the perfect Master even though he doesn’t realize that’s what he’s after. He encounters the near silent Mr. Benson in a leather bar and goes back to his wealthy penthouse within minutes of meeting. Soon Jamie has pledged to be Mr. Benson’s slave and gives up his life entirely to be at the whim of his Master. What follows is Jamie’s sexual journey as a slave with a side trip into a bad mystery before a happy ending and tacked on epilogue. Of course Jamie wasn’t called a twink back then but he also makes some incredibly bad decisions that likely would have left him dead, maimed, or diseased if the setting was more modern. So right away the story is over the top in many ways and a fantasy. Frankly that works well since it’s trying to show a mentality and a culture more than anything else.

Jamie is the narrator as he describes his journey from hapless cruiser to well trained sex slave. His thoughts and observations are biased and focus more on the sexual aspects than the emotional. Jamie lives out his sexual fantasy in its entirety while indulging in just about every kink – water sports, fisting, branding, piercing, and masochism to name a few. Jamie also gives up his job, apartment, friends, family, and entire life to be submersed into the life of a 24/7 sex slave. This is part of Jamie’s ultimate fantasy and the narration luxuriates in such raw, brutal sex. Jamie is branded almost immediately and there is never a discussion of limits, desires, wants, or needs. There is only Mr. Benson and his immutable will. The lack of responsibility on Jamie’s side allows him to revel in his sexual fantasies. This delves into the mentality of a masochist and the more extreme desires and hidden longings.

Jamie is not perfect and questions, theorizes, and misinterprets a lot of what goes on. This is later contrasted beautifully in the epilogue written from Mr. Benson’s point of view where his mentality comes through strongly in mere pages. His strong desires and needs aren’t questioned and wondered, merely accepted point blank. He also explains the hard work and mindset of a sadist that is not out simply to use and abuse. The contrast is startling and a perfect ending to the book. The epilogue is especially nice since the last quarter of the book or so deals with the somewhat obvious and silly kidnapping mystery. This portion of the book is definitely not the highlight and thankfully by the time this aspect gets going, the strength of the writing, characters, and story are well defined.

Overall Mr. Benson delivers exactly what it is supposed to be – a tantalizing look at hard core BDSM participants that gets readers questioning, wondering, and squirming. Not all of the kinks are easy to read or imagine and the writing pulls no punches with the raw, blunt language. Some may find these aspects difficult to handle while others may be frustrated at the mystery portion, but most will be fascinated by the glimpse into the minds of Mr. Benson and Jamie. Even written over twenty five years ago, the themes, concepts, and portraits depicted have lasting impact. If you haven’t read this iconic work, you must.