Rating: 2/5

What attracted me to Barbara Pym was the comparison that was made between the two authors. Jane Austen is sort of a literary deity to me :) so I was pleased with the idea of meeting an author whose works might resemble the greatest Austen characteristics. I was totally disappointed in my expectations. With due respect to Pym as an author, I must say that there is a vast gulf between the two authors. Austen's subtle humor, well-observed character portrayals, and in-depth social commentary are at a level unparalleled that Pym cannot ever hope to achieve. In truth, no author can. It is therefore an unfair comparison to both, which is especially damaging to Pym, who would lose her own authenticity as an author. 

My disappointment with Jane and Prudence was mostly due to this false expectation. The only Autenian characteristic I could find from this Pym novel is independent women and their strong aversion to being conventional married women. It's unfortunate that it took half of the book for me to shake off my illusion. Had I approached the book without preconceptions, perhaps I'd have enjoyed it more. The audiobook to which I listened made matters worse. While her narration was pleasing, her recital of dialogues was over dramatic which was irksome. It was rather a terrible listening experience.

And now, let me come to the book proper. The story is about two women as the title indicates: one married and older, the other single and younger. What I really liked about the novel is the view Pym takes on women. Both characters are portrayed as independent minds not bowing to convention. However, the story is told in such a manner that I didn't feel a party to the story. The result is that I felt detached and distant from the characters. I didn't really care what they did or what would happen to them. In any case, they were dull and insipid characters with absolutely no character development. The story didn't have a coherent flow; it was more like little vignettes of the character's daily routines, their eating habits, their love lives, and general village gossip. Towards the end, the story gets more interesting but not enough to compensate for the overall lack of enthusiasm. What I really looked forward to was the humour so promised in Pym novels. But unfortunately, this was lost on me through the over-dramatized audio narration. So, overall, the experience was not gratifying. 

However, I'm not ready to be done with Barbara Pym. I read her under an illusion, and the narrator of the audiobook took off much of the pleasure of listening. I hope that once both are removed, I may be able to form a better connection with her novels. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/