Rating: 5/5

I've always been fascinated by this subject. It's amazing to me how little most Americans know about it, since it is hardly possible to know anything about the history of the world over the last 200 years without knowing something about the theory and history of socialism. This book was written by someone who was born into a family of true believers, but came to the conclusion, with, I believe, a certain degree of reluctance, that he had to leave the fold. 

Muravchik does a good job of telling the story of socialism. It is all there: the French Revolutionaries, the Utopian Communes in 19th century America, the Marxists in Germany, the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, the Fascists, the revolutions in China and Cuba, the Scandinavian attempts at Social Democracy, Third World socialism, the Israeli Kibbutzim, and the New Left. In the newest edition, there is an epilogue that comments on its current revival, but my copy is an older one, and doesn't include that.

The chapter on Fascism is worth the price of the book. Most people have no idea what Fascism is, but Muravchik correctly points out that it is a heretical offshoot of socialism. Read it, and you will understand a weird thing that socialists do. You've probably noticed it: they tend to see fascists everywhere. This illustrates the truth that the scariest bogeyman is the one you see in the mirror.

Muravchik does a good job of explaining that socialism is not a theory of property, or a theory of human development, or a spontaneous movement of the poor. It is the world's second oldest religion: the belief in man's ability to create heaven on earth, without and against God. It is as old as the Book of Genesis. 

Socialism exerts a strong attraction on some of the best people in the world, especially when they are young. It is a permanent tool in the hands of the very worst people in the world. Socialism was pronounced dead in the 1990s, but it's a story that began a long time ago, never ends well, and seemingly never ends.