Rating: 3/5

I'm 16, and I left school seven years ago, so I'd say I'm pretty close to the target audience for this book. Not that I left on a quest to 'get a real life and education', it was actually just to try out home-education and see what it was like, but I haven't been back since. I was interested to read this author's perspective on home-education and hear the arguments she made in favour of it, as well as suggestions and ideas for new ways to pursue my interests and all that. My mum has a huge collection of education and parenting books around the house, but the reason this one stuck out to me was the fact that it's aimed at teenagers. That, for starters, I thought was a bold and unique choice, but at the same time such a clear and rudimentary one when you consider the subject matter.

I wrote [this book] because I wished that when I was a teenager someone had written it for me. I wrote it for teenagers because my memory and experience insist that they are as fully human as adults. I wrote it for teenagers because I found an appalling dearth of respectful, serious nonfiction for them. In short, I wrote it for teenagers because they are the experts on their own lives.

Being a home-educator myself (completely by my own choice), and knowing many others by now, obviously I'm biased in the opinion that I think home-education rocks. But I will say I didn't agree with everything this book has to say. Llewellyn takes a pretty black-and-white stance on the matter of education and isn't subtle in her opinion that school is, to put it frankly, evil. I'm not saying this opinion isn't right - it may well be, there's plenty of logical arguments for it - but I'm just not into that way of thinking. I actually really liked school when I was in it, and still think there are cool things about it. Basically, I think home-education is so much more than the opposite of school, school at home, or a rebellion against schools - any term that defines itself by school, basically. Hence why I've become accustomed to calling it 'home-education' rather than 'home-schooling' or 'unschooling' (the type most referenced in this book, which is the style our way of doing it is most similar to I'd say). 

This is not to say the part of this book dedicated to examining and evaluating the school system wasn't interesting to me. I had been looking forward to getting to the part actually about being home-educated, but in retrospect I think the 'Making the Decision' part was the strongest and most enlightening part of the book. Llewllyn certainly has a lot to say on this subject, having had experience working as a teacher, and clearly having done her research as well. Here are a couple of points I thought were particularly profound and well-said:

"I have no hope that the school system will change enough to make schools healthy places, until it makes school blatantly optional." [Side note: In case you didn't know, in most places school is optional, if not blatantly, it's only having an education that's compulsory] :)

"In the long run, pressure is an ineffective substitute for curiosity and the freedom to pursue those things you love, because people only remember and think about things they use or care about."

"Think about it. Would you continue to enjoy (and improve at) skateboarding or hiking if someone scrutinised your every move, reported to your parents, and acted as if you'd never succeed in life if you didn't perfect your double kick flip before Friday, or add ten pounds to you pack and reach the pass by noon?
Obviously, we all need both privacy and respect to enjoy (learn) any activity. By privacy, I don't mean solitude. I mean freedom from people poking their noses into your business or 'progress'."

"School conditions you to live for the future, rather than to live in the present. [...] Marti Holmes, mother of a 15-year-old, wrote, 'Homeschooling has not closed any doors that I can see, and has provided rich, full years of living (rather than "preparing for life").' [...] More than anything else, this book is bout living - now, as well as 20 years from now."

"The world and its complex, terrible, wonderful webs of civilisation are far bigger and older than our 19th-century factory-style compulsory schooling system. There is room for all kinds of people - those who love books, and those who'd rather build things and take them apart all day, not just for an hour in the woodshop or autoshop. There is room for those who would rather wander dreaming on a glacier [...]. There is room for those who want to make lasange and homemade French bread and apple pie all day. None of these callings is better or worse than others. None means failure as a human being, but they may cause failure in a dull system that you never asked to be a part of in the first place."

Let me just say this last quote, even as someone who's been in charge of her own education for so long now, was really inspiring to me. I think the school system and its conceptions of self-worth (being acceptable at everything, not exceptional at one) can really get drilled into you and apparently did for me more than I realised. This quote alone I feel was something I needed to hear, firmly and directly, so honestly it's worth picking this book up even if you just get one moment like that from it - regardless of its overall flaws. I can think of a lot of people in my life who I think would be a lot less judgemental of home-education if they read The Teenage Liberation Handbook, so it's definitely got some helpful ideas.

However, I do have to agree with other reviewers that the author's strong views and the not-so-subtle way she expressed them, could come across as quite obnoxious at times. Don't get me wrong, as a teenager I think it's great to have a stubbornly encouraging voice telling you all this stuff, but I don't know if it's the best approach for getting the wider population on board with home-schooling. 

In addition to this, I found myself pretty disappointed with the advice for once you get started home-educating. Looking back, I can see a big gap in this book of discussions of what home-education actually is. Obviously, part of this is a reflection of how vastly different it can be for each and every person doing it, but it kind of comes back to what I was saying earlier - home-education is a concept in itself, more than just 'not being in school'. This book claims to be a handbook for teenagers taking the reins of their own education, but the fact that the author was not one of those becomes blindingly obvious as we get into the second half of this book. As I said above, she's clearly knowledgeable and well-read on this subject, yet there were still fundamentals left out of this book. There was frequent references to 'unschooling' but not much in the effort of explaining what this meant or mentioning the alternatives. I'm sorry to say that to me also there wasn't enough attention to the common fears and uncertainties that come from both inside your own head and the people around you when you make this kind of major, pretty unorthodox life decision (again I'm taking about starting home-education here, not stopping school - to my disappointment, the latter was given more emphasis).

Part 3 (The Tailor-Made Educational Extravaganza) and Part 4 (Touching the World - Finding Good Work) were the ones I was most looking forward to, and the ones I thought me in my current position would get most out of - the ones giving suggestions, advice and motivation to get the most out of your freer education and life. Maybe they would give those things to a new home-educator, and maybe I'm just into the flow of it enough already, but to be honest I found them to be mainly boring, insuccinct listings of resources you pretty easily could think up yourself, or find on the internet. Countless times I saw a sentence along the lines of: "If you want adventure, you can learn to fly planes, explore local cultural monuments, or challenge yourself to eat a new food everyday..." or "Studying English for unschoolers can involve anything from writing your own novel, studying a major author from history in depth or volunteering to coach people for whom English is their second language..." 

Honestly, she could have just said the possibilities for everything are endless and saved us both a lot of time. I know this is not all down to the author - the possibilities of home-education are pretty much endless - but the way she supposedly 'guided' us was so lazily vague that none of it felt helpful to me, or like it was coming from a very experienced position. 

I would've liked to have seen more general stuff about what the subjects in the chapter names actually entailed (I imagine Llewellyn would have a lot to say about them having much more to them than what school teaches you - so why not explore that, go into specifics?) and more personalised advice. E.g. for Literature and Writing: "If you already enjoy writing, try experimenting with different types (novels, poems, essays etc.) and see which you like best. If you don't, consider looking into how it can benefit future endeavours into what you are interested in, or try seeking out interviews of people who do like writing (successful authors, for example) on why they enjoy it, before discounting the subject completely." Obviously this is much more brief and rough than it would actually be in the book, but hopefully it gets across the kind of thing I would've found useful.

OK, so I feel like I've been being really negative in this review, when actually I'm really glad I read this book. I loved every single real life account from real life home-educators and their experiences (where have all these super cool home-ed teenagers been all my life?!). Particularly talk of the 'depression period' after leaving school, where you don't really know what to do with yourself, was really relatable for me, as I remember going through that phase, and actually had no idea before this that almost everyone does. The section on the laws surrounding home-education in all different countries, as well, was incredibly insightful. Overall, lots of good in this book, but it's definitely not perfect in my eyes. Though I would recommend it if you want to learn more about home-education, I would say go in with an open mind and don't take all it's points for fact.