Rating: 3/5

I’ve been slow about writing this review because, at first, I wasn’t sure I had anything to say, and then, once I thought about it more and came up with some topics, I wasn’t sure how to put them together.

Partly that’s a result of the book’s organization--which leads to a first gloss: imagine Richard Tarnas’s “Passion of the Western Mind” cut into four page chunks and re-arranged at random (rather than chronologically.) That gives a sense of both the book’s content and arrangement.

Another attempt: Harpur is a Jungian structuralists unbothered by post-structuralism and post-modernism--indeed, he’s anti-modern, looking to a lineage of thought that predates much of what we call Western civilization but which was reclaimed by romantics first during the Florentine Renaissance then Elizabethan England (alchemy is an important practice; John Dee an important character) and later again by the German and English Romantics. He sees Jung (and himself) as operating in the same tradition.

Beyond “Romantic,” what is that tradition? It is the belief that, as Blake put it, imagination--not sense perception--is the key to human understanding of the universe, forcing an engagement with the the sacred.

Which raises the question, what does Harpur think the imagination is? That’s where the book gets weird. He believes that the imagination is another world, both spiritual and material, populated by what he calls daimons--these are real beings. They manifest themselves in the world as fairies and monsters and aliens, all of which he thinks are both real and metaphorical (but still: real). They are ambivalent forces, good and evil, manipulable by some. Harpur calls this world world imaginal, in reference to Henry Corbin’s work on the Mundus imaginalis.

Poets, shamans, and, of course, psychoanalysts (he especially likes James Hillman) have access to these creatures; they see the other world not simply as metaphor--not simply as abstract creations of human musing, but as an actual entity. This part of the book reminded me of the end of Roger Penrose’s “The Emperor’s New Mind,” which discussed just such a mental landscape--one that is not just a collective unconscious but a place subject to its own rules, a place where actions feedback into the human world.

Normal people can also access this otherworld, usually through dreams, though possessions, out-of-body experiences, and alien abductions may also be encounters with this daimonic reality. Generally, though, we ignore this place, or make it an intellectual abstraction--the soul of the world, the imagination, or the collective unconscious--but not a real place that is (again) both actual and metaphorical. There’s a strong Neo-Platonist strand that runs through the book, and that’s another way to think of Harpur: he really seems to believe that the world of Platonic forms exists. Jacob Boehme is, of course, central to the intellectual history Harpur is trying to write--Boehme thought imagination was what held the universe together, imagination understood in this Romantic way.

Harpur blames ignorance of this other world on Christianity, generally, which made demonized the daimonic (as Victoria Nelson has also argued) and Cartesian dualism in particular. The separation of mind and material left no room for understanding this world (it was a Fortean damned fact, so to speak) and unleashed a heroic modern ego that saw itself as completely individual and disconnected, focusing only on the literal meaning of its senses rather than the metaphorical. (He calls this rampant rationalism, as opposed to reason.)

Building on Mary Midgley’s (really brilliant) book “Science as Salvation,” he argues that science has become a modern myth--the myth of scientism, in which everything can be explained materially, rationally, without recourse to metaphor or myth. Technology aids in focusing the human attention on the literal to the exclusion of the metaphorical, and so turns the mind away from the daimonic realm. The clock divided time and the compass divided space (this is reminiscent of Charles Taylor’s argument in “The Secular Age” about the loss of ritual time and ritual space). The telescope literalized the heavens, the printing press literalized knowledge, and television literalizes the imagination, creating a simulation of the other world, but one that does not nourish the human soul.

This focus on the material, he argues, has led to a contemporary ennui and poisoned souls--medicine treats the body, but nothing nourishes the psyche. We need myths to do this (shades of Robert Bly). If we understand how myths work, he claims, then we can understand how imagination works, and therefore the human soul.

So how do myths work? Harpur does not want to offer a single theory--citing anthropologist Rodney Needham, he notes myths do a lot of things: they reflect history, provide social character, embody a metaphysics, respond to nature, express both the timeless and the historical. Any single theory could not account for all this--and more to the point, any single theory of myths would itself become a myth, the way science has become a myth.

Instead, Harpur looks at how myths work. He is a (mostly) unapologetic follower of French anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss in arguing that myths are structured analogies (moon:sun::woman:man, for example). The content of myths do matter--the heroic myths are used to prop up the idea of individuality, for example--but structure is preeminent. Nor are the values always the same: they change and can be reversed; they are only known by considering a whole collection of myths, and deciphering the structure. Myths, then, are not just good to think, as Levi-Strauss had it, but good to imagine as well.

Understanding the imagination in this way requires what Harpur calls double-vision: seeing both the metaphorical and the literal at the same time, with the ability to switch back and forth. The mad (he’s a Romantic, after all!) are good examples of this ability--often, he suggests, citing Odysseus, they are playing (or acting As If, in Michael Saler’s terms). Rites of passage are also important to seeing the world this way (shades of Bly, again), and Harpur condemns modern society for downplaying them. He notes that the English Romantics were great walkers, and so had chances to have experiences with the Other World on their peregrinations.

He also insists that science is a place where the imaginal world can be seen to operate, and offers two examples (by my count), one of which is interesting, the other just odd. The odd one is an extended consideration of Darwin’s theory of evolution, which he says--but does not really argue--literalizes nature and hides its metaphorical side. I got the feeling that this was mostly trotted out so that Harpur would not be seen as to enthralled by science. That was necessary because of his other example: quantum mechanics and modern physics, which replaced Newtonian mechanics and is currently accepted, he says is an example of the daimonic realm. Subatomic particles are daimons, unpredictable, unseeable, affecting the nature of reality. Harpur’s approach, then, is not so different than Erik Davis’s “Techgnosis” in seeing mystical metaphors structuring the world, although it is not clear to me that Davis actually believes in Gnosticism.

This view also solves some of the problems presented by Cartesian dualism--well, not solves so much as dissolves. There is no difference between subject and object, he notes--they are connected, and so epistemology isn’t really needed (although there is an inherent epistemology in this system; he just doesn’t acknowledge it). Memory, he notes as well, is not a literal remembrance of things past, but a recreation--in this he parallels Alison Winter’s recent work--and so is both something literal and metaphorical.

Given that the current system is, in Harpur’s view, unstable, what should we expect of the future? He rejects Tarnas’s conclusion that the masculine intellect will merge with the feminine instinct. Implicitly, he also rejects Victoria Nelson’s suggestion that these mystical themes are working themselves out--indeed, evolving--in popular culture to nourish the soul and give access to the other world, the daimonic. Rather, sees a collapse brought on by a kind of dialectic. Science will be brought down by those who try to literalize the paranormal, maybe, and materialism be lost when people accept angels and demons as purely literal creatures.

So, after all this, what do I think? A hint is given in my continual attempt to connect Harpur to more legitimate thinkers. I want him to be right. I like Penrose’s ideas and loved Tarnas, who I encountered about the same time that I first read Midgley. There’s something to all of this that I think is right: the imagination is bigger than we think, not just flights of fancy. Science is a myth, and sometimes a pernicious one, a myth that will have to be accepted but ultimately transcended. I’m a Romantic at heart, I guess.

And then there’s the discovery that “fort” meant, at one time, a fairy hill--or part of this other world. This is to perfect: Charles Fort’s very name suggesting that his ideas were a passage to the imaginal world. Harpur’s ideas have to be right!

But I am reluctant to follow Harpur too far. Maybe I’m just scared: I don’t want to be thought crazy for believing in real demons (even if they are also metaphorical). But that’s not the whole reason. I’m enough of a postmodernist to be skeptical of these grand narratives attempting to explain the entirety of human beings. A few Greek myths don’t convince me that all people are guided by similar structures. Harpur is right to be skeptical of theories of myths that attempt to explain everything--but he is writing just such a myth himself. And if there’s anything I learned reading this book, it is to question such myths.