Rating: 5/5

From an interview with the author: 

  "In Beyond the Bedroom Wall, you seamlessly shift between different points of view and time periods to tell the Neumiller family’s saga. How did you approach writing a novel that encompasses so many distinct narrators and eras? 

 Larry Woiwode: Slowly. Pieces of the novel appeared over a ten-year period and I was working on parts of it before that. I had a college fascination in the unaccountable grotesque, call it metafiction, laboring under the influence of Beckett (especially Watt), Borges, Nabokov, Kafka, William Gass and the like. I believed this was the truth of my time, and to represent what is called reality in any other form would be a lie. I was living in a room on St. Marks Place before it became gentrified for a rent of nine dollars a week—not an aesthetic setting—and on a sunny fall afternoon it came to me that if I wanted to be absolutely honest, not lie an iota, I would have to admit the most significant influence in my life was my maternal grandmother. She guided me out of the speechlessness of grief after my mother’s death, when I was nine.

I sat and drafted a quick sketch of a scene centered on her. With a bit of work the sketch became more general, as the addition of specific details has the power to do, and an ending came that set my hair on end. I had been showing William Maxwell, whom I met the year before at an Arts Conference at the University of Illinois, some of my metafiction, and this sketch, now a story, I thought, I sent by mail, as I remember, rather than carrying it up to his office, as I’d done. I heard in a week that The New Yorker was taking it, my first real publication, and it set the direction for the rest of my work. The story falls at almost the exact center of Beyond the Bedroom Wall. The shifting points of view in the novel are meant to give as many characters as possible a voice in the story, the leaps in time to save the reader time. All interstitial material—call it transitional or descriptive material—went. " 

[Interesting, i find it, that he came from PoMo but elected to cut down and focus on the personal - one can detect traces of Gass and others in the text, though they are off in the distance somewhere...] 

******************************
The story begins like this: 

 "Every night when I'm not able to sleep, when scrolls of words and formulas unfold in my mind and faces of those I love, both living and dead, rise from the dark, accusing me of apathy, ambition, self-indulgence, neglect --- all of the accusations just --- and there's no hope of rest, I try again to retrace the street. It's an unpaved street and it's the color of my hand. It's made up mostly of the clayey gumbo from the flat and tilting farmland all around the village so small it can be seen through from all sides, and its ungraded surface is generally overrun with ruts that are slippery and water-filled in spring, ironlike in summer, furred in fall with frost as phosphorescent as mountainy ridges on the moon's crust, and in winter buried beyond all thought except for any thought that clay or gravel or the booted feet of people crossing ice-covered snow above might have. It's the main street of Hyatt, North Dakota, and it's one block long. I lived in Hyatt from the time I was born until I was six and returned only once, at the age of eight, wearing a plaid jacket exactly like my brother's, too light for the weather, and ran up and down this street with changed friends, playing hide and seek between buildings that stand deserted, now that time has had its diminishing effects." 

An opening such as this tells me all I need to know about a writer I am reading for the first time: that he hears the music of prose; that there is just enough of the lyrical in his writing to move me, but not too much to irritate; that his technique is in perfect control; and that he has an eye for the significant detail, the telling detail. It also tells me that I am in the presence of a teller of the oldest stories – family and the blurring weight of ancestry, land, light and the indifferent presence of Nature. 

The writing is sophisticated, complex, but subtly so – not showy or demonstrative, not pun-filled and playful – it is the flow of the telling that matters, the evocation of a Family. We shift perspective and time, we shift format and tone, but always delineated, demarcated, defined. It is conservative, one could say, with all the many meanings such a word contains - the past will be conserved regardless of our attempts to over-write it. It is in the earth and buried in our skin.

This is a wonderful work. A deeply moving, deeply engaging, deeply enriching work. It has traces of Cather, O'Connor and McCullers. It bears some similarity to Stegner, though it's ambition is greater and its ability to play with time and memory more pronounced. A masterpiece in the old style.