Rating: 3/5

Let me organise 'em, the ideas upon this book, so that I may write 'em. I read The autobiography of Alice B. Toklas there are I suppose three years now and, inasmuch as some reminiscences of that reading came to me whilst reading the other autobiography, this one of everybody, they were raving helpful.

Well, I am supposed to say that – despite knowing more or less what to expect – the preface let me a bit dizzy; names and names and even more names were displayed simultaneously and so did facts and events.. indeed: atounding. Still worthy to mention that the book is separated, and I am not quite sure that's the correct word, in five parts in order to, somehow but not completely (and is this splitting infinitives? If so I love it), mark different narrative events. Now, it's necessary to say the book hasn't become particularly cherished to me; at first not due to its narrative – sharp and challenging –, but due to its content: I just didn't care, I wasn't sympathetic at all, characters but Stein (whose quasi-fictionality cannot be denied since, yes, she is a character) weren't acquainted with me; it seemed, wholly, an enormous and impersonal diary of people whose existence meant nothing to me.

Don't get me wrong, I don't mean that the book has nothing to say, neither that hasn't he said anything to me. Indeed, I mean that, although it has a lot to say and has a few said to me,  it hasn't said to me what was necessary so that I could be fond of it. Some passages really marked me (as much as I could write them down in a sort of reading diary I've irregularly kept), such as Stein's sensations when she discovered Picasso had started writing poetry (and her rejoice with his "failure") and her fear of her writing, something of her, that builds her identity, being stolen; the reflexion upon the harshness inherent to continuity since it is originally aimed at emulating the irrecuperable magic and originality and bright of the former action, whose unfruitful results misfortune us (and the application of these thoughts to Art, specially paintings); another reflexion, now upon what's in and what's out of us wherein the author afirms that, when we start being recognised, what's outside us becomes what's inside us (and here one may see Gertrude's identity question – possibly promoted by the outcomes of her fame – which is retaken when she says, as she sees an strange phenomenon, if she is herself because her dog knows her or if that knowledge says more about the dog's identity itself than about hers); besides all that, her impressions on Paris' changes and on how's the world full of people everywhere anywhere were also of some remark for me. Upon the language, I must mention that in order to achieve some sort of impersonality that leads the Autobiography towards an arid style, Gertrude Stein uses impressive skills, markedly the non comma's use: enlarging orality in a book that claims for the differences between what's oral and written, what's read and heard; giving it fluency (as much as Stein's works can be) – I must reinforce that language wasn't a hindrance, nay it was one of the most dashing characteristics of the work (but still not enough to instill me cherishing thoughts upon it)

Therefore, Everybody's Autobiography isn't, at all, neither good nor bad but indeed average. I've read already two G.S. autobiographies and, even though I don't collect so good experiences, I'd like to read other works from her – something at least strange but that may prove some of Stein's genius (that comment was made less for truth's sake than for my wish to try to explain so strange a will of mine).