Rating: 4/5

#2023ReadingChallenge
#6Youngboyonthecover

#6 Young boy on the Cover 
Book: Silk
Author: Linda Chaikin
Why I chose this book: I love Linda, and it has a young boy on the cover who is the catalyst to many of the events in the book. I couldn't resist!

Full disclosure! I made this list kind of already leaning towards books that were already on my to my TBR list.
Not all, but some of the books have already been populated simply because I knew what I wanted to read.
My best friend introduced me to Linda Chaikin about five years ago, and I have been hooked ever since. As a personal goal, I will read every book she has ever written. I truly believe she is an unsung hero in the CF genre and she does not get enough flowers!
I finished Silk, the first book in her Heart of India trilogy on New Year’s Eve. Silk was her first published work.
I gave the book a four star on Goodreads, simply because though I loved it, and would highly recommend it, compared to her other first entries (she does a lot of trilogies), I found this one overly talkative. Maybe she was finding her footing as this is her first book, but compared to her others, there was less action and more talking.
As usual, I found the characters and location engaging, FYI this is Linda's gift, combining complex characters with exotic or atypical locations, i.e. this one takes place in colonial India. Coral is a girl I can relate to and Jace is intriguing. Coral's desire to bring the gospel to the untouchables in India is crafted in a way that I can appreciate. It is not preachy or "I'm civilized, so I know best" but shines from a pure heart of a young girl that has a very genuine relationship with Jesus. This relationship is reflected in the choices she makes, the way she carries herself and the way she reacts to surroundings. I couldn't put it down and finished it in three days! 
Overall I highly recommend this one!
Have you read it? If so what did you think?
What will you be reading for #6 of this challenge? Please let me know! 

Join my 2023 reading challenge at the link below

https://www.facebook.com/groups/scrip...