Rating: 3/5

The Course of Irish History compiled by Theodore Moody is a book drawn from a TV series built on lecture/essays by noted academics. As far as books covering 2,000+ years go, this is a solid introduction to an island that has been imaginatively cursed and blessed by waves of intruders, including the Norse, the Normans, the English and to a certain extent the Celts themselves. The chapters overlap a bit but that's not a significant problem. Anatomizing Ireland is no easy task. In some ways the best chapter is the first one, surveying Ireland's geography, which has so much to do with its destiny--an island riven with mountains and bogs, transected by rivers, green with pasture lands, fertile in some places and rocky in others, and wrapped around with a wild coastline that only occasionally yields to useful harbors.

Of all the curses that beset Ireland, one would have to rank the English highest, although even they are bred into its human fabric. Their occupation of the island was partial but persistent, covering centuries, exploiting scarce resources, dominating some parts of the population and setting other parts of it against other parts. They never seem to have thought Ireland was the greatest of prizes, but it was there, and they didn't want the Spanish or French helping themselves to it. In the end, their policy's lasting impact derives from supporting protestant immigration to the north, and so, on top of geographical divisions, we see a political division that remains extremely inconvenient to the English as well as the Irish, given the role the border between the Republic and Northern Ireland plays in Brexit. To use the old phrase, the English can't seem to chew Ireland and can't seem to spit it out.

Membership in the EU, ironically, would appear to be Ireland's greatest blessing--the Republic's greatest blessing, I mean. The EU has provided a powerful counterweight to the U.K.'s asymmetrical domination of the Irish economy. This is a good thing, just as staying in the EU would be a good thing for the U.K.

This book is better on physical culture (ruined castles, monastic artifacts) than on literary or musical culture. It's not very analytic, but mentioning Yeats and Joyce and the other great Irish writers may be enough to convey the point: here is an apex tale-telling, story-spinning culture, one of the world's finest.

The book's final chapters, covering the last five decades of Irish history, are rushed, crammed, and generally dismal. Here you have immense political corruption, financial chicanery, and the sins of the Roman Catholic church. But for the Irish, as the text suggests at one point, there's always a bit of death in everything, a bit of misery...or a lot of misery, better dealt with through another drink sometimes as opposed to historical fact.