Rating: 5/5

Pure sodium fluoride was used for the early Newburgh and Grand Rapids experiments, but today 90% of fluoridated public water supplies in the US are not pharmaceutical grade fluoride but industrial grade silicofluoeide scrubbed from the smokestacks of the phosphate industry. It is collected, billed to the tax payer and dumped into public water supplies —all under the guise of protecting childrens teeth.
Fluoride was so much more toxic to the esterase enzyme than uranium that contamination by fluoride and uranium could easily be differentiated.”
It may be that aluminum combined with fluoride is especially responsible for fluorides roll on health and environment. Attack G-proteins in the body
Today most industrial fluoride Used in the US is raw mineral fluospar now mined and imported from China.
Fluoride concentrates in the arteries, attracting calcium and can contribute directly to their hardening.
The more I read and the more I listen, the more I understand that we were subjected to experimentation.”
Fluoride has the ability to impact the female reproductive system and may be lowering the age at which women are reaching puberty.”
Water fluoridation increases hip fracture.
Sold to New Yorkers as a public health initiative, the Committee to Protect Our Childrens Teeth had powerful links to the US military-industrial complex, and to the efforts of big industrial corporations to escape liability for flouride pollution.”
Today such a pseudo-grassroots effort would be known as an astroturf organization because of its fake popular character and essentially corporate roots.”
From the beginning the scale of the taxpayer funded propaganda was driven by the strength of public opposition to fluoridation nd had its hallmark disrespect for open debate and a democratic vote.”
The government agency for perpetuating such smear campaigns which serves as the CIA and the USIA of the pro-fluoridationists was a taxpayer funded outfit inside the NIH, the National Fluoridation Information Service of the Division of Dental Health of the US Public Health Service.”
The American Dental Association funded in part by millions of taxpayer grants from the PHS joined the propaganda campaign releasing a torrent of movies, slides, booklets, and exhibits…”
Industry’s top lawyers received copies of the Kettering dog study— but nobody told America’s workers or their doctors, the research was buried for almost 40years.”
The US spent $5.5 trillion to build nuclear weapons, we hid the health risks of working in those factories, denied workers additional hazardous pay, and then fought the same workers in court when they became injured or ill and filed for compensation.
60,000 or 4% of all US deaths from air pollution
When you poison the environment the fiber of the community comes apart. Into that void comes the non-traditional economies- gambling, smuggling
In an obscure paper published in 1979, after all the tumult and shouting had died down, Hodge quietly admitted that his safety figures had been wrong.”
Bernays hallucination if democracy was a hierarchical world in which an intelligent few had the responsibility of adjusting the mental scenery from which the public mind , with its limited intellect, derives its opinions.”
By the law of averages you can usually find an individual in any field who will be willing to accept new ideas, and the new ideas then infiltrate the others who haven’t accepted it.”
Those who manipulate this unseen mechanism of society constitute an invisible government which is the true ruling power of our country… our minds are molded, our tastes are formed, our ideas are suggested, largely by men we have never heard of.”
Mottling: fluorosis does nothing to strengthen the tooth, may in fact weaken it, and is a visible indicator of systemic fluoride poisoning during the period that the teeth are being formed. No matter how mild the mottling, it is an external sign of internal distress.”
Although mottled teeth are somewhat resistant to decay, they are structurally weak; when the decay does set in the result is often disastrous.
While gaining broad access to the government investigation, Kehoe was privately working with US Steel to shoot down citizen lawsuits.”
My take was that they did a very fine job of writing lots of words in the hopes that nobody would see through to the fact that there was not much information there.”
Flouride was critical to the US economy and military defense and industry’s freedom to use it could not be seriously hampered during the Cold War.
Nine months after the Donora disaster on Halloween 1948, US PHS Oscar Ewing declared his agency now favored adding flouride to drinking water supplies across the USA.
Using the phosphate industry’s waste to fluoridate public water supplies meant that the fertilizer producers would now pay far less, if anything , to dispose of their most troublesome toxic waste. They would be guaranteed a source of taxpayer revenue for installing pollution-control devices; and US strategic planners would get a nearly inexhaustible potential supply of domestic fluoride. The Florida phosphate beds were also an important source of uranium, harvested for the Atomic Energy Commission.”
The facts were hidden by a Kettering coverup that misled a generation of medical researchers about the consequences of industrial fluoride exposure and sentenced many thousands of US workers to undiagnosed fluoride injury.”
American workers were regularly exposed to 3ppm fluoride.
He seemed to have wound up suffering from the very type of skeletal disability his industry-funded scientific studies said did not exist. Osteofluorosis
Fluoride appears to carry aluminum over the BBB; the aluminofluoride complexes then damage the brain structure.”
Is the CIA having its work done by some innocuous entity that is then funded by some other agency?
The Dane found the country inspiring and hospitable though he did note that the absence of public health care make him think that it would be a catastrophe to get sick in the United States.
USDA and American Dental association has editorialized against the idea of water fluoridation.”
From the darkness it can be difficult to determine the source of a shadow.
From 1927-1987: 68 million young children in the US were exposed to toxic amounts of lead from gasoline until the additive was phased out in the US.”
Sodium Fluoroacetate
Trendley Dean, the man who became famous as the father of fluoridation had secretly opposed the Newburgh fluoridation experiment, fearing fluorides toxicity.
The government long dismissed claims that any of its scientists ever endorsed water fluoridation despite reservations regarding its safety.
Second dental study on laborers at the Harshaw Chemical Company in Cleveland became an important piece of evidence for the idea that fluoride reduced cavities. The published Harshaw study helped to shift the national medical debate over exposure to industrial fluoride. It was dental propaganda.
There was extraordinary resistance to the use of rat poison in public water supplies.
Despite an early awareness that cancer and occupational injuries were extraordinarily frequent at the gaseous diffusion plants, workers could never prove that such was the case.”
The crucial toxicity studies on bomb program chemicals performed at the university of Rochester were sculpted and shaped to defend the Manhattan Project from lawsuits.”
DuPont plant was belching out mass qualities of hydrogen flouride:30,000-165,000 lbs per month expelled over the adjacent farmlands each month.
The New Jersey farmers were blocked in their legal challenge by the government’s refusal to reveal the key piece of information that would have settled the case- the amount of flouride dupont vented into the atmosphere during the war. Deepwater New Jersey
1945 Newburgh-Kingston Fluorine-Caries Trial: simply another Cold War human experiment serving the interests of the nuclear industrial state.
The uranium hexafluoride gas was so corrosive that thousands of pumps, blowers, and piping first had to be treated with either chlorine trifluoride, or elemental fluorine, leaving a thin film of fluoride on the machinery, protecting it from future corrosion.”
Klaus Fuchs gave the Russians key details about the top-secret sintered nickel barriers through which the gas diffused.”
Joes stuff 1940: invented process of electro-chemical fluorination which used electricity to replace the hydrogen with fluoride in hydrogen-carbon bonds producing fluorocarbons.Russian Astride V. Grosse found a way to mass-produce these compounds.
DuPont mass produced the fluorocarbons. DuPont Freon was vital to the US nuclear program: it was needed to cool the k-25 diffusion plant. Teflon first fabricated in 1938, allowed US companies to move enormous quantities of fluoride around the country.”
The millionaire industrialist with one of the greatest personal stakes in the commercial exploitation of fluorides was quietly donating to the dental organization that would become one of the most aggressive boosters of fluorides use in dentistry.”
More than 60 years ago the worlds leading expert on fluoride rejected the notion that fluoride was needed for stronger teeth agreeing with earlier studies that found that fluoride weakened enamel and explicitly warned against giving fluoride to children. Neurasthenia.
12 million children in the US suffer from one or more learning, developmental or behavioral disabilities.”
Fluoride pollution was the single biggest legal worry facing the atomic-bomb program following WWII.
From 1957-1968, fluoride was responsible for more damage claims than all twenty other major air pollutants combined.
Processed foods made with fluoridated water and fluoride chemicals from often unrecognized sources.”
By mid-1930s European scientists had already linked fluoride to a range of illnesses, including breathing problems , CNS disorders, arthritis-like musculoskeletal problems.”
During the Cold War, fluoride was systematically removed from public association with ill health by researchers funded by the US military and big corporations.”
1940s-1950s: Harold Hodge and Robert Kehoe led the promotion of water fluoridation
The fluoride added to drinking water in the US today is an industrial waste scrubbed from the smokestacks of Florida phosphate fertilizer mills to prevent it from damaging livestock and crops in the surrounding countryside.”
I can only wonder how many children were harmed because I and others like me took the word of the NIH, USPHS, and major pharmaceutical companies producing these products. We were caught up in the spin. We were blind to the corporate hubris and the enthusiasm that accompanies every new advance in modern technology and medicine.”
Prenatal exposure to certain fluorinated chemicals is dangerous, often fatal in high doses and even at extremely low levels, such exposure can undermine the development of the brain, the thyroid, and the metabolic system.”
Young boys at higher risk of bone cancer if they drink fluoridated water.
Ingested fluoride is deposited in bone, so the chemical’s ability to wreck havoc with growing cells makes it a prime candidate for interfacing with young joints and causing cancer.”
 
DuPont company chemical cause eye malformations in children.
Adding even a single fluorine atom to a drug molecule can boost chemical potency. Numerous modern drugs contains small amounts of flouride.
PFOS accumulates to a high degree in humans and animals. It has an estimated half-life of 4 years in humans.”
PFOA, PFOS fluorocarbons disrupt intercell communication, allowing potential tumor-producing cells to multiply.
Sulfuryl flouride: damaged the white matter in the brain.
Inhaled flouride causes lung and lymph-node damage.
Big flouride polluters continue to vent tens of thousands of tons of hydrogen flouride gas over our homes and farms.”
Dr Taves (1968); because fluorine and carbon form such a stable bond, their presence in the human body in low doses is of little health concern.
Dr Donald Taves may have buried evidence of fluorides harm to humans on behalf of his Rochester colleagues such as Harold Hodge who worked for the nuclear program.
Kidney dialysis can greatly concentrate the amount of flouride in blood.
The environmental sink of many PFCs in the blood where they bind to protein and accumulate in the liver and gallbladder.
Two types of reactions have been noted in humans as a result of accidental inhalation of the products of heated polymer: 1) a condition similar to metal fever 2) condition in which there may be an irritation of the lungs leading to pulmonary edema.
The same types of PFC polymer chains that once helped process uranium hexafloride for the Manhattan Project carry fast food in wrappers and allow spills to be wiped from carpets impregnated with DuPont’s Stainmaster fabric protector