Rating: 4/5

I recently came across this book, “Going Off The Beaten Path, An untraditional Travel Guide to the U.S., 1991 by Mary Dymond Davis. It was previously published as “From Walden Pond to Muir Woods: Alternatives Ways Across America”, in 1990. A very interesting theme and one that's deep, wide and evolving. Written before the Internet became the source for all our answers and primary information source, I wondered how it had faired over the years?

The book is well organized and researched. While conditions have certainly changed for some of the information provided, it still serves a primary purpose to get the reader to think broadly about how they can get it touch with the earth including its landscapes and those working to make it a better place. The book was designed as both a guide for travelers and a reference tool for concerned citizens to use. My take is that is still possible and it also provides some history and insight. 

I decided to see what I could learn about the author and whether there were updates to this work online. So far, I haven’t turned up anything related to updates for the book. What I have found so far about the author, Mary Byrd Davis, makes it very clear that she was a special person with a passion for ancient trees and old growth forests among other things. I decided to summarize preliminary information about her to share here where it seems a good fit.

A tireless advocate for world peace and environmental protection, and author and editor of books on both subjects, Mary Byrd Davis played a key role in the protection of old-growth forests in the Eastern U.S. Her books Old Growth In the East: A Survey and Eastern Old-Growth Forests: Prospects for Rediscovery and Recovery include the most complete survey to date of old growth forests in the Eastern U.S. The book not only enabled conservationists to locate these forests, but it also helped call attention to the need to protect them. In 1990, Mary Byrd Davis, along with husband John and colleagues Dave Foreman, Reed Noss, and David Johns, started Wild Earth magazine. Published until 1997, Wild Earth blended conservation biology and wildlands activism. Mary Byrd Davis also produced a great deal of research and writing on the nuclear industry, particularly in France, where she was well known for her expertise on the subject. She directed Yggdrasil, a project of Earth Island Institute that she formed in 1994. http://www.earthisland.org/journal/in...

Mary Byrd Davis was a freelance researcher, writer, and editor. Her publications include Guide de l’industrie nucléaire française (L’Harmattan and Wise-Paris, 1988); The Green Guide to France (Merlin, 1990), Going Off the Beaten Path: An Untraditional Travel Guide to the U.S. (Noble, 1991, published under the name Mary Dymond Davis), Les déchets militaires nucléaires français (co-author) (Editions CDRPC, 1994), Eastern Old-Growth Forests: Prospects for Rediscovery and Recovery (editor) (Island Press, 1996), La France nucléaire: matières et sites, 2002 (WISE-Paris, 2001), and Old Growth in the East: A Survey (revised edition) (ASPI, 2003). She co-authored a reference book for libraries on biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons published in 2006 by Facts on File. Research for a green guide by Mary Byrd Davis led, among other projects, to a report, "The Health of the Bluegrass" (2008) (see www.earthisland.org/ecoperspectives). It also resulted in occasional jottings, which formed a Working Diary (2004-2007).

Mary was born in Cardiff, Wales in 1936. Her family moved to Florida in 1947. Mary was a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Agnes Scott College and earned Masters and Doctoral degrees in English at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and a Masters in Library Science at Simmons College. After several years as a college librarian, she worked for 30 years as a free-lance writer and editor, publishing several books and articles on English literature and on environmental issues, and was active in various peace and environmental organizations and activities. Her principal occupations, however, were wife, mother, and grandmother. She offered ceaseless and effective encouragement to her children and grandchildren to realize their potential academically and personally. 

Mary assiduously took notes on most of her trips, activities, and ideas, and she published a few guides for environmentalist travelers. She brought the same habit of notation and record-keeping to her outdoor activities. She enjoyed sightseeing and hiking, in forests and fields, and could keep up with almost anyone. She became very interested in botany, studying flowers and trees and inscribing her observations in sundry notebooks. Already ill, Mary made her last trip to France in March, 2010, and in September of that year, she attended a conference in New York City, to be present at an award ceremony honoring one her colleagues. She continued writing and editing until the last week of her life, and died bravely, of cancer, February 13, 2011. She remains an advocate for wildlife and peace through her work.

The Mary Byrd Davis Nature Writing Residency was created and granted a one-month residency in 2014 to a writer concentrating on environmental issues. The grant is named in honor of "Mary Byrd Davis, a passionate conservationist, researcher and great friend". An impressive list of writers and works were on the short list to receive the grant. 

Clearly, Mary was an effective force in peace and environmental issues for decades. While I didn't recognize her by name initially, some of her projects and connections were very familiar to me and major efforts I followed. I'm intending to look deeper into some of her work and may update this later. For starters I want to learn more about her connection with old growth forests, which appears to have included literature and mythology including Tolkien's "Ents" and the Norse "Tree of Life" legend.