Rating: 3/5

W.E.B Dubois said of 'Home To Harlem', and I quote, “Home to Harlem for the most part nauseates me, and after the dirtier parts of its filth I feel distinctly like taking a bath. . . . It looks as though McKay has set out to cater to that prurient demand on the part of the white folk for a portrayal in Negroes..."

Upon reading the first few pages of this book, I thought I was going to despise it... it seemed too much like a Disney movie. And worse still, Dubois' charge seemed to ring true. Yet, I'm very glad I persisted in turning the leaves, for it ended up being an unexpected delight.

Though much of Harlem's epic seems to be a mass of iniquity, this is far too narrow a reading of this work which on many occasions serves as such a fine example of tenderness and divine reflection on blackness in 1920's America, from black, to brown, to lemon yellow, and passing white.

And can't we take the rather haphazard existence of the characters in HTH of living in a world of absurdity and little justice? Surely, the reader is meant to take their first queue from Jake's insistence that he wasn't going to fight a white man's war (WWI) any longer, and he deserts. After staying in London for a bit, Jake then sails home to Harlem, and so our journey with Jake and friends begins...

Jake meets a lot of rude characters, a lot of women, and a lot of alcoholic beverages. Yet, his pal Ray, a Haitian (like McKay himself) who he meets working as a cook in a train car was by far the most resonant character for me. He has an admiration for Jake's day-to-day existence, his ability to throw caution to the wind and not think about tomorrow. Contrariwise, Ray's head is made heavy by his extensive reading in Western Literature, and his desire to be a writer. Yet, what is there for the black man to write on? For, he lives not like Zola, nor Hugo, in whose works Ray

"... had lived on [their] brilliant manna that fell like a flame-fall from those burning stars."

though after WWI, writers could not write simple stories with simple words in a world shattered by war. It was the end of an era. Ray reflects,

"What were men making of words now? [...] He had read, fascinated all that D.H. Lawrence published. And he wondered if there was not a great Lawrence reservoir of worlds too terrible and too terrifying for nice printing. [...] And literature, story telling, had little interest for him now if thought and feeling did not wrestle and sprawl with appetite and dark desire all over the pages.

and so Ray asks himself,

"Could he create out of the fertile reality around him? Of Jake nosing through life, a handsome hound, quick to snap up any tempting morsel of poisoned meat thrown carelessly on the pavement? Of a work pal he had visited in the venereal ward of Bellevue, where youths lolled sadly about? And the misery that overwhelmed him there, until life like one big disease and the world a vast hospital?"

It doesn't stretch the imagination too thin to imagine McKay must have asked himself this many times while writing 'Home To Harlem'. I think this is why McKay is so deliberate with working with black colloquialisms (rather than 'catering' to white sensibilities, as DuBois puts it). Ray, who surely channels McKay himself, says to Jake on the topic of education,

"A Negro getting [an education] is an anachronism. We ought to get something new, we Negroes. But we get our education like—like our houses. When the whites move out, we move in and take possession of old dead stuff. Dead stuff that this age has no use for."

...and finishes his thought with a Nietzschean epiphany,

"[fine feelings] are false and dry as civilization itself. And civilization is rotten, We are all rotten who are touched by it."

a few pages later, McKay as narrator says,

"No wonder [whites] hated them, when out of their melancholy environment the blacks could create mad, contagious music and high laughter..."

This must be McKay's project. And I'm sure we may consider it done. And, in a sweet sweet moment in the books later, Jake and his love, Felice, go to the pictures and watch blacks on screen, and the crowd laughs as blacks play white society people, and play themselves as whites see them.

My one (major) foible with 'Home to Harlem' is that it's a bit of a boy's club, a 'men's warehouse' if you would—unfortunately it's a big peeve of mine, and not the kind of story I'm very likely to dig. Woman chasing and drunken bro-revelry only goes so far, and there's a little too much of it here for me to become carried away with the novel's truly brilliant moments. Nevertheless, this seems to have more to do with the characters featured in what seems to be Harlem's very own epic, rather than a systemic sexist current which pervades the author's psyche... a recommended read indeed, at a good ol' 3.5 stars.

--AF