Rating: 4/5

Close your eyes.. 
look deep into yourself.. 
what do you see.?
red..? black.?
no.. go deeper..
concentrate on your breath.. 
unable to concentrate..?
finding some murmurs in the background.?
well.. those are your thoughts.. 
those thoughts which fill your mind every moment..
most of us do not observe our thoughts.
start observing them.. 
try to concentrate on each and every thought as a single grain of sand..
most of them will be repetitive..
eliminate them..
fill your mind with cheerful thoughts..
replace every negative thought with a positive one..
think about what you wish to be and work for it..
you will find your whole life changing..
and all you did was observe and slightly alter your thoughts..

This book is about the value of thoughts,how they influence a man,or rather how they make a man. The text is divided into different chapters,each on how thought is related to various aspects of life, and gives a clear and brief explanation of how thoughts influence one's life. To summarize the text in its own words..

* Thought and character
“Of all the beautiful truths pertaining to the soul which have been restored and brought to light in this age, none is more gladdening or fruitful of divine promise and confidence than this—that man is the master of thought, the moulder of character, and the maker and shaper of condition, environment, and destiny.”

*Effect of thought on circumstances
“The outer world of circumstance shapes itself to the inner world of thought, and both pleasant and unpleasant external conditions are factors, which make for the ultimate good of the individual. As the reaper of his own harvest, man learns both by suffering and bliss.”

*Effect of thought on health and the body
“THE body is the servant of the mind. It obeys the operations of the mind, whether they be deliberately chosen or automatically expressed. At the bidding of unlawful thoughts the body sinks rapidly into disease and decay; at the command of glad and beautiful thoughts it becomes clothed with youthfulness and beauty.”

*Thought and purpose
“A man should conceive of a legitimate purpose in his heart, and set out to accomplish it. He should make this purpose the centralizing point of his thoughts. It may take the form of a spiritual ideal, or it may be a worldly object, according to his nature at the time being; but whichever it is, he should steadily focus his thought-forces upon the object, which he has set before him.”

*The thought-factor in achievement
“ALL that a man achieves and all that he fails to achieve is the direct result of his own thoughts...Before a man can achieve anything, even in worldly things, he must lift his thoughts above slavish animal indulgence.”

*Visions and ideals
“The Vision that you glorify in your mind, the Ideal that you enthrone in your heart—this you will build your life by, this you will become.”

*Serenity
“CALMNESS of mind is one of the beautiful jewels of wisdom. It is the result of long and patient effort in self-control. Its presence is an indication of ripened experience, and of a more than ordinary knowledge of the laws and operations of thought.”

Being brief and clear in presentation,this book is an excellent work in the self-help genre and unlike many others in that genre,interesting till the end.