Rating: 5/5

You don't get it, son. This isn't a mudhole... It's an operating table. 
And I'm the surgeon.

The Dark Knight Returns is Frank Miller's most popular comic (at least here on GR) and arguably the best Batman comic ever. Originally published in four installments in 1986, it single-handedly undid the damage done to the Bat by the goofy 60's show with Adam West. Situation at the time was pretty tragic. Initial success of the West show influenced the writers of the Batman comics who adapted a similar, campy approach; but the show's popularity waned slowly, and it eventually got canceled in 1968. Popularity of Batman comics also dropped steadily. Attempts were made to distance the comics from the show and make Batman an edgier, darker and grimmer character, an avenger of the night, but to no avail; despite being popular with the fans their work didn't help to boost steadily declining sales. Circulation of comics featuring Batman continued to drop throughout the next decade and a half, finally reaching an all time low in 1985.

And then KABOOM! A miracle! Frank Miller comes out with The Dark Knight Returns, which does exactly what it says - brings back the Dark Knight, literally and figuratively. People couldn't believe what they were seeing - and loved it. Miller brought Batman back into the cool, and showed that some comic books are definitely not for kids. Miller's re-imagining redefined Batman for the 1980's, and opened a floodgate for the good stuff to come through. Miller's own Batman: Year One was published in 1987, which redefined Batman's origins and further contributed to the vision we have of him now, as the Caped Crusader. Alan Moore's Batman: The Killing Joke came out a year later, and in 1989 Tim Burton made Batman, the second Batman feature film but the first to be non-camp. Burton's movie was gothic and grotesque, it starred Michael Keaton and Jack Nicholson as Batman and Joker and defined my childhood. It was amazing - I saw it at least 20 times on VHS as my parents owned a rental at the time. It also brought Batman firmly into public attention and made millions of dollars, influencing and paving the way for creation of the excellent Batman: The Animated Series. It aired on Cartoon Network around 7 or 8 PM over here. I was practicing martial arts at the time (I too wanted to kick butts of the bad guys) and ran home after each practice session to catch the new episode. It was my favorite cartoon and the opening is just as awesome as it was all these years ago. The animation! The music! Man oh man!
Unluckily, none of the subsequent films experienced such success (though Burton's Batman Returns is badass and I have a soft spot for Val Kilmer in Batman Forever), and with the release of 1997's dreadful Batman &amp; Robin (which was an attempt to return to the campy style of the 60's and featured George Clooney as Batman - why, oh why?)the film franchise has pretty much died. Thankfully, Christopher Nolan had the good sense to reboot it in 2005 with his Batman Begins which starred Christian Bale as Batman, and was followed in 2008 with The Dark Knight and completed as a trilogy with The Dark Knight Rises in 2012 (which is a homage to TDKR with a great tribute scene, but doesn't change the fact that Michael Keaton was the best Batman).
But none of this would happen without Frank Miller. He invented the Dark Knight.

The Dark Knight Returns opens in a world where Bruce Wayne is 55 years old, and has not worn the cape for 10 years; the younger generation doesn't even believe that Batman was real, and considers him to be just a myth. Wayne retired his alter ego after the traumatic loss of Jason Todd, who fought crime alongside him as Robin. Bruce promised Jason that he will never again be Batman, and became an even more reclusive figure, distancing himself from pretty much everybody except for his trusted butler Alfred and police commissioner James Gordon. Bruce is very close to becoming a broken shell of a man, and slowly gives in to his alcoholism. Meanwhile, crime levels in Gotham are skyrocketing, and the city is on the verge of being overtaken by The Mutants - a violent gang which terrorizes its streets, led by the despotic Leader. Batman's archenemy, The Joker, is locked up in Arkham Asylum, as he became catatonic after Batman disappeared; Harvey Dent, a former attorney who gained notoriety as the infamous Two-Face has been released from Arkham after being imprisoned for 12 years. Dent was given a clean bill of health from a psychiatrist who treated him for three years, and had his face successfully reconstructed by plastic surgeons. It was Bruce who paid for Dent's treatment and surgery, seeking in him proof that one's inner demons can be defeated. However, Dent disappears soon after his release and fresh wave of crime hits Gotham. Dent's disappearance and Gotham's ever-worsening state drives Bruce to quit retirement, and emerge to the world once again - as Batman.

Miller's Bruce Wayne/Batman is as far removed the character played by Adam West in the 60's as possible. He's a vigilante whose return is greeted with mixed response. People see Batman as a symbol of justice, someone who stands up to oppression and does what the law should do, but doesn't; they also see him as a figure whose actions upsets law, stability and order instead of upholding them, and who violates people's rights instead of protecting them.
Batman constantly walks the thin line between the good and the bad, and is no less obsessed and haunted than his arch-enemies and rivals. In a way, Batman is a mirror for those whom he is supposed to fight. The psychiatrist who treated both Harvey Dent and Joker in Arkham is convinced that it's Batman who is responsible for the state of his clients, and that they are both victims of Batman's own psychotic obsessions and his vigilante crusades against crime. The psychiatrist is clearly made by Miller to be a ridiculous figure, a parody of pop psychologists who deal in disputable self-help techniques and enjoy huge audiences - and sales. At the same time, the fact that it is Batman who is responsible for both making the Joker catatonic with his disappearance and bringing him out of it with his return is something to be considered. Did Batman create the Joker? Do people create their own demons? Miller delights in not giving a clear answer to this question.

In his appearances in various media Batman is almost constantly displayed as a perpetual 20/30 something - powerful, fast, agile, young. Batman is famous for being a hero without any superpowers: he relies only on his physical strength, skills and gadgets. But how would Batman continue to fight crime as an older man, encountering younger, stronger and faster foes? Miller's Batman must come to terms with his own mortality and age, which will slowly but unstoppably reduce his physical strength and ability to engage in direct combat, one day making him unable to do that at all. But that day has not yet came, and an older Batman still has a whole spectrum of powerful advantages over his potential enemies: years of experience and practice, his stealth, his gadgets, his enormous intellect and tactical genius. There's a great scene in a Justice League comic which shows that Batman has collected data on all the other members of the League, their physical and psychological strengths and weaknesses, so that in case he had to fight any of them he could - and would - win against anybody from this planet or other: he has devoted himself to the cause with an obsession bordering on insanity (well, you can't accuse a man who dresses up like a bat to be fully sane). Batman can and will turn his enemies against themselves, outsmart and outplan them all, trap them in the web of his cunning and strike in the exact crucial moment. He is more than a man in a costume - he is the obsession personified, he is the avenger, he is the night.

There's a lot of grim humor in this comic. Alfred relentlessly teases Bruce about his drinking habit and the impossibility of what he actually tries to do, comparing Batman's return to a suicide; Batman himself thinks that if he was an older man, he would surely be nothing more than a mass of broken muscle and bone. Miller unmercifully lampoons real life talking show hosts, such as Dr. Ruth and David Letterman, going as far as to include a caricature of the U.S. president who looks and talks suspiciously like Ronald Reagan. This takes away from the universal appeal of the comic, and unfortunately makes it a bit of a product of its time.  TDKR even has Reagan order Superman to take part in the Cold War, fight the Soviets and stop their nuclear missile (of course the Soviets fire first), which puts the comic firmly in the 80's when fear of a nuclear attack was still pretty real. I felt that this was uncalled for, took away from Superman's character and unnecessarily ruined the timelessness of the story, which could have just as well been set in an ordinary dystopic Gotham without any real-life politics at all.

Miller has Batman stand against his well-known foes, Two-Face and Joker, and both make Batman reconsider his moral conduct and ideas. Two-Face is a broken man who can't beat his own nature and turns back to crime, but he is not demonized by Batman: instead, in Two-Face Batman sees an obsession which is just like his own, but instead of trying to fight it he embraced it and revels in it. The Joker is a homicidal maniac, who commits evil acts just for the sheer sake of doing them. He constantly aims to push Batman beyond his own limits, and make him break his one rule - no killing. The Joker doesn't value anyone's life and not even his own: he wants to be killed by Batman, because he knows that only when he will make Batman his executor he will truly and finally defeat him. The ending scene of their confrontation is unexpected and one to remember. BUT The Dark Knight Returns has the coolest ever possible thing to happen in DC comics: Batman and Superman duking it out. Their standout becomes unavoidable because of a multitude of differences on both parts, and there really aren't words to describe its epicness. 

Frank Miller has used plenty of interesting visual tricks to spice up The Dark Knight Returns. He divides some pages into many small frames, much more than usually used, to give a successful imitation of the slow-motion effect. These small frames are then contrasted with much bigger backdrops of Batman against the cityscape. Suspense and pace are achieved through having different people describe the same event in quick succesion, and characters are first hidden in the shadows before they make a grand entrance. Some readers took offense with Miller's drawings of his characters, accusing him of making Bruce Wayne look like he was on a perpetual roid rage, but I think they were perfect.

It's a shame that Frank Miller seems to have gone a bit kuku around 9/11 and has made some really stupid comments about the Occupy movement, and generally seems a bit unhinged. He also wrote the incredibly bad Batman: The Dark Knight Strikes Again, which is supposed to be a sequel to TDKR but Batman's barely in it and it's really nothing more than Miller's excuse to tell a crappy Justice League story which bears no relation to TDKR at all (and the drawings suck too).
Gods have been kind to us though, and Warner Bros. Animation has adapted the comic into an animated film and released it as a part of DC Universe Animated Original Movies. This surprisingly great adaptation has been released in two parts - Part One and Part Two, released in 2012 and 2013 (click on each to see the respective trailers). The animation is faithful to the source material, the music is great, the voice actors do their job splendidly, the script is dark (lots of violence - not suitable for kids) and generally it really kicks ass. If the gods will be more kind of us in the future perhaps we will see a faithfully adapted motion picture, but I wouldn't count on it. But it doesn't matter. We have the comic - which is essential reading for any Batman fan, and pretty much any comic book fan in general or anyone even remotely interested in good art, as it completely redraw the character and his image and vision, and made an impact on millions of readers all across the globe. Essential reading - get to it!

  The time has come.
You know it in your soul.
For I am your soul...