Rating: 4/5

This is the fifth and final volume of the Tommy and Tuppence series. I have enjoyed all their adventures and especially appreciated that the series follows their life span from young adults through their final years. We've met them as a new couple, as parents and as grandparents. They have maintained their relationship with each other and they cooperate well as a team. 

Some of the other touches I liked were the references to the other volumes in the series and the update on Betty whom Tommy and Tuppence adopted in the previous story. Finally, the dog, Hannibal, who was a good judge of character (aren't most dogs?) and was made a 'Count of the Realm' at the end is truly worthy of a mention.

If I've made it sound like a cosy mystery, it really isn't, as in this volume several attempts are made to end the couple's lives and serious topics such as fascism and germ warfare are included.

These passages gave me pause, as it seems so topical for our current times: 

"Things are coming back to finance all the time. What finance is doing, where it's going, what it's supporting, how far hidden it is. There are people you knew, people in the past who had power and brains and their power and brains brought the money and means and some of their activities were secret." 

"The time when we thought something like fascism might be a splendid idea to reform the world with. This chap Jonathan Kane had followers, a lot of followers, young followers, middle-aged followers, a lot of them, he had plans, he had sources of power, he had the kind of knowledge that gave him power." 

"We think we know it all, but do we? Do we know anything about germ warfare, do we know everything about gasses, about the means of inducing pollution?"

What is truly chilling is that some of these secrets "were in the past, some of them were on the point of being developed, but the development didn't take place. There wasn't time for it but they were written down, committed to paper, or to certain people."

I know it's fiction, still, I feel like Agatha Christie was trying to tell us something.