Rating: 4/5

January 2011

THIS BOOK IS ABOUT
"Fencing. Fighting. Torture. Poison. True love. Hate. Revenge. Giants. Hunters. Bad men. Good men. Beautifulest ladies. Snakes. Spiders. Beasts of all natures and descriptions. Pain. Death. Brave men. Coward men. Strongest men. Chases. Escapes. Lies. Truths. Passion. Miracles."

Wait, sorry, my mistake. And now: 

NYRB: A History of an Addiction (With Book Porn!)
July 2006
Half-Price Books, Madison, Wisconsin 

Hello there, aren't you a pretty thing. But what are you doing on the $1.00 clearance shelf? You poor guy, you should come home with me...

September 2007
Avol's Books, Madison, WI

Hey, I couldn't help noticing you the last time I was here, Exploits and Adventures of Brigadier Gerard. That's funny, I didn't know Doyle wrote you too. You sound like a pretty cool book. Wanna come back to my place?

January 2008
Renaissance Book Shop, General Mitchell International Airport, Milwaukee, WI

So, The Stories of J. F. Powers, I saw you on that bookshelf and thought "now there's a bold fellow in yellow." Heh. I don't usually go for Catholic writers, y'know, but I just came from my grandfather's funeral--drank himself to death four days before my 21st birthday, how's that for a cautionary tale?--and I'm feeling kinda melancholy. You feel like keeping me company?

You know, you look kinda familiar. Do you know a book called Hadrian the Seventh...?

September 2008
Reedsburg, WI

So, you're Stoner by John Williams. The Stories of J. F. Powers told me about you. You're all from the New York Review of Books, huh? Is that, like, some kind of sorority? 

Got any friends?

December 2010
Loganville, WI

WHAT THE HELL?! I said you could invite a few friends to the party! A few friends! This is not a few friends! Shit, guys, the neighbors just called the cops, you gotta get out of he--wait, is that COCAINE? Are you doing cocaine?! Shit, guys! Oh, shit, my parents are gonna kill me!

Wait, I can explain...
New York Review Books (or NYRB) is a curious little publisher with an equally curious selection of titles, from obscure out-of-print books, somewhat-forgotten classics, long-dead cult hits, and works in translation, to travel writing, memoirs, history, and even cookbooks. Probably nine out of ten books they publish are by writers you (or, at least, I) have never heard of. In my case, actually, these are books I would never notice, much less pick up and read--were it not for the covers. THOSE GODDAMN COVERS.

Look, I'm not a book collector. I don't really care where my books come from, or who publishes them. I'm slightly shallow, of course: I do occasionally judge books by covers, but mostly, if it sounds good, I'll give it a try. But--and feel free to nod along, if you know what I'm talking about--NYRB books are something special. It's the covers, man. See above! Uniform editions, artistic cover design with the simple title box in the center, monochromatic spines, what more can I say? They look good, and they look even better arranged together on a shelf. See above! (And below!) In fact, check your own bookshelves: even if you're not a fan of NYRB (re: you've never heard of it before), you've probably, unconsciously, aquired one or two of their titles over the years. Look for a brightly colored spine. There! There it is! Now take it off the shelf--gently, now--and just hold it. Feel that? That's what intellectual liberalism feels like.

I know, I know. I'm such a nerd. A NYRB nerd, that is--perhaps even a NYRD? It’s like being a Gleek or a Belieber, but without the music and the screaming fangirls. But the fanaticism is still there. In droves. I mean, my interest in the NYRB series started out small. I was once like you! When I first realized I actually owned a few of their books, in 2008, I looked around, checked out the rest of their catalogue, bought a few here and there. Nothing major; it was all so innocent. Started out with three. By the end of 2009, I had a modest collection. Eleven NYRB titles. 

Now? As of December 2010 January 2011, I have 46 49 52 53. 

FIFTY-THREE

I may have gone slightly overboard last year. I might actually have a problem. It may even be time for an intervention of some sort. 

But that's what an addict would say. Me? Pshaw, I can stop whenever I want.

Hadrian the Seventh
Hey. Hey, you. Yeah, you, the one with the cat. 

Wanna be Pope?

And thus it was that George Arthur Rose became Pope.

A "hack writer and minor priest" (as opposed to the author, a minor writer and hack priest), Rose has spent the past twenty years laboring in obscurity, wronged and forgotten by all of his so-called friends, until--unexpectedly--the gridlocked papal conclave in Rome selects him as a safe and noncontroversial figure to replace Leo XIII. Or so they imagine. Although the rest of the world is somewhat astonished by this turn of events, Rose--under His new monicker Hadrian VII--adapts to His new role with ease (and no small amount of glee). And his papacy is far from noncontroversial. Hadrian's first major act is to renounce material possessions--His own, and those of the Church--because "My kingdom is not of this world." That alone is a bold pronouncement, enough to ruffle feathers both within and without, but Hadrian's other acts--denouncing socialism, selling off the Church's great wealth, dividing the world up among the great nations in an attempt to forge an everlasting peace--gains him more enemies in his one-year reign than the average pope would earn in a decade. Add to his problems a woman from his past and a socialist with an agenda, and--oh, dear, I suppose you'll have to read it.

As a novel, Hadrian the Seventh is cranky, longwinded, somewhat pedantic, and occasionally dull. As a wish fulfillment fantasy of its author (Frederick Rolfe, who called himself Baron Corvo and shortened his first name to Fr. to fool people into thinking he was a priest), however, it's charming, eccentric, and nothing short of entertaining. NYRB made a good choice when they republished it.

"...Beautifulest ladies. Snakes. Spiders. Beasts of all natures and descriptions..."
While reading this book, I kept thinking about another forgotten novel by another forgotten eccentric. Like Hadrian the Seventh, the great Florinese novel The Princess Bride also languished in near-obscurity for decades before its rediscovery and eventual reprinting. However, unlike Rolfe's novel, which received the glorious NYRB treatment, S. Morgenstern's Classic Tale of True Love and High Adventure fell into the hands of William Goldman, a shameless monster who butchered Morgenstern's original masterpiece by removing the "boring" bits; these days, the "Good Parts" version is probably the only one anyone has read. 

What if Hadrian the Seventh had had the same fate? Imagine if Goldman's semi-literate father had read him Rolfe’s story of The Man Who Would Be Pope when Goldman was a boy, and he had grown up with his childhood fantasy of a book that, when he finally tracked down a copy of his own, didn’t resemble the real thing? Imagine reading a "Good Parts" version of Hadrian the Seventh! George Arthur Rose's embittered monologues--gone. The week-long, thirty-page papal conclave that resulted in Rose's surprising papacy--gone. The theological debates, the papal bulls and decrees, the bumbling socialist meetings--all gone, all lost. 

A travesty! We would not accept such a crime with Hadrian the Seventh, not to mention any other book (except, perhaps, for War and Peace), so why do we continue to tolerate Goldman's literary maiming of The Princess Bride? It’s time we restored S. Morgenstern to his rightful place in the Florinese literary canon: it is time (past time, in fact--long overdue) for the New York Review of Books to reissue The Princess Bride--complete and unabridged, as god and Morgenstern intended.

William Goldman could even write the introduction. I expect to read a very long apology.

My name is Jacob, and I’m a NYRD
I hope, by sharing my story, that I can get other people to realize that they own NYRB titles too, and that it's ok to admit it. There is nothing wrong with you, because NYRB publishes beautiful books that look great on your bookshelf. In fact, you should add a few more, because it’s fun to rearrange them in colorful patterns…

Look! You can even do a rainbow!