The blurb on the front cover says that it is still (or was at time of publishing) the best one volume history available. I am not such a connoisseur of one volume histories of south-East Asia as to be able to judge, it seems ok, although I did like that there was a chapter on the arts which included novels as recommended further reading. Though perhaps you could judge this book on the basis that it is recommending people, young and old, to go forth and read The Quiet American to further their understanding of mid-20th century Vietnam, you might find relying on mid twentieth-century novels written by Anglophone authors for anglophone audiences something other than an infallible way to understand a largely non-anglophone region of the world, but I do like the idea that history and literature belong together as ways of understanding the world.

I would say, inspired by Asterix, that this book is divided into four parts, the supine beginning, the transformative colonial period, then the transformative Japanese victory over the colonisers, finally Independence and afterwards, in which it is revealed that despite two dynamic transformative periods exercised upon the region by outsiders, that much the same old elites are still in charge as in the ancient old sleepy times before the coming of the funny foreign man with his apparently endless desire for spices and rubber goods.

Rather than the phrase introductory history - overview from altitude may describe it better, this means in effect that we come to know some countries by contrast - so we know Thailand because it was not colonised and therefore in some ways it is unlike its neighbours which were. The treatment then of any individual country is varied, the Philippines gets about as much coverage as Laos and simply pops in to the text in the colonial period. Also Osborne ends his account unevenly - possibly an affect of this being a multi edition book (I read the 6th) so Vietnam is discussed until circa 1980 but Indonesia to 1965. This is a bit disconcerting.

Something which caught my attention was his description of the unevenness of the colonial experience, for instance the take over of Burma took about sixty years, British rule then lasted for sixty years, and while there had been Dutch control over Jakarta for 300 years most of modern Indonesia had been under Dutch control for far briefer periods of time.

Anyway the essential narrative was that southeast Asia was just lying around for hundreds of years, there was a civilisation in ancient Cambodia but this was a bit flaky and soft round the edges. The region was open to influences from India and China. Vietnam was strongly coloured by its relationship with China. Across the region there were individual immigrants from India and China too, as we know from contemporary popular political discourse, immigrants are horrible and ruin everything for everyone, so here too down to the present day such immigrants run shops in rural areas, are money lenders, or miners, or casual labourers and generally carry out various specialised economic or social tasks. At the same time obscurer peoples were shifting around, various people coming down from the North from China, and Thai speaking peoples moving eastwards, so Osborne tells us the current countries of Southeast Asia tend to be a mess of various ethnic groups speaking many languages, historically this didn't matter maybe much, but with population growth there is more competition for farm land, so ethnic tensions can be expected throughout the region, also the tendency of some of the wilder hill peoples to farm, use and market opium may not be regarded with equanimity by central governments. Historically all the regional states tended to be hard in the centre but soft at the edges, with peripheral regions effectively acknowledging the centre but doing their own thing. In the age of colonialism this meant that European companies or Imperial empires tended to chew off dangling peripheral regions, Thailand perhaps narrowly avoided being completely gobbled up between the French and the British, but as it was it lost chunks of itself to Malaysia and to Indochina.

From all this though we see in Malaysia that the communist insurgency was a non-starter because it was rooted only in the Chinese community (which had a long tradition of secret societies). More interesting was the essential social conservativism and the post independence reveal that politics and society would be dominated by the same land owning elites that colonial authorities had to work with. In the Philippines and Indonesia the full weigh of defence budgets were deployed against Communist groups. While in Vietnam we might see communism itself as a conservative force compared to the social disruption caused by Catholicism, or communism marked a return to Confucian values ( either Marx in Confucian garb or Confucius wearing a red coat and white woolly beard 'Ho,ho, ho, Merry Marxmas everybody - have a cigar from father Karl!'). That in Cambodia there was an attempt for a radical return to the completely rural past only confirms a picture of a region deeply ambivalent about change.

Neither religion nor folk beliefs feature much, and it is interesting how in an introductory history how lightly actual people and their concerns or way of seeing the world press upon its pages.

Osborne's picture at the close of the book is of rapid population growth and urbanisation coupled with the exploitation of natural resources in societies in which leadership is exercised by technocratic and military elites, all of which suggests future violence and ecological disasters, of course this may simply be an optimistic impression caused by looking out of the wrong side of the aeroplane as it flies across the region in 240 pages with the occasional photograph.