I think that this book gave me the clearest picture of what breastfeeding should be like, without actually having experienced it myself, that I have ever had. The authors did an excellent job of articulating and simplifying breastfeeding in a way that is easy to grasp. I also appreciated their insight into how to best help a woman struggling with breastfeeding; by watching her, offering suggestions, and if hands-on help is necessary, putting your hands over hers. That way she can feel what your are doing, and gain confidence. Getting the baby latched on correctly and then walking away never did anybody any good.
I thought it was a bit strange that this book emphasized sitting-up straight as important in helping the baby get a good mouthful and avoiding the breast pulling-away. This is because I had recently read an article advocating "laid-back breastfeeding." Also known as "Biological Nurturing," this approach is based on the primitive neonatal reflexes (PNR); they found that the very same PNR that were uncoordinated and generally unhelpful (head shaking, leg cycling, arm thrashing) when the mother was in some positions, became smooth and effective reflexes that help establish a good latch when the mother was in a laid-back position. I also appreciated the suggestion of using a band of soft material tied about the neck and looped under the breast, giving extra support for large breasts. That way both hands are free to support the newborn to take the breast. Apparently, this has been a traditional practice among some Native Americans.
I enjoyed learning about how milk composition changes from foremilk (high in volume and protein, low in fat and calories) to hindmilk (low in volume, high in calories). It's kind of like dessert, and it makes sense why it is important to let babies decide when they are full themselves instead of timing feeds. I hope I can remember their explanation about colostrum and why no supplementation is necessary - it seems to be a common misconception, especially with the Amish, that formula, water, tea, or even juice, should be given while waiting for your milk to come in.

The basic steps towards an effective latch:
1. Really take time to calm yourself and your baby. Make sure you are comfortable and in a good position.
2. Hold your baby tucked in close and turned towards you. Support her whole body (especially from her head to her bottom), keeping her head, neck and back almost in a straight line (her head can be slightly tilted back). You can either support using the inside of your forearm (on the same side) or your opposite hand and arm to cradle his shoulders, neck and the base of his head.
3. As you prepare, hold her so that her nose is opposite your nipple when her mouth is closed; that way her lower jaw will be pressed against your breast once she's on.
4. Brush her lips lightly against your nipple, waiting for her to open wide before you move your baby quickly on to the breast (not your breast to the baby). Make sure she gets a good, deep mouthful, not just the nipple. If any areola is showing, more should be beyond the baby's top than his bottom lip. The baby’s tongue should cover his lower gum while feeding; this protects your nipple, which lies safely in the back of the baby’s mouth.
5. Breastfeeding should not hurt, except for maybe the first few sucks. If it does, break the suction by slipping a finger in, take a few slow breaths, and try again to get a better attachment.
6. As the feed goes on, babies pause feeding now and then; allow him to keep on feeding on and off until he lets go of your breast on his own. Give him a short rest, e.g. change his diaper, and then offer the second side.
My favorite quote, found on pg. 217:
“Bottles, schedules, and the separation of mothers and babies are interventions in breastfeeding, in just the same way as inductions, the use of oxytocin in labor, and cesarean sections are interventions at birth.”