Rating: 5/5

Ian Fleming, creator of James Bond, has always had the reputation of being one of those authors whose own life was as colourful as their books. While that reputation might be slightly exaggerated Andrew Lycett’s 1995 biography certainly suggests that Fleming was an interesting and contradictory character.

Fleming is the kind of writer who is today almost aggressively unfashionable. He was born into a world of wealth and privilege, he was politically conservative and his books are about as politically incorrect as books can be. There was actually quite a bit more to the man that that.

Born in 1908, Fleming’s life up until the outbreak on World War II was a series of failures. He was a failed journalist, a failed stockbroker, a failed banker. He failed in his initial ambition to enter the Foreign Office. He spent the pre-war years drinking too much and chasing women. The war finally brought him an opportunity to put his talents to some use. He landed a job as assistant to the head of the Naval Intelligence Division. It was the just job at which he was an unqualified success. Fleming was what today would be described as an expert networker, and his imagination and flair for detail made him a highly useful intelligence planner.

The end of the war brought that to an end. He returned to journalism but maintained his contacts with the intelligence community. Although the family had possessed a considerable fortune at one time much of it had been dissipated and the remainder was in the hands of his eccentric mother. When he finally married money was something of a problem and writing seemed like a good way to supplement his income. The result was the first James Bond novel, Casino Royale. It was a modest success but certainly sold well enough to ensure that it would be followed by more, and over the course of the 50s his fame grew steadily. Unfortunately a combination of a weak heart and much too much good living took its toll and by the age of 50 his health had collapsed leading to his death at 56 in 1964.

Lycett’s biography is neither overly critical nor fawning. It’s a portrait of a man whose talents were limited but within those limits extremely impressive. Fleming revitalised the spy novel for a post-war audience, adding sophistication, glamour, violence and sex. One critic described his formula as being based on the three S’s - Sex, Snobbery and Sadism. It was a formula the reading public loved.

Fleming is often seen as a simplistic Cold Warrior but in fact his politics were not particularly extreme. He seem to have been a moderate conservative. He was certainly anti-communist, another black mark against him as far as the literary establishment is concerned.

Lycett doesn’t gloss over his subject’s faults nor is he especially coy about Fleming’s sado-masochistic sexual tastes (which his wife apparently ethusiastically shared). He doesn’t really provide a satisfactory explanation apart from the rather obvious one that it was a taste one was highly likely to pick up at Eton. The strong impression is also given that Fleming had a self-destructive streak - he consistently ignored all medical advice and continued to live the lifestyle that was killing him. And perhaps he had the right idea. Fleming’s life was short but it was certainly full.

Fleming also had a talent for making lasting friendships, often with rather unlikely people. Noël Coward remained one of his closest friends until his death.

The book is very much focused on Fleming rather than on Fleming’s books and personally I’d have liked a bit more of an attempt at an analysis of Fleming the writer. Despite that minor quibble it’s an entertaining look at a writer whose influence on popular culture has been immense and lasting.