Rating: 5/5

Richard Laymon's Cuts is an interesting novel that takes the simple story of a serial killer and adds a bit of a twist to it. If you've read Laymon before it's a bit different and shows a writer moving into new territory with subplots and characters that seem to have nothing to do with the overall story, but soon, it becomes clear they do. The main story of course is Albert and his reign of terror. This is where Laymon shines but then you have the other characters who seem to be a seperate entity and appear to have no bearing at all on the main story line. Laymon has a knack for the macabre but Cuts shows that Laymon is also capable of pulling off a novel full of suspense while keeping the gore and violence to a minimum. Albert is the kind of villain Laymon loves to create. He's the star of the novel but these other characters keep things from becoming too much of a cliche. As a Laymon fan, I liked the way the story progressed. It was as if he were trying to create a mainstream story while keeping his horror roots intact. The subplot of Janet, Ian, and even Lester kept you wondering how this would all tie in together, What did any of this have to with Albert? The ending itself is a bit lackluster, and a bit unbelievable but at the same time, it shows that as a writer, he can pull off something different and it all works well. You know you're reading a Laymon novel, even if at times it just feels like an experiment. There's nothing at all wrong with that and Cuts is easily one of Laymon's better novels. He's stripped away a lot of the cliches that most would associate with his books and creates a story that is both entertaining and violent. 
 While Laymon may have a cult following in the States, Cuts should have been the novel that pushed him into the mainstream. At its core though this is still a little violent for most horror readers which is unfortunate becasue there's more to this than just a guy with a knife killing random people. The strength here is in the characters themselves. You get inside their head a bit and see them as they really are. Albert is a killer on a mission, towards the end of the book you see how everything connects and leads to the violent finale. It moves swifly dragging you along. This is a writer who likes to shock and offend his readers. There's a reason why Laynon is such a respected author. He never takes the easy way out nor does he keep things simple. If you've never read Laymon before this is a great introduction. It has the violence we all come to expect but it also adds a layer of suspense to keep things interesting, He knows what his reader expect and he delivers while also adding newer elements to keep things from becoming to stale and boring. It's also nice to see writer's successfuly experimenting with the formula a bit and Cuts succeeds where other author's have failed.