Rating: 5/5

I thoroughly enjoyed this book. I read Anne Perry maybe fifteen or twenty years ago...the first several each of her William Monk and Charlotte and Thomas Pitt books, and then I stopped, although I’d enjoyed them. It occurred to me I might try one again and at this much later date I decided to just plunge into the middle of either series...the chances of finding the older ones and being able to read them in order seeming slim. So I checked out two on CD. Since both were from the C &amp;T Pitt series I started with the earlier of them. 

I’m not sure I would have loved this book if I’d continued reading them all in order as they came out. Charlotte is offstage the entire time. We get three letters from her and that’s it. Even the mystery plot involving Thomas seems at times to be more of the “B” story rather than the main story. The rest of the book is taken up with Pitt’s mother-in-law Carolyn and her relationships and concerns. And as it turned out, I truly loved Carolyn. I thought she was very interesting, very likable, quite courageous, incredibly compassionate, and worth rooting for. She was my favorite character in the book, followed by Pitt, I think. 

There was a lot of philosophy and debating of issues in this book-both between various characters and within individual character’s thoughts. I enjoyed it, probably more listening to it than if I’d been reading it. I do think the mystery took backseat to the exploration of those issues and ideas, and that might bother some.

I’m not a history scholar and unless the error is egregious, I may not know if an author gets it right or wrong. It seems to me I’ve always heard Anne Perry gets it right, which would be a plus. But she is definitely exploring modern issues and ideas through her historic characters and settings. I’m not saying the same issues weren’t discussed back in that time period, but I felt the modern connection to the ideas more than the historical one. Maybe simply because I’m alive now and relate anything I read to my own life now.