Rating: 5/5

Ever since reading  Constellation of Genius by Kevin Jackson I was fascinated by the fact that Ford Madox Ford was, to lift the phrase from The L-Word, a major hub; I even considered rereading the book to draft a graph showing all of his intellectual connections. While he didn’t sleep with everyone who mattered he clearly knew, in person or by correspondence, everyone worth knowing in the modernist writing circles. I already knew, and wasn’t floored by, The Good Soldier, I knew of the troublesome ménage involving Ford, his ‘wife’ Stella Bowen, and a then-newcomer Jean Rhys. So when I watched BBC version of Parade’s End, and read Warwick’s review of the novel, I knew I have to give Ford another chance.

I approached Parade’s End with some apprehension, having read reviews that stressed how confusing it is. I knew what to expect of a modernist novel - I like the period - but the sheer number of such remarks coming from people who had the literacy and the stamina to go through it was intimidating. Unnecessarily so; it is a wonderful novel, and even though it took me three months to read due to its impractical bulk (I rarely have the time to read at home), the events of the previous chapters were fresh in my memory and when I came back to the retelling of a scene from a different character's PoV I didn’t find it difficult to follow. Another thing the reviews and the introduction pointed out was that the last part of the novel is markedly weaker than the previous three (it was deemed so by the critics, even left out in some editions), but my experience was different. It wasn’t as vivid as other parts, perhaps, but definitely not worse than books I-III.

The subject matter… let’s say this is another novel for grown-up people. It is largely set during World War I; the loss of freedom is manifested in one’s inability to “stand up” (one of the books is entitled (“A Man Could Stand Up”, which refers to one character’s wish to “stand up on a hill” and not be shot at), but the focus is not on “physical suffering”, but rather “mental torture. Immense miles and miles of anguish in darkened minds. That remained. Men might stand up on hill, but the mental torture could not be expelled." Reading Parade’s End, I learned two things about WWI that were completely new to me – one was how emotionally disturbing, distracting it was for soldiers to keep contact with their family, lawyers, keep track of their affairs during wartime thanks to improved comunication.It's that they won't let us alone. Never! Not one of us! If they'd let us alone we could fight. But never...No one! It's not only the beastly papers of the battalion, though I'm no good with papers. Never was and never shall be...But it's the people at home. One's own people. God help us, you'd think that when a poor devil was in the trenches they'd let him alone...Damn it: I've had solicitors' letters about family quarrels when I was in hospital. Imagine that! ...Imagine it! I don't mean tradesmen's dunnings. But one's own people. I haven't even got a bad wife as McKechnie has and they say you have. The other – that the men who went to war, often because they were shamed and emotionally blackmailed by the society and even their loved ones, were, on their return, treated with suspicion and frequently hostility: “after the war was over, the civilian population would contrive to attach [determined discredit] to every man who had been to the front as a fighting soldier.”

Yet the war seems to be simply a manifestation of worldwide catastrophe, rather than the catastrophe itself. The message, to me, seems to be against the simple interpretation that the British society changed as a result of WWI; the end of "Old England" was not due to the war. Rather, the war gave people – chaotic, evil, selfish people - the chance to shatter whatever harmony was left in the world (the novel is narrated from the PoVs of "Quality", mostly). The post WWI order is one of modernist chaos, uncertainty, and despair, in which the protagonist, Christopher Tietjens, strives to function with his new family. Christopher is a Job-like figure, whose socialite wife turns his life into a nightmare, probably in order to exert some kind of emotional power over him, and who is routinely betrayed by everyone, and let down by debtors. 

A large part of the novel’s appeal lies, to me, in the examination of what it meant to be a pre-WWI gentleman. Gentlemen, remarks Tietjens bitterly, dwell in a celestial sphere untainted by financial affairs:Gentlemen don't earn money. Gentlemen, as a matter of fact, don't do anything. They exist. Perfuming the air like Madonna lilies. Money comes into them as air through petals and foliage. Thus the world is made better and brighter. And, of course, thus political life can be kept clean!...So you can't make money.The representation of upper class’ morality is fascinating: characters seem very preoccupied with the issue of who fathered who, and make most outrageous guesses; protecting oneself against STDs is what a gentleman does so as not to cast a bad light on his sphere – as we learn from the internal monologue of Christopher’s brother; central to the plot is the fact that gentlemen do not divorce, for divorce would mean “dragging one’s woman through the mud” - even when the woman is mud itself. 

And there’s responsibility, in various shades and forms. The unavoidable paternalism towards lower classes:It was to him a certain satisfaction that (...) he hadn't lost one of the men but only an officer (...) for his men he always felt a certain greater responsibility; they seemed to him to be there infinitely less of their own volition. It was akin to the feeling that made him regard cruelty to an animal as a more loathsome crime than cruelty to a human being, other than a child.Self-control -“If you let yourself go …you may let yourself go a tidy sight farther than you want to”. It is Christopher's and Valerie's sense of responsibility which makes the main love scene of the novel look like this:We never finished a sentence. Yet it was a passionate scene. So I touched the brim of my cap and said: So long!...Or she...I don't remember. I remember the thoughts I thought and the thoughts I gave her credit for thinking. But perhaps she did not think them. There is no knowing.Characterisation is formidable. Making Christopher relatable is short of a miracle. The contrast between Sylvia Tietjens, probably the single most fatale femme I have encountered in fiction, and Valerie Wannop, Christopher’s eventual lover, seems lifted straight from Jane Eyre’s Bertha and Jane (with the stipulation that little unfolds for the two women after JE fashion). The only thing the two women have in common is their good physical shape – sport for Sylvia being a way of maintaining her stunning figure and spending more time around men, for Valerie – a part of her moral, hygienic, modern education. Sylvia is compared to “the apparition of the statue of the Commander in Don Juan”, or a snake; she is “[radiant] and high-stepping, like a great stag”. She uses her sexuality to dominate, destroy, use men: she ran the whole gamut of 'turnings down.' The poor fellows next day would change their bootmakers, their sock merchants, their tailors, the designers of their dress-studs and shirts: they would sigh even to change the cut of their faces, communing seriously with their after-breakfast mirrors. But they knew in their hearts that calamity came from the fact that she hadn't deigned to look into their eyes." Valerie, on the other hand, “seemed a perfectly negligible girl except for the frown.”

And finally, the wry humour: 'I see what you're aiming at,' Sylvia said with sudden anger; 'you're revolted at the idea of my going straight from one man's arms to another.'
'I'd be better pleased if there could be an interval,' the Father said. 'It's what's called bad form.'