Rating: 5/5

After my Grandmother died, I inherited the Complete Oz library which she had amassed in the early part of the Twentieth Century, after her marriage to a successful San Francisco businessman.

To her, as to us, a large disposable income spelled books...

The books themselves I had always treated with reverence as they were a sacred part of my magically autistic early childhood. I remember the time a little later when my Mom tried to interrupt my reveries with a YA tale called The Green Umbrella, about a youngster smuggling machine guns to WWII resistance fighters.

I took furious exception to this suggestion, being averse even then to all forms of violence. Well, what was my fury, if not violence, kids?

I thought being anything than myself was a fraudulent betrayal of my soul.

Well, I was sorry to learn in Frank Baum's first Oz book, this one, that the Wiz was a fraud. A fraud using phony magic to bolster the egos of three neurotically insecure creatures - Lion, Tin WoodMan and Man of Straw - whose only deficiency is, let's face it, their fear of authority.

But hold on.

If we're NOT being taught, subconsciously to my mind, to fear authority as ordinary adults watching the news, I'll eat my hat. B.F. Skinner is still alive in Ozland, folks. What gives with this jive?

See, when facing authority as kids we're continually being taught to smarten up, and if we're introverted, fear is immediately born in us. Why does Big Brother constantly tear us down, only to tell us to get back on our feet, pronto, and to build up our ego? 

Well, I believe this impasse can be resolved. The only thing we're lacking, like Oz' trio of introspective neurotics, is our Self Possession. Remember when I objected to Mom's WWII book for kids? I just couldn't be bothered to read a violent book in the midst of a wonderfully peaceful, autistic childhood!

I had my contented self and I intended to keep it!

Self Possession, you see, is what you understand to be the result of not wanting to be bothered by neurotic violence that is above and beyond the norm.

Oz is a fraud, and he can't help this poor trio of ne'er do wells. 

He can't help them because HE's a Snake Oil Peddler.

The fraud of the world nowadays - through any internet diversion we choose - will Not heal our insecurity, when it's Induced by news giants. No, only We can do that...

By politely saying we're not interested in neurotic violence, and retreating to Our Stories!

Now, where was I?

Oh yes... In my own Perfect World -

Somewhere over the Rainbow.