Rating: 5/5

This was a perfect book for my taste. “Akenfield” is a fictional village, but author Ronald Blythe tells us it is based on the village of Charsfield in Suffolk “but with the surrounding countryside and myself drawn into it.” In particular, most of the craftsmen that feature, the blacksmith, wheelwright, saddler, thatcher etc, are drawn from neighbouring communities. As the author highlights, these craftsmen were part of the village in the sense that the village relied upon them.

During 1966-67 the author, who was living just outside Charsfield, interviewed his friends and neighbours about their lives. Blythe was a poet and not an oral historian, but I find this book exceeds any other I have read in giving a sense of rural English life in the last century. There are a total of 48 interviews.

Blythe caught rural England at a time of great change, a major factor in which was that by the 1960s the motor car had started to come within the reach of ordinary people in Britain, meaning that people could live in the village and commute to work elsewhere.

"Only a generation or so ago, a villager who had to ‘go away to work’ was obliged to give up the close-knit and meaningful village background of which he was an important part for lodgings in an Ipswich or Norwich backstreet."

Combined with the above was the mechanization of agriculture, which had led to a huge fall in the number of farmworkers that were needed. What had once been a village of farmers and farmworkers, was rapidly turning into a community of commuters.

Not that this book is a wistful paean to a lost idyll. The older men, who had been farmworkers in the early part of the century, told of being brutally overworked and mistreated. The stories from certain “problem” families were thoroughly depressing, particularly the one featuring the odd-job man called Persis Ede. The interview with Mrs Annersley, a local magistrate, gave an unvarnished picture of the underbelly of local society. How attitudes have changed! Other interviewees struck a lighter note. Mrs Ferrier, Chairman of the local Women’s Institute, was an absolute hoot.

A gardener called Christopher Falconer provided a fascinating picture of the relations between the villagers and the local aristocracy. He was employed at the local manor house. I was interested to read that the locals called it “the big house”, the same expression used in my own local area, 500 or so miles away. Of particular interest to me was a section called “The Northern Invaders”, about a group of Scots farmers who had come to the area. One local landlord had let a farm to a man from Lanarkshire, who had proved so efficient that the same landlord wrote to estate owners he knew in Scotland asking whether they had any other tenant farmers interested in taking on a farm in Suffolk. This created a small colony of Scots who had the reputation of being more enterprising and effective than the locals. I doubt whether my countrymen have the same reputation today.

About the only section that I found to be a drag was one featuring campanologists (church bell-ringers). This was obviously something that appealed to the author, but it was too esoteric for me.

Even though there are a lot of books of this type, this is one I would recommend to anyone with an interest in British social history.