Rating: 2/5

On an old episode of LATE NIGHT WITH CONAN O'BRIEN, Norm MacDonald once told a 4-minute joke that ended in a bad pun. Conan's sidekick, Andy Richter, said listening to the joke was like taking a 12-mile hike just to look at a turd.
The same could be said for Richard Laymon's CUTS, a book that is all build-up with virtually no pay-off.
To be fair, in the moment-to-moment sense, CUTS is a decent enough beach read. The story thread involving Albert the serial killer is overly gory and not very convincing (especially when he dresses up in drag and no one suspects he's actually a man), but the parts featuring the novel's other characters are generally well done. Janet's run-ins with her creepy ex-boyfriend, for example, contain more genuine tension than any of the book's slasher nonsense. Lester's relationship issues with both his wife and his much-older secret lover were interesting. Ian's interactions with his fellow high school faculty members were fun.
Narratively, though, the book is a total train-wreck. Janet's boyfriend ends up being a pointless side plot. Ditto her new job as a substitute teacher. Her last-minute romance is never explored. Lester exits the story without resolving any of his life issues. His entire chunk of the novel could be removed without affecting much of anything. Ian is mostly an unnecessary character, as well. And we really didn't need to spend so much time watching Albert dispatch victim after victim.
In other words, very little in this story serves to drive the actual plot. Laymon does a good job establishing a group of interesting characters and injecting a lot of dramatic conflict among them, but to what end? I wish he'd left out all the serial killer stuff and just written the novel as an interpersonal drama, like the movie MAGNOLIA or something. But one thing we all know about Laymon is the man had virtually no range, so it's no surprise that CUTS finishes in much the same way that all his other novels do: stab, stab, stab; fight, rape, fight; bad twist ending. Meanwhile, all the more creative and interesting aspects of the story dissolve into nothing, leaving you with the question, "What the heck was I supposed to take away from this?"