Rating: 3/5

Shivers time again. We have a random one that I actually have history with. Back in middle school or so, I recall seeing this one and trying to read it. I didn’t make it that far and I still don’t know if I disliked it or just didn’t feel like finishing it. It’s my only experience with these series prior to this reviewing thing. Well, time to finally find out.

Harry Keller’s parents are archaeologists staying in a jungle looking over Mayan ruins. Harry was allowed to tag along since he thought it would be cool and fun. Instead the place is just too hot and boring for his liking. He explores the place and ends up discovering an ancient mayan temple, like you do.

He finds the skeleton of a Mayan and decides to take the skull since it has a jewel in it or something. And of course it turns out there’s a curse attached. You could say there’s a curse in the jungle but that would be silly. 

This book was an odd one but for different reasons than I expected. It’s mostly good enough, being par for the course for the series. It has the expected beats of a curse plot, nothing too out there. Writing is better than average for Shivers with some decent descriptions. The highlights come from the danger we get, as both parents end up in the hospital.

I like the higher stakes this gives us. Although the escalation is a bit messed up, as that’s the first thing we get instead of having some smaller things before that. There are some clunky moments typical of the series as well as some meander but there ends up being a solid enough core to it as it goes.

There’s an attempt to be educational with the Mayan culture thing and it’s fine. Nothing too offensive by the series standards at least. Harry is just there but I like his parents and that we get more info on them than usual for these. So it has some pros and cons but mostly was shaking up to be a mild good. Then the 3rd act happens and it gets weird. This one felt enough like MD due to some moments but by the end this really felt ghostwritten.

It does that thing where you think it’s about to wrap up but a new complication randomly happens and it goes on for another 30 pages. It was shaping up to be short even even for one of things so it mostly serves to pad things out but it does so in an odd way.

Harry does something super dumb that was so obviously not gonna end well, so that’s a problem. Then it doesn’t quite commit to it and plays coy on what is truly going on. It does something unique with the ending that was somewhat welcome but just didn’t fit with the rest of the book. It actually doesn’t fully confirm the existence of a curse for the most part and it just felt weird.

I appreciate shaking things up but it wasn’t that well executed and it made the last part of this drag. So overall, it lands in the upper decent. It is better than average in some regards with the writing and adventure but that last portion just felt clunky and dull. It almost comes together but in the end it doesn’t stick the landing. On its own the final bit could have worked but in practice it just felt anti climatic. 

It’s fine and hardly the worst but nothing too special either. Now, as to why younger me quit early on this, I don’t know. Writing has some problems but it’s decent and I think I’d feel that way if this was my first Shivers. Maybe it was still able to throw me off back then compared to the Goosebumps I was used to?

Who knows but I wasn’t missing out of anything too crazy. An odd one to add to the pile. That leaves us with one more series for this round. Next time, I finish off another series with my last Bone Chillers for now. See ya then.