Rating: 2/5

"Hadrian the Seventh" is a 1904 novel by the English novelist Frederick Rolfe, who wrote under the pseudonym "Baron Corvo". Every time I see those words, in introductions, on the back of the novel, on the internet, wherever I see it, it always says (also known as "Hadrian VII") which always makes me wonder how it could also be known by the same name it said in the first place, so I skipped saying it. :-} Before I tell you how much I didn't like this novel I'll tell you a little about the author, a very interesting also very strange man. Frederick William Rolfe was supposedly better known as Baron Corvo although I didn't know him by that name until I bought the book, so I must be in the minority. He also called himself for reasons that I can't imagine 'Frederick William Serafino Austin Lewis Mary Rolfe. Rolfe was an English writer, artist, photographer and eccentric. When I read in a short biography of him that he was an eccentric I looked up the word because it seemed like an odd word to use to describe someone and the meaning is:

"a person of unconventional and slightly strange views or behavior".

When it comes to Rolfe I'll have to agree. Rolfe was the son of a piano manufacturer which would be so awesome getting to watch your dad make pianos all day, at least for me it would. He left school and became a teacher at the age of fourteen. I am still amazed that you could become a teacher at the age of fourteen. He converted to Roman Catholicism and felt a strong vocation to priesthood which persisted all through his life, however he was constantly getting in trouble for one thing or another and his goal was never realised. I did find out that the reason he called himself Baron Corvo was because at one point in his life he became close to the Duchess Sforza Cesarini, who, he claimed, adopted him as a grandson and gave him the use of the title of "Baron Corvo". Now that is what he claimed, whether it is true or not is beyond me. He also abbreviated his own name to "Fr. Rolfe" suggesting that he was the priest he hoped to be, although for me calling yourself Fr. would not suggest a catholic priest at all, I would have had no idea that's what you meant, but I'm not catholic. He also called himself "Frank English", "Frederick Austin", "A. Crab Maid", among others, beats me why. 

 Rolfe seemed to go from one trouble to the next to me; he was expelled from St. Mary's College at Oscott, for concentrating on his hobby of painting rather than his studies, then he was forcibly ejected from Scots College in Rome where he was a candidate for the priesthood. Even though Rolfe's hopes of priesthood were at an end, he decided to remain celibate for twenty years so he could be ready if he ever got another chance at priesthood, I have no idea if he made it through the twenty years, or what happened after the twenty years was up for that matter.

 Although a published author he never earned much money from writing, and struggled to make ends meet as a tutor, painter, photographer, and journalist. It seems like he often relied on benefactors for support, however he had a tendency to sooner or later fall out with most of the people who tried to help him. The guy was extremely eccentric, the biography was right. Now on to the book "Hadrian the Seventh" which seemed in many ways to be a story of his own life, at least the main character seemed to be Rolfe.

In the Prologue or "Prooimion" as it was called in my copy we are introducted to our main character George Arthur Rose. I don't like George he is a whiner. The first line of the novel tells us "In mind he was tired, worn out, by years of hope deferred, of loneliness, of unrewarded toil."He is sitting alone in his apartment holding his cat "the only living creature to whom he ever spoke with affection as well as with politeness." We are told how he is in mental fatigue, corporeal anguish, near collapse. His capacity for work is constricted, now we are told that:

"That salient trait of his character, the desire not to be ungracious, the readiness to be unselfish and self-sacrificing, had done him incalculable injury. This world is infested by innumerable packs of half-licked cubs and quarter-cultivated mediocrities who seem to have nothing better to do than to buzz about harassing and interfering with their betters."

So, from what I can tell George thinks he is a wonderful person that others take advantage of. When he begins praying he tells God that he wants to be good and clean and happy but God won't let him. He is God's prisoner "writhing in my fetters, fettered, impotent, utterly unhappy."

After this he begins listing those friends he has had over the years who have been unfaithful:

"Andrews, faithless; and Aubrey, faithless; Brander, faithless; Lancaster, faithless; Strages, faithless and perfidious; Scuttle also; Fareham, Roole, and Nicholas, faithless; Tatham, faithless"

It seems everyone he knows is faithless, and of course he was perfectly innocent in all of it. I do get tired of hearing of how all of his problems were caused by other people, so it isn't going well for a good relationship between George and I so far. All of a sudden, at least it seems that way to me, in the middle of this long feeling sorry for himself scene Rose is visited by two prominent clergymen, one a Cardinal-Archbishop. The two propose to right the wrongs done to him, ordain him a priest, and take him to Rome. I find this incredibly strange but it gets even stranger quickly. 

Finally we are at the first chapter and our story is about to take off, at least I hope so. I find we are at a Roman Conclave, along with fifty-seven cardinals and three-hundred and eleven conclavists. Unfortunately in the next paragraph I get the feeling that Rolfe is intending to list each and every one of them. It doesn't get that bad but I do feel as if I have landed in the book of 1 Chronicles for awhile with names like:

"Coucheur, Lanifere, Goeland, Perron, Mateur, Legat, Rugscha, Zarvasy, Popk, Niazk, Nascha, Sanasca, Harrera, O'Dromgoole, O'Tuohy, Moccolo, Agnello..."you get the idea. 

They are gathered together to elect a new Pope, however after many votes and many meetings and many other political dealings, they still haven't been able to elect their new Pope, so after being deadlocked they decide, and this is extremely strange to me, to elect George as Pope. I never understood why they did this, I guess it is just because Rolfe wanted the character so like him to become Pope. So now instead of George Rose we have His Holiness Hadrian VII. Now as Pope he is going to save the church, the people, the politics of Europe, the world, just about anything you can think of is going to be better now because we have Hadrian as Pope. He rewards all his friends, although I'd be careful if I were one of his friends because he never seemed to keep one long in his old life and if he follows the same pattern you could eventually find yourself in real trouble now that he has power. I won't tell you much more of the plot, I wasn't that interested. He ran around doing things that Popes do I guess, stranger things than most Popes, and the Cardinals went around doing whatever cardinals do and arguing with the Pope, and a lot of people went around bowing and kneeling when he was around and I guess that's what people do. 

One of the things that almost drove me crazy was when he became Pope, right from the beginning he began to talk as if he was more than one person, I don't know if other Popes do that, but it was annoying, here is a sample:

"We cannot call it arrogance to assume that We know more of a particular subject, which We eagerly have studied from Our childhood, than those do who never have studied it at all. Eminency, We began by saying that We desired to establish relations with you. Now have We shewn you something of Our frame of mind? 

This part made me smile:

"They talked of books, especially of novels; and His Eminency asserted that the novels of Anthony Trollope gave him on the whole the keenest satisfaction. There was a great deal more in them than generally was supposed, he said. The Pope agreed that they were very pleasant easy reading, deliciously anodynic."

I was going to write more but I'm tired of it, tired of thinking about the book that is. There was this long "Epistle to the Princes" that Hadrian writes re-arranging the world I guess you would say. As far as I can tell the only countries that survive in "undiminished energy" is England, America, Japan, Germany and Italy. The rest would be maintained as sovereign states, republics, constitutional kingdoms, and some such things. It was confusing and I lost interest. Go ahead and read the book, just about anyone would like it better than I did. I would get to the end of certain chapters and realize I had no idea what I read and go back and re-read it. Only the very last chapter raises the book from one star to two stars. I was actually sad when I read that chapter and not because the book was over.