Rating: 4/5

This is a fun baseball fantasy (not to be confused with fantasy baseball, which is a wholly different slug of Louie) that sprang from an April Fools' Day story that Plimpton had published in Sports Illustrated magazine in 1985. It concerns an English orphan whose adoptive parents die in Tibet, and he ends up living there in a monastery where he hurls yak dung at snow leopards to keep them away from the livestock. Between this and his meditative studies of Eastern philosophies, he finds he can throw a baseball with unerring accuracy at speeds far higher than one has ever been hurled before, and he decides to give major league ball a try, even though he knows nothing about the game. Or anything much else about Western civilization, which of course provides some amusing situations. Sidd gets a try-out deal with the Mets at their St. Petersburg training facility. Not having enough to really hang a novel on, Plimpton adds a mentor/caretaker, who's a journalist suffering from PTSD due to what he's seen observing the Vietnam War, who narrates the whole story, and Sidd also acquires a teenaged girlfriend. The three of them navigate the problems of spring training and somehow stay together when the team moves up north when the season starts. Plimpton's humor is very wry and dry and will appeal more to baseball fans than the casual reader. It's set very firmly in the 1980s and references to celebrities and ball players of the time abound, though they're obviously no longer familiar household names. I was especially pleased by a long discussion of Steve Dalkowski, for example, who was still something of a minor local legend when I was in high school, due to his exploits and misadventures as a member of the Bluefield Orioles (the Baby Birds) a couple of decades before. It was fun to read about baseball about the way it was played in those days, before the crazy analytics and super-focus on timing and minor details. There were a couple of things I did not like; there's the introduction of bungling members of organized crime families near the end that seemed entirely unnecessary, and there's a scene of what amounts to animal abuse that Sid would never have been a party to no matter what, and Debbie Sue seems just a bit too quirky once in a while, and the narrator's mental struggles aren't really funny... but it's a well-meaning and lighthearted romp of a book overall. Play ball!