Rating: 3/5

Off to fight a baby carriage
4 February 2012

	It appears from looking at some of the reviews that the concept of anthropomorphic animals wearing clothes is something more for children and teenagers as opposed to adults, however I would hardly call the Spellsinger series a children's book. It is probably more suited to the young adult market, but then by the time one gets to being a young adul, the whole concept of talking animals simply seems to be a little childish, despite Foster attempting to make some of them (like Mudge) crewed and sex mad.

	It seems that Foster's imagination was declining a bit in these later books, particularly since all of the book's titles have been alliterative (that is using the same letter to start each of the main words – I believe that is what alliteration is, but please correct me if I am wrong). This is not really all that surprising since most of Foster's works tends to be the novelisation of movies. I'm not a big fan of novelisations since if a movie is made from a book, the adaptation generally does not adequately bring out the best of the book, whereas I struggle to understand how novelising a movie can really produce a decent work of literature.

	As for the idea of talking animals, I am sort of on a borderline with that idea. When I consider  C.S. Lewis' Chronicles of Narnia, which included talking animals, I find that the strength of Lewis' story telling easily outweighs the use of such animals. There is a similar idea with Alice in Wonderland (not that I have actually read the book so I cannot say whether this is the same thing). However Narnia is clearly a children's book, and both Narnia and Alice in Wonderland are allegories. This is the form that most fantasy novels would take up to Lord of the Rings (though one can also argue that Tolkien is writing allegorically as well, exploring the conflict between the idyllic and the industrial, despite the fact that he vehemently denied it).

	Some have said that Foster has returned to a good novel in this one, but it is something that I can't really say too much since it has been a while since I read these books (and the fact that I am writing about them now is evidence that it is unlikely that I will read them again). Apparently an extra-dimensional being, known as the Perambulator, has appeared and is causing havoc and turning the world into a chaotic mess, so Jon-Tom, Mudge, and Clothahump go and attempt to kick it off into another dimension. The funny thing is that a perambulator is actually the proper name for a pram, the type used to push babies around.