Rating: 4/5

Lonely Planet Costa Rica by Ashley Harrell, Jade Bremmer and Brian Kluepfel is a wonderful guide. I started it before my own trip to Costa Rica, which took me to a few sections, but also our guide took us through towns in the Central Valley. I was in San Jose, but also the Monteverde Cloud Forest and Arenel regions, so I read that material carefully. Once I finished my other reading material on the trip, I did not have any other English books, so I read this book cover to cover. I did not read about every restaurant and hostel, but the details on the regions, their histories, and unique situations. This reading helped provide details on some of the information from the excellent tour guide. This adventure in 2018 was my third trip to Costa Rica, which is becoming more and more eco-friendly and listening to how the laws have shaped this culture was interesting. Costa Rica own history is part of the equation, as while there was exploitation, it was not on the level of other “colonies” and independent nations caught in global politics. 
 
This tiny nation is very complex. It is agricultural: coffee, bananas, pineapples, palm oil, and others along with the more technological and medical innovations. Costa Rica had no standing army, a decision made in 1948, so there are more state resources to address social inequality. Kindergarten is mandatory and they want to make early childhood education beginning with four years olds. There are various ways to secure health insurance. Yet, there is still some poverty, not as much as our nation and now everyone can vote. There is a legacy of mistreatment of the people from Jamaica who came to work. Reading the guide book, helped me put into context so of the decisions the guide made, not just the cloud canopy and rainforest walk—must do events, but some of the towns, churches and squares. I also understand more about my two previous trips, one a tour and the other to visit friends in the region. I also have many ideas for future trips.