Rating: 5/5

Comic books of the early '80s weren't really that good. I was a young child reading about Batman and a variety of other superheroes. Then along in 1986 came a comic that was utterly different than the usual fare. It was a four-issue mini-series from Frank Miller. In marked contrast to the contemporary trends, he posited a very dark interpretation of Batman and emphasized the "Dark Knight" aspect. This collection originally had four similar, but different titles for each of the four issues. They were:
The Dark Knight Returns, Dark Knight Triumphant, Hunt the Dark Knight, and The Dark Knight Falls. But, whenever you come across the collected volumes (mine was an excellent HC with additional information, plus a different plot ending) they are called "The Dark Knight Returns". It is, accurately in my opinion, one of the greatest and most influential Batman stories ever published, as well as one of the greatest works of comic art in general, and has been noted for helping reintroduce a darker and more mature-oriented version of the character in pop culture during the 1980s. Its influence is felt to this day in modern renditions of Batman.

In this story, we see an older Bruce Wayne. No longer a young man, this Bruce is weary of the damage done to his body. The world around him is changing. Superheroes are not what they used to be (this darker image is also seen in Alan Moore's "Watchmen") and society has gotten darker. Into this returns Batman. With a new Robin, he sets out to fight the forces of chaos that infect Gotham.

But his return also heralds darker things as well- the Joker has returned for one last laugh, one that will lead to a conflict between Superman and Batman. This conflict is a truly evocative moment and some of the panels in this story are actually very famous.

All in all? It is truly an amazing story. Considering the time when it was written it is truly a comic book legend. A must-read for all Batman fans and a certainly recommended read for people that seek to find the very best graphic novels out there. This is one of my personal favorites and has had an outsized impact not only on Batman but comics in general. Miller's Magnum Opus.