Rating: 5/5

What a great history book this was; great pace, exciting, bloody anecdotes mixed in at just the right times. And it covers a lot more ground than the last book I read about this stuff. 
This is really one of the most interesting little corners of history if you are at all curious about the history of France or of the Christian church. If you haven't ever heard about the Albigensian Crusade (where have you been? living under a rock?), let me give you a rundown. Round about the year 1200, the Pope was feeling pretty good about his ability to send great big crusading armies to do his bidding, usually in the holy land. The crusading armies were fond of crusades, because they got all their sins forgiven and no one could bother them about debts or things while they were off fighting. But they were sick of having to get all the way to Jerusalem. (In fact, the last time, they had given up halfway and sacked Constantinople instead). So the Pope decided to use a crusade to stamp out a particularly feisty sect of heretics called "Cathars", who had built a sort of rival Christian faith in an area of Southern France. 
Now the Cathar faith had really grown impressively by 1200, they actually outnumbered Catholics in many areas. They had been noticeably around in France for over two hundred years. But having a crusade against them wasn't exactly fair. The Muslims were a little more prepared for this kind of thing. The Cathars were vegetarian pacifists. The higher-ups weren't allowed to kill anything, not even a chicken. So, as you could imagine, this was something of a bloodbath. There were several instances of armored knights hacking small cities of men, women and children into little bits. And once the original crusade kinda wrapped up, the church started an inquisition to hunt down heretics. The author is of the opinion that this is the point where the Catholics kinda sold their souls and started down a bad road that lead to the spanish inquisition and other awful things, and I can see that. 
What's really interesting about this to me is that this is a real turning point in history. If this crusade had never happened, the cathars could have grown even larger, and they had a lot of the same goals that the protestants ended up having. Maybe the reformation never would have happened. If the northern French knights hadn't basically subjugated this whole area of what is now Southern France, maybe it wouldn't have ended up as France at all. It could have ended up as part of Spain, or as its own country. (it spoke its own language, which by now is close to dead). 
The other great thing about this book is that it's filled with this kind of dry wit. I actually laughed sometimes, which is odd in a history book about a crusade. I don't know if this is Oldenbourg or the translator, but it keeps the book interesting.