Rating: 5/5

If you have any interest in polar adventure, this book and its prequel, Barrow’s Boys, should be at the top of your TBR list. In the first book, Flemming presents the history of the search for the Northwest Passage. In this, the sequel, he gives us the history of the explorers who searched for the North Pole.

This might not sound particularly interesting. After all, the pole doesn’t exist in any physical sense. It’s the top of the earth, the point where every direction is south. In the early years of this quest, there were many different theories about what would be found at the Pole. Most believed the Polar ice would open into a giant sea. Some believed the Pole would be on an island in this sea, a Shangri-la beyond anything ever seen by man. Others thought that the Pole would be an opening into a never-before-seen underworld filled with scientific and biological marvels.
The explorers were driven beyond all imaginable physical limits in their drive to reach the Pole. Many would suffer horribly from frostbite, exposure, scurvy, and starvation. They would return home as mere skeletons missing toes, fingers, and noses. Yet they applied again to head north as soon as another ship was ready to go. 

Expeditions were brutal. All involved some combination of sailing north until the ship froze in, camping through a winter, then heading out across the ice dragging sledge boats filled with supplies. Dragging these boat-sleds for sometimes hundreds of miles would be amazing enough if the ice was flat. It wasn’t! Huge sheets of ice constantly shifted as they walked. When they crashed together, huge ice mountains bucked up. The men had to pull their sledges over these mountains as well.

There was one man who tried to reach the Pole in a balloon. His story was particularly memorable.
Several of these expeditions set out from Spitzbergen, an island northwest off the coast of Norway. Last summer, my wife and I took a cruise up the coast of Spitsbergen. Our ship crossed eighty degrees north within 600 miles of the Pole. We even crashed across the polar ice for part of a day. As we went up the coast of Spitsbergen, we stopped at several of the points Flemming talks about, like broad beaches where whalers butchered their prey taken from calm bays and the site where the balloon launched.

Flemming does an excellent job describing the beauty these men met along with the horrors. I recommend this book, and I plan to find others by him.