Rating: 3/5

I'm sure this was supposed to be heartwarming. In the 1940s the Doss family adopted 12 children, 11 of whom were unwanted and languishing in orphanages because of their racial makeup. All of the children came from different races: Filipino, Indian, Mexican, Japanese, etc. The children all grew up to be happy and healthy and well-loved. There were cute stories. The end.

I know the 1940s were a different time. The prevailing opinion was that all children needed was love. But even then, this story seemed...extreme. The first child the Dosses adopted was a white infant, but when he got to be a bit older they decided he needed more company. They first adopted a 2-year-old. By the time this 2-year-old turned 3 the family had adopted three other children, all under 3. By the time the same child turned four the family had adopted three more children, one of whom was a newborn, and had also provided long-term foster care to a troubled Japanese boy who had watched most of his family die in an internment camp.

Who thought it was a good idea to keep giving this woman children??? Not her husband...he kept begging her to stop. She actually sent out the inquiries behind his back. There was one social worker who seemed to be the lone voice of reason: when Helen Doss wanted to foster two Indian children the social worker looked at their two-bedroom one-bath house with 10 people living in it (and only one of the children was even in school by that point) and refused.

And it also made me wonder whether kids in the '40s were that much more resilient than kids today. There was no reported separation anxiety or behavioural issues until children #8 and 9 came along--they sometimes cried for their "Other Mother". But within a week they were fully adjusted and happy.

Helen Doss clearly had good intentions. But I'm curious about what these kids would say about the way they grew up. I can't imagine having three other brothers and sisters in my same grade at school--was this as fun as Helen claims? There's only one racial issue reported in the book--one of the little boys got teased on his first day of school for having dark skin. Helen gave him a hug and told him it was okay, and by the end of the week he was the most popular boy in his school. Were things really that much simpler then?

I'll give the woman props for trying to do the right thing, but I don't think this was the whole story.