Rating: 4/5

Mujica took some rather strange liberties with her fictional biography of Frida, but I thought this book was very engaging and extremely clever. It's written from Frida's younger sister's point of view. Cristina and Frida were very close growing up, and it was Cristina who cared for Frida right up until the day she died from apparent suicide.

While Mujica included a lot of historical facts in her story and covered Frida's life journey from a young child afflicted with polio, through her marriage with Diego Rivera, and up to her death in 1954, her story was told from Cristina's bitter point of view as she recalls Frida's life in a therapy session with a psychiatrist. 

Cristina is quite venomous in her recollections and paints Frida quite negatively at some points in the book, but the feelings of jealousy about her sister's success are there alongside her love and fear for her sister and her deteriorating health. She also expresses much remorse over her affair with Frida's husband, Diego Rivera, and recounts just how badly Rivera treated Frida without ever loosening his grip over her.

Frida's story is sad. From her battle with polio to a horrible trolley accident at age 18 that left her bed-bound for months to a completely awful and destructive relationship with Diego Riviera, her desperate wish to have children, and the many surgeries she had to correct the damage done to her spine, leg, and uterus, it is clear that Frida led a lifetime of suffering and she spent a lot of time immobile and in bed. Nevertheless, what she was able to accomplish when she was upright was astonishing. What a character this woman was! I am simply fascinated by her story.

And while some people might not like the picture that her sister paints, anyone who understands what it is like to be sick your entire life will understand Frida's moods and her desire to create something out of the mess that was her life.

Suffering is never pretty, but as Kahlil Gibran has said — 'Out of suffering have emerged the strongest souls; the most massive characters are seared with scars.'

Frida Kahlo is a woman who was seared by her suffering, and the world benefited from what she created out of it. Her madness, her agony, her suffering - she channeled it all into some of the most remarkable artwork that the world has ever seen. 

It was hard for me to put this book down once I started it! I can see why some readers didn't like it, but for me, I thought this was a terrific read and it has earned its place of honor on my bookshelves.