Rating: 2/5

I shouldn't really be writing a review on a book I only read the first four chapters of, and usually I wouldn't give up on a book after only four chapters, but I have a really bad headache and I'm tired reading about sage. Purple sage. From what I get from the first four chapters this book is about really mean Mormons and not all that nice Gentiles being mean to each other while looking at the sage. The purple sage. I don't know why the Mormon men feel the need to be so mean to anyone who isn't a Mormon or to any woman. I don't know any Mormons but I doubt they are much like that. And everyone who isn't a Mormon is a Gentile. That's where I would fall in except I'm not staying around for anymore talks about cattle and Mormons and gentiles and sage. There was this guy named Lassiter who rode in and was supposed to impress me with his gun shooting, I guess, but I was too busy watching the purple sage and couldn't concentrate on what he was doing. I couldn't stop concentrating on the sage. Whenever I read the book of Ezekiel I find myself being driven crazy by how often he uses the words "son of man" it almost drives me crazy. Things like this:

He asked me, "Son of man, can these bones live?" I said, "O Sovereign LORD, you alone know."

Then he said to me: "Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel.

"Son of man, take a stick of wood and write on it, `Belonging to Judah and the Israelites associated with him.

"Son of man, say to Pharaoh king of Egypt and to his hordes: "`Who can be compared with you in majesty?

And he said to me, "Son of man, eat what is before you, eat this scroll; then go and speak to the house of Israel."

See what I mean? Now there's purple sage:

clouds of yellow dust drifted from under the cottonwoods out over the sage.

the browsing herds of cattle and the lean, sun-browned riders of the sage.

Her clear sight intensified the purple sage-slope as it rolled before her.

a vast heave of purple uplands,

 would you rather go out in the sage? 

 Once more her strained gaze sought the sage-slopes.

Jane Withersteen loved that wild and purple wilderness

silhouetted against the western sky, coming riding out of the sage.

Again, see what I mean? I can't concentrate on the story because my eyes are only looking for the words purple and sage and how many different things are linked to them. I am going to move on to something that has nothing at all to do with anything purple. Happy reading.