Rating: 3/5

Shivers Summer is currently limping toward the finish line like a 22 year old trying to drink around the world at Epcot. But hey, I wanted to give Robert Spencer Knotts one more shot after last week’s Babyface and the Killer Mob faceplanted harder than Robert Anthony Cruz, on CNN. (I know what you are thinking Savanna Banana refence in the second, impressive.) So I cracked open Lost in Dreamland. The cover is basically a carbon copy of Welcome to Horrorland. I was braced for a Goosebumps knockoff so shameless R.L. Stine’s ghostwriter would send a cease and desist… but nope. It was its own thing. And “its own thing” was… not great. And as always, the spoilers are coming.

We’ve got twins Bill and Barbara Donovan, Babs for short, because apparently “Barb” was too edgy, convincing their parents to take them to Orlando. Not for Disney, not even for Universal, but for Dreamland, a theme park famous for “the most realistic robots.” And by realistic, they mean “there are zero human employees.”

Randomly a stick-up man pulls a gun on Bill and demands cash. Which raises three questions:

How much cash does a kid have?

Why rob inside a theme park?

How did this Jesse James impersonator get the gun past security?

Oh, yeah. Duh. Its a robot, since every living thing in this park is a robot.

Anyway, Babs and Bill wander into “The Haunting House” ride, get dropped into what is essentially an underground human-trafficking setup, and now we’re in full Taken mode. If Liam Neeson had been there, the book would be over in 30 seconds. Instead, they meet the Big Bad? Alex. Just Alex. Like your cousin who vapes and wears cargo shorts to funerals. Well he must have big evil plans you think to yourself. Wrong. He forces the kids to record a radio ad. Truly the second-worst fate possible for a child in the 90s (right after being picked last in dodgeball).

Then we meet Doctor Ferret, legitimately a banger of a villain name. Ferret runs the secret lab where “robots” are made… except they’re not robots, they’re just people and animals turned into robots for… reasons? Because evil. Babs bluffs Ferret into giving them 30 minutes to “practice the oboe” so they won’t suck at it for eternity once robotified, and somehow Ferret buys it. They Houdini their way out, sprint to parking lot PH36, and then big plot twist, their parents are gone.

Cue Alex, Ferret, and some random bearded henchman closing in… until the cops literally helicopter in, arrest everyone, and shut down Dreamland. Why now? Oh, turns out people have been going missing for ages, but they were all adults so nobody cared. Babs closes the book with “Next time, let’s go to Disney World,” which is low-key the best idea in the whole book.

This one was about as thrilling as waiting in the FastPass line for It’s a Small World. Knotts is now 0-for-2 for my Shivers Summer, but hey, Dr. Ferret is objectively hilarious, and the fact that “recording a radio ad” was a top-tier villainy had me dying. Hoping the next book sticks the landing, because right now Shivers Summer is looking like the late seasons of The Simpsons, still part of the canon, but not the ones you talk about.