Rating: 5/5

"When I was a child, I spoke as a child...." This is a story of passages, of critical moments. It opens
and closes with the same birthday party for Martin, who is the center of attention and instigator of
games that include spying on and criticizing the adults in another room. Intelligence gathered shows the grown-ups guilty of the very sins they scold their children for, like reaching across a table for another cake, crossing legs, smacking lips, putting elbows on the table, and "chomping"! Who would want to be like that? (Perhaps THEY'RE playing a game, Martin thinks.) Discussion turns to what
benefits come with age. Phyllis, having reached thirteen, reasons they'll all find out in time.

The central section of the book shows several of the same characters now quite aware of what there was to find out. Phyllis and George, married with three daughters, have rented the same seaside
house that was the setting for Martin's birthday party years before. Their children eagerly await a
picnic, to which have been invited the self-satisfied Ruth and Ben, laconic commentators who pro-
vide gossip and grunts and have taken to heart Ruth's childhood aversion to parenting. Miss Clyde
(Joyce) is an artist from the city, who is to do the graphics featured in a travel brochure George is writing for his ad agency. It is Joyce whose interior monologue encapsulates the dynamic of this
beautiful bittersweet book about "the eternal collision between life as dreamed and life as encountered."

Phyllis would be the perfect hostess, wife, and mother--gracious, lovely, and loving. But the honey-
moon is over, the picnic impends, and the house has limited capacity. And needs repairs. George,
preoccupied by procrastination and the distractions of the seven-year-itch, anticipates an (incredibly
misbegotten) tryst with kindred spirit Joyce. And then there appears on the eve of the reunion the
improbable-but-inescapable catalyst, Martin. An attractive man asking often disconcertingly naive
questions, to Phyllis he seems poetic savant; to George, freeloading Svengali; to the children, too-
ticklish-to-be-flensed Moby Dick. To Joyce, the overwound clockwork mouse she gave him years ago,
safely inert with the bobtailed trio beneath the old wallpaper in the former nursery. To Bunny, big
brother too brave beyond borders, gerascophobic chrononaut, to go back.

The climax comes as Joyce is pleading (as had just-limned sister Bunny before she faded at the shore)
with Martin to go back, to avoid becoming "just like all of them." Ironically, "they" have had a cathartic night. The children are quite overcome. In their ardor, they stress the upstairs guardrail,
which breaks, and they fall.

Back at the birthday party, the blown-out candles still trail wisps of smoke, recalling (or prefiguring)
Ben's cigar, George's pipe. Kids and their raincoats and rubbers are being gathered to go. The simple
presence of grown-ups dampens the contentious mood overall, but not for Martin. He challenges his
mother to declare whether adults have fun. She deflects the question as absurd. He concludes with
passion, they do not tell the truth. They are all liars.