Rating: 5/5

“I sat down in the middle of the garden, where the snakes could scarcely approach unseen, and leaned m back against a warm yellow pumpkin. There were some ground-cherry bushes growing along the furrows, full of fruit. I turned back the papery triangular sheaths that protected the berries and ate a few. All about me giant grasshoppers, twice as big as any I had ever seen, were doing acrobatic feats among the dried vines. The gophers scurried up and down the ploughed ground. There in the sheltered draw-bottom the wind did not blow very hard, but I could hear it singing its humming tune up on the level, and I could see the tall grasses wave. The earth was warm under me, and warm as I crumbled it through my fingers…I kept as still as I could. Nothing happened. I did not expect anything to happen. I was something that lay under the sun and felt it, like the pumpkins, and I did not want to be anything more. I was entirely happy. Perhaps we feel like that when we die and become part of something entire, whether it is sun and air, or goodness and knowledge. At any rate, that is happiness; to be dissolved into something complete and great. When it comes to one, it comes naturally as sleep…”
-	Willa Cather, My Ántonia

For reasons I cannot fully explain – it just sort of happened – I spent the bulk of my life living in Nebraska. Being there, but not being from there, gave me certain insights into what it meant to live in that most middle part of Middle America. 

Part of being a Nebraskan is dealing with the condescension of the rest of the country. It’s not just the coasts, though in the years I lived there, I noticed that the New York Times often referred to Nebraska as though it was an intensely backward country, feigning surprise that it should have such exotic attributes of civilization as good restaurants and popular bands. No, it’s everyone. Even Kansas and Iowa looked down on us – I mean them.

As a result of this, Nebraskans tend to be very proud – and defensive – about what they have, whether that is good beef, college football, or the College World Series. That holds true with Willa Cather, who set some of her most famous works in the Cornhusker State (though born in Virginia, she also grew up in Nebraska, and attended the University of Nebraska-Lincoln). From just about the moment I arrived in the state, I was told I had to read her books. 

Maybe it was the vague titles, or maybe it was the fact that my to-be-read pile takes up six bookshelves, or maybe it was a bit of anti-Nebraska condescension of my own, but I dragged my heels. Finally, though, I gave in. 

Turns out, I probably shouldn’t have waited so long. 

My Ántonia is a beautiful, engaging book, a look into the past that is both nostalgic and melancholy. In a way, it is a grownup Little House on the Prairie, with a shared connection to the land, and to the telling details of the lives of pioneers on the plains. Unlike Little House, though, there is more than a hint of repressed sexuality, along with the occasional outburst of violence. 

Following a brief introduction by an unnamed narrator, the bulk of My Ántonia is presented as a manuscript – told in the first person – by a successful lawyer named Jim Burden. Jim is looking back at his childhood in Black Hawk, Nebraska, focused especially on a Bohemian girl named Ántonia. 

(In this context, Bohemia refers to a part of Europe now occupied by the Czech Republic; it does not refer to a commune-dwelling hippy artist who only eats grass-fed grass and drinks rainwater from storms that occur on Tuesdays). 

I found the nested narrative conceit a bit unnecessary. The story works just fine without it being from a “manuscript” written by a person with the literary skills of Willa Cather. Moreover, it’s a bit distracting at times, as Jim talks about things he is unlikely to know. 

In any event, Jim’s story is divided into five parts. The first, longest, and best part details the newly-orphaned Jim’s arrival at the Nebraska farm of his grandparents. There, he meets the Shimerda family – including young Ántonia – who are also new to the neighborhood. The Shimerda family is the proverbial fish out of water (or more accurately, the Bohemians in Nebraska). They are inept farmers and are constantly being cheated. While the appropriately-named Burdens give them what assistance they can, Jim and Ántonia become friends. Their time together is not an epic adventure – rattlesnake killing is about as big as it gets – but rather a journey of discovery, of both themselves, and this harsh new world. 

My Ántonia is a modestly paced novel, without a clearly-defined, overarching plot. Jim and Ántonia do not, for instance, have to fight off a ruthless cattle baron who is trying to take their lands. Instead of shepherding us from Point A to B, Cather is more concerned about the existence of the characters in this specific place, in this specific time. To that end, the great joy in the early going is the marvelous evocation of the land, and its effect on ten year-old Jim.

Of course, the land is not the only thing affecting young Jim. The other would be the eponymous Ántonia. There is a delicate, dramatic tension in the relationship between the two youngsters. It is clear that Jim loves her. Yet he also demonstrates a strange ambivalence, which opens up a distance between them that ends up haunting Jim forever. 

One of the more interesting things about My Ántonia is the elusiveness of Ántonia herself. Cather has chosen to tell Ántonia’s story through the eyes of a man, and in doing so, deprives us of any insight into her inner life, her hopes and dreams, her likes and dislikes. To the extent that we know Ántonia at all, it is through Cather’s physical description of her, from the beauty of her eyes (“like the sun shining on brown pools in the wood”), to the way she looks tending a field, to her moves on the dance floor (which flirt with the scandalous). Everyone who meets Ántonia finds her unforgettable. Unfortunately, we never quite grasp why, since Ántonia – at times – feels more mythological than real. Jim sort of admits this when he says: “It’s through myself that I knew and felt her.” 

There are a lot of ways to read My Ántonia, including through the prisms of gender and sexuality. Admittedly, I went down a bit of a rabbit hole after I finished the last pages, perusing an essay or two or three. I’m not sure that deconstructing the novel in this fashion increased my enjoyment or understanding, but it was fascinating nonetheless. 

Still, it is not really necessary to comb through the dissertations of aspiring English doctoral students to appreciate what Cather accomplishes with My Ántonia. This is a classic novel of the American West, buoyed by gorgeous prose and a tone that precisely balances the brutal realities of the pioneer experience with a welcome helping of elegiacal romanticism.