Rating: 5/5

My children and I enjoy Raffi's music and play it often in our home, so I have been curious about the man behind the fun children's tunes. An Armenian who grew up in Cairo, Egypt with a father who was a top portrait photographer and painter for prestigious world leaders. They emigrated to Toronto, Canada when he was in grade-school and his parents had to start from scratch, but eventually made a name for themselves there too. In his adulthood, after a hippie stint exploring Canada on foot and trying his hand in the folk music scene, he started working on music for children. With his wife's teaching experience as well as two good friends (also educators) who helped him understand childhood development and create age-appropriat, engaging music for young children, Raffi became known around North America for his catchy tunes. His music career has spanned over four decades, which is impressive. He developed a passion for ecology/environmentalism, which is expressed in many later albums. His autobiography was incredibly interesting. Rather than focusing only on him and his rising stardom, he takes lots of detours to share his heart on different matters. The first part of the book, for example, goes pretty deep in the violence against Armenians by Turks that directly affected Raffi's grandparents. A lot of pages are spent on talking about his family, most notably his father's portraiture photography business, which I felt was a way for him to honor his parents after their passing (this book was written shortly after their death; his mom and dad died within twenty-four hours of one another). He also digs deep in the issues he is passionate about, from decreasing screens and advertisements for children (he often denied lucrative commercial deals because he didn't want to promote materialism through his work, nor promote kids sitting hours in front of TV watching him rather than playing and exploring), to environmentalism (he spends the most time discussing the issues facing our environment and the detrimental effects to earth that pollution, chemicals in our food, wasteful living pose for our children's future). He was very interested in honoring the whole child, rather than talking down to them or creating entertaining but ultimately too shallow music. Although he grew up in a strict Orthodox family, he later landed more in spiritualism, with yoga and meditation being a way to have inner peace he so desired. This part made me sad because he talked about a season of sadness after some big life changes and I so wish he would have known the endless love and true peace of Jesus rather than trying to search for it in so many avenues. His integrity and intentionality shine through the book, though he readily admits his own faults and doesn't try to make himself look flawless. I especially enjoyed when he would talk about how he wrote certain songs, like one of my kids' favorite, Baby Beluga (the first song we listened to by Raffi) and the funny stories behind some of the albums (like the pun-filled Bananaphone, another favorite of my kids, and the hilarious Raffi Radio album). I really enjoyed a look behind this musician, especially since we listen to so much of his music in our home (and love the board books that have the lyrics of his songs, like Baby Beluga, Everything Grows, Rise and Shine, and Shake My Sillies Out). I was relieved that I didn't find out anything shocking or disturbing about Raffi that would turn me away from his music; instead, reading his autobiography endeared me even more to him and his legacy of music and honoring the whole child. 

Content rating: G