Rating: 4/5

Score: 4.00 out of 5
Grade: 80% (A-) | Great 

BLAM – Green Arrow reconciles with his family – BOOM – while a mysterious new killer is hunting down vigilantes – BANG – and Green Arrow is next on the list! Here is my review of Green Arrow Volume 2: Sounds of Violence:

The Good:

I need to start off by mentioning how much more of a badass Ollie was in this story. The first book felt goofy, but this one made him tough and scary. Every time a fight broke out, it felt brutal like there were actual consequences to losing the fight. There’s this darker tone throughout the book, which is also highlighted by our new villain, Onomatopoeia.

Onomatopoeia was such a cool villain and I loved the creative use of this character through the comic book medium. Every ”BLAM” or ”CRUNCH” that he utters gets you hyper-focused on whatever it is he’s going to say and do next. Our introduction to the character is also really dark and sets the tone for this story. What he does to Buckeye and his wife is shocking and gruesome, but in the best way possible – everything you would want from your villain.

I’m so happy Kevin Smith actually made Connor somewhat more interesting in this story. By sharing this bonding moment between Ollie and his son, you begin to grow invested in their relationship. This second volume is more of a father/son story, which was great. It builds on the theme of family and second chances – just your normal superhero, back-from-the-dead, dysfunctional family – and I love it!

With family taking on a larger role in this story, Kevin Smith absolutely nailed all the characters. The dynamic between Dinah and Ollie was great. You begin to understand their complicated past and start rooting for them to get back together. Not only was there a touching moment between Ollie and his son, but also with his surrogate daughter, Mia. She clearly wants to take up the mantel of his sidekick, but Ollie sits her down and has a really great heart-to-heart with her. Heroes really ought to be arrested for putting kids in danger as their sidekicks – 
  *cough* Batman *cough*
!

It’s actually funny because when I was going back through my notes, I noticed I wrote a few times, “there’s less writing in this book than the first one.” I don’t think it’s a coincidence since many readers were not a fan of the excessive writing in volume 1. So you hear that fans? Kevin Smith listened to us! In a way, the minimal dialogue worked with this story and the villain of Onomatopoeia, but sometimes it gets annoying when all you’re reading are sound effects.

The Bad:

The first chunk of this story does the “house keeping” for the last book. It gives us the epilogue that should have been at the end of the first book, but I guess the first book was already long enough… This story is also small scale compared to the first story. In some respects, it feels like this story took a step back in terms of its narrative scope, which can be a good or bad thing depending on your thoughts on the first book.

Again, Kevin Smith is great at writing characters, but less so when it comes to the story. One minute, Dinah hates Ollie – questioning why they were together in the first place – then they fight some goons and now she’s all good. They went from “it’s complicated” to “back together” in a matter of a couple pages. I was rooting for them to get back together, but I just didn’t buy how quick and easy it was. There’s also no real resolution for Onomatopoeia, which ends in such a cliché and boring way.

Conclusion: 

This was definitely an improvement from the first book! This one was darker, the new villain felt refreshing, and the characters’ dynamics with each other were all great. Some dumb coincidences push the plot forward and we don’t really get much of a resolution for our villain. But it was a fun, quick story with Ollie and the gang reuniting as a family once again.

Recommended for: Fans of Green Arrow and DC Comics, or people who just like saying “BLAM”, “BOOM”, “BANG” a lot.

Thanks for reading! :)