Rating: 4/5

It’s very interesting to scan other Goodreads reviews about this one: Aside from the fact that some readers dismiss this book because it is not written in particularly modern English or because it features long sentences (have some self-respect, guys!), the claim that the topic is outdated seems like wishful thinking to me. The story is probably well known: Around 1640, Hester, the young wife of an older man, moves from Europe to a Puritan Massachusetts Bay Colony. Her husband has planned to follow shortly after, but he is held back for several years. In the meantime, the young married woman falls in love with a minister and has his daughter - while Hester does not give away the name of Pearl’s father (who is thus not publicly disgraced), she is shunned as an adulteress and sentenced to wear the letter “A” in red on her chest. 

The most striking feature of this novel, which was first published in 1850 (so around 200 years after the narrated time), is Hawthorne’s psychological realism and how he uses it to discuss the repercussions of moral concepts like sin and guilt. Hester is a single mother who has to deal with a town that looks down upon her, and the minister is tortured by the knowledge that the word he preaches and his own deeds are contradictory – he knows that he is a hypocrite. It is true that Hawthorne likes to use a lot of words, but he applies them to evoke intricate psychological profiles of his characters.

These psychological renderings have stayed extremely modern, and while the exact same thing will of course not happen in today’s New England, the mechanisms that prompt the characters’ feelings and reactions have simply changed appearances: There are still strong forces in our societies that operate on what they perceive/declare as moral grounds, and which use this rationale to pressure and shame others. There are still many people who chose conformity over responsibility. Hawthorne is a voice in this conversation that dares to ask the question which prize the individual and society as a whole are paying for that. 

Today, it does not seem like the religious right in America is going anywhere, public shaming is having its renaissance on the internet, and misogyny is also alive and well. Hawthorne’s characters display deeply human feelings that are comparable with what we might feel today. I did not have to read this at school, but I do not think that the criticism around reading this in the classroom is justified: Part of learning how to interpret literature is to work with different historic contexts and unusual language (I had to read stuff like The Oedipus Cycle: Oedipus Rex/Oedipus at Colonus/Antigone and Götz von Berlichingen – not only is “The Scarlet Letter” an absolute breeze in comparison, I would also never have been able to understand more complicated books if no one had explained to me how to unlock a challenging text). Don’t keep those kids stupid by only feeding them the most literal stuff that is congruent with what’s happening right in front of their noses. 

Oh well, this was partly a review about reviews, but you guys knew what this book was all about anyways, and I can reassure you that it is still a worthwhile read! :-)