Rating: 5/5

The story of Faust, the man who sold his soul to the devil, is a familiar one but I have never actually read Goethe's book before this and I am so glad I did. 

The story is in two parts and really reads like two different novels with of course the theme of Faust's story throughout. That could be in part because there were decades between the writing of both parts or maybe that is the way Goethe intended it to be. The format of both parts is the same: a play written in poetic form. 

Part 1 is a bit dark like a gothic romance. Faust is educated, successful and seriously depressed. He wants to find true meaning and feel fulfilled. Voila' in comes Mephistopheles who made a "Job like" wager with God that he could tip the scales and bring Faust over to the dark side. But as we all know, betting on the devil is always a bad idea. Then begins the story of Faust getting "experience" guided by Mephistopheles with a tragic story including Faust's love interest Gretchen that will end part one but you will be wanting more. (If this seems a bit like Dante's trek through Hell by Virgil, I agree)

Part 2 is like cold water in your face. Wake up, this is real life here! This is almost campy and edgy in style with lots of mini parable like stories using characters from Greek myth, Shakespeare, Homer, etc. If you aren't familiar with some of these stories it may be a bit frustrating but if you are it is a fun read as Faust is getting "experience" in the world of supposed bliss that turns out anything but. 

The real point that Goethe seems to be making is that intention matters. If you are striving in the world to be a good person or are striving to find true meaning that you will be forgiven your mistakes. It sounds more Christian than the story really is but that seems to be the essence. 

Books like these are so worthwhile not just for their philosophical messages but you will find yourself writing in the margins other literary characters and even movie characters that you'll realize must have been based on parts of this story. Certainly a must read for people interested in literature.

Just a note: I read the A.S. Kline translation which gives the full story. I also have the Kaufmann translation which only has Part I and a pared down version of Part II. I guess Kaufmann felt that the longer part 2 section was a bit bloated and superfluous but I enjoyed it so for me I prefer the A.S. Kline translation.