OK, I just gotta say -- GOOD GRIEF. There's a story here, and I'm gonna tell it, because that is what Goodreads is for! I love you, Goodreads! You keep my thoughts alllll organized. 

So, I went to a reading by Michael Ondaatje where he promoted his new book the Cat's Table, and he was interviewed (of course) on stage by another writer who name I can't recall (sorry, lady!). Of course, the inevitable question came up -- what are your influences? Ondaatje replied Faulkner of course, then went on to say that one of the best writers he's ever read is John Ehle, that he hails from North Carolina, and that in order to read his books you will probably have to get on Amazon and find someone selling a used copy from their box of books in the basement. 

Luckily for me, I didn't have to go that far. My school library carries a couple of his books! Hooray! So I checked this one out, and have been reading it whenever I can catch a spare half hour. Now, on reading it, my first thoughts were hmm. This sounds awful familiar. REAL familiar, in fact. And, you know, come to think of it? DUH. The premise is a woman named Collie, living in the mountains with her bastard baby child Jonathan, who houses and protects a man who came out of the mountains with his young daughter Paula. Collie lives alone due to her family's sense of betrayal over her bastard child, and because she will not tell anyone who the father of her child is. She has three brothers that all live in town, as do her mother and father. Her brothers all have a hard time hiding their jealousy over male attentions to Collie, because, as the novel demonstrates, she is strong, dynamic, and beautiful. The man who comes out of the mountains, and who earns her favor with his own handsome face, Wayland Jackson, is a clockmaker by trade. 

SO AM I THE ONLY ONE HERE READING THE SOUND AND THE FURY AGAIN, GUYS? Caddy = Collie (they both have illegitimate children) and her brothers are all so drawn to her by sexual jealously and other unresolved tensions in both books. 

It seems that Ehle has, of course, made some substitutions and improvements. For example, instead of the abusive and neglectful father in Jason Compton Sr, in Mr. Wright, Collie's father, we have a kind, generous and intelligent man. Instead of four brothers, Collie has only three --- however, Gudger, who runs the general store and is bitter about his own penchant to work hard (Jason Jr) is both jealous and resentful of Collie because she insists that Wayland sets up shop in a corner of Gudger's store (in the Sound and the Fury, Jason grinds his ax continuously about Caddy costing him his job). Wayland Jackson, the new apple of Collie's eye, is a clockmaker, and sets up shop to repair clocks. Wayland mirrors the character of Quentin in the Sound of the Fury, who is plagued by the passage of time throughout his section, and who is one of the more tenderly and intimately devoted brothers of Caddy, and who appeared to have a blatant sexual interest in her. 

AND, of course, time is a persistent symbol and theme of Sound and the Fury as well. Ok, I'm not even done with this guys. I just had to freak out for a minute and write this down somewhere, because I like it when dots connect. 

Also, get this: John Ehle had a daughter named Jennifer Ehle, who became an actress. I am also taking a Jane Austen course this semester, and we're currently reading Pride and Prejudice, and watching the BBC (Colin Firth) version. And uh, of course! Why should it surprise me that Jennifer Ehle stars in this version, playing the role of Elizabeth Bennett? 

I love being a nerd.