Rating: 4/5

(4.5) My copy of The Blue Mask has a quote from Joseph O'Neill on the cover. It says: 'Joel Lane's writing has the quality of dark glass shattered...' That's it exactly. This novel is fragmentary and elusive, studded with darkly enigmatic sentences like these (all from the first ten pages):

The voice sounded lost, terrified, its message impossible to decode. (p4)
The boy's eyes were pale blue and wide open, as if he were staring at something too bright and terrible to look away from. (p5)
The field was a lake of shadow. Poplar trees swayed uneasily, waiting for the band to come on. (p10)

Neil is, as the blurb puts it, a 'typical student'. He's producing a play, writing a thesis on fascist ideology, and dating Matt, a medical student who loves horror fiction. One night, having just discovered that Matt has slept with someone else, Neil goes out and tries to hook up with a stranger. The man attacks him, slashing his face with a knife. Eventually, thanks to several rounds of reconstructive surgery, Neil's face is almost free of scars – but it is changed; it no longer looks like him. He calls this face 'the blue mask'.

The book begins in 1997, and that year's election occupies much of the characters' thoughts and conversation. Neil and his friends are torn between euphoria over the Tories' long-awaited downfall and distrust of what Tony Blair represents. It comes to seem that Neil's inner turmoil and fractured identity are inseparable from his perceptions of politics. 

The Blue Mask has a lot in common with Lane's debut, From Blue to Black: both are set in an election year, focus on a relationship between two men, frequently reference particular music, and take place in locations around Birmingham. (Through Lane's work I am becoming more and more familiar with the geography of Birmingham, a city I have never visited in reality.) Yet, strangely, this book feels slightly less confident and assured than From Blue to Black, the prose prone to the occasional startling stumble. Once or twice, awkward or unlikely phrasing jerked me out of the story. The political elements don't always entirely seem in tune with the main plot; perhaps that's simply because they're more overt. This is a no doubt realistic position for a story set in 1997, but as we've seen with various authors' attempts to satirise the Trump/Brexit era, it can be difficult to weave political controversy into fiction without making your characters seem like puppets.

Like From Blue to Black, this book is not a horror novel, but it possesses much of the eeriness and ambiguity of good horror. After the attack, Neil begins to see shadow figures in his peripheral vision, intruders that vanish when the lights come on. He operates at a remove from the rest of the world – and from himself. The language often emphasises this sense of otherness:

His memories felt like rumours. (p38)
The only buildings were churches, so old they were like dreams. (p108)
His own life had become strange to him. (p169)
The bright April sunlight – or was it May already? – gave everything a faint glow. The negation of the negation. He could feel its warmth, as if through a sheet of glass. (p198)

But this isn't necessarily a consequence of the attack; it seems to be a part of Neil. Right from the very beginning the signs are there: 'His image in the mirror was more a shadow than a reflection' (p3).

I didn't love this book as much as From Blue to Black, but it is beautiful in its own jagged way. Neil's 'blue mask' gives the story a vague throughline, but so much of it isn't about this, and the narrative often branches off into vignettes that give us glimpses of other characters. In the end, it's difficult to sum up – it's not one kind of fiction in particular, it's not about one person/situation in particular. It leaves a mark, but it's smudged and indistinct, an indeterminate hieroglyph.

TinyLetter | Twitter | Instagram | Tumblr