Rating: 3/5

Zurich Kingdom is on a two-week vacation at his favorite resort in South Padre Island. He has it all planned: rest, relaxation and sexing a few lovely ladies. That is, until he lays eyes on Hailey Hamilton, a dream come true, a total package. She is intelligent, drop dead gorgeous and she isn't interested in a committed relationship. The chemistry between the two heats up immediately as they experience paradise together. Zurich and Hailey have several things in common: they love adventure, have top-secret jobs, love their family, and plan to enjoy their two-week escape away from work. Even though they have sworn off committed relationships their feelings blossom into love and they regret having to leave each other at the airport. Then Hailey realizes that Zurich is an officer in the Air Force and their love is forbidden, according to military policy.

Heartbroken Hailey prepares a "Dear John" letter to send to Zurich but decides to delay mailing it when she is deployed to Germany. Hailey is pleasantly surprised when her best friend, Alicia, greets her at the airport. Hailey confides in her friend that she loves Zurich.

As Hailey is processing in at the base, she is noticed by Zurich. They cannot believe that God has shone mercy and brought them together again. They agree to carry on life as usual until they can determine a way to be together without being court marshaled. The hours turn into days, then weeks as their love burns uncontrollably while being unable to physically connect with each other. The stakes are high. Will they be together as man and wife? Only time will tell.

Top Secret Rendezvous is one title in a four-book series that is supposed to honor our US military. The story has a military setting and defines concepts related to Air Force policy. However, that is where honor to the military stops. This is your usual romance novel and nothing special. This is a quick read without a secret. If you are in the mood for romance, this would fit the bill.