Rating: 3/5

“We may brake human laws, but we cannot resist natural ones.”
― Jules Verne, 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea

First published in a serialized form in 1869 (1871 book edition) "20 000 Leagues Under the Sea" is a pioneer sci-fi adventure novel. It inspired many subsequent stories and visual media works of art.

But, what is it all about? Does it stand the test of time?

* Storyline

We follow Professor Aronnax and his devoted servant Conseil who embark on a mission to seek and destroy a narwhal that is causing much damage and loss of many lives. However, their encounter with the beast doesn't end well. Together with a harpooner Ned Land they are picked up at sea by a strange vessel - only to realize that they are dealing with a very peculiar crew of a mighty submarine, called "Nautilus".
They meet captain Nemo who is in command of the submarine and its crew, an extremely mysterious and secretive person whose mission is both intriguing and frightening.

So, basically that's for the plot.
"Nautilus" travels the distance of 20 000 leagues visiting various exotic localities (The Red Sea, Greek Archipelago, the South Pole ... even the Atlantis!). 
Final confrontation leaves us questioning the fate of both the captain and his super-modern submarine.

* Conclusions

1. Unfortunately, this novel didn't age well. It is overloaded with racial comments and remarks (any other non-white person is labeled as savage or "something like monkeys".
Our protagonists discuss about endangered sea species only to slaughter each one of them along the way and eat them...

2. Also, there are quite a few rather dense info dumps which are, in actual fact, catalogs of plants and fishes. Those parts of the book are really tedious and difficult to read, for they serve no purpose but to allow Verne to show his accumulated data about the sea life.

3. Characters are totally undeveloped. Especially badly written is Conseil. I believe that Verne tried to present him as an extremely devoted and loyal servant to Professor, but he only achieved to make him look like a half-human, half-robot imbecile ready to sacrifice his life for for his master's, while Professor is regarding him as an "object" that worships him. That was simply painful to read.

4. Captain Nemo's character is wasted and we learn very little about his quest and motives. He is potentially an extremely intriguing anti-hero, but Verne didn't know what to do with a well imagined idea of a character. It's a pity really, because a skillful storyteller would be able to create a whole series of stories based on such potential and Nemo's arch. 

5. The ending is relatively good, but the pacing overall was very uneven, so the whole novel feels very disjointed and resembles a collection of half-related episodes. 

To conclude, the idea is wonderful and obviously Verne had invested a lot of time and energy in research. However, his prose is weak and not very engaging.

"20 000 Leagues Under the Sea" has a great historical significance for the sci-fi genre and as such is a must read, even though it is burdened with many flaws.