Rating: 3/5

Parts of this book about a drag queen-turned-gay-porn-director are actually pretty interesting. Other sections are deadly dull if you don't know specific 1980s and 90s gay porn films or stars. It's a mixed bag that isn't badly written, even entertaining in spots, and refreshing in its approach to the gay community (often slamming political correctness). I don't think "Chi Chi Larue" (the fake drag name of a man named Larry from Minnesota) would get away with saying some of these things now, over twenty years later.

The most interesting section is the first fourth of the book, where Larry writes about his upbringing in Hibbing and how he got into the business in Minneapolis. It's refreshing that he claims no one knows if you're born gay, but he claims he must have been and it was genetic--just like his talent for performing and directing were from birth? That's what he says. He also oddly claims that some of the talent he has "can't be learned, you're born with it." False. If this guy is that confused about how you are able to develop abilities no wonder he's confused about being born gay. 

Then he gets specific about working in the porn business and it quickly goes south as he describes what goes on at a porn shoot and then goes movie-by-movie through those he directed or star-by-star through the men he worked with. I had no idea what he was talking about during at least 80 of the 260 pages.

When he talks about his drag queen work things get confusing. Chi Chi Larue is the name of a female character portrayed by a man. The author uses "her" when referring to any drag queen, including himself, but they aren't really "hers" they are "hims." These aren't transgender females, but men that enjoy playing makeup for a few hours a week (as the author makes clear). Then why on the back of the book, in the summary about the author named Chi Chi Larue with a photo of Chi Chi in female drag, is the author called "him?"

And why is RuPaul called "her" in the book, even though when the star appears outside of drag makeup in his male clothing he is a man called RuPaul?

What's even more bizarre is when Larry went to France to do the drag show, "Chi Chi" was met by a hot guy in the men's bathroom, and while in drag Chi Chi proceeded to top the young Frenchman during hot sex, ripping apart "her" panty hose to do it. So a man dressed as a woman was screwing a man but calling himself a "she?"

Add to that Larry never directs his movies as Chi Chi Larue in female makeup, he always is in his male street clothes. So why is Chi Chi Larue the name on the screen, does that mean it was directed by a "she?" No, he calls himself a "he" in the book when directing under the name Chi Chi Larue.

So obviously there are a lot of inconsistencies. Can you say split personality?

I do admire him for standing up against the gay community in saying there are many different ways to be gay, and that gay men need to stop criticizing those that don't fit their very out and flamboyant image. Larry makes some politically incorrect statements, almost conservative in spots, that gays are the most intolerant, bitter, and critically mean people around (especially drag queens) and he has simple common sense when it comes to truly accepting all, tolerating even those who disagree with him, instead of marching in parades to try to jam a bigoted political perspective down the throats of Americans.

His inconsistencies really come out near the end, where he talks about his drug abuse. While he claims he rarely touches drugs and isn't an addict, he says he has used cocaine once or twice a month for decades. That's not an addiction? Same with drinking, where he doesn't have any booze in his home, but will go crazy when out at parties or bars. It was nice to hear him admit "I guess I'm a very antidrug drug user. I know that makes me a hypocrite."

There's not much sex in the book, beyond his descriptions of scenes in his films which are dull on paper, so if you're looking to get off it won't come here.

It's now outdated (most of the films he mentioned I couldn't find online) and some modern queer studies students will object to how "Chi Chi Larue" uses inappropriate gender language, but the guy (gal?) has a good positive attitude that brings a lot of charm to an otherwise charmless industry.