Rating: 2/5

This book sure didn't live up to it!

At first, I thought this would be one of the few Danielle Steele books I really liked (though they do make good miniseries), but then it sure disappointed me! I liked the whole thing with Kezia having that double life as a frivolous society columnist and a serious journalist, with all the aliases along the way. I understood her feeling she needed to break away from her gilded cage background, with all its unattractive baggage. It was also amusing the way society thought she and Whit were a couple, while it was just a ruse to hide his being gay. (The book was written in 1979, when it still wasn't so easy to come out.) I can't say I thought much of her using that young artist guy, since it seems he was really in love with her, but I figured I'd overlook that when Lucas, the ex-con radical fighting for prison reform came on the scene, and hence starts the H and h romance!

Or so it seemed! But then Ms. Steele decided to do a number on her readers which could have had an impact but turned out to be dud ammunition. She killed off the H and made the h have a HEA with the OM!

It so happens that I liked the OM better, as Alejandro was the kind I prefer. He's not the boring beta simp, willing to wait in the wings forever if only the h will glance his way, or the intrusive, controlling jerk, who thinks he knows what's best for the h, which - of course - is him. Instead, Alejandro (Lucas's friend) became a friend to Kezia, was there whenever she needed him (which was often), never overstepped bounds, and when it became clear he was falling for her, he never made any moves or tried to take her away from Lucas, even when his parole was revoked, and he went back to prison. And I was never crazy about Luke, who used the "f" word one time too many, called Kezia "Mama", and was a bit too radical for his own good.

(I also hated all the drinking everyone did, but that's just me.)

So, while I had no objection to a Kezia/Alejandro union, what bugged me was how fast it came about, as far as her feelings went. She was Lucas this, Lucas that, Lucas everything, couldn't seem to imagine her life without him, wanted to stay near the prison, even though he told her to stay away, etc. etc., then no sooner does she lose him to the grim Reaper, she decides it's Alejandro she's loved all along! (Altogether now: "WTF!!!!!!")

If that were the case, there should have been signs of an attraction there, that they were both fighting, especially when he spends more than one platonic night in her apartment. There was no quickening heartbeat, no spontaneous kiss, no subtle hints, nothing, just friendly advice, brotherly comfort and platonic outings. And we're supposed to believe that all of a sudden it hit her: SHE LOVES HIM!!!

Funny, she never once thought of Alejandro when she was in bed with Lucas!

GIVE ME A BREAK!!!

Also: what's with the snarks about Chicago? A "Sears and Roebuck" city??? More like the third largest city in the country, one of the "big three" (L.A., N.Y. and CHI). Hardly a hick town.

And that was rather a crummy comment, about women getting horny, then feeling guilty and crying rape! While I'm sure - human nature being what it is - that it's happened, I doubt very much it happened all that often, maybe 5% of all rape cases? In another of her early novels, Ms. Steele has a female character who makes a habit of accusing men of rape, and the H is sent to prison because of this, so I'm guessing she knows some guy who was falsely accused, and it's colored her outlook? Perhaps.

Okay, enough said!