Rating: 5/5

In Batman: The Dark Knight Returns, a fifty-five-year-old Bruce Wayne comes out of a ten year retirement, amid a historic crime wave caused by the youth gang known as the Mutants, to take up the mantle of Batman again and rid the city of Gotham of their menace. We encounter old foes in this story in Two-Face and Joker, but there are some fresh faces as well.

One such character I found to be a very welcome addition to the Batman universe was Carrie Kelley, the new Robin. Not only is she a welcome change from the endless series of young boys Batman usually uses for Robins in that she is a girl, she is also a better Robin than previous iterations, in my opinion, because in this book she was able to be useful to Batman.

Prior to this book, Robin has been a somewhat pointless character in the Batman universe, at least in the Batman books I've read so far. Batman usually just tells him to stay in the car while he does the real work, or he gives him some menial task to keep him away from the main action taking place, or etc. I've actually wondered a lot more than once why he even has a Robin to begin with. It seems like maybe he wants someone to take over his mantle some day, but then he never trusts him with anything, making him ill-equipped to ever take over for him and effectively sabotaging his own plan in a self-defeating way.

But in this book, Carrie Kelley's Robin seems to always be right in the heart of the action; she flies attack helicopters, squares off with villains like Abner, and even drives the Batmobile, which in this book has basically become a tank on steroids. I think in his old age Batman has realized that he isn't capable of doing everything alone anymore, like he could as a younger man, and so he relies on Robin a lot more in this book than in previous installments. This change of heart makes for a much more purposeful Robin, which I was thrilled to see.

The story itself is also quite fascinating, exploring a lot of themes relevant to today's society. Things like the gullibility of people and their susceptibility to blindly following cult leaders (insert Trump emoji here), the rehabilitation of criminals and the mentally ill, as well as how the same are treated by society, the ethics of vigilantes, hero worship, and more are explored, but not in a way that bores or preaches to the reader.

Another question, though admittedly one that's been covered in many previous Batman stories, that I thought was masterfully explored in this book, is the question of whether Batman creates his enemies. Do villains like Joker, Two-Face, and so on exist only because there is a Batman? Or does Batman exist because they do, in order to stop them? It's the ultimate "chicken or the egg" question in comics. In this volume, Miller appears to create a powerful argument that Batman's enemies exist only because he does. In the story, Joker is in a mental hospital, and has been for years, and he appears to be content with his fate. It's only when he realizes Batman has returned from retirement that a long-dormant, evil grin of joy spreads across his face and he begins plotting a scheme to once again wreak havoc on Gotham.

In conclusion, I've read a decent amount of Batman books over the past few years, most of them considered classics, but am by no means anything close to an expert. It could be that there are far superior Batman books and stories out there. But in terms of the ones I've read so far, I think this one is probably the best. It was a pleasure to read, despite being very bleak in tone, and it has a spectacular ending that opens up exciting new possibilities for later installments in the franchise.

Highly recommended!