Rating: 5/5

Rose Tremain's 'Sacred Country' is heartbreaking, brilliant, and miserable as mud. Following a number of residents of the small English village of Swaithey from 1952 all the way to 1980 – including, miraculously, a trans boy, who suffers and does wrong and yet has more purpose than many around him – it's what I would call 'a Middlemarch': a collection of many vignettes of ordinary people's lives that adds up to something much more profound than the sum of its parts.

I should say: this book was published by a cis author in 1992, and there are aspects of the trans story that have the potential to irk a modern audience. (I'm a trans woman, and after a while they certainly irked me.) Even after he's clawed his way into medical transition and basically everyone in his life has come around to calling him Martin, the narrative voice persists anachronistically with 'Mary' and 'she' for much too long, which feels undermining of what the writing otherwise achieves. (It does finally, in the title of his very last point-of-view chapter, switch to 'Martin'.)

At the same time, there are aspects of the depiction I appreciated, such as Tremain's staunch refusal to provide any *reason* that Martin is trans. (That's always such a temptation for cis authors, I feel, especially of those older generations – to locate some childhood trauma or psychological dysfunction or genomic abnormality that 'explains' our condition.) But Martin simply *is* trans, who knows why, and despite the unfortunate old-fashioned semiotic stickiness, the novel does treat this substantively as a fact. 

Martin, however, is only one of many characters that Sacred Country follows, and his isn't even close to the saddest story. There are wayward country singers and suicidal farmers and papery schoolteachers and self-mutilating butchers and fragile aspiring dental nurses, and they all get their due: aging through the decades until they don't. 

It's always hard to articulate the emotional payoff of a Middlemarch, because you find yourself gesturing frantically at a pile of what sounds like quotidian village trivia and saying lamely, "It's just life! People live these whole lives, and then it's over! Every person is so vast and so small and it's so sad!" 

Anyway, Sacred Country made me cry, and I'll probably sound like an idiot if I try to explain why. 😋