Rating: 5/5

Review Part I:
Three reads and my opinion changes every time. While complex and full of great moments, it's prosaic as hell. This time I really struggled with all the exposition and talking heads, it's so unnecessary--I think Frank just likes to hear himself talk. It's strange that he could write the minimalism of Batman Year One and then this, which I would argue is pretty maximalistic. I also feel like Carrie Kelley, for being Robin, is a token character to show that Frank is progressive--'look I wrote a female Robin!' She has almost no personality and basically bookends Bruce's plans in the most robotic way, a major missed opportunity. Overall a classic start to the god damn Batman / Dark Knight but it's feeling more dated the more time goes on. 

Review Part II:
This took me two slow reads full of notetaking to begin to fathom the complexity and sociopolitical satire in this masterpiece. My first read two years ago was lukewarm. I didn't hate it, I just didn't get it. I knew it was important, but the art and 80s culture takes some getting used to. And there's so much Batman lore that if you don't know it you're going to get lost, which I didn't know and so I did. Dick Grayson. Jason Todd. Harvey Dent/Two-Face. Joker. Jim Gordon. Those characters alone. And there are many characters in here. 

Before I go all literary I'll just tell you what I thought. I loved this on the second read. The writing is perfect, serious, gritty, brutal, with some humor to ease the tension. The weird 80s alternate universe mutant slang wasn't as confusing this time, like "balls rad," "billy," "shiv." I still don't understand "god damn milk baby" but it makes me laugh. The artwork is 80% for me. Some panels I scratched my head and just had to move on. I wish there were more splash pages because those are fantastic. It gets a little tedious with all the TVs and I wish the captions were below not above. But I don't know, this felt more complete on the second read. I'm gonna buy this copy and start baptizing people with it. After reading lots of other Batman comics, new runs like Morrison, Tomasi, Snyder, and the classics like this, Year One, Long Halloween, Black Mirror, The Killing Joke, Joker, I can see how far the influence of The Dark Knight Returns reaches. It's dark, real, noir, bittersweet. Love it, hate it, it's vital to Batman, and I now get why. 

If you're afraid of literary analysis then now's the time to leave this review. This book is knee deep in literary themes so I have to dive deep!

Summary:
I'll quickly preface but I will not summarize 200 pages, I promise... Commissioner Jim Gordon is retiring. Batman has been retired for ten years following something tragic. My guess? Jason Todd and the outlawing of super heroes, which is not directly stated. Parallel to X-Men Days of Future Past. Bruce is feeling rather dead inside because Batman, the Dark Knight, is actually who he really is. Bruce is the mask, not Batman. Following the drink with Gordon, Bruce is threatened by mutants in Crime Alley under the exact street light where his parents are killed. That awakens the beast. That's what causes the Dark Knight to Return. (An aside: Do we know where Bruce's mustache goes? And why?)

Arkham Asylum. The Joker is locked up. Following years of cosmetic surgery and therapy Harvey Dent is being released. Gordon thinks he should he locked up while Bruce "believes in Harvey Dent" (see Christopher Nolan). Dent's release and Batman's reemergence sets everything in motion. Could be argued their presence/psychological impact instigates the violence, as the TV tells us. In fact, Dent is outright responsible for motivating the mutants. And Batman's return inspires the Joker as well as the mutant response. So there's truth to this scapegoating.

Themes: 
demons/regret, doing more harm than good, violence in society/media, vigilantism, bureaucratic hypocrisy, religious zealots, classism, order versus chaos. 

Character Overview:
-Police Commissioner Ellen Yindel wants war against Batman. She has zero tolerance. Symbol of fascism?
-Former Police Commissioner Gordon knows Batman's true identity. He can't let go of the job. Much like Batman (his foil?) his violent identity is all he has. Symbol of corrupt government? 
-Superman/Clark Kent. Ha! Miller clearly hates Superman with all of those pretty butterflies and the fact that Batman almost kills him. Bruce says "There's just the sun and sky and him, like he's the only reason it's all here." So that was funny.

Media Analysis:
Let’s talk about the media. I’ve been told (as I was born in ‘87) that 24 hour news was a new thing in the 80s. The news is mega violent here. Always murders, rapes, freak accidents, assaults. The only "light side of the news" is the weather when the heat wave finally breaks. But guess what? Turns out the rain is a symbolic violent storm which signals the return of heavy violence. So there is no good news. Among the violence there's also blame/scapegoating. According to psychiatrist Dr. Bartholomew Wolper, "Every anti-social act can be traced to 
  irresponsible media input
. Given this, the presence of such an aberrant, violent force in the media can only lead to anti-social programming." So Wolper blames Batman's fear atmosphere, or atmosfear, rather than the media itself. Interesting Wolper/the media blames Batman considering how the media continues to irresponsibly input only violence after violence on TV. Seems Miller is presenting dual ideas here. That Batman does in fact create violence by creating fear and by goading criminals with fear, but without the media his violence wouldn't exactly be mainstream. The media scapegoats Batman but won't admit any responsibility of their own. Interestingly, the mutants, Dent, and Joker were all around before Batman returned. Violence precedes vigilantes. But Wolper does make a good point if shifting some of the blame from himself and media. The violence does increase, but I think create is too strong a word, for when Batman returns. The media also blames Gordon's incompetence for the violence. But it's not as much incompetence as cooperation, huh? But in a zero tolerance world Gordon is essentially a traitor, as bad as the vigilante himself. 

Political satire. It's the 80s. Cold War, Reagan, WWII still fresh in the American Mind. Russians, fascism, guerrilla revolutions (symbolic of vigilantism?). For as much as the government claims to hate violence they sure A. commit a whole shit ton of violence, and B. shirk their responsibility to control the violence. When things are worst in Gotham, the TV exposes the shirking of responsibility starting with Reagan, moving down to the governor, mayor, then ending with Gordon's replacement Commissioner Yindel. Clearly there's a theme of failed government and hypocrisy, especially because Yindel/GCPD doesn't catch any of the criminals. Batman does it all. And as much as the government says they hate super heroes they're actually full of crap i.e. secretly hired Superman who is leading the war on the Soviets, including directing the bomb away from the US. And there's a hint that the government sold guns to the mutants in the very beginning (allusion to Al Qaeda? Not sure of the timeline there). So what the fuck? We hate super heroes, vigilantes, they do in fact cause violence, but they're the solution to the problem they've created? And we can't trust the government, because they're just as bad, and maybe even causing all of this? Wolper himself says violence in media leads to violence in society, but he himself is constantly on TV talking about violence and psychosis and assures us Harvey Dent, mass murderer, is making a full recovery. What about that? What about all the footage of the Cold War then? What about the boom bomb? How does any of what the bureaucrats and media and scientists are saying make any fucking sense when Batman, the scapegoat, the cause of all this violence, is still saving the day?

Conclusion:
Miller makes a helluva lotta points here. Government. War. Violence. Media. Justice versus vengeance. What's the right thing anymore? Well in my opinion I think Batman is one of the few that knows. He's incorruptible. Sure he breaks laws and bones, but he gets the job done and still doesn't kill anyone. Not even you know who. Joker. And Carrie Kelly isn't just some random women's rights inclusion. She's proof that Bruce is full of shit, there is some humanity to him. Just look at the end, with everyone surrounding him. He's smiling. Carrie is his child, just like Dick, Jason, Tim, and Damian. That one splash page of them hugging is downright love. So he's the Dark Knight. He's ruthless. But despite what one civilian said, Batman is still human.