Rating: 4/5

And No Birds Sang

Dying is just a word until you find out differently.

And No Birds Sang is a short war memoir by Farley Mowat.

The story begins with Mowat's enlistment in early 1943 with the first Canadian division. Then it's off to England for live training drills and on to Sicily for the war. 

There is a tragic scene where a German sniper shoots at an old donkey who is working its way up the hill towards the town to the west of Mt Etna. Lots of blood was spilled there on the ground amongst the spare brush and skittish lizards. 

Much of the island was heavily mined by the retreating German army and many bridges had been blown up. Mowat led many reconnaissance missions so the threat of explosives were ever present. In some cases they would encounter Italian forces who were not clear who or what they were fighting against. They could not decide if the British and Canadians were actually foes because they were most interested on being on the winning side. 

Many of the Germans (the Jerrys) fighting were elite paratroopers. They were merciless in their efforts to demolish Sicilian cities as they retreated. In this regard the deaths were especially unnecessary. 

After six months of near misses and the agony of seeing his comrades who had been shot or blown apart, and the fury of artillery barrages and the horrors of the dead bodies all around him, Mowat himself was wounded in the buttocks. Much to his dismay the medics removed the pieces of shrapnel and sent him back out to the Battle of Moro.

This battle did not go well for the Allies or the Germans for that matter. Some three days later some five hundred bodies lay lifeless near the flooded river. Mowat describes the battle as his breaking point moving about like a "robot". Days later he drank himself into oblivion. His battalion had already taken very heavy losses over the six months. 

This memoir penned in 1979 ends abruptly on the island of Sicily in December of 1943 when Mowat was transferred off the front lines to headquarters. 

4.5 stars. This is an excellent restrained piece of writing.