Rating: 4/5

Halpin has several adult and YA novels to his credit, a couple of which have won awards, but I had only previously read Notes from the Blender (with Trisha Cook), which I really liked. This one is also a “teens with problems” story (because “teens whose life is perfect” would make for a pretty boring story), the focus being fourteen-year-old Rosalind Butterflied of Boston, who suddenly finds herself a semi-orphan. He two gay moms were killed when a truck loaded with turduckens rolled on their car, and no she’s living with Sean Cassidy, a lawyer in his mid-thirties, who was the sperm donor (he was a close friend of both women, even though they were rather older) and therefore, technically, her father, though she’s never seen him before. But his name was on her birth certificate, so there she is.

Sean is single, kind of a nerd, and not at all ready for this, but he saw his newborn daughter at the hospital and fell in love with her (and then, in defense of his own emotions, lets her and her moms drift away). And he tries hard, he really does, but Ros is rather a handful. She used to be, by her definition, a “goody-goody” who made excellent grades and behaved herself, but now she’s failing everything but English and she doesn’t care, because nothing matters. She takes up smoking because she wants to hang out with the Bad Girls, and she punches a guy out and breaks his nose when he makes a sneering and anti-gay remark about her dead moms. Sean’s defense at her expulsion hearing keeps that from happening -- “ I sue schools for a living, gentlemen” -- but that incident of Ros’s greater and deeper turmoil. The fact that “Aunt Karen,” whom Ros has been close to all her life and who wanted custody of her, too, doesn’t help.

The author tells the story entirely in a modern epistolary style, through emails between Sean and Ros (because it takes her a long time to talk to him face-to-face), and between Sean and his high school gym teacher buddy, Dave, because Dave is a father and also hopefully understands teenagers, and especially in lengthy entries in her therapist-mandated “grief journal” (which she names “Fluffy”). She’s a very bright kid but also a very normal one, what with sulking and getting drunk at parties and all the usual stumbling blocks in the path of growing up. I dislike using the word, but Ros’s voice in her journal entries is “authentic” and believable and the perspective it gives the reader makes for a very nicely done book.