Rating: 4/5

‘Beware of the insipid vanities and idle dissipations of the metropolis of England; beware of the unmeaning luxuries of Bath, and of the stinking fish of Southampton.’
Collected in this slim volume are three works taken from Jane Austen’s juvenilia, written in her mid-teens. They belong to the genre termed epistolary fiction, with Austen supposedly inspired by the works of the 18th-century author Samuel Richardson and others; each narrative consists of written correspondence conducted between its fictional characters.

But the first work also takes the form of what might now be termed a novelette – in other words, light fiction a little longer than a short story but without any pretensions of being a novella let alone a novel. Moreover, it’s possible that Love and Friendship may have been ‘serialised’: the late Fay Weldon suggests here that the teenage Jane could have read the ‘letters’ aloud in instalments to amuse her family.

Ultimately, though, it’s a tremendously cheeky parody of social customs as well as certain literary tastes in the late 18th century. More than two centuries later it’s still possible to view it as trenchantly funny, provided the reader doesn’t view themselves as too sophisticated to be amused. But I’ve yet to even mention the other two offerings in this selection: are they on a par with the opening piece?

All three items – Love and Friendship (1790), The Three Sisters (?1791), and A Collection of Letters (1791) – are taken from two of the three notebooks in which Austen jotted her early fictions between the ages of 12 and 17, from 1787 to 1793. The first is like a farce, the second a social comedy, and the third a sequence of five one-act plays – several of which I think quite sophisticated – but they’re all told in effervescent epistles as if from various genteel and mostly young females.

As well as drama another medium that the trio of works reminds me of is the visual arts: Love and Friendship and The Three Sisters are reminiscent of William Hogarth’s moralising sequences ('A Harlot’s Progress', 'A Rake’s Progress' and 'Marriage à-la-mode') and at times the cartoons and caricatures Thomas Rowlandson and James Gillray specialised in; A Collection of Letters is more like a wall of miniature portraits which one examines closely for clues as to the nature of the sitter and the emotions they seemed to be conveying.

So much for impressions, but what of the subject matter? If I tell you the subtitle of the opening work is ‘Deceived in Friendship and Betrayed in Love’ that’s a good indication that the tale it tells will be eventful. Laura is an older woman who’s invited by Marianne’s mother to recount the details of her picaresque life.
‘You are this day fifty-five. If a woman may ever be said to be in safety from the determined perseverance of disagreeable lovers and the cruel persecutions of obstinate fathers, surely it must be at such a time of life.’
Laura proceeds to justify the thieving, lying and leeching off acquaintances perpetrated by herself and her friend Sophy by asserting they’re doing so with noble principles, in pursuance of true love. The reader may beg to differ.

The nature of Austen’s narrative is soon clear from Laura’s pen portrait of herself: “My father was a native of Ireland and an inhabitant of Wales; my mother was the natural daughter of a Scotch peer by an Italian opera-girl – I was born in Spain, and received my education at a convent in France.” The action moves from the wild Welsh countryside in the Vale of Usk via Middlesex to Scotland, and includes the deaths of lovers, fainting, acting, fainting, fortuitous meetings with distant relatives, and more fainting. If you’ve read Northanger Abbey (which Austen had begun under the title Susan in 1797/8) you’ll recognise the melodramatic motifs from the kinds of romances that Catherine Morland was so enamoured with.

No less humorous is The Three Sisters, but instead of the over-the-top Gothick of Love and Friendship we have a more domestic drama in which Mary Stanhope, who has received an offer of marriage from the older Mr Watts whom she despises, prevaricates about whether she’ll accept his offer or not while she weighs the change in status she will gain over her sisters and neighbours’ daughters.
‘He is quite an old man, about two and thirty, very plain – so plain that I cannot bear to look at him.’
One of her younger sisters, Georgiana, casts an altogether more sensible and considered eye on Mary’s foolish behaviours, including her demands concerning the décor of the carriage she will insist on if she decides to accept. The reported dialogues in The Three Sisters is at times on a par with those of Austen’s more mature novels, capturing the empty blatherings of this teenager as she ineptly attempts to negotiate conditions with her suitor, as well as the bemused observations of her sisters and the amused reactions of her supposed rivals and their male friend. This was a most delicious account describing the prelude to Mary Stanhope’s likely future life of domestic pother rather than bliss.

Finally, the five vignettes of A Collection: this is Jane in her own mid-teens exhibiting the range of moods and scenarios that were to characterise her later published novels. She alliteratively dedicated “this clever collection of curious comments” to her cousin Jane Cooper who, with Jane’s sister Cassandra, had survived school in Oxford and typhoid fever in Southampton. They purport to be from a mother not unlike Mrs Bennett, anxious about her two daughters ‘coming out’, and from young ladies variously described as ‘crossed in love’, ‘in distressed circumstances’, ‘rather impertinent’, or ‘very much in love’.

Each ‘letter’ is very different from its fellows; where one is witty, another is written by a deluded correspondent, and where one details the nastiness of a prototype Lady Catherine de Bourgh it’s followed by another revealing how over-inquisitiveness may lead to an embarrassing faux pas.

Fay Weldon’s introduction extolls the delights of this Hesperus Press selection, including examples of the “Wildean bons mots” that caused her to “fall about with delight at the sheer wickedness of what’s contained in this volume.” This edition modernises the spelling and adapts Austen’s paragraph formatting for modern readability; purists who may prefer the original texts can consult the versions offered in, say, the Oxford World’s Classics edition of Catherine and Other Writings (1993) edited by Margaret Anne Doody and Douglas Murray. But for convenience this volume is hard to beat.