Well that was a bit strange.

The second thing I would say, is avoid this older edition with it's old 'translation'. The editor in fact suggests that the English was only slightly modernised, my general impression, as maybe you can tell from the updates, is the translator produced a weird sounding Tudorbethan style that often comes over as a pastiche. It has neither the pleasures of the original, nor the clarity of a modern translation. The passages about lice or Margery tormented by visions of naked men and being told by the devil that all she has to to make it stop is to select which one she will be intimate with first, are rendered particularly obscurely, no doubt out of respect for a 1950s readership who wouldn't want to read such filth. But the 50s are over now and we ought to be able to read about people stripping off their clothes on pilgrimage to attack each other's lice freely - the fifteenth century wasn't just about the battle of Agincourt after all.

The third point is that this is also simply a deeply odd book the forth point, in the manner of the crooked man who walked a crooked mile who found a crooked sixpence against a crooked style; he bought a crooked cat which caught a crooked mouse,and they all lived together in a little crooked house will be that the contents are equally odd . This book might be a tremendously rare thing - a medieval autobiography, except that Margery was illiterate, people have to read to her throughout the book, it might be ghostwritten, but the book tells us that it was written twice, firstly by a mysterious man (and I still suspect that this might have been her son - the only one of her sixteen children who is named hopefully some of the others survived to adulthood) who had spent a long time abroad in the German speaking world (as did her son) was literate, but in an idiosyncratic way , who undertook nonetheless to write out the story that Margery tells of her life. This man dies (Margery's son also predeceased her) and Margery passes the manuscript on to a priest who can't understand what he wrote at all, we're given the impression that it was written in some weird north sea melange neither English nor German, however after some time, prayer and the intervention of God, the Priest continues with the manuscript. It is unclear if he rewrote it and if so if he edited, or reworked the material in any way, his text has come down to us in a mysterious manner, excerpts were published but the complete manuscript first came to light in the 1930s. So it is odd, you can decide for yourself if it is an autobiography, biography or something sui generis.

One of it's odd features is how depersonalised it is - hardly anybody is named, Margery herself is invariably referred to as 'this creature', her husband is named once and that midway through the book, as I said only one of her sixteen children gets a name, people who help her might be called the 'good priest' (or whatever the profession happened to be) those who hinder her likewise might be the 'evil friar'  not someone who owns a chip shop and charges extra for salt and vinegar but of the religious type. When the occasional Bishop, or Mayor or Abbot's official is named they leap off the page at the reader. Typing, my stomach full of coffee and pancakes, I wonder if this was a deliberate literary decision in imitation of the Gospels in which repeatedly we come across 'a Centurion', 'a woman taken in adultery', or 'a fisherman' when presumably all these people had names, but by implication they are irrelevant, it is the role and relationship to the central narrative figure alone which is of significance. If so then this is a further way that Margery is a difficult figure for the reader, for all her protestations of humility she's plainly holier than thou, and me. This isn't a new feeling, her neighbours seem to have felt the same already in the fifteenth century and they were not always shy in expressing their displeasure, one man pours a bowl of water over her head (I did wonder if 'water' was not a fair rendition of the original), and after a hundred pages with Margery one can see why.

One of the few people named is  Julian of Norwich who Margery goes to visit early in her career of being holy. The comparison is a bit unlucky as the two are very different mystics. Julian had a series of visions at a precise time in her life that she then contemplated for years before having them set out in writing - Revelations of Divine Love, her vision insights are striking and distinctive. Margery is very different, she has an ongoing interior dialogue with God (the whole trinity) and the Virgin Mary, with the occasional vision. Her religiosity is characterised by intense emotion, specifically the habit of bursting into tears and screaming for hours at a time, in church services, during open air preaching, at pilgrimage sites, even randomly out in the countryside, this it turns out was a phase, but one which went on for ten years. Margery when she began to be holy gave up eating meat, however all her weeping and wailing left her weak, eventually the Virgin Mary appears to her and asks her to start eating meat again just so she can sustain herself in the work of weeping and wailing. One of the good things with Margery is that there is no false modesty about her. One gets the impression that she was pretty proud and haughty before being holy - she was of a fancy well to do family in King's Lynn (then Bishop's Lynn) a fairly busy port town in eastern England  I might, if I were polite, describe it as something of a backwater today, in the vernacular I would use a different expression, but then I am not native to that part of the country, and it seems I have my patriotism too , her father was an important prominent citizen, as was her husband - once she becomes holy this is even more marked the Virgin Mary will have her as her servant, while she will become Jesus's lover, and mother, and daughter apparently simultaneously (and incestuously), maybe we are meant to understand this in a spiritual sense but it feels pretty physical in her expression, though I understand this isn't so unusual (at least in mystical circles  to which, I confess, I am not privy). It seems to me significant that while she has the subordinate role, it is to the very highest spiritual beings in her world.

The crying is very interesting, as you can imagine many people who came into contact with Margery found it difficult to cope with, if we are being polite. She is accused of being a heretic, specifically a Lollard - something which could lead to your being burnt unto death in the England of her time. Yet in a way her extreme emotional response is a reasonable reaction to the practise of religion in her day, if you are being told to focus on the awful sufferings of Jesus on the cross, and the unbearable grief of Mary, crying is the least one can do. Her contemporaries repeatedly and in many countries found it a bit too much though  she would have been useful in a drought I feel, 'hey Margery come stand over my crops and remember how the people beat Jesus', if you wanted to irrigate the Sahara and turn it into a garden you would just have had to introduce her to Friedrich Nietzsche: ' Margery, God is dead', this I think the problem with Margery, it becomes swiftly hard not to poke fun at her, she's a challenge to take entirely seriously, I think if I could cry like her I would go to Church often too, it is pretty subversive to respond so intensely to the message of the religious body that you can stop it from functioning normally.

The expression of religion is however always very public, Margery eventually, after the sixteen children, convinces her husband to take a vow of chastity with her, they then have to separate and live apart as no will believe they are chaste if they live under the same roof. The husband, a true romantic, only seriously protests when Margery wants to go on pilgrimage (Rome, Jerusalem and Compostella) then he insists that she pay off his debts first  possibly debts she had incurred through the failure of the businesses she set up proud Margery ultra religious after being a failed serial entrepreneur seems a very modern figure some how  .

She is also troubled by revelations from God about who is going to die, and once dead if they go to Heaven, Purgatory or Hell. She finds this hard to deal with. Once or twice there are instances of her knowing things that God told her, some are fairly generalised like suspicion of shysters and frauds, who go on to trick and defraud the gullible. Once she convinces a priest that she has true insights from God by telling him what three sins he has committed and hasn't confessed to, the Priest however is not at first impressed, 'and my lechery' he says 'was it with married or unmarried women?' after a moments consultation with God: 'married' quoth she. Is accusing a priest of lechery with married women evidence of a connection with God , a lucky guess, or a reasonably safe deduction, with all due respect to any passing Priests who take their celibacy seriously, I'm not sure.

Although she goes to a lot of places: Rome, Jerusalem, Leicester, London, Lincoln, York, Danzig (Gdansk), Prussia, Aachen, Stralsund, Canterbury, Ipswich, Norwich etc. There is no interest in them as places, buildings, sites, or their appearance, population, and customs, only in what happens to Margery (crying, praying, being abandoned (but not by lice) having no money, giving away money that belongs to other people). So again this is an impersonalised memoir all the more to focus on the personal - the relationship with God, there really is nothing else other than Margery's interior relationship with God and it's manifestations in the physical realm. As with Julian of Norwich, there is not a lot of interest in saint's outside of a narrow group (though much a bigger group of saints than Julian's), in Margery's life there is John the Baptist, St. Anne, and St Bridget of Sweden although Margery protests that she hath not read her book at first, that reading comes later, despite which there probably was an awareness of her as she visits Rome on the occasion of Bridget's canonisation and meets one of Bridget's servants (they have no common language and don't communicate - a recurrent theme). Bridget significantly was a mother with a second career as a holy woman, like Margery, virginity might have been the ideal but both women break ground in asserting, I don't know how to phrase it maybe, a post-virginal sanctity,the potential for an extraordinarily holy life by an everyday (ish) womanish since Bridget iirc was a noble woman and Margery a well to do townswoman . The other saint mentioned is Catherine, I'm not sure if this is Catherine as in Catherine wheel or Catherine of Siena, the former would be more conventional, the latter an interesting choice a young woman who withdrew from daily life and because of that became more significant in the life of her community, again like St. Bridget a 'modern' inspiration for Margery if that was the Catherine she referred to.

That is Margery, a difficult person to be with, with an intense relationship with the divine. Her book even in this foul translation probably more artful than I can recognise. A medieval woman who did what she wanted on her own terms and who was much abused for it, she was plainly deeply annoying, but then I guess saints probably mostly are though Margery has not been canonised, and being annoying is not I hasten to add the sole criteria for sanctity.