Rating: 4/5

I read this book for the #ScottishBookClub.

It was an engrossing and quick read, written in Scots. The characters drew me in immediately and despite their all having their flaws, I actually liked and sympathised with all of them.

Jimmy's interest in, and growing commitment to, Buddhism is not understood by his wife Liz or daughter Anne-Marie. Based on his previously fun loving and haphazard character no one expects him to stick at it for any length of time, but when he does, cracks start to show in their previously "happy" family life.

There were a few aspects of this book I found particularly interesting:

Jimmy's attraction to Buddhism - he found something that gave him some peace and clarity in his life but it wasn't something he discussed with his friends or family or was able to explain to them. This lack of communication was prevalent throughout the book. Despite being regarded as a bit of a "nutter" he actually took real pride in his work and without realising it, painting served as a kind of meditation for him.

Liz was an interesting character. At first, I didn't like her and her somewhat dismissive/hostile attitude to Jimmy's newfound practice. However, getting to see things from her point of view changed my mind. Again, I wish there had been more communication between the two! Liz goes through her own journey of enlightenment and self-discovery and it's perhaps more unexpected than Jimmy's. 

Anne-Marie was a highlight for me. Her journey into being a teenager and discovering new friends and interests was light relief throughout the novel. She suffers in her own way through her parents’ troubles but finds good friends and a passion for music to support her.

This novel touches on a lot - family dynamics, communication in relationships, stereotypical class and gender roles and varying types of grief.

I really enjoyed this book. The end left me with some questions however and I wasn't satisfied with it as a resolution to the plot. I felt it sold the characters and their journeys short. Nevertheless an engaging and enjoyable read.