Rating: 5/5

On this , my umpteenth reading, I am still finding gems of psychological insights and still hoping against hope for a different outcome for most of the courageous, but ill-fated inhabitants of this noble old house of many functions! (It has served as a wool-merchant's premises, s silk-weaving factory, an upscale inn and a boy's school!)
This is the second volume in The House Trilogy by Norah Lofts, the 1st being: THE TOWN HOUSE, the last being: THE HOUSE AT SUNSET. In many ways, THE HOUSE AT OLD VINE is the saddest entry in the trio of this saga. It begins with Josiana Greenwoods' Tale, circa 1496, relating a love story gone horribly tragic (Romeo &amp; Juliet aren't even close!) and proceeds through the centuries up until the last tale told by Oliver Stanton during the years 1679-1680. The author very successfully uses the multi-narrator device that is common to much of her work. Thus, we learn the history of the house and the events of the day happening as they swirl around it, but each "tale" is told from the unique perspective of either a family member or an intimate outsider. These narratives are woven together with brief "interludes" that segue from one time and protagonist to another. The transitions are smooth and create natural lead-ins to the next phase.
As in all her books, there is much introspection and pondering on life, fate and the human condition. There is almost always a solid core of sorrow embedded in her stories, but there are enough moments of happiness and humor to lighten the emotional load.
The authenticity of the historical background, the contemporary concerns, the religious and political stances of the personalities, the descriptions of the scenery and the language used blend seamlessly to satisfy the most discerning reader. In this particular book, the reader is treated to a section detailing the lost lifestyle of the mysterious Fen People who inhabited tiny islands that used to dot the intricate waterways of Norfolk. It is a most intriguing episode.
I will end where I began, by reiterating that I have reread this novel countless times and find new delights every time!