Rating: 5/5

From the voice of “Baby Beluga,” a surprising, tender, furious look into an increasingly multicultural Canadian culture and the importance of children in reorienting society towards environmental consciousness.
Anyone from an ambitious, overprotective immigrant family (which describes a lot of Canadians) will find emotional resonance in Raffi’s account of his Armenian family’s life in Egypt and their adjustment to Canada. Particularly poignant is Raffi’s struggle to define success outside the parameters of the family’s expectations and his mid-life reengagement and renewed love for Armenian language and culture. 
His account of the 1960s cultural revolution definitely illuminated the background of today’s “Canadian” cultural values. (Which differ from previous versions of “Canadianness”…for the better.)
His concern for the environment will also ring true in today’s climate crisis. Ugh – too much has not changed.
This book was written in 1998 and it feels super current in Raffi’s assessment of the role of technology in turning children into passive consumers rather than active creators and engaged participants in the physical and social world around them.

Here are a few choice quotes:
“Gradually I understood that my parents were culturally and personally incapable of seeing me as a legitimate “other,” someone with my own life to live. In later years, so that I might be a more frequent presence in their lives, my mother would increasingly say, “We take our life from you” – a phrase her parents used to say to her. I knew that, on the one hand, this spoke of the joys a parent derives from seeing her children. But she said it over and over, with great emotional force, as if she were imploring me not to deny her my life-energy. … when she really wanted something from me she’d say, with great emphasis, “Won’t you do this one thing for your mother?” as though nothing else I had ever done for her counted.” (91) 
(Yowzer…doesn’t that sound like my grandparents!)
“So-called educational shows primarily teach children to love TV, and any learning that occurs is much thinner than that gained through interpersonal activities” (163)
“Responding to a child’s willful or accidental testing of the behavioural boundaries – “misbehaving,” not keeping agreements – requires that parents be consistent. This is not about being obsessive, strict, heavy handed or even disciplinary. It has to do with helping a child learn the outcome of his or her actions. And when it comes to optimal learning, love is the most effective enabling context. … When children are not distracted by parental anger, they have room to consider the lesson at hand – the consequences of their own action. In this way, discipline can grow as an inner value rather than as something always imposed from the outside.” (261)
“As we approach the new millennium, I do detect a great deal of fear in people struggling to know what to hold onto. Many retreat to old beliefs and behaviors in an instinctive reach for something familiar, as often happens in times of personal crisis. Some seek shelter in fundamentalism, others put their faith in computers, and some ride capitalism even harder. It’s no wonder. The task at hand is a tall order: integration, both societal and personal, in a fundamental redesign.” (298)