Rating: 3/5

“I’ve dug a few graves in my time. But I’ve never gone so far as to make a man dig his own. There’s no need to go that far - it would be plain bad manners” - Mark Brandon Read.

Have you read many autobiographical books that begin with the author being stuffed into a car trunk at gunpoint before being forced to dig their own grave? That’s the chilling beginning to Chopper, From the Inside, the story of Australian criminal turned celebrity, Mark Brandon Read, AKA Chopper.

You may have seen the Australian film Chopper, the movie that propelled Eric Bana to Hollywood stardom for his hypnotic portrayal of a violent, charismatic Melbourne extortionist (if you haven’t you’re missing out- it’s a great film and a classic piece of Australiana). This is the book the film was based on, and Mark Read (or his alter-ego, the terrifying standover man known as Chopper) is the ear-less extortionist that Bana was playing.

Chopper, From the Inside is violent, entertaining, outlandish and horrifying. This is a book that should be given to anyone considering a life of crime - Read’s life is surely not something anyone would wish to emulate.

Read wasn’t a low-profile criminal and spent most of his career under lock and key – between the ages of twenty and thirty-eight he was a free man for thirteen months. However, the months he spent outside prison were, well… productive. Read made his money extorting drug dealers, pimps and other criminals, bashing, torturing and occasionally murdering other denizens of the underworld. Read details nailing a target’s hand to a table, burning down a rival’s home, blowtorching drug dealers’ feet to extort the locations of their cash, and his own experiences of getting bashed, stabbed, shot at and imprisoned.

I’m making it sound like the transcripts of a war crimes tribunal, but this book is an engaging read, and is often surprisingly funny. Read’s sense of humor, and his near comical disdain for drug dealers and mafiosos somehow make his crimes less horrific and more entertaining, a strange balance that the Bana film managed to absolutely nail.

Read was known for paraphrasing Mark Twain’s adage of “Never let the truth get in the way of a good story”, and as per Twain’s dictum, some of the stories in the book feel somewhat exaggerated. Without corroboration there isn’t really any way to confirm many of Read’s anecdotes are based on real events, but they are entertaining nonetheless. 

While some of his stories are suspect many of Read’s dirty deeds are matters of public record. The incident where his best friend stabbed him multiple times in the stomach. His attempted abduction of a County Court judge. His shotgun killing of Sammy the Turk behind a Melbourne nightclub, and of course, his voluntarily getting his earlobes cut off with a razor so he could be put into the prison infirmary and escape his cell block.

Read’s was a life of violence, pain and imprisonment in Pentridge Prison (one of Australia’s worst gaols) and there is an element of regret mixed in with his grandstanding, of having wasted a life in state custody, of being tired of having to constantly look over his shoulder for the next angry criminal seeking revenge.

Read is no literary stylist, but despite this his book has a raw charm - much like its subject - and its direct, unvarnished prose is often quite refreshing. It’s well worth a read, although you can probably skip the section at the back that go into detail about Read’s prison-mates, unless you’re particularly interested in the history of Melbourne’s underworld.

Postscript: I once met Read at a stand-up comedy gig. He would perform as ‘Chopper’ at The Comic’s Lounge in Melbourne, and I had a gig there the same night he did. I was intimidated by his reputation (and his noticeable lack of ears) but he was surprisingly friendly and polite. He is by far the nicest murderer/torturer that I have met.