Rating: 4/5

In the Time of a Crisis, 
Rita is tired of living in the projects and cannot deal with her 15 year old daughter sprouting into womanhood. Her twin sons are growing up and taking their problems out on each other and will not listen to a word she says. On top of that, she has to deal with a late night excursion that may cost her everything that she has worked so hard to build up and change. Can the one person that she has not been able to lean on come through when she least expects it? 

Jeanine has always felt like an outsider while her sister, Meme, has always been the outgoing and beautiful type. Being a late bloomer at so many things, it was not a surprise that she married well after Meme. Having been so shy and sheltered, Jeanine cannot come to grips with leaving the one person who makes her life a living hell. Her husband James has continuously shown violence mentally and physically towards her until one day her violence has him pay a price that he will never forget. Will Jeanine also have to pay for her negligence and shy demeanor? 

Desiree has been through thick and thin with her fiancé Andre and now their big day is approaching. Living on cloud nine, Desiree finds a damaging piece of evidence that can land her right back where she came from - lonely, depressed and in her mother's arms. Will she take the advice of someone that she has hated for years or will she go with her own mind and dump Andre for good? 

Marsha is the oldest child of three. Her mother has always been her backbone and continues to be the glue that holds this close knit family together. As mother's health fails and she suffers from a severe stroke, the family realizes that their matriarch might not be around forever as they assumed. Being as headstrong as when she was healthy, mother has only two dying wishes. Can the family come together without the help and support of their dying mother? 

Four incredible short stories that will leave you emotional and yearning to hug the ones you love.