Rating: 5/5

Non-Fiction. People were interested in the North Pole long before the Franklin Expedition went in search of the Northwest Passage, but once it became clear Franklin wasn't going to return and the search efforts started up, several enterprising fellows had the following thought: "Hey, while I'm in the neighborhood, why not look for Franklin up Smith Sound, even though there's really no reason why he'd be up there, but what if he is, and what if I happen to discover the Open Polar Sea and find the North Pole while I'm there? And also rescue Franklin. Obviously."

The Open Polar Sea was a thing back then. Like the top of the world, one of the coldest places on Earth, was going to be all aslosh with a temperate sea. Other popular North Pole theories included: a hole that led down into the center of the hollow Earth, a giant mountain made of iron, an actual pole, a landmass complete with an advanced race of humans, or possibly angels. No one knew what to expect. It was the top of the world for gosh sake.

The massive search for Franklin covered most of the Canadian Arctic, filling in a lot of previously mysterious spaces on the map, and created a renewed interest in finding the Pole. It's this time period that Ninety Degrees North covers, from 1853 to 1926. Unlike the search for the Northwest Passage, which was primarily a British undertaking, the Pole drew all kinds. America, Russia, Norway, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Italy, and Sweden all had at least one horse in this race. Some with actual horses. Expeditions took ships, kayaks, sledges, dogs, skis, snowshoes, balloons, dirigibles, and finally airplanes to the Pole, and Fleming lays out the history with nimble, exciting prose. He can get a little carried away with his hyperbole, but it doesn't happen too often, and mostly takes the form of extended metaphors where the ice is trying to kill someone, which, to be fair, it probably felt like it was. He uses direct quotes to good effect, naturally leading into them so they don't disrupt the text, places events in a larger context with relevant commentary, and never tries to pass off authorial speculation as undisputed fact. He's also really funny, and if I didn't feel like a nerd before, snickering over my Arctic history book definitely requalified me.

In his introduction, Fleming explains some of the terminology choices he makes, like using Eskimo instead of Inuit, which I appreciated. I didn't agree with some of it, like using Eskimo instead of Inuit, but it was good to know where he was coming from and that he'd considered the issue. Units of measure are another thing he addresses. But despite his choosing to use Fahrenheit, it's clear what he really wanted was Celsius, as throughout the book he constantly refers to temperatures of, for example, "70F below freezing." That is not a way we indicate Fahrenheit values. That is actually -38F. Which is still damn cold, but not, apparently, as impressive as "70F below freezing." Please. Fahrenheit is a ridiculous system to begin with. There's no reason to make it any sillier or more arbitrary than it already is.

The fifty-one black and white plates of explorers and ships stuck in ice are great, but they aren't in any kind of order, nor are they ever referenced in the text. Their sources are hidden at the back of the book, as well, so it's not always clear what we're looking at or where it came from. And the book itself has several typographical errors, like a bunch of missing end punctuation, or that time on page 337 where Franke is suddenly "Frank." 

There are some things he glosses over, as well. His treatment of Frederick Cook isn't very balanced. Fleming presents all the evidence that made people doubt Cook's claims to Mt. McKinley and the North Pole, but without thoroughly explaining the circumstances behind that evidence. Fleming writes that Cook, on his return from the Pole, left all his instruments and most of his journals behind in Greenland. Sounds fishy! Except what Fleming doesn't tell us is that Cook left them with Harry Whitney, a trusted friend who tried his best to bring Cook's things back to him; it was Peary who refused to have a single item of Cook's on his ship and would have denied Whitney passage if he brought them, meaning Whitney would have to spend another year in Greenland, and that's why Cook's journals were left hidden on the coast of Greenland and why they've never been found. If there was an instance of Cook being suspected of falsehood or wrong doing, Peary and his cronies were usually behind it, and it'd be that way for the rest of Cook's life.

Even with its flaws, I can't resist giving this book all of the stars because I just really enjoyed reading it. I liked it so much I'm even thinking of picking up Barrow's Boys, Fleming's book about the Northwest Passage, even though I swore I was done with that subject.

Five stars. A highly readable account of the search for the North Pole, written with intelligence and humor. Has a brief outline of relevant events, three maps, bibliography, index, and end notes where the author attributes every direct quote he used.