Rating: 5/5

Science, as our explanation for the outer world is always flawed. We have always strived for this theory to explain everything throughout history. I find the last chapter very interesting because it talked about some fallacies that the scientist makes. We assume that the universe should be one unified theory, one that explains everything, simplifies the universe into something that can fit on a T- Shirt. Yet it is important to realise that just because unified theories worked in the past does not guarantee the entire universe works like this. The mistake here is that they believe a unified theory is super important. However, science is our tool for the understanding of the universe, so I believe it is more important to make the universe a known place first and use the information we have and need to create things that benefits humanity. Theories helps us understand our findings, but that should not be the end of everything. Theories are ultimately theories. Theories are for the understanding of the unknown, but in the end, just assumptions. We are making imperfect, indirect observations of the universe through tools and sometimes just theories and nothing more. 
At the end of the day, science is a belief, not 100% a religion, but in many ways it is. If facts are 100% then there would be no theories. We are hoping that our theories are the theory of everything, even if we can prove the practicality of something doesn't mean we understand it. We just think there is no other explanations when we might just not know it. 
 In the end, humans are just trying to understand. We are afraid of the unknown, the uncontrollable. Yet it is important not to be blinded by the idea of this theory of everything that we stop our quest for finding. I suppose I'm trying to make the point of the correlation between the reality that we think it is and the one that it actually is. As David Hume stated, we couldn't be sure of anything. We just assumes these things for the hope that it will work the next time. Certainty doesn't exist in this chaotic universe. All we can do it to think, to theorise, to discover, to use the knowledge we gained. I suppose the Newton example is pretty good. Mercury's orbit was not matched with the actual movements. The main thing to find out is how to attain a more accurate representation of the universe and sometimes, perhaps the practicality of these findings and what we can do with these findings are what really matters. Although sometimes we don't know what one finding will bring, its potential. 
 The theory of everything is like you are walking towards the door, but with every step, you half the distance you walk. We might not be able to reach the final goal, but humans are not perfect. This is why science never ends. We keep finding, keep discovering, keep inventing, to have a better theory about this mysterious universe.