Rating: 5/5

It’s official: I have joined the ranks of Luciaphils. When we rejoin our friends in Riseholme, we learn that Lucia’s dear Peppino has died and Lucia is enjoying her year of mourning. Daisy Quantock has taken advantage of Lucia being out of circulation by planning an Elizabethan fête, with herself taking the role of Queen Elizabeth I. Georgie is to be Sir Francis Drake. Daisy makes a critical error — she urges Lucia to join in as Drake’s wife. Naturally, Lucia takes this as the insult it is and determines that Daisy will beg her to take the role of QEI.

Of course, Lucia prevails. Meanwhile, Lucia has seen an advertisement that a house called Mallards is available to let during August and September, and she takes it. With Lucia’s encouragement, Georgie lets a nearby house known as Mallards Cottage. Mallards belongs to Elizabeth Mapp, the foremost busybody of Tilling. The rivalry between Lucia and Mapp is of Olympian proportions. One of the features of this friendly war is a recipe called Lobster á la Riseholme; Mapp covets the recipe but Lucia ignores all her hints.

Lucia decides to stay permanently in Tilling, anc of course where Lucia is, there will Georgie be found also. Both buy homes in Tilling. 

Tilling experiences severe storms on Christmas Day, resulting with a flood on Boxing Day. Mapp is our for her daily walk, going past Lucia’s house, known as Grebe. She knows Lucia has given the servants the day off and on impulse, she slips into the yard and around to the back. She enters the kitchen undetected, finds and copies the recipe. However, at that moment, she sees Lucia in the garden and Lucia becomes aware someone is in her kitchen. She moves to confront the intruder, but at that moment, the bank holding in the floodwaters collapses and water rushes into Lucia’s garden and into the kitchen. 

Lucia and Mapp turn the kitchen table upside down and get into it as though it were a boat. The waters sweep the table and the two ladies out of the house and out to sea. They are seen by all their friends, who call the coast guard. But the table-raft is seen no more until days later, when it is discovered washed up on the land. Lucia and Mapp have not been heard from and as the days pass, they are presumed dead.

I won’t give away the ending, but I will say how funny this book is, and how much I enjoyed it. I admit that while Lucia is an irritating character on her own, Mapp has no scruples at all; she is sneaky and as the episode of the lobster recipe shows, Mapp will stop at nothing to best Lucia. I found myself enthusiastically rooting for Lucia.

5 hilarious stars!