Rating: 2/5

To be perfectly honest I found this story tedious. It is basically comprised of two pathetic individuals who, after barely knowing each other, embark on a sordid affair of drinking and attempted suicides.

Helen is a young woman coming from a wealthy background. That does not stop her from rushing down a path of self-destruction, although sauntering sensually with swinging hips is probably a better description. She leaves her privileged home and status to prowl the seedy sections of San Francisco. Nothing seems to fill the gnawing emptiness of her soul.

Harry works in a diner. He's only been there a couple of months. He is the first-person narrator of the story and he lets us know that he does not keep jobs very long.

Helen comes into Harry's diner and he is immediately struck by her beauty. She asks for several cups of coffee. While she drinks she lets Harry know that she has no idea where she is, she has been to several bars, is fairly drunk, and can't pay for the coffees because she lost her purse. Or rather she thinks she left it at a bus station, or a train station. She doesn't remember which she took to get down town.

Harry pays for her coffee and they leave together. Where do they go? To bars. Harry and Helen both have drinking problems and together they spend a good deal of time drinking. A lot.

Reading about their time drinking in bars is as interesting as going to bars and watching alcoholics drink. The fact that they eventually agree on a suicide pact doesn't alleviate the boredom. Call me callous.

What ensues is several psychological examinations and jail stays. I won't give away anything except to say that the final sentence in the novel includes a previously omitted fact that will cause the reader to consider everything they have just read in a new light. As someone else said, this detail probably caused more shock in the 1950s than now. I was merely surprised.

If Crime Noir is your cup of tea, you may indeed enjoy this novel. I think I have had my quota of Noir this life time.