Rating: 5/5

India - A wounded civilization - VS Naipaul.
Rating 5/5

One of the brilliant books by Sir Vidia. What a man and what a writing! I bow in respect to you Sir Vidia.

If you grade a writer on the basis of how many times he hits the bull's eye (target) then Sir Vidia would not fall into that category of writers. With Sir Vidia, we need to see how many times did he miss the bulls eye. And I can say, not many a time. 

Sir Vidia hits bulls eye every single time, with his observation, with his criticism, with his knowledge and writing skills. You cannot ask for more. 

In Khushwant Singh's own words on Sir Vidia - "Squalor and stench attracted his attention more than scenic beauty and fragrance". This can be summed up as many a people's opinion on Sir Vidia, not mine though!

The book is about Sir Vidia's observations during his travel through India in the 1970's, Hampi, Bombay, Poona, Bihar, Rajasthan, Delhi. The book is a serious attempt to decode the cause of the shortcomings of the country, post independence or even for that matter before independence.

Sir Vidia attributes the culprit to be Hinduism, the culture which on the whole, through years of defeat, surrender and invasion has left people intellectually drained. He concludes the lack of progress to lack of intellectual abilities, lack of interest to observe and learn. 

Sir Vidia equates Hindu karma to Hindu calm also calling it Hindu killer which calls people to accept fate and adjust and move on with life and in turn leads to self absorption ignoring what is happening around them. He also mentions the missing of an agreement between man and another man and between man and a state.

Sir Vidia is not a much liked gentleman here in India, no wonder such brilliant writing never made it to our textbooks. Sigh! Writings such as these can make men out of boys. It opens up one's own thought process and makes one open to ideas. It is a very highly recommended read and I am sad, I found it only now.

There is mention of RK Narayan and his books with their shortcomings and the reason why RK Narayan chose to keep his world of Malgudi away from political movements. There is mention of Mahatma Gandhi and his autobiography. Also, emergency finds a place, Naxal movement, Hampi - Vijayanagara empire too find a much detailed chunk of Sir Vidia's observations.

This book appeals to people who are interested in questioning stuffs and are having a heart big enough to appreciate an alternate viewpoint. 

One thing I realized is people find it hard to accept criticism or shortcomings especially in this part of the sub-continent. This book by Sir Vidia has criticism, but its accurate, spot on, so, one needs to have that intellectual resilience to understand and appreciate Sir Vidia's writing, let alone criticism.

This is the reason why Sir Vidia never got his due in India (or did he?) for his utmost intelligence.

Cheers,