Rating: 4/5

4 shameful but courageous stars and a touching story of one woman’s determination to turn fate and fortunes in her favour in the face of poverty having been abandoned, first by her husband, and then the father of her child as she was left to endure the punishment alone. 

Hester Prynnes, is standing on a scaffold facing an unsympathetic and puritan crowd, who have branded her an adulteress for having given birth to a child outside her marriage. As she looks through the crowd, her eyes lock on the man she once called her husband. He has not come to help her; he has disowned her – but long ago.

Refusing to provide the name of the father, Hester is forced to stand in public for weeks and wears the letter A on her chest as a constant reminder of her crime and disgrace. From that day forward, every gesture, every word, and even the silence of those she came into contact with was a constant reminder of a society she did not belong to it. A reminder of the love lost from cowardice, as she faced her shame alone.

Needing to feed her child, she turned to her talent of needlecraft and made gowns, coats and adornments for the wealthy in an opulent society where image was everything. For Hester “.. learnt not to do battle with the world but learnt to be a woman in it”.

The Scarlet Letter A, that Hester wore as punishment and with shame in the face of public ridicule became a badge of courage and survival. Ironically because Hester’s reputation was already destroyed there were no boundaries in which she could take her business. The wealthy were able to transact in private to feed their vanity. Even the disreputable were not off limits. 

A powerful story and quite daring for its time because it dealt with many themes that would have raised eyebrows; adultery, sin, religion, and redemption in an unforgiving puritan society. 

The Scarlet letter was described as a romance novel, however we never read of the affair, or the relationship that led to the turn of fate for Hester. There is no talk of love, except for two episodes with Hester and the father when it is revealed he has lived in quiet punishment that he did not stand beside her. Hardly a love story. 

Yet a story of courage that was to exploit hypocrisy and indecency of a different kind, which makes this both a tragedy and a triumph.

A timeless classic.