Rating: 4/5

This was a fascinating read that I would recommend simply because of the history that it covers. It also provides and interesting insight into not only J. Edgar Hoover -- but eight presidencies, the rise and lasting impact of the Cold War, World War II, Vietnam and the volatile history of the FBI. This is a book I picked up mainly because of the publicity and press the FBI has received in the wake of James Comey's firing. I wanted to get an idea of the origin of the organization and how it came into being. And saying that it started with J. Edgar Hoover is like saying that ice is cold. It is a given -- and yet reading the whole story is like taking a trip down the rabbit hole.

This book presents the picture of a man that had some real issues. He was the definition of paranoia, and focused on gossip and rumors more than law enforcement. Reading this book I came away feeling like he only dabbled in law enforcement when he had to dirty his hands -- as a way of insuring he could keep his job. But his primary focus was always political -- and it always revolved around the information he maintained on those in power as a way of wielding power over the powerful. 

The history the book covers is also a fascinating look into a very troubled time -- particularly for those who don't know what it was like to grow up in the cold war. Hoover helped to define the cold war on the home front as his brand of paranoia eventually came to mark and entire generation. It also shaped eight presidential administrations in ways that continue to have lasting effects. And even through all this reading I couldn't help but wonder how effective Hoover would have been as the head of the premier law enforcement agency in the age of terrorism, gang violence and serial killers. 

While the writing wasn't always the best -- and the editing at times could have been better, this book is an engrossing read. It opens the door into the world of federal law enforcement and allows the reader to gain an appreciation for how the FBI became the organization it is today. Hack certainly does have some bias in regards to Hoover. And at time that bias does show through -- particularly in his need to try to defend Hoover in relation to the myriad rumors that seem to swirl around the man. But those biases are not over bearing and don't detract from the book as he uses historical records to prove the points he is trying to make. In the end, I came away feeling that we would never really know the man that defined the FBI -- but this book is a good starting point for gaining some greater understanding.