Rating: 4/5

'They say, though, that men only want one thing - that's the truth of the matter.' Miss Doggett again looked puzzled; it was as if she had heard that men only wanted one thing but had forgotten for the moment what it was.

I've completely fallen for Pym's delightfully sharp novels that trace how wasted women's lives were in the immediate post-war period. She perfectly conjures up an atmosphere that appears superficially sunny, all Trollope-esque clergymen, English villages and tea - but beneath that there is discontent and dissatisfaction.

Jane is married to a vicar and so has put her own interests on hold for the last twenty years - she once published a book of essays on seventeenth century poetry but now she is confined to worrying about jumble sale dates and how to keep the peace on the Parochial Church Committee. She loves her husband and her daughter but her life is dull and unfulfilling. But because this is the 1950s, her interest is to see her glamorous younger friend, Prudence, married securely - even if that, too, is an inadequate relationship with a philandering man. 

Beautiful Prudence has other ideas. With a string of affairs behind her, she has a gorgeous wardrobe, a small but Vogue-esque flat and an office job. The latter seems as dull as marriage so she fantasises a desire for her grey and married boss while her co-workers agonise over when the tea will be made and share a frugal biscuit. 

Pym's women are well educated (Jane and Prudence met at Oxford) but there is no room for them in middle class English society: whether married or single, they are superfluous other than to prop up masculine egos. And Pym exposes this without ever being bitter or savage: her humour is absurd, her men generally hopeless - and I find it all hilarious. Whether poking fun at Jane's husband deciding to grow his own tobacco and plastering the kitchen with drying leaves, or pointing up the way women always end up doing the washing up after a dinner party, the writing is lively and often tongue in cheek, full of British satire and irony. 

It may surprise how even single women have sex lives in Pym: not on the page, of course, and very discreetly but Prudence is no virginal spinster even if she's generally more or less written off at thirty! Still, she goes on holiday to Spain with a female friend and has a string of admirers to reminisce about when she's not out for dinner or at the cinema. The subversion is couched in a genteel manner, but Pym doesn't hold back from calling out middle class society and values for the way women are dismissed and expected to be no more than domestic helpmeets to the all-important men.