Rating: 4/5

This may go down as my most interesting reading experience of the year. Margery was a delightful, yet very peculiar person, for her time, the 1400s, or really any age. She was extreme in all her behaviors, especially her emotional love for Jesus, which I both admire and envy ... somewhat. The suffering she endured for her full-hearted love was nothing to be envied for sure, and yet, having had such a dry love for so long, I confess to missing the affectation of days gone by. However, such public displays as Margery was prone to and found beyond her control? No. I cannot even imagine what it must have been like for her, even though she tells us over and over how she alienated and offended so many, was ostracized, banned from groups, churches, towns, etc. That she wasn't burned as a witch, is testament to the protection of Jesus and His Grace. 

I also cannot imagine what it must have been like to be her friend or family. Her outbursts, which are one thing to read about, must have been disturbing, even for believers. She lived in an era of much greater faith than we do, yet how many can bear well with someone who is (seemingly) calling attention to him/herself on a regular basis? We had a man at our Cathedral downtown named Michael and he used to shout out, "Amen!" and "Preach it brother!" and various other positive (but LOUD!) comments when the Spirit moved him during homilies he liked. He could be a bit disruptive, and until you got to know him his comments seemed out of place in the usually staid Catholic Mass. However, as time went by, I grew to like and even love him and wish we all felt more comfortable being able to express our Love and Faith so openly. I remember feeling a great sense of loss when he died though I did not know him well. 

Margery reminds me of Michael. Of course, she went way beyond anything he ever did. She called herself 'the creature' throughout the book. She was married and had 14 children by her husband but felt called to chastity, something she struggled against her husband with for years and finally won. She had the Gift of Tears (actually loud crying!) and unflagging enthusiasm for our Catholic faith. She was able to give correct answers (credible evidence for her beliefs) whenever questioned though she never received any theological training which would seem to indicate the Presence of the Holy Spirit within. 

She went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem with a group who hated her--for her loud crying during inspirational homilies and during Communion--and chucked her out. From there, she found a companion to get her to Rome and then met up with her old group and tried to modify her behavior so as to have their traveling company again. This was only partially successful. She went to Santiago de Compostela and other holy places on her own, although meeting up with other pilgrims, friars and travelers along the way.

Margery would have been less visible, but it was Jesus' desire for her to stand out in her clothing and behavior to atone for other sinners which made her a focus of public ridicule and anger. She struggled with her fellow citizens, was arrested, jailed and brought before bishops, mayors and other authority figures. She remained calm during questioning, relying on Jesus and the kind people He sent her. However, when she was alone, she frequently called on Him in fear and uncertainty. He allowed her a great deal of suffering which He said He wanted her to endure for His sake, but He promised to bring her Home to Him and reward her richly in Heaven.

I have read other reviewers here on GRs who have belittled her comparing her to my heroine, Teresa de Ávila, but considering they didn't even spell her name correctly and she is a saint and the first woman doctor of the church, to lump Margery in the same category as the Great Teresa is praise rather than insult. Although both women shared many of the same battles, living back when women were considered property, witches and chattel and endured some of the same scorn and suffering on behalf of the Jesus they loved, they are still more different than alike. 

The biggest qualm I have with this book were the visions associated with the Blessed Mother and how she was portrayed at the time of Jesus' death. These may be true for all this poor sinner knows but they do not fit other things I have read and come to believe about Our Lady, and this bothered me. Mary was portrayed as emotional as Margery herself. 🤔

As for the rest of the book, I found it to be interesting and for the most part, inspirational and that IMHO was the point of the book. I don't think Margery made up her visions and locutions, but I also don't rule out that she might have been she somewhat deluded, as we all are. Recommended with reservations.