Rating: 4/5

When I was a child, I read a story which was so scary to me, so anxiety-inducing, that I could never finish it--I'd hide it under my bed. As an adult, I could never remember what book it came from, but was determined to revisit that first foray into spine-tingling fun that I've enjoyed ever since. All I could remember was that it involved that old classic "in a dark, dark wood" theme common to ghost stories told around a campfire, as well as the ghost of a drowned sailor boy dripping in seaweed. I recently found this book after searching online, and sure enough, this is it! The story "In a Dark, Dark Box" still resonates as a superior spooky story for several reasons: first, it involves several retellings of the "dark, dark wood" story, each cut off abruptly without ending for various reasons (e.g. the grandmother relaying the story to the child realizes he is too scared to continue, etc) which serves the purpose of ratcheting up the tension so that the reader is practically begging for the story within a story to end, just to break the tension. Additionally, the grandmother (which should normally represent a kind, loving, maternal figure) is instead strange and unpredictable--she seems kind and loving, but also a bit weird, strange, spooky. Is it in the child's mind, or is she really a possible threat? All of these things to the adult mind are unremarkable, repeated endlessly to the point of becoming a trope. But it lil ole me as a child, it was psychological horror. I was too scared to finish that story as a child, but I'm not now, and I'm so glad I found it again after all these years!

I also feel that this book is strong for children as it has a fairly robust vocabulary, and the writing is not simplistic--it utilizes the standard techniques of repetition, etc, common in children's books, but has challenging prose. Additionally, there are children featured in the story from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds, which is a delight and showcases spooky stories from a number of traditions. 

Not all of the stories are as excellent as "In a Dark, Dark Box," and some are needlessly bloated and complex, but overall this is a very good spooky book for children old enough to appreciate it's themes and handle the fear factor. I was scared, but I loved it, and it helped me gain an appreciation for spooky tales (and reading of all kinds) that lasts with me today