Rating: 5/5

I enjoyed this book. This is book three in this delightful series and it goes from strength to strength. I don't normally like to go from one book straight on to the next in the series but I am having so much fun with this series that I have no choice. Marla finds herself caught up in some unusual and amusing situations, which has you wondering just how the author comes up with her ideas and I hope she has a lot more to come. There is a lot going on in this book with keeping fit, reunions with old friends, animal rights and of course dead bodies. So the story moves along quickly and of course Marla is there to figure it all out, which is a good job because I had no clue who was involved. I love the characters, even the detective is winning me over. If only Marla was so easy she might not have half the problems that she does but then again the story would be so entertaining. I can't wait to start the next story.

Somehow Marla's best friend talks her into getting fit by trying out the local fitness club but they get more than they bargained for when Marla discovers a dead body floating in the hot tub. Jolene was a client of Marla and with the detective keeping what happened close to his vest, Marla bank choice but to find out what happened to her. Jolene was killed at the fitness club so does that mean the killer works or goes there too? It's not her fault if while exercising she asks some questions right?.Although Jolene's company has put her on the radar of an animal right activist but would an animal lover killer a person? Marla hopes not because the same animal right activist turns her sights on Marla. Can Marla work out how she died in order to give her a clue to the killer. At the same time her friend needs her to pretend to be engaged to him to get him out of a troubling situation but it leaves her and Dalton at odds. Can Marla help her friend and solve the murder? Then things get really complicated and two more bodies are found.
I like the narrator and hope she remains the author's narrator of choice because I couldn't imagine anybody else bringing Marla and her wacky friends to life, quite like she does.
I was given this free review copy audio book at my request and have voluntarily left this review .