From about four in the morning until nine on the eighth of May 1373, Julian of Norwich, then thirty years old, sick and believing herself to be near to death, had a series of visions of Christ. After this she had a vision of the Devil (he had tile red skin, dark freckles, red hair, white teeth and smelt terrible thank goodness, my skin isn't exactly tile red in colour ) before seeing Christ again that night and then the Devil again (who upon departing left only his awful stink behind him). It then took her between fifteen years and twenty years, less three months, to come to an understanding of the meaning of the visions that she experienced. At some point she then presumably dictated the book that we can read today.

Julian's visions as spiritual literature don't seem to have been particularly well known in the middle ages. It survives in one manuscript of a short version and three manuscripts of a long version, the oldest of which dates from the fifteenth century. However Julian as a person who had visions was well enough known in her own lifetime for Margery Kempe  Margery's spiritual practise was very different to Julian's to seek her out and visit her. The book's wide availability today probably reflects its very domestic spirituality, its joyful message, and its almost complete lack of personal or contemporary detail while might serve to alienate and distance a reader. 

Julian is associated with Norwich. In the fourteenth century this was one of England's largest towns. She lived there at a time of on going war with France and occasional outbreaks of the plague, but none of this intrudes on what she has to say. We don't know if she was married, or a mother, owned land or practised a craft or even where she was born. The whole narrative is at once completely personal, focused on her experience of seeing Christ, and yet at the same time striped of all personal details to the point that she is not just an everywoman but in effect an anybody, my reading of The Hollow Crown to give me some context beforehand turned out to be of no advantage except for showing how disconnected Julian's story appears on a casual reading to be from her cultural and social surroundings  details though like her description of the Devil and perhaps some of the imagery might put her in a specific cultural context if one was familiar enough with the iconography and varieties of spiritual practise in fourteenth century eastern England .

There are a couple of partial exceptions to this timelessness in the 170 odd pages of this printed edition, such as an extended metaphor of Christ and Adam as master and servant and a single reference to saint John of Beverley who is the only British saint she mentions  it is tantalising that she mentions a Yorkshire saint rather than one from East Anglia - like St.Edmund for instance, and not a saint with a supra-regional cult. Apart from that, the personal and social context has been almost entirely stripped away to give us Julian and her sense of revelation. 

The text plunges us straight into her visions. This produces a curious, intense effect that is also imprecise, disembodied and abstract. For most of the book we are apparently with her while she has a series of visions from the moment that a Priest, called to her bedside, holds up a crucifix and she begins to see it bleeding. At the same time she is not just narrating what she saw but telling us what she understood those visions to mean even though that understanding was only reached many years after the initial experience. This very literary choice on her part creates immediacy for the reader, but is entirely artificial. Looking back on reading it it is not even always entirely clear, as with the vision of being under the sea and seeing the stones there all covered with green moss, what she saw on that morning of the 8th of May and what she saw at some later date. Clearly that kind of a distinction was not what she aimed to achieve.
 
While towards the end of the work she says "This place is a prison, and this life a penance" (p.200) and "We are nothing but sin and wretchedness" (p.201) this runs counter to the force of her experience which was of overwhelming faith in God in the person of Jesus and his love. Jesus is father and mother and brother for her. She has a nice description of Christ as a mother watching their child stumble as they learn to walk, or in a slightly more bloody image the wound in Christ's side from the crucifixion allows the Christian to enter into God, which is likened to the intimacy and love of a mother breast feeding her child as far as I know imagery of Jesus as a mother is unusual in any period, more typical of the time is the image of Christ on the cross. The two spiritual sicknesses that Julian feels are important are sloth or impatience - in the form of making heavy weather of hardship and suffering and despair. Against this she experiences God comforting her by telling her 'you shall not be overcome'.

Faith is at the centre of her experience at one point In my foolish way I had often wondered why the foreseeing wisdom of God could not have prevented the beginning of sin, for then, thought I, all would have have been well (p.103) The answer is of course that "Sin was necessary" and she feels the problem that Ivan raises in The Brothers Karamazov "we see deeds done that are so evil, and injuries inflicted that are so great, that it seems to us quite impossible that any good can come of them"  (p.109). The answer again is faith. That everything will be clear in Heaven. Since Julian's emphasis is on the compassion and love of God, her experience is of a joyful message. God in Julian's vision is not angry and wrathful, but loving.

Although she was an Anchorite  a form of devotion for those who lacked the head for heights to become Stylites - with the permission of the ecclesiastical authorities an anchorite lived in a cell generally attached to a church in which case the cell would have a window on to the church so the Anchorite could participate in Church services without having to leave their cell. Sometimes the anchorite would be walled into the cell, which would then have a window to the outside world for vitals to be passed in and waste products to be passed out, as well as for people to consult the Anchorite to tap into their spiritual power, Julian's spirituality as revealed in this book is entirely domestic. It does not require monastic retreat, pilgrimage, good works or even a hair shirt. It is something that can apparently be lived in any circumstances by anybody. This is a revelation of the power of faith in giving a person confidence and joy in their life. It is more of a piece with later forms of Christian spiritual life, Luther's salvation by faith alone comes to mind, and is a long way from the angry saints of an earlier age always out to punish those who were insufficiently respectful towards them, or the need to flee the world for a desert place to suffer for salvation of the desert fathers or even the Cistercians who could not bare to set up one of their monasteries within hearing of the bells of another monastery. By contrast here Christ and the Devil come to Julian while she is in bed. It could hardly be more homely. 

There are some particularly striking moments. Julian seeing all that God has created as a tiny thing, the size of a hazelnut, in Jesus' hand. Later the soul located in her heart is by contrast as large as an eternal kingdom and ruled over by Christ, while Christ's thirst to have everyman inside himself is so great that God is continuously drinking, drawing all in.

I wouldn't recommend this particular edition which is a translation into modern English, I'd look out for a version with the original text and a translation on the facing page if there is such a thing. The introduction didn't strike me as helpful with it's discussion of her heresy without any attempt to put Julian in her religious context. Also my second hand copy, sold for six shillings in 1966, split in two while I was reading it, there's no life in these short lived paper books compared with a decent work in vellum!