Rating: 5/5

I thoroughly enjoyed this comic as what I liked it followed through from the previous issue and continues the story and expands on some issues that were brought up in the TV series. 

This story takes place sometime after Buffy's Season 5 episode "The Body". 

My Review
The first story is about Buffy still dealing with the loss of Joyce and the emotions of Buffy and her friends are running high, and lots of little things are causing lots of little problems. With everybody preoccupied with grief, anger, guilt, and regret the fight against the forces of darkness doesn't seem like a top priority.

Remember in the last issue? That human girl in love with a vampire (sounds familiar?) but instead bargains with a voodoo demon for immortality but lost her own life in the process when she couldn't deliver what she promised - the Slayer, yeah that girl who remained nameless.

Her mother is after revenge and plots the slayer's demise and Buffy must battle her emotional trauma as she deals with her own loss of her mother's death and struggles to fight against mind-controlled zombies and vampires under the control of Vengeance Mumma Bear.

In the second story, there is a swarm of angry, deformed, green gremlins who are proving to be menace. This couldn't come at the worst time as emotions are running high within the Scooby Gang I liked this comic and explored further themes and issues that were dealt with in the TV series of jealousy and resentment, especially Xander/Anya and Tara/Willow.

Despite Spike's faults and yeah ok he doesn't have a soul like Angel, and true he hasn't made the best decisions but it really irks me how the Scoobies treat him especially when he's genuinely just trying to help, but I liked the end scene between Dawn and Spike as it opened the door of some goodwill that may help heal the wounds. 

What I liked was how the characters in this comic dealt with their varied emotions when someone is grieving or any sort of intense emotions are being felt and how we all know that sometimes we don't always make the best decision when we're upset, angry or whatever, it was great to see the character development being present not just for the main characters but the side characters as well, showing the consequences of their decisions and how they learned from that (both good and bad) and the importance of not bottling it up and talking about it and not letting it fester.