Rating: 4/5

I remember discovering Oscar Wilde with 'The Picture of Dorian Gray', a luscious and decadent read which, ironically enough, had not only made his success but also caused his downfall (being quoted ad nauseam during his trial). Well, Oscar Wilde, we know, finally ended up in jail. His work from behind bars is, about, really touching. 

First, 'De Profundis', his letter to his lover, is an insightful take upon his fate - the pain of a man looked upon, ruined and humiliated, who nevertheless has the unforgiving lucidity to don't spare himself for his mistakes. For sure, it reeks of a sad bitterness! It is, nevertheless, quite disarming for its deep honesty. 

Then, 'The Ballad of Reading Gaol'. Powerful verses, grim but deeply heartfelt, here's one of his most intense text, and surely one of his best work. Well, as far as I am concerned, it certainly stands out from the rest of his poetry, which, I confess, I don't really like.

His 'Poems' indeed are, overall, quite bad. A classicist at heart, Oscar Wilde attempted to follow strict formal rules that are everything but suited to his stylised and flowery language, going over the top and feeling way too rigid. I preferred his 'Prose Poems', where he discarded such strictness to completely unleash himself. In fact, mostly religious (mystic?) his prose displays him at his playful best. 

As for the plays... I am not one for theatre; it's just not my cup of tea. I have to say, though, that I absolutely enjoyed reading most of his! 'Lady Windermere's Fan' (my personal favourite), 'The Importance of Being Earnest', 'A Woman of No Importance'… Oscar Wilde is witty, sharp, cynical and sarcastic, always catching the reader off-guard with the unexpected, and, his creativity and bluntness are a delight that takes no prisoner. I just struggled with 'An Ideal Husband', predictable, too long, and tiring for its feel of déja vu. I didn't know he had written a tragedy ('The Duchess of Padua'), which was a nice surprise, especially since it's a really good play overall. My favourite remains, however, 'Salomé' - wonderfully poetic, dark, occult, bathed in bloody moonlight, all here is but foggy vision dancing enthrallingly before our hypnotised eyes. 

Noteworthy too are his essays on Art. 'Intentions' and 'The Decay of Lying' may not be ground breaking, but they deserve a read to better understand what he meant by some of his most famous (and misunderstood!) quotes -e.g. 'life imitates art'... His tales are entertaining too, though I disliked the ones he wrote for children (for me -personally- all unsuited and complete failure).

All in all then, here's a great compilation. It can feel unequal (again, some of his work was really bad -most of his poems, a few tales...) but, considering how far ranging, creative, sharp and, above all, so unique such a writer was, it's impossible to don't be in awe. A pure jewel, that deserves to adorn the personal libraries of every lovers of literature.