Rating: 5/5

Enthralling Tale of an 18th Century Highwayman

Nadine Crenshaw’s stories are original, her plots complex and intricately woven. Her characters are multifaceted and so believable. Her work reflects great research and attention to detail. Her heroes are drool worthy and her heroines are strong women who overcome great obstacles--inspiring. Crenshaw weaves a story that will keep you reading late into the night. She is a master storyteller.

THE HIGHWAYMAN is set in the 18th century at a time when there was a great divide in England between the classes, between the wealthy and the poor. Highwaymen frequented the deserted roads and attacked carriages traveling at night. Keith Cutler, is just such a man. Raised among gentlemen as a youth, though he is the bastard son of a poor girl and a wealthy gentleman soldier who spurned him, Keith is a gentleman rogue. A bandit of the night, he is also, amazingly, a man of honor. 

Jane Fitzpatrick's mother is dead and her father, a cruel thief, deserted them long ago. While working as a housemaid in York, Jane becomes educated and dreams of a life in the American colony of Georgia. She is saving her money for passage when a famous artist living in her town sees her and decides to paint the beautiful girl. His painting of her as a noblewoman in a garden becomes famous, "The Rose of Midnight." Then her father reappears and demands all her money. When she refuses, he beats her unmercifully and she flees while he dies in a fire from a collapsing roof. On the open road, she meets the highwayman who has seen her portrait and recognizes her. And, that is just the beginning of this enthralling story.

It is well-told, original, with rich details of the life of the common people in England in the 1700s. Country life is not always pretty as we experience the lives of those who struggle for existence, but it provides a rich background against which Keith and Jane meet. Few can weave a tale as good as Crenshaw. You will be drawn in, captivated. I think Nadine Crenshaw is one of the great romance authors and this one is a keeper.

Her historical romances:

MOUNTAIN MISTRESS (Golden Heart Winner; 1987)
CAPTIVE MELODY (1988)
EDIN'S EMBRACE (1989)
SPELLBOUND (1990)
DESTINY AND DESIRE (1992)
THE HIGHWAYMAN (1993)
VIKING GOLD (1995)
FIELDS OF THE SUN (1997)

After doing some research, I believe the book of hers you'll see on some lists titled CITY OF DREAMS and published in 1992 is actually DESTINY AND DESIRE, as the City of San Francisco is described in that novel as "the city of dreams."