Rating: 5/5

Read this because it has my one of my favorite poems, The Thing Is, and I have always meant to read it in context, and I am so glad I did. This collection is diverse and beautiful. Sexual poems, poems about long time partnerships, what if wonderings, ordinary days, grief, worry - all the makings of life. 

And this beautiful long poem, that I won't quote all of here, called "Bearing Witness," which is all about child abuse and neglect, and how much we'd all rather ignore it, and go to the movies for false adrenaline rushes, then acknowledge it in our neighborhoods. And I think the last two stanzas really pay homage to those who do listen, like the therapists, the caregivers, the best friends. And the last seven lines are just a punch in the gut of painting what too many children suffer. Anyway, here it is:

And if we stop, all our fears
will come to pass. The knowledge of evil
will coat us like grease
from a long shift at the griddle. Our sweat
will smell like the sweat of the victims.

And this is why you do it--listen
at the outskirts of what our species
has accomplished, listen until the world is flat
again, and you are standing on its edge.
This is why you hold them in our arms, allowing
their snot to smear your skin, their sour
breath to mist your face. You listen
to slash the membrane that divides us, to plant
the shiny seed of yourself
in the common earth. You crank
open the rusty hinge of your heart
like an old beach umbrella. Because God
is not a flash of diamond light. God is
the kicked child, the child
who rocks alone in the basement,
the one fucked so many times
she does not know her name, her mind
burning like a star.

And then immediately following that was my favorite poem:

The Thing Is

to love life, to love it even
when you have no stomach for it
and everything you've held dear
crumbles like burnt paper in your hands,
your throat filled with the silt of it.
When grief sits with you, its tropical heat
thickening the air, heavy as water
more fit for gills than lungs;
when grief weights you like your own flesh
only more of it, an obesity of grief,
you think, How can a body withstand this?
Then you hold life like a face
between your palms, a plain face,
no charming smile, no violet eyes,
and you say, yes, I will take you
I will love you, again.