Rating: 4/5

This is one of the earliest manga I picked up at the library, back when I would visit after school for some me time before going home to my parents and four siblings. It was written almost thirty years ago now (it's only just older than me, written in the same year I was born!), so there are some dated phrases, relationships, and moments in it: I am particularly referring to the mention of Chernobyl on page 16, and on page 128, Seishiro says (to tease Subaru):

  A man loving a man... that's just perverted, isn't it? Ha ha ha!
I think what I'm trying to say with this is that it was written and drawn a long time ago, and our worldwide society has grown much since then.

I personally find Subaru's sister, Hokuto, irritating, although I believe I did when I read this at 11-12 as well. She's selfish and materialistic to a fault, she values her appearance over her concerns for the environment (which I believe is a discussion when Chernobyl does come up), I also don't think she's particularly essential or helpful to the story (although this may very well change in later volumes) and there's something flat about her, although there's something flat about the other two main characters as well so I think that's more a comment on this story than Hokuto's character.

Re-reading this recently, I'm not fond of Seishiro's character either: he's 25 while Subaru's 16, and yet he clearly has an interest in Subaru and has no concern for how young Subaru is. That said, I can also dismiss this as Japan's culture is different; I believe that nowadays many Japanese manga artists are more aware of 18 being a more acceptable age of consent as this is the age of consent in many states of USA, however it still is 13 in Japan, and it's 16 in the UK (where I am), so that may also explain why I didn't have an issue with this relationship when I was younger.
Again, with all that said, I think there's multiple reasons why I am able to continue reading and even enjoy this story despite Subaru's and Seishiro's age gap- I do feel that I need to explain myself, as an age gap and relationships involving younger people has made me put down many other BL manga before, so what makes this one different?

1. I am aware that I am biased towards this series, I know that this isn't a valid reason to be dismissive but it's something I'm acknowledging and calling myself out for. I explain why later in the review.

2. It's a supernatural story about Subaru being an onmyoji that helps restless spirits pass on, it's not primarily a romantic BL manga that centres around his relationship with Seishiro.

3. Seishiro, while he may tease Subaru (sometimes with Hokuto's help) at times, seems very respecting of Subaru's boundaries/comfort levels, and doesn't seem to push or influence Subaru. He seems to genuinely value and love Subaru. In the other series I am unable to read, the older person in the relationship tends to be in a position of power (whether that be literally, financially, or emotionally) over the younger person, so there's an unequal and abusive dynamic; I don't see that here.

4. There's no sexual contact between Subaru and Seishiro, if their relationship does develop further later, that's later and not now, it's not rushed or anything.
So now, why am I personally biased towards this series? This book was also my earliest exposure to homosexuality, and it actually confused me at the time (much like it seems to confuse Subaru later in the book as well, so I guess Seishiro was educating both of us!) I was young enough that BL was something that simply didn't occur to me as a thing that existed, I was raised thinking: man and woman falls in love, gets married, have kids, the end. I definitely think this 'nuclear family' brainwashing is a problematic thing for children (at least back in my childhood, children seem much better educated on other lifestyles now), and I would've been spared a lot of internal suffering and confusion had I been aware that it's okay to be LGBT+, it's okay to not want children, and so on. When I first saw Seishiro's and Subaru's relationship, I initially thought I was wrong about Subaru and that he was actually a female, but that misunderstanding is cleared up towards the end of this very book, on page 127, Seishiro says this to Subaru:

  I'm a man and you, Subaru-kun, are a man too... but all it means is that I fell in love, and the person I fell in love with happened to be a man.
Moving on from the BL content, I like that Subaru covers different cases in each chapter (reminds me of the earlier episodes of Supernatural); I feel that we, as readers, learn a little more about his character with each case. I do like the art style, Clamp has always been a personal favourite of mine, and while many fans of Clamp associates it with series such as Cardcaptor Sakura and Chobits, I've always associated it with this book and Clamp School Detectives (another series my library had!)

I like that they translated some words to Romaji rather than English, and not only translated/explained those in the glossary at the end, but also translated the sound effects that were kept in Japanese! (Although I can read some Japanese so I didn't need this, but this would have been something I likely used at 11-12 when I read this the first time!)

In addition, it may seem really silly to praise this but most manga doesn't have this important thing: I really like that the pages are numbered! It frustrates me when I'm writing a review on other manga and can't refer to specific pages for quotes or moments that happen in the book, when reading an e-book I have to rely on the app's page count.

I'm not sure that I would recommend this since I think without my bias and being able to dismiss the age gap of the relationship included in this, as well as Subaru's young age, I definitely wouldn't be able to enjoy it. Still, I'm glad I got my hands on it and I am curious about what happens in the second manga (I did read it but that was nearly 20 years ago!)

If you managed to read my word vomit and find it helpful, thanks! Haha.