Rating: 4/5

Initially, I picked this book from a list of others by Australian writers as it was one of the shorter books to choose from. I didn't realise quite how much I would like it.

Except, when I was just a little over have way through, my teacher had someone come in and give our class a lecture on the book, and she spoiled the ending for me, so at that point, I didn't really want to read it anymore, as the ending (in a lot of cases) is the best part.

However, I had to keep reading it. It was either that, or pick another, longer book and start all over again. And I'm glad I did. I pleasantly enjoyed the book.

Except it's ending. I really liked the character of Linda, so when she killed herself in the end, I felt as though she was just giving up, throwing away all that she had been fighting for for most of her life, as well as what she had been fighting for in her marriage.

While some people might like the ending, as it gives way for Kay to be with Nigel, I really didn't see anything in this way (until I was told that it can be viewed as a love story, if you will). Right from the jump, I didn't like Kay. In fact, after a little character development, I grew to hate Kay even more than I did when I first read her character. The fact that Kay was so obsessed with Nigel just made her even worse.

Nigel's mother drove me nuts. I couldn't stand her. She claims to have hated Linda, but here's the problem I have with that: was she not the one that set them up? If she hated Linda so much, why would she go through the trouble of setting her son up with the woman?

Linda in my view was nowhere near insane. It was the environment in which she lived that made it seems as though she was insane, or going insane. Her uncle would always be watching her as she was going to sleep, and Nigel decided for them that they wouldn't have children to prevent her wrecked genes from carrying on in a child of their own. As well, she and Nigel lived away from most of the civilisation, which probably helped aid her "insanity". It is with great reflection when I say that she was fooling people in the end to believe that she was more insane than she really was (because, who ISN'T insane in some small way or another?).

Nigel was a bland character. While he had an eventful and somewhat exciting character, I thought there could have been more to him than there actually was. I was often bored while reading the parts based around him. I did, however, like him to some degree. Another however: It was a reluctant liking, as I did not appreciate the way he simply determined that he and Linda would not have a child. (I'm not a feminist in any way any more than than the average woman, but I believe it more the woman's right to decide whether or not she and her husband should have a baby. Either that or that it should be a mutual decision.)

All in all, with the exception of the ending, I enjoyed this book. It has a twist at almost every corner which just made it all the more pleasant to read. Aces!