Rating: 3/5

Riddled with some outstanding passages Naipaul starts off Part One (A Wounded Civilization) this the second of his famous/infamous trilogy of sorts bemoaning the wretchedness of India with the resolute faith in his thesis that India is not only decrepit in so many ways it was destined to decrepit and also designed to remain decrepit. There is at times yearning for some idyllic early Aryan past which was followed by a millennium of darkness and decline - a monochromatic and now increasingly belligerent and weaponized assertion which more fuels a generation of younger Hindutva writers of fiction and fiction disguised as non-fiction and which is contradicted by scholarship and popular writing Indian and non-Indian that points to vast and multifarious growth, cross-fertilization, productivity and indeed light, during this darkness - and after an admittedly on part of Naipaul (grudgingly one can tell) despotic colonial interregnum which nevertheless had invaluable boons to offers he hastily adds, the rot only deepens post partition. 

Naipaul finds even the triumph of Hindu culture in Vijayanagar regressive and insipid what to say of Muslim invaders thereafter. Though to give him credit he finds suffering and caste exploitation to be mainstays of Indian society from even earlier times. Several of his observations about the modes and magnitude of this exploitation may be unpalatable but they are brutally true. It is in his exegesis of the complex, multi-textured, and often beguiling narratives of history that one is lost as to what exactly does he ascribe it all to - happenstance, culture, dialectical materialism, natural order of things, eugenics, or something else. Certainly colonialism and post-colonialism make an appearance in passing. Is the Indian path-dependent when it comes to retreat, surrender and decline? Ridiculous as it may seem we cannot tell and the very last possibility appears to what he seems to be most inclined towards. He refers multiples times in this part of the book to two novels by R.K.Narayan finding therein evidence of the quintessential Hindu approaches to the changing world.

Part 2 (A New Claim on the Land) is quite brilliant because Naipaul describes much more than he theorizes, conjectures, generalizes, imagines, surmises and concludes - the depressing contrast of the skyscrapers and chawls &amp; squatters settlements on the one hand and irrigation cooperatives in bursting Bombay on the one hand and small village tiers of power and control in broken and arid Maharashtrian country on the other. His description of the Naxalite Movement though is sketchy and dismissive. And definitely not prescient as he appears to have written it off though that is not what eventually transpired as we well know.

Part 3 (Not Ideas, But Obsessions) is where Naipaul shows both sides of his writing - at one level he is lucid, poignant, brilliantly deconstructive, irreverent, and capable of writing truly magical sentences (I have to hold a pencil to underline); at another level he is acerbic, dismissive, grossly generalizing, reductionist, pessimistic, misanthropic and downright insulting. At one level he narrates uncomfortable truths and if the modern purveyors of Hindutva were to go through his thorough dressing down of all they they weave their fantasies around they would have rather depressing season. But at another level after floundering here and there (having brutally disabused the reader of any notion that Indian civilization was ever truly capable of growth and its intelligentsia having the potential for brilliance and innovation or it ever will be) he fails in putting down his finger on why how and why it is so distinctly designed to be doomed. Race and some better sense of a regional racial identity and not religion, regionalism or caste is what he feebly mentions a few times but does not quite elaborate. And the manner he mentions it sounds rather ominous given the racism, toxic nationalism and insularity that has come to grip the world since he wrote this in the mid-1970s.

Though written during the Emergency the Emergency remains a side theme and he finds it hard to condemn and a natural outcome of the failure of not just Indian politics but Indian imagination. His primary preoccupation in this section is the life and politics of M.K.Gandhi whose South African apartheid influenced politics he admires but whose transformation into Mahatma he moans and considers a cop-out. He finds the latter to be a retreat into superstition, inaction, self-defeatism, fatalism, lack of propensity to take on the hard challenges of contemporary life, and the fantasy of a glorious past that he finds to be a recurrent theme in Indian history and a fatal flaw of the Indian psyche. One is at times persuaded - especially when he quite splendidly deconstructs Gandhi's career and politics - but one can't help but noting how his broad sweeps ignore multiple facets of Indian intellectual thought and social progression. This does not persuade as an intellectual history or astute sociological and political insight because Naipaul's method tends to cover up a more comprehensive and deeper assessment with outstanding rhetoric and turn of phrase. He gets so carried away by the latter - as he keeps repeating the same observation and ever so many new and glorious ways - that his belief in what he believes become self-evident and incontrovertible. 'A Defect of Vision' is the chapter he starts off with. Then he moves on to how almost all Indian thought and civilization - which he blames constantly on invasions but then he hardly finds anything worthwhile pre-invasions as well; and very rarely does he mention the Aryan invasion and its impact on Dravidian civilization - is weak and defective mimicry and synthesis in 'Mimicry and Synthesis."He finds no renaissance but dull, debilitating continuity in 'Renaissance or Continuity." And before that he appears to paradoxically both mock and bemoan a bygone time in 'Paradise Lost.'

One instance of where one gets some vague idea of what would have been renaissance rather than continuity is when he says: "Gandhi, the South African, was too complex for India. India made the racial leader the mahatma."

His castigations are complete and absolute.

"It seems to be always there in India: magic, the past, the death of thee intellect, spirituality annulling the civilizations out of which it issues, India swallowing its own tail."

"The racial sense, which contains respect for the individual and even that concept of 'the people', remains as remote from India as ever."

"Gandhi swept through India, but he has left it without an ideology. He awakened the holy land; his mahatmahood returned it to archaism; he made his worshippers vain."

His wit is at its biting best when describing Vinobha Bhave, Gandhi's successor.

"He is in the old Indian tradition of the sage who lives apart from men, but not so far from them that they are unable to provide him with a life-support system."

"Gandhi took India out of one kind of Kal Yug, one kind of Black Age; his success inevitably pushed it back to another."

"It is what Gandhianism was long ago reduced to by mahatmahood: religious ecstasy and religious self-display, a juggling with nothing, a liberation from constructive thought and religious burdens. True freedom and true piety are still seen to lie in withdrawal from the difficult world. In independent India, Gandhianism is like the solace still of a conquered people, to whom the state has historically been alien, controlled by others."

"India is without an ideology - and that was the failure of Gandhi and India together. Its people have no idea of the state, and none of the attitudes that go with such an idea: no historical notion of the past, no identity beyond the tenuous ecumenism of Hindu beliefs, and, in spite of the racial excesses of the British period, not even the beginning of a racial sense. Through centuries of conquest the civilization declines into an apparatus for survival, turning away from the mind ..."

Naipaul is impressed by RSSS and its grassroots work and grappling with contemporary issues in its encounters with it. He often mocks brilliant white homespun cotton wearing Congress Wallahs with their fake modesty, ineffectualness and caprice. Towards the end of his life he was also quite taken with Hindutva politics and BJP of course except quite paradoxically a lot of what he admired can be seen today as highly anti-intellectual, unscientific, yearning for a mythical past, superstitious and fascist. Towards the end of the book he surmises.

"The past can now be possessed only by inquiry and scholarship, by intellectual rather than spiritual discipline. The past has to be seen to be dead; or the past will kill." 

Well the past is definitely killing as we speak. Naipaul in my final analysis is clear and zealot in his castigations but confounded in his rationale and justifications of the same. Often he is brilliant astute and incisive but as often just bitter and dismissive. This is nevertheless perhaps his best non-fiction and relevant equally to those on the other sides of the border when it comes to religion and religiosity being abused to escape from hard battles for betterment of the people.