Rating: 5/5

“Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end”

"Richard III" boasts one of Shakespeare's most gleeful and charismatic creations in the character of the deformed Duke of Gloucester. The greatest success of this long play is the interaction between the reader/viewer and the title character. Richard is a horrid human being, but we are reading or watching the play because we are entranced by him and his villainy. It is a sobering thought, one that should horrify us, but we can't help ourselves. We are drawn to the bastard! I imagine Shakespeare loved his version of Richard because he endows him with such gleeful wit and debauched enjoyment in creating pain for others, that you are seduced by this worst of human beings. It almost borders on melodrama, but it never quite sinks to that level. The role of Richard III is Shakespeare's second longest, after Hamlet, and yet Richard is very rarely dull. Reading Act III where he and his henchman the Duke of Buckingham manipulate other into supporting Richard's claim to the crown will bring a rueful smile to your face.
I also enjoy the trio of queens in the play: Margaret the Lancastrian widow of Henry VI (who Richard killed), the Duchess of York (Richard's mom), and his brother's widow Queen Elizabeth. All three hate Richard with an intense passion, and all have blistering scenes of rage towards Richard at various times in the text. Detracting from the play is that these scenes and curses do get redundant, but there is no denying the ferocity and bile Shakespeare gave these women, and in the hands of talented actresses they would be a joy to watch.
Many academics criticize "Richard III", for various reasons. I find most of them foolish. This play is not meant to be a historical recreation of the actual events (it isn't) nor is it some great lofty text. It is a glimpse into evil and ambition. Really it is just a more modern version of a morality play. Richard represents Vice and Ambition, and like most who let those traits govern their lives, he suffers the consequences.
The new RSC Modern Library editions of the plays of Shakespeare are a quality trade paperback edition of the works of the Bard. “Richard III” contains an Introduction by Jonathan Bate. It has a nice focus on Ricard as an influence on the work of Marlowe, and also as an actor, creating his own role. 
This edition includes an essay on the performance history of the piece, and interviews with a director and designer as well as an interview with actor Simon Russell Beale who gives some awesome perspective and insight into the character of Richard. 
The Modern Library edition also includes a scene-by-scene analysis, which can help point out an image or symbol you might have missed. The edition also includes a nice “Further Readings” list specifically for this play.
Frankly, all of the extra essays allow you to dive into the world of the play, and it is all included in one text.
The RSC Modern Library editions are a good addition to the editions of Shakespeare out there.