I've been putting off reviewing this book for over a month now, but here I am, because I don't want my list of reviews for the Romance History Project to be incomplete. The reason behind my hesitation is that reviewing this book critically and fairly involves balancing two fundamental yet difficult-to-reconcile aspects of the novel and its legacy. The first aspect is that The Lord Won't Mind was revolutionary and meaningful as perhaps the first book (claims of firstness always being complicated) to portray a central romantic arc with a happy ending for two men. Peter and Charlie's love, and indeed their physical attraction and sex life, is neither hidden nor euphemistic. It is the center of the book's concerns, a subject of literary text rather than subtext, and the path towards its happy resolution the driving force of the plot. The second aspect is that the book is eye-wateringly misogynistic, violent, and racist. The racism, in particular, is not an incidental attitude expressed by characters and easily understood as a "product of its time": it is fundamental to how the book frames the social significance of Peter and Charlie's relationship. 

I step into the space of talking about this book really hesitantly and (I hope) carefully, as much as I can. In particular because I'm highly aware that in reviews of romance in general, and m/m romance in particular, voices of both queer men and people of color - and especially queer men of color - are often silenced or otherwise sidelined. The absence of those perspectives probably has a lot to do with why, in most mainstream reviews I've read, the full extent of the racism in this book is elided. 
I do take it as a principle, though, that conversations about racism in romance aren't something that white reviewers should be opting out of. So I'm going to do my best to think through that here. 

Doing so involves a quick run-down of the plot and particularly the denouement, which needs CWs for violence and racism. Peter and Charlie have been engaged in an emotionally tumultuous, on-again-off-again relationship throughout most of the book that has, as the final chapters approach, come to an end with Charlie's marriage to a woman (undertaken in part because, despite his attraction to Peter, Charlie believes marriage to a woman to be the only appropriate life path for him to take.) In the final scenes of the book, Charlie's wife assaults him by attempting to bite off his penis: this is both a horrific act of physical violence on her part, and an extension of the book's foundational assumption that all people without penises are grotesque, fundamentally lacking, and by extent living in a state of semi-hysterical envy. Charlie responds by beating her horribly and leaving her for dead: he and Peter "reconcile" as Peter attempts to ascertain if she is alive and, once finding her so (barely), to prevent her from reporting her own assault. The story then concludes with a seemingly-unrelated episode in which Charlie's grandmother reveals that her father was Black, that she's kept that fact a secret, and that it is why she has been adamant that Charlie never have any children, so as not to pass down this heritage. This story about Charlie's distant parentage is accepted - uncontested - as a foundational narrative to explain not only his sexual prowess (with which the book is obsessed) but also his violence and his attraction to men. All of these are described, for varying values of the term, as "beastly." The novel extends this already-horrific white supremacism by inviting the reader, too, to celebrate that Charlie will not be able to have biological children. 

At the risk of sounding naive about encountering misogyny and racism in a book published in the 1970s, coming across this ending to the story was one of the more upsetting reading experiences I've ever had. It leaves me at a loss to reconcile not just what this book means as a part of romance history, but also what it means that very few reviews actually talk about the racism inherent in the ending. So many aspects of Charlie's queerness are given a foundation story in white supremacist attitudes, attitudes which are simply presented and then left there as an explanation, a coda, not a problem to unpack. 

If anything, I suppose the experience of reading this novel left me with an impression of the difficulty - and necessity- of reading critically when multiple axes of marginalization are at play. Of understanding how a book can both be a watershed moment of inscribing queer romantic stories into literature and a horrific act of narrative violence against characters of color. And how really there isn't any way for the genre to fully grapple with that duality, absent reviews engaging the voices at the intersection of those issues, specifically queer men of color. I'm honestly not sure my reviewing this book serves a purpose, except I hope to both warn people of the content they might find here, and to try to do a bit of the work of reading critically even those texts that are taken to be foundational to the genre.