Rating: 5/5

Many times when I read a book about some subject, I find myself wishing the author would more often get out of the way of the subjects, let them speak for themselves and interject to add color or commentary here and there only when necessary. Writing such a book is, in many ways, like learning the art of conducting an interview. Know which questions to ask, when to ask them, and when to get out of the way. The path to success in such sociological outings seems so straightforward and obvious, and yet rarely is it done well, so there must be some trick that most writers, even the most well-meaning sociologists, never quite figure out.

Like the best in the field, for instance a Studs Terkel or a Barbara Ehrenreich, Ms. Connie Fletcher has mastered the art. "What Cops Know" is a book that contains the voices of people who need to speak (many times scream) and who need to be heard. There are reams of print and countless hours of film and TV shows about the world of cops, but little (if any) present the unmediated and uncut version of what it means to be a policeman delivered in this book. Being a cop is, like being a soldier, a job whose stresses perhaps outstrip the coping resources that most, if not all people, lack at some level. It's an impossible job to do perfectly and yet it's a job that must be done. This book is about what the job that must be done does to the people who do it.

Some subjects presented in the book are fascinating, leavened with humor, like the world of burglars. Others are more tragic than tragicomic, like the world of drug addicts. Some of the stories of criminals and the cops who pursue them are simply vicious tales of adrenaline junkies who, via their predefined roles as cop &amp; robber, join into a sick symbiosis that destroys everything in its path, from marriages to psyches.

It is quite a thing to behold, and is compulsively readable, on a par perhaps with "The Hot House" by Peter Earley, which is my all-time favorite foray into a secret world we all wish didn't exist, but will not stop being there no matter how much we want it gone. Highest Recommendation.