Rating: 1/5

I had good memories of this book when I read it years ago. I wonder now what I liked. Must have been just Tommy &amp; Tuppence and the village setting. At any rate, this is not a good book. There is no way I can twist this novel to claim it is a good, or even coherent, book. 

Tommy &amp; Tuppence are now grown old and have retired to a village and purchased an old house. In the process of redoing the place, Tuppence comes across a book in which the book owner had inscribed a code. She deciphers it and realises that a mystery is awaiting: 'Mary Jordan did not die naturally'. So far, this is thrilling stuff, right? But this is about it. After this, the book simply degenerates into mindless, incoherent rambling so much so as you have absolutely no clue what people are even talking about. 

Long conversations with prominent financiers and politicians about 'something' happening 'somewhere' and they knew 'someone'. We, the reader, are plunged into a morass of words that means nothing at all. Who is someone? Where is this action taking place? What is this something that happened? Was it First World War or Second World War? I couldn't even make that out! I have a feeling Christie wanted this to be a big spy thriller but she was supremely vague about everything. Just random phrases here and there about 'Common Market', 'Hitler Youth', 'Fascists', 'Mussolini', 'Communists' and so on and none of it made any sense whatsoever. 

In the end, there is a murderer but I have no clue what the murder was about. Why is this random person going around trying to murder people and the higher echelons of the British society hyperventilating about it? This is about as vague as it gets. The murderer character too appears out of nowhere at the time they are revealed as the murderer. We never get to see them before. It's just frustrating.

I did enjoy the Tuppence scenes a bit because she is fun, but it led nowhere in the end. Unless you are a T&amp;T fan and enjoy the more personal aspects of their relationship, give this book a miss.