Rating: 4/5

From one of the creators of King Kong comes this 1919 crime thriller that later was adapted for the silver screen and distributed in America as "The Human Monster" starring everyone's favorite Dracula Bela Lugosi. The film genuinely terrified me as a kid, and remains one of the more memorable Lugosi vehicles, but now that I've read the book, I can't help but think how much better a movie version could have been if it followed the source material more closely.

The story follows a rather manic detective and his new secretary as they attempt to solve the mystery of an apparent drowning of a rich Canadian businessman in London. In the dead man's clutches is a cufflink, pointing to possible murder. Soon, their investigation catches the blind but watchful eye of a giant brute and serial killer "Big Jake." Kind of like "Resident Evil 3," Jake pops up throughout the narrative to foil our protagonists, and though he takes a beating each time, getting shot, stabbed, and tazed in the face, he seems indestructible. As our heroes get deeper down the rabbit hole, it appears the secretary, with whom our detective has become smitten, has secrets of her own.

This is the first Edgar Wallace I've read, and I must say that I was impressed with the slick, if not pulpy, style of this forerunner to the modern thriller. The author certainly knew how to craft suspenseful cliffhangers between chapters, which are all short and well-paced. The story loses steam towards the end and fizzles out in a Scooby Doo ending of over-zealous exposition that somehow explains very little. I can't really say I ever understood the motivations of the villains at all, other than they were clearly insane sociopaths. For this, the book loses a full star.

The movie trimmed down a lot of the actions and characters no doubt due to budget limitations. Particularly noteworthy was the film eliminated the elaborate Death Chamber at the climax of the novel, and the roles of two antagonists were condensed into one character known as Dr. Orloff, played by Lugosi. But the film did a better job giving motivation to the bad guys. Big Jake, though portrayed as more of a traditional monster, has a tender relationship with another blind comrade named Lew in the film, and this has impactful consequences in that version. In the book, there is no pathos or humanity in any of the antagonists. They are simply stereotypical and wooden memes, and I would not have been surprised if one of them didn't bellow out, "Mwo hoo ha ha!!!!"

The book is superior in its portrayal of the female lead, who outwits her enemies and outshines her male counterpart throughout the story. She is truly a great character and ahead of the time. The pacing and action is also much better than the Lugosi version, which plays as more of a creaky low-budget horror than a grand, nail-biting crime thriller.

For fans of classic adventures, thrillers, mysteries, and pulp fiction, this is worth a read. You will not reach any grand insights here, but you will be entertained by the smooth and easy prose and rather taught action. I enjoyed it enough to check out some of the other 170 or so novels this prolific author produced before his untimely death from diabetes just before the movie "King Kong" was released.