Rating: 4/5

This book begins with a widowed clockmaker and his young daughter landing stranded at the doorstep of the pretty, unwed mother of an infant. The mother and clockmaker quickly develop a rapport and fall in love, each finding something they need in the other. The clockmaker’s daughter also responds to having a warm, new mother figure, and a baby to help care for, a family. 
The unwed mother, Collie, lives as a bit of an exile. Her own mother disdains her, and the identity of the infant's father is a mystery to most. While Collie already seems to have cooled to her absent partner, the appearance of the clockmaker makes it final, since he shows her what a loving, supportive man is like.
Of course it all goes great until absent partner returns! There is then a violent fight with terrible consequences.
I enjoyed the book. It was a solid plot with good characters and an evocative setting. Except for the bear hunt, the whole story goes down pretty fast. The writing was natural and flowed without $10 words or awkward turns of phrase. Some of it was impressive:
"Wayland could smell honey, so he supposed one of the fallen trees had had bees in it. Honey was a night smell, he decided, was particularly delicious and mouth-tingling to have floating around in this black crispness. Bear come along, break open the fallen trunk, fill his belly with honey...
"That thought struck him with a chill, and he sat flat down on the ground and stared about, glaring at the fire-lighted door of the hunting shack, considering this new idea, thinking about honey and the bear, wondering if he were to be the first one to see the bear, if this honey were to be the strangeness, the attraction of the day, and he, the newcomer, the outlander, to be the benefactor, the slayer of the bear."

The consequences of the fight with Collie’s former lover leaves everyone with gravely difficult decisions and confessions to make. The atonement that is asked is hard to bear, yet beautiful. The scene of love and sacrifice is one I can’t imagine forgetting.
To make it more poignant for me it’s worth mentioning that this is one of the last books my mother read before she died last month. I had ordered it and sent it to her to read first, and she gave me the daily blow-by-blow on the phone: first, how she found the bear hunt tedious, then how the story grew more interesting and in the end was terrific and we should order more books by this author. I found her handwritten list of the author’s books on her desk.