Rating: 3/5

I discovered this book via a recommendation on History Twitter. The author gets rave reviews and apparently influenced quite a few minds 40 or so years ago. He mostly wrote about conservationist topics. However, this book, written in 1958, whose title suggested a specific thrilling sea rescue - perhaps during the convoy battles of the SWW is not at all what I expected.

That is, it was not "A Cruel Sea" or "HMS Ulysses" albeit told from a salvage tug's point of view.

What you get it a 15 year story of a specific ship - the Foundation Franklin, a rugged salvage boat that served out of Halifax between the early 1930s until just after the end of the War. That part of the North Atlantic shipping lanes saw frequent freighter groundings, breakdowns, or other maritime disasters. These often occurred in the worst weather. When the SOS went out, Franklin got the call.

An interesting part of the book's early chapters was how the salvage companies made money. Basically, a contract was made between the ship in distress and the salvor, with the amount to be paid decided by an arbiter after the rescue (months after). This amount was based on the value of the ship and its cargo. Ship owners avoided to the last possible moment striking this deal with the salvors. Salvage companies, if they had options, could tell the captain of the injured ship to stuff it if they didn't quickly agree. Time was wasted while the seas got stormier, the winds howlier, and the rocks ever closer.

This dynamic made for some exciting recues of both ships and crews. Conditions were terrible. Oh, did I mention the Franklin was coal-fired? The Franklin's crew was made of iron and her captain of the toughest steel.

You'll need a map handy to understand where all these bays, ports, and islands are off the Nova Scotia and Newfoundland coasts. A warm jacket to protect you while you admire the crew through bitter cold and sleeting conditions can't hurt either.

OK, so why only three stars?

Well, it got repetitive. Franklin made countless rescues over the years under appalling and risky conditions. But once you've read about, say, five of the these, the next five aren't any more interesting. The accounts are taken from interviews and ship's logs (at least I think so, the author has no list of sources and no source notes for any of the accounts or quotes).

Another reason why only three stars is that Franklin's wartime experience was not particularly noteworthy. Only a couple of chapters are devoted to that period. She never was part of a convoy and never underwent a torpedo attack or even saw a U-boat attack.

When you read this, you will definitely come away with awe and respect for the rugged crews that manned Franklin over the years and even more admiration for everything she accomplished in salvaging ships and men from the dangerous coats and seas off the Maritime Provinces. Truly remarkable.

But books that cover the history of a ship over 15+ years are just not going to be 5 star reads unless you have some family connection with the Canadian ship salvage scene or are a real marine salvage aficionado.

No maps, one poor photo and one ship line diagram.