Rating: 5/5

The second book of the trilogy covers 1496 to 1679. The narrative has the same structure: stories told by different people, mostly members of the family taking their roots from Walter (Martin) Reede, and "Interludes" covering the events in between the stories.

Compared to the first book, the narrative has expanded to include a wider historical background. While in the first book the storyline mostly focuses on the local events (uprising led by the citizens of Baildon against the Abbey, while larger historical events, such as peasants rising against the landlords are only briefly mentioned), in the second book, the main characters often directly participate in the historical events: Walter Rancon (Maude Reede's grandson) is burnt as a a heretic; Henry Kentwoode hides a Catholic priest; Anthony Flowerdew and Christopher Kentwoode fight on both sides in the Civil War - the former as a Parliamentarian and the latter as a Cavalier.
However, the historical events are rarely described in the 1st person's narrative as a live action scene; rather, the reader is shown their consequences. For instance, the reader is briefly told that Walter Rancon was burnt or that Christopher Kentwoode got his consumption as a result of soldiering and sleeping in wet clothes. I personally was hoping for a more detailed description.

Also, I felt that the narratives became somewhat briefer focusing on one key episode in the character's life rather than presenting the whole picture. This is not necessarily a drawback but it did make me feel as if the narrative were somewhat rushed at times.

I quite enjoyed the "mirror effect": many events are an echo of similar events in the past. Just to name a few, Josiana Greenwood dies in fire like Kate Reede, Martin's first wife. Elizabeth Kentwood consciously allows the Catholic priest die in his shelter just as old Agnes let Madga, Martin's second wife, die in childbirth. Barbara Hatton is unhappy and unsatisfied in her marriage as Anne Blanchfleur was. Ethelreda Benedict shares some of her self-sacrificing nature with Maude Reede. Rupert Hatton poisons his father in the same way Anne poisoned her Danish lover. Not mentioning Christopher's and Rupert's violin playing. Oliver Stanton (the teacher) comes into the family as an outsider and has an unrequited love for Ethelreda just like Nickolas Freeman (the clerk) fell in love with Maude. 

Yet, the new set of characters are not mere copies of old ones. They are more fleshed out, and while reading book 1, I felt mostly engaged with Martin as a central figure and to a lesser extent, his granddaughter Maude, there is no central character in book 2. I found myself sympathizing with Josiana Greenwood, an out-of-wedlock offspring of the Reede family, and her mother who slaved all her life and had to hide the secret of her illicit affair with Henry Rancon. Elizabeth Kentwoode was not a sympathetic but nevertheless a very interesting character, and the story of the priest dying of thirst and hunger is one of the most memorable - it stayed with me for 15 years since I have read the book. My personal favorite is Ethelreda Benedict with her quiet fortitude, which reminds of Griet in "The Girl with a Pearl Earring".

In general, women in this book are stronger personalities, who take charge of the house (Elizabeth and Barbara) and create their own destiny (Josiana and Ethelreda). Men are somehow less remarkable and more submissive. Henry Rancon, who fathered Josiana, falls the victim of his passions and dies of syphilis. Walter Rancon stands for his religious belief, but this is mostly his way of dealing with the fact that he has lost Josiana, a sort of avoidance and shrinking away from what really tortures him. Henry Kentwoode falls a prey to his granddaughter's whim. John Kentwoode allows his aunt to ruin his marriage, and although it is implied that he has fathered Emma Webster's son, he never openly admits this. Anthony Flowerdew abandons his duty as a spy for Parliamentarians for Barbara. Oliver Stanton - although for me he is the most sympathetic of male characters in book 2 - is still rather passive and is satisfied with living on scraps at the Old Vine, his old school, rather than search for his place in the sun. 

I enjoyed tracking family traits running through generations; although, after a while, all the Walters and Henrys are somewhat mixed up in my mind. It is yet another evidence for the fact that male characters are less fleshed out and altogether less memorable.