Rating: 4/5

Farley Mowat, one of Canada's most famed and successful authors, was known mainly for his works about nature and the Canadian North and his provocative attacks on the Canadian government's treatment of native peoples. This is a different kind of tale, a highly personal and profoundly honest one, about his experiences as a young lieutenant in a Canadian infantry regiment -- the Hastings and Prince Edward Regiment -- in World War II. 

After Mowat has impatiently endured more than two years of training, his regiment is sent into battle in the invasion of Sicily in 1942. His eagerness for war is quickly dampened as he soon sees the ugly face of battle, looking into the face of a dead Italian soldier lying in a dusty street, and noticing that he and the dead man have the same blue eyes.

Within months, as the regiment fights its way across Sicily, crosses the Straits of Messina and then begins the slow, bloody slog up the spine of the rugged Italian peninsula, one quarter of its soldiers have become casualties. Almost everyone he knows is killed or wounded. He struggles against the constant presence of fear he calls the Worm. And he struggles just as much against his fear of showing fear, knowing that as an officer he must inspire courage in others and lead them into battle. 

The closing chapter of the book, by which time it is 1943 and the war still has two more years to go, makes clear he is at the breaking point. Almost certainly he is suffering from shell shock -- what we would now call PTSD. He carries a canteen filled with rum. He begins to move like a robot. He is constantly in a rage at the insane orders that come down from above to mount yet another attack up steep slopes against an entrenched German enemy who determinedly makes them bleed for every foot of ground gained. 

One day, he meets a fellow officer and friend, Alex, just returning to the regiment after recovering from a wound, who hands him a sheaf of poetry. Alex tells him to read it and then marches off, leading a bunch of brand new recruits directly into a battle already raging. 

The first poem Mowat reads is about struggling against fear and showing fear:

"These men of mine must never know
How much afraid I really am!
Help me to stand against the foe
So they will say: He was a man!

Later that day, Alex unaccountably grabs a rifle, suicidally rushes a German machine gun nest head on over open ground, and is riddled with bullets. A sergeant, still incredulous, relates this story to Mowat and concludes: "Crazy as hell, but Jesus, what a man!"

Mowat is left weeping, and writes from the perspective of more than 30 years later,
"I wonder now ... were my tears for Alex and Al and all the others who were gone and who were yet to go?
Or was I weeping for myself ... and those who would remain?"

I have read several books by Mowat, starting when I was a teenager. I think this may be his best.