Rating: 5/5

I read this years ago in college. It's a hilarious, magical parody and still uproariously funny (though to judge from the reviews on Goodreads, it's a polarizing book). George Rose is a fastidious oddball, an intractable misfit who always wanted to become a priest but was prevented, either by the malice or by error of his bishops, from being admitted to candidacy. He spends his days smoking cigarettes, stroking his cat, and scribbling out mediocre articles for small newspapers, living by commission, hoping that one day his vocation will be supported by the diocesan authorities. He is an elitist misanthrope, sickened by physical ugliness, lowbrow fiction and any vulgar breaches of fashion. One day he wakes up to find a cardinal and bishop at his doorstep who tell him that not only will he finally be ordained a priest but, by an impossible series of serendipities, he has been elected by the conclave of cardinals to become the next pope. He chooses the name of Hadrian VII.

Hadrian is a comically British pope: snooty but austere, sombre in tone yet ironical in outlook, rigid about rules but idiosyncratic in their interpretation. He is part saint, part madman. He repudiates wealth, celebrity and power. He proclaims humility as his chief virtue and, when he sees his name is the press, he is queasy about the attention. When he is ordained, he decidedly abjures lace ("leave that to the ladies"); when he is attired in the robes of pope, he rejects the emerald gem on the episcopal ring—the appropriate stone is amethyst. Following canon law, he refuses to be ordained until all his personal debts are paid; once pope, he papers over the lavish rococo walls of the Vatican palace with brown cardboard, eschews silk, sells its prized art, and renounces all temporal power. Yet at the same time, while he may reject materialism, this pope is constitutionally an aesthete and connoisseur. His private thoughts redound not on the interior soul but on interior decor: "Hadrian was mooning about in the Treasury one morning wondering why people will persist in using diamonds by themselves instead of as a setting for colored gems: grieving at the excess ugliness of most modern goldsmith's monstrous work". While political upheavals roil European peace, Pope Hadrian publicly negotiates treaties between emperors and kings but privately ruminates on the garish excesses of contemporary artisanship. The world is stunned by Pope Hadrian—a true individual who is consistently his own man and, for that very reason, is completely unpredictable. He is not just a sign of contradiction but a genuine paradox—outwardly pious but fiercely cynical, humble but prickly and rebarbative, sanctimonious and mercurial, simultaneously decadent and ascetic. He is certainly never prayerful. They call him an "anarchist academic". 

When I first read this novel, I wasn't as attuned to its campiness and its homoerotic subtext. Like Firbank's Concerning the Eccentricities of Cardinal Pirelli, this novel is full of sartorial snobbery, ornamental exotica and swishy refinement, and it is festooned with uranian allusions: Hadrian has read John Addington Symonds; he has read the ephebophilic epigrams of Strato and Meleager; he discourses in ithyphallic verse and hendecasyllables (a meter associated with Sappho); his bishops exit the room to read Theocritean idylls dedicated to love. He commissions a masterpiece from an artist—a crucifix in which the body of Christ is modelled on the form of the Apoxyomenos and the face of Antinous, combining two male figures famous for their lithe beauty and taut athleticism (Antinous, of course, was also the lover of Emperor Hadrian). Pope Hadrian believes in sublime beauty, a high-minded concept which has, since the time of Socrates, served more as a by-word for a more prurient interest in the male physique—love, however, is elusive. 

"He who was a frog has become king," says one of the cardinals, quoting Petronius' Satiricon. And this is the fundamental spirit of the novel, a Saturnalian inversion of power in which a derelict ex-seminarian is made most sovereign bishop of Rome. The novel has the impish flavor of the medieval Cena Cypriani—the irreverent banquet parody in which prophets, apostles and saints all meet at a wedding feast—and in a spirit of allegorical tomfoolery—act out their roles, bizarrely culminating in a violent commotion. It's a fun and feverish comedy.