Rating: 4/5

Wow, what a pager turner. I started reading this book in the early afternoon and couldn't put it down until I had finished it in the late evening. I'm not normally someone who zips through a book in a single day, but it was short enough, and had enough momentum to make you want to keep on reading. Even though I have this categorized as a vintage mystery on my shelves, its really more of a domestic thriller, with suspense being the driving force. We know who the players are early on, although their motives and ultimate fates are teased out along the way. As the synopsis says, the story revolves around 2 university professors from the Science building who go missing. Nearly everyone, including the police, the University Provost, and even one of the guy's wives, assume they are off on some bender or engaged in a dalliance, so there is really nothing to be done. However, the young wife of one of the professors, along with the strange teenage daughter of the other, decide they don't want to sit around and wait, and take action into their own hands. Its well paced and well written, with quite the dramatic ending. I wouldn't say that I liked any of the characters per se, but I was sympathetic to their plights, particularly Anabel O'Shea, the aforementioned investigative wife. I would like to think I know my own husband pretty well, and if someone, or even a bunch of people, tried to convince me he had just run off without telling me, I wouldn't believe it either. Its her faith in him, and her drive to figure out what happened to him, for good or bad, that is the heart of the story. Armstrong particularly excels at changing narrative voices, which happens throughout the novel, quite seamlessly, and each character feels unique and full of their own personality. Perhaps my one complaint with the book is the daughter of professor #2, Violet "Vee" Adams. She's supposed to be a university student where her father teaches, but she is extremely immature for her age, reading more like someone who is 12 or 13. I have to assume the author meant for her to feel stunted and underdeveloped, and part of her arc is gaining some independence and sense of self. But I suppose just like in real life, we don't have to like someone to understand them, and ultimately I still cared about what happened to the characters, which is what keeps us reading.