Rating: 3/5

Here's a favourite quote - oh they're so cynical those cops you know...

You should fight like hell if you get attacked on the street, or in your home. The old thinking was, especially with women, submit, give in, maybe the guy will give you a break and not kill you. Now, maybe you will get raped, but least you'll have the satisfaction of knowing you didn't just lie down and take it. You don't know how many home-invasion scenes we walk in on where the people are sitting there all tied up and all dead. There'll be four, five people, a family, maybe some guests: enough to put up a fight. And you know they let themselves get tied up. You just know the guys said, 'We just want to tie you up. We won't hurt you.' You'd think the people would realize — why do they want to tie us up if they don't want to hurt us? But they bought it. It always gives us a little chuckle.

And they have interesting first hand insights :

With offenders who molest kids, you pick up that they genuinely love kids...[People] go "Somebody who really likes kids couldn't possibly do this". This nice day-care centre owner, this nice coach. People get confused at that. But paedophiles genuinely love kids - and they have a sexual desire for kids.

Here's a favourite:

 I was new on the force and I had my first death notification. I had to tell a woman that her husband had just been killed. I just dreaded doing this. I remember sitting in the squad car in front of this woman's house, trying to get what I had to say exactly right. I sat there for about half an hour mentally composing what I had to say. So I go up to the front door. I'm so nervous. A woman answers it and I start : "It is my unfortunate duty to inform you that your husband has been killed." She looks at me and says "What did you just say?" Oh no. I start again. "It is my unfortunate duty..." "Wait, wait. You just wait right there. I gotta wake up my kids."

So I'm standing there feeling miserable. I hear her yell through the house "Kids! Get up, come in here." They all come in. "Now tell them what you just told me." So i do, and they all start hugging each other and dancing around. "Officer, you just gave us the best news, that rotten son of a bitch is dead at last!"