Rating: 2/5

Work of Flawed Opinion Rather Than History

This book is widely viewed as the best book on the Korean War by military professionals and national security policy makers alike. However, there are significant issues with Fehrenbach’s assessments, conclusions, and sourcing. Throughout the book, Fehrenbach’s confirmation bias and mirror imaging of his perceived experience in the war are so strong that I could not see how this is accepted as a respectable work of history. It is dangerous that this book is universally praised by military leaders. 

The lessons of Task Force Smith for readiness, hubris leading to intelligence failures, and the sacrifice of tactical and operational success for strategic gain are very real. However, Fehrenbach consistently draws the conclusion that softness and liberalism led to the death of thousands whereas as a professional legion would have saved the day. Nothing further from the truth could be stated. In all wars and in all nations, cowardice and lack of skill and training are perpetually present. It is especially nothing new for American war fighting. 

What was new for American war fighting, in regards to the Korean War, was the lack of mental agility of American leadership to understand the strategic, operational, as tactical concepts employed by the CCF. Sun Tzu first wrote, and Mao leveraged, the need to erase battle lines from the concept of warfare. Americans forgot the lessons of the Revolution by always focusing on Jomini style warfare with clean lines of battle. The US military has yet to adjust to this shortcoming to this day and continues to pay the price in low intensity conflict across the globe. This book fits nicely into American military leaderships fantasized view of what warfare should look like. It gives operational and strategic leaders an out by essentially stating “well if these liberal wussies that are getting raised now weren’t such cowards, the war would have been over by Christmas.”

The only reason I gave this two stars is because of the chapter on BG Boatner’s successful operation to fix the systemic issues at Koje-do Island.