Rating: 2/5

“I have so much in me, and the feeling for her absorbs it all; I have so much, and without her it all comes to nothing.”

A lot of classic novels contain certain things that make us cringe a little today but The Sorrows of Young Werther is one that, more than most, really hasn't aged well. I do not know if some people consider this tragically romantic, but it is not my idea of romance. Werther is a serious pest and borderline stalker. He needs to let it go.

In this story, Werther falls head over heels for the first pretty girl who wants to dance with him, obsesses over her, and continues to pursue her even after learning of her engagement to another man; even after she openly refuses him. He turns up at her house constantly. He attempts to force kisses upon her. We suffer through accounts of his sex dreams about her. They're not called that, but that's basically what they are.

The book is written as a series of letters to Werther's friend Wilhelm. It's a tiny book, but it feels so much longer because these letters mostly consist of Werther's repetitive internal struggles. Of course he believes he is the only person in the history of the world to feel like he does, and he repeatedly insists that Charlotte - the object of his obsession - secretly loves him, too, despite her protestations. 

I can sympathise with the pain and angst of young love, even when it is wrapped up in a flowery, introspective package. I liked Call Me By Your Name after all. However, any sympathy I had for Werther quickly dissipated when he continued to harass both Lotte and her now husband, Albert. I guess this is just an old example of predatory behaviour being excused because of passion, and men's emotions being perceived as more important than the damage they do to the women they're directed at.

It also romanticizes suicide, as Werther eventually kills himself over the rejection by his beloved. In fact, it apparently led to some of the first known copycat suicides in Europe. And though the intellectuals smell blood when anyone dares to call a 300-year-old classic "boring", I'm going to have to be philistine and say it: It's also really boring.

Blog | Facebook | Twitter | Instagram | Youtube