Rating: 3/5

Travel guides give us information about what to expect when visiting a foreign land: with commentary on the sights, precincts of interest, what to eat and where to stay. Good guides also suggest what to enjoy and importantly what to avoid. 

But what actually happens to the intrepid souls who undertake this research? Unpacked: Travel Disaster Stories is an interesting collection of stories from the hidden side of travel writing; the often unfortunate experiences of contributors as they report on their given countries. 

These candid tales of arduous travel include a car crash, a charging elephant and a Tibetan monk who uses his head, literally, to crack Tony Wheeler’s windscreen when the Lonely Planet founder was  Walking the Mount Kailash Circuit. Jim Dufresne pens a moving account of a lone kayaker dying in the white water of the Tatshenshini River in the Yukon. Having found the corpse on the river bank many kilometres from civilisation, the problem for Jim and his associates, is what to do with the body. To deal with brown bears potentially sniffing out the body, they wrap it in a tarp and hoist it up a tree. This seems sound, as brown bears do not climb trees. They just hoped there were no black bears about. Then there was the added problem of managing their clients who had paid a lot for their rafting adventure and were reluctant to be held up too long. The body was helicoptered out with only a day’s delay to the trip.

Because it resonated, my favourite account comes from Mark Honan, Travel in India – the Hard Way. Mark is an Englishman who lands in Mumbai at 2:00AM from London. Given his tight research schedule, he has no time for resting up so he hires a car and driver to go to Gujarat, 150 kilometres away. He is shown a rather small Mumbai taxi, which he thinks might be OK. Before leaving city limits this taxi is exchanged, under duress, for a white jeep, somewhat less comfortable, with a new driver and for more money. Mark then experiences bruising, jerky acceleration and sudden swerving as the driver, increasingly agitated, attempts risky passing manoeuvres on the crowded road, often on the opposite shoulder. The trip takes six hours.

I have travelled to India several times with my family, initially to meet up with my stepdaughter Zoe in the process of completing her (Australian) Social Work degree with a three month placement in Chennai and Kochi. To get to India from Australia requires two or three flights for around 27 hours. You can do it in one hop of 13 hours but you take your chances. On the first trip we arrived after midnight, weakened by lack of sleep, to be confronted with the noise, crowds, excitement, bright colours and the fragrance of India.

I briefly entertained the thought of driving in India as the car from Kochi International Airport to the Grand Hotel, Ernakulum, seemed to encounter little traffic. I thought: ‘I’ve got an International Drivers Licence and they drive on the correct side of the road’ (the left). However, as we got closer to our destination, the traffic became heavier, there were massive construction works along the middle of the road (they were building an elevated railway) and it became apparent that driving on the left was more a guideline than a requirement. I also became aware that Indians (especially tuk-tuk drivers), have a unique capacity to drive organically with minimal margins for error. Even so, the frequent sight of whole families aboard a motor bike or motor scooter is disturbing- father, mother, assorted children, with smaller ones on the handlebars - up to five of six souls hanging on with no helmets and sandals on feet if you are lucky. It is not a wonder to me that there are so many road accidents in India – the wonder is there aren’t more. 

Because I am claustrophobic, during our Indian travels I sat next to the driver, with the rest of the family squashed in the back. So I had a terrifyingly full view of the oncoming traffic. There were several occasions when I hoped my life insurance was paid up. Then I thought it won’t matter because we’ll all be killed by the giant brown truck bearing down on us, on the wrong side of the road. On another occasion, returning to Delhi after visiting the Taj Mahal we had to constantly engage the driver in conversation to stop him falling asleep. That was a long three hours. We later learned the toll road we drove on had been recently constructed, cutting the trip in half. It used to be six hours. 

This type of experience is captured eloquently in Mark Honan’s account, with the religious tokens in the vehicles, the driver habit of sitting on the horn with one arm and the other on the steering wheel, and the suicidal passing manoeuvres on appalling roads. One thing we did not do was travel by train, but Honan did: he describes crowds surging towards an already over packed carriage, in stifling heat. His spectacles were a predictable casualty. He has a big pack on his back, and a small one in front. The train is going at a funereal pace. Many hands around him push the big pack up so he had to carry it all the way in his arms. But he has no problem standing up because of the press of bodies around him. No matter that he is leaning at an angle of 10 degrees. Just as well he is not claustrophobic.