Rating: 4/5

"The Invisible Collection" contains ten stories that embody a spectrum of human experiences. It touches on passion for a pursuit deemed worthy (e.g., art and/or beauty), obsession with unattainable objects of desire, delusional behaviors, deception of others in the service of self, and losses that obliterate motivation for living. The stories share a disturbing and searching quality in rendering visible the character flaws that we are too well acquainted with. Most of the stories are very good but a couple is quite weak. The prose is beautiful, with an intoxicating, even mesmerizing, quality, especially in its power to evoke a sense of the mystical or sensual or unutterable. This is my first acquaintance with Stefan Zweig and I look forward to reading more of his work. 

The Invisible Collection
It was the time of the German inflation in Berlin, a time when philistines felt compelled to buy art when money had become worthless. An art dealer told a deeply moving story of an elderly blind art collector. The latter inhabited the world of his art collection so much so that blindness did not rob him of his enjoyment of the pieces he had painstakingly acquired over 60 years. He could still see every piece in joyous detail even though in truth and unbeknownst to himself his collection had been sold off to put bread on the table. The art dealer told a white lie but the guilt was perhaps worth it for the ecstasy it reawakened in the old art collector when sharing his prized collection with a fellow art lover. This old art collector had a passion so deep that the loss of sight could not obscure his intimate knowledge of and pleasure in his art collection. Would you tell a white lie if only to safeguard the one thing that gives a man pride and dignity?

Twilight
The heart is deceitful above all else. This is an epic story about deception set in France. Madam de Prie, a French mistress of a disgraced prime minister, was exiled to her country estate and stripped of the fawning adoration of high society on which her vanity and survival depended. Her massive effort to deceive others and herself culminated in a last bid to stage a dramatic exit. But death had the last laugh. 

The Miracles of Life
This is an atmospheric and melancholic story about an old painter painting a commissioned picture of the Madonna for an altar piece. At its heart was an adolescent Jewish girl - traumatized by war as an infant - who was persuaded by the painter's gentleness to act as a model for this painting. What was wondrously captured was how this emotionally stunted young girl bonded with the baby Jesus model she carried and played with while she sat for the painting. It spoke of miracles that led to the choice of models for the painting of the Madonna. The young girl who hated Christianity was a half-hearted participant in the painting, and yet she came to embody the essence of that painting. Ironically too, as events turned out, the painter lost faith because miracles do not necessarily lead to transfiguration. 

A Story Told In Twilight
It was summer and a grey rainy day was drawing to an end. The narrator was asked to tell a story. 15-year-old Bob spent a sensual summer in a Scottish castle where he had a sensual encounter with one of his cousins. Because it was dark he didn't know who it was but it led him to be obsessed with the mystery girl. As it turned out, the girl who kissed him wasn't the girl he thought he loved. Even when the identity of the mystery person was revealed, he clung to his obsession with the persona he created of his secret admirer instead of cherishing the cousin whose caresses attracted him to her in the first place. The mystery of the garden in the misty dark and the secret moments of rapture and confusion were very well captured. 

Wondrak
This is a story about deception borne of a mother's protective instincts. A woman called "Death's Head" - facially deformed from congenital syphilis - had a son after she was raped by three strangers in the forests. When time came for her son to be conscripted into the army, she hid him. It was amazing how her fear of losing her only son and kin shook her out of her reclusive way of life to court the sympathy and support of the town folks. The motivation behind her deception is understandable and her courage at defying the military police remarkable. The son appeared rather spineless and unbelievably compliant to his mother's deception plan - not too convincing a character. Zweig did not complete this story. What would happen to her son? How would she survive? 

Downfall of the Heart
A 65-year-old man stricken with a gall bladder infection was on vacation in Italy with his self-indulgent wife and his 19-year-old daughter. He suspected that his daughter was sleeping around but could not bring himself to confront her. He suffered silently his disappointment at his daughter's moral laxity and his wife's self-absorbed concern with having a good time. That alienation from his family, disgust at their behaviour, his sense of impotence ate at him until his heart finally gave way. His heart brokenness at his wife and daughter's shallow lives and shame of his shabbiness eventually led to heart failure. I did not take to this story. 

Leporella
This is a very sad story about Crescenz, a 39-year-old female servant who was wooden and joyless but hardworking and strong like a horse. She worked for a young cavalier Baron and his extremely wealthy but estranged wife. What made this story powerful was the way Zweig gradually built up the processes by which Crescenz became obsessed with serving the Baron's needs and supporting his amorous adventures and conquests in a dog-like fashion as well as the enmity she slowly felt toward his wife. The psychology of self-abnegation and complete subservience to another human being was so convincingly portrayed as did the potential for self-destruction when the "master" of one's devotion ceased to want or desire that cloying and unnerving attention. Crescenz put too much store in the small acts of attention and kindness the Baron showed her. Her delusion as to its meaning generated an appreciation and subservience that was totally out of proportion. I felt really sorry for Crescenz. 

Did He Do It?
I did not like this story about a vindictive dog that was so jealous of a newborn that it plunged her and her pram into a canal. The obsession of the dog for attention from its masters was diabolical. The story did not seem real to me. The dog was rendered too human like in its neurotic craving for affection and its venomous plotting for revenge. It over-stretched the imagination. 

Amok
This shocking and tragic story carried the strongest emotional charge for me in this collection. I felt a range of emotions: disgust, revulsion, anger, pity and sadness. A doctor refused an abortion to a woman desperate to hide her infidelity from her husband who was due to return home. The doctor was obsessed in breaking the pride of this confident, self-assured woman who would not cave in to his demand for sex as the price for helping her. The woman was driven to deception in a frantic need to preserve her honor and reputation. She died from a botched abortion in the back lanes and the doctor could not save her in time when he was summoned to her rescue. Her last cry was for the doctor to promise to keep her secret. What seemed inauthentic was how the doctor related to the woman's aggrieved young lover. The doctor professed that he "wanted to love him..because she had loved him." That struck me as somewhat implausible and forced. If there was one act of decency it was in the doctor keeping his promise, but that came at too high a cost. This was a tragedy of two flawed and obstinate people pitting their will against each other. Human weaknesses - allowed to run amok - carry a force so furiously destructive no tragedy can be averted. 

The Star Above The Forest
A beautifully heartbreaking story. A poor waiter was infatuated with a Baroness who had no inkling of his devotion to her. Her impending departure spelt the end of his dream of remaining in her presence which then led him to put himself under the train that was taking her to Warsaw. I read this story with my heart racing and aching for this lovelorn man and wished he would change his mind and snap out of his crazed enchantment with a woman who had no way of knowing or returning his affection. Inexplicably, the Baroness was overcome by a deep sadness and pain at the time of the suicide. Although an inexact comparison, the waiter's obsession reminded me of the folly of the young men in Max Beerbohm's "Zuleika Dobson". (In this instance unlike the latter, the waiter had no amorous encouragement from the Baroness.) What a lavish emotion love is! What a great travesty against the sanctity of life itself when a person's obsessive desire blinds him to other possibilities for the future and removes all hope.