Rating: 5/5

“People don't do things without a reason.”  

The Sittaford Mystery is a 1931 detective novel set in a snowy English countryside. Despite an inspector investigating the murder, a female amateur sleuth solves the case.

During inclement weather, a mother and daughter, who have let the isolated Sittaford House for the winter, held a séance (called a table-turning in the book) for entertainment and invited the guests staying at the six cottages on the property. It is from the séance that they learn of Captain Trevelyan’s murder, owner of Sittaford House and who was staying at a house in town for the winter. Everyone thinks the message about the murder is just a distasteful joke. Without another way to check on Captain Trevelyan, a guest sets off for his residence by walking in blizzard conditions. Once the murder is confirmed, the police investigation begins. 

I listened to the wonderfully narrated audio by Hugh Fraser. Everything about it makes it worthy of recommending. However, this book has a large cast. So, arm yourself with a character list before starting. I had to refer to my list frequently until several chapters into the book, then I rarely needed it again. 

The victim, Captain Trevelyan, was an extremely wealthy man, so part of the investigation was focused on who would benefit from his will. That’s at least four family members, plus his servant (and wife and mother-in-law). There are numerous people who can claim Captain Trevelyan as their landlord. Could they have had a grudge against him? Could the escaped convict, from a nearby town, have committed the murder? What about the blizzard, who could have been outside in such conditions? 

While the inspector (and various police and doctor) investigates the evidence, an amateur sleuth, Emily Trefusis, fiancée of a suspect, teams up with a journalist from the city to do their own investigation. Emily is convinced the police are targeting an innocent person. 

This is a complex plot that had several mini story threads. It had interesting characters and multiple suspects. It had schemes and red herrings. The subplots added intriguing layers. I had no idea how this would end. The solution was cleverly devised. In fact, I think this is one of the most interesting and satisfying mysteries that I’ve read by Christie. 

The Sittaford Mystery is a perfect choice if you are looking for a mystery to match the winter season. It has all the classic elements you’d find in a golden age mystery. And being a fan of book-to-film reads, my only regret is this novel wasn’t adapted to full-feature film.