Rating: 4/5

Darwin applies his theory of natural selection to humans in ways that are not supported by today’s evolutionary science. Echoing Malthus, Darwin frames his argument by saying that reproduction outpaces the resources necessary to support a population and this creates competitive pressure that natural selection acts upon. “As all animals tend to multiply beyond their means of subsistence,” he writes, “so it must have been with the progenitors of man; and this would inevitably lead to a struggle for existence and to natural selection.” The strong survive to propagate their kind; the weak die off. Groups extended and amplified this competition, pitting one group against the other. “Savages, when hard pressed, encroach on each other’s territories, and war is the result,” Darwin writes, “but they are indeed almost always at war with their neighbors.” The stronger group reproduces its kind and advances the species.

As to what constitutes group strength, Darwin focused on the “arts,” by which he meant intelligence to create superior warfare technology. “Civilized nations are everywhere supplanting barbarous nations,” Darwin states, “and they succeed mainly…through their arts which are the products of the intellect. It is, therefore, highly probable that with mankind the intellectual faculties have been mainly and gradually perfected through natural selection….” This knowledge is passed on to succeeding generations, thereby advancing the group’s superior strength. (1) Group strength was also directly related to the “moral” faculties, the social instincts, that brought the group together. This involved a willingness to cooperate for the good of the group. And, with the advance of “reasoning powers,” Darwin writes, “each man would soon learn that if he aided his fellow-men, he would commonly receive aid in return.” (2) Then, bringing in Lamarck’s inheritance of acquired characteristics, Darwin says that “from this low motive he might acquire the habit of aiding his fellows; and the habit of performing benevolent actions certainly strengthens the feeling of sympathy which gives the first impulse to benevolent actions. Habits, moreover, followed during many generations probably tend to be inherited.” Hume’s approbation and disapprobation supplements reason-based cooperation. “Praise and blame” rests on sympathy (here, sympathy means a capacity to know how others view oneself, as opposed to care for the plight of others). Endowed with such cohesive-inducing attitudes, all of this now translates into the advantage of one tribe over another and the advance of the species. (3) 

Darwin then applies his thinking to “civilized nations.” We “do our utmost to check the process of elimination,” he writes, and allow “the weak to propagate their kind.” (4) Darwin refers to the “imbecile(s), the maimed, and the sick,” though it’s clear that he applies his theory to moral and intellectual capacities as well. If the checks “do not prevent the reckless, the vicious and otherwise inferior members of society from increasing at a quicker rate than the better class of men, the nation will retrograde, as has too often occurred in the history of the world.” 

A few critical comments: First, were all groups hostile? Wasn’t there also cooperation for mutual benefit? Or, just an uneasy coexistence? More importantly, didn’t the struggle for existence apply to the environment as a whole (and not just hostile groups), and wouldn’t this necessitate a mutually dependent, cooperative, network that created genetic-reproductive benefits for all? Prior to Chapter V, Darwin seemed to recognize that the social instincts were created by natural selection to provide mutual survival benefits: “With those animals which were benefited by living in close association the individuals which took the greatest pleasure in society would best escape various dangers, whilst those that cared least for their comrades, and lived solitary, would perish in greater numbers.” 

Second, although Darwin’s group selection and the inheritance of acquired traits (habits and emulation) are generally considered to be inaccurate, Darwin was getting at something. If, as discussed above, the group is essential to individual survival, then the unit of selection can remain still at the gene-individual level. Now Trivers’ reciprocal altruism (mutual benefits) and Dawkins’ extended phenotype notion (the group as an extension of the individual gene’s interest) can work within a Darwinian context. 

How might these social tendencies be passed along genetically in a way that avoids Darwin’s Lamarckian language? Evolutionary scientists today define altruism to mean actions that benefit the genetic success of others at the expense of the self. That is not the dictionary definition of altruism. Even if it were, that definition stipulates that those with altruistic tendencies always died before reproducing when it is just as likely that they did not die and were able to pass along their other-regarding traits. And, given the integral connection by the individual-gene and group interest for survival and reproductive success, is it not possible that the social instincts evolved, as they did for parent-child relationships, because of the extensive and intensive reciprocal benefits and that those who were more other-regarding were able to pass along the same tendencies to their progeny?

Third, Darwin is at his best in emphasizing the role of variability (physical, mental, moral) among individuals. Given this, is it not possible that some are more other-regarding than others, at their genetic core? The benefits of other regarding behavior are clear for the reasons argued above. The survival benefits of an egoistic, self-regarding strategy are also clear (i.e., individuals who dominate, manipulate or deceive others). In other words, could there could be the twin poles of a successful evolutionary strategy, with most of us lying at points in between.

Darwin also did not pick up on the implications of Hume’s argument that reason is a slave to passion. Given the variability of human nature, and the possible poles of human nature that lie at our genetic core, the advancement of reason does not lead, as Darwin believed (e.g., “highly civilized nations do not supplant and exterminate one another as do savage tribes”) to a common good. Reason is the advance of means and technique, but reason doesn’t change the motive force that comes from a relatively fixed character or disposition. Reason that rests on an other-regarding foundation is one thing. Reason that serves an egoistic nature is quite another. 

1. “Now, if some one man in a tribe, more sagacious than the others, invented a new snare or weapon, or other means of attack or defence, the plainest self-interest, without the assistance of much reasoning power, would prompt the other members to imitate him; and all would thus profit. The habitual practice of each new art must likewise in some slight degree strengthen the intellect. If the new invention were an important one, the tribe would increase in number, spread, and supplant other tribes. In a tribe thus rendered more numerous there would always be a rather greater chance of the birth of other superior and inventive members.” 

2. “When two tribes of primeval man, living in the same country, came into competition, if…the one tribe included a great number of courageous, sympathetic and faithful members, who were always ready to warn each other of danger to aid and defend each other this tribe would succeed better and conquer the other….Selfish and contentious people will not cohere and without coherence nothing can be effected. A tribe rich in the above qualities would spread and be victorious over other tribes: but in the course of time it would, judging from all past history, in its turn overcome by some other tribe still more highly endowed. Thus the social and moral qualities would tend slowly to advance and be diffused throughout the world.” 

3. “[An] increase in the number of well-endowed men and an advancement in the standard of morality will certainly give an immense advantage to one tribe over another. A tribe including many members who, from possessing in a high degree the spirit of patriotism, fidelity, obedience, courage, and sympathy, were always ready to aid one another, and to sacrifice themselves for the common good, would be victorious over most other tribes; and this would be natural selection. At all times throughout the world tribes have supplanted other tribes; and as morality is one important element in their success, the standard of morality and the number of well-endowed men will thus everywhere tend to rise and increase.” 

4. “No one who has attended to the breeding of domestic animals will doubt that this must be highly injurious to the race of man. It is surprising how soon a want of care, or care wrongly directed, leads to the degeneration of a domestic race; but excepting in the case of man himself, hardly anyone is so ignorant as to allow his worst animals to breed.”