Rating: 3/5

Horrid Henry's underpants is a book with 4 short stories.

The first about horrid Henry eatting his vegetables, which he wasn't very keen on, so in true horrid Henry style he tricked mum and dad into believing he had eaten them a whole 5 days in order to get a treat. The treat being to eat at his favourite restaurant. At the end of the week after he had fooled the whole family they go to Gobble and go for dinner but find its closed and replaced by a rest that specialises in vegetables, which mum and dad think are perfect now Henry's a huge fan!

The second is about a pair of pink, frilly,hearts printed all over them, pair of PANTS that aunt greta had given him as a present, which he hides in embarrassment in his pant draw. That is until one day he is late for school and rushes to get dressed and puts on those PANTS! It isn't until he is at school that he realises. He tries to solve his problem but nothing seems to work so he gets rid of the pants and goes pant less, it was nearly the end of the day and last lesson and nobody knew he had pink pants or was now pant less. Except the last lesson happened to be PE!

Sick day, the third story. Peter Henry's younger brother is ill and gets the day off school so Henry fakes being ill so he too could stay at home. He had so many ideas of things to do while at home, TV, computer, games but if he was ill, he was to stay in bed. His plan back fires and it turns out thw whole family if ill but him and he has to run around looking after everyone. School seems the better option after all.

The final story horrid Henry's thank you letter. Henry has a plan for everything. He was asked to write thank you letters for the gifts he received at Christmas and so he did, although, they were not very nice ones. This triggered a plan, he was to set up a business writing thank you letters for the children in the neighbourhood to give to their families. He cut all corners and made a general letter to send to everyone, again his plan back fired and all the children got into trouble and Henry was to blame!

This book is aimed at key stage 2. The quick short stories are ideal as you could read a while story at once with a child. Although Henry comes up with all these crazy, imaginative plans they never seem to go his way. The moral of the story is to think things through, your first idea may not always be the best. I think the children would find the book laugh out loud funny!