Rating: 4/5

Its safe to say that spending a lot of time in introspection, and dealing with the fallout of a failed relationship has been a powerful motivator to get these particular self help books read. Sadly I have also come to the realization that even if I had read them.. they wouldnt have saved that relationship, in fact they probably would have made them worse for reasons that were core to why it failed to begin with.

But this isnt going to be badmouthing my ex. Despite how in reading any of these by far the hardest part is taking that hard look at yourself instead of working yourself up into a.. lets call it an 'unkind emotional state' and ruthlessly listing all their faults and how wronged you feel. If you read one of these books it is extremely important to focus the information on yourself and not your partner or you are preemptively defeating the whole point of reading a self help book on relationships.

The book itself is rather dry, but extremely clear. It gives you some history on each theory and the theories that came before it, cites its sources regularly and gives tangible examples and workable (but diverse) sets you and your partner can take to approach a number of problems. It doesnt try and sell one big overarching point, instead it breaks itself down and even tells you outright at the beginning that you should only focus and read on the sections that apply to you. (Yes I read it all regardless. What did you expect).

The book helped me a lot, even if it would have made the past relationship worse. It helped shine a harsh light on some of my own bigger flaws once I was willing to sit down and think on it. And with that and a bit of hindsight I think I can apply some lessons here to both be a better man going forward.

One important thing to note. And the book even tries to quietly warn you away from it. Is that its a book about couple skills. For couples. If only one party reads it and tries the things listed here it not only probably wont help too much, but it might break a toxic cycle only to replace it with another one if you arent both on the same page. In hindsight this will help me be a better man, but in the heat of the moment reading it alone it would have made me a worse partner.