Rating: 2/5

I am giving this book two stars and that is being generous. Not that it is badly written or anything, but it was NOT what I was expecting. I finished it only because it was too cold to get out of bed and go look for something else.

Having recently read Lost in the Barrens, I was expecting another story about wilderness, wildlife and friendship. Little did I know that this book is not fiction. It is actually an autobiographical account of Farley Mowat's military service in WWII. I was unprepared, to say the least. I'm not too crazy about war books to begin with, but this one came off as a little dry, although I admit that once in a while a turn of phrase would almost have me smiling. I do appreciate Mowat's ability to write. However, this particular story did not interest me all that much. I felt that the characters weren't developed enough for me to really care about them. It feels cold to say that, because they were all real-life human beings. But the story was too journalistic. It seemed like a list of dates, transfers and soldiers' names that all seemed to blend into one. It seemed kind of monotonous. Once the young Farley Mowat got to Italy, there was more action, but once again the story failed to draw me in. I wasn't even horrified at some of the descriptions of people dying. It was just too dry.

Even the ending of the book was disappointing. We do not see Farley Mowat safely home after the war. Instead, we leave him with tears in his eyes at the loss of one of his fellow soldiers. I felt that the end of the book came too abruptly. As long as I had stuck with it that far, I felt disappointed that I didn't at least get a nice coming-home anecdote for having having stuck with the book to the end.

The reason I am giving this book two stars instead of one is that there is a slight chance that, had I known what I was getting into, I may have been more open to the story. Perhaps part of the reason I wasn't drawn to the characters is that I was holding back. I do appreciate Mowat's writing and I still have some of his books that I really want to read, especially The Desperate People, which I have yet to find used or at the library. So I will stick with this author, but I won't be rereading this particular book.