Rating: 4/5

Although this is my first written review of this book, it isn't my first time reading it. In fact, I'm not even sure how many times I have read it, but it must be 3 or 4 times. That alone gives an indication that it is one of my favorite "comfort" reads! It is that, for sure, although this time through I did read it with a more critical eye and discovered some flaws that didn't bother me before, but now rankle somewhat. The author uses some language and attitudes in expressing the fictional opinions of one of her narrators, Lydia Walker, that would never have been used in the 1850's, the time period of her "tale." Through-out the book, there are several continuity issues which should have been picked up by careful editing.
However, any book by Norah Lofts, despite a few errors, is almost always going to be far better than any current book of historical fiction! This author is a master storyteller who knows her history and how to use her narrative skills! She is just a delight to read because one becomes immersed in the interwoven lives of the families who dwell in the environs of her fictional world in and around Layer Wood. These families make appearances in all her books which are set in her home county of Suffolk. This particular tale is the third and last part of her "House" trilogy, the others being: THE TOWN HOUSE and THE HOUSE AT OLD VINE. Of the three, I feel this one is the least enjoyable. It may be because the house itself is now in decline and it is painful to think of it sliding away into obscurity and ruin. Also, she brings it up to what was the present day when it was written, but even that, 1956, is now a long time ago, so that one can't help but wonder what its fate may have been at this late date. I found the ending unsatisfying and loose-ended.
Although I admire the author, Norah Lofts, tremendously, she does not go in for the traditional happy ending and most of her books are bittersweet at best. This one is even more somber than most! Having said that, it's still a great read and one I will continue to turn to when I want to feel comfortable in a well-known story that feels like home.