Rating: 5/5

I picked this book up from a free shelf, never intending to read it myself, but rather obtaining it for my husband who has taken a recent interest in the desert. After reading it, he insisted I read it as well. In all honestly, I didn't have high expectations of it, so I was surprised when I ended up enjoying it immensely! Writing a book from the perspective of animals is a tricky task, but I've never seen it done so well. The author has a great understanding of coyotes and it really shows through the writing. She describes the way the animals perceive the world and communicate so well, I'm convinced this is the closest we will ever be reading the thoughts of animals. The author also has a unique way of switching narrators without the story coming to a full-stop, yet also without leading to confusion. I don't know if I've ever come across that writing style before. Although the majority of the story follows the coyotes, there are little dips into humanity that filled me with rage, disgust, pity, love, horror, fear, sadness and heartbreak. Not that the coyotes' story was lacking any of those emotions. Despite the fact that the entire novel is in a desert setting, the descriptions of the landscape and surroundings never get dull or redundant. It is inadvertently educational about the land and the animals without feeling like a lesson at all. Even over 15 years later, it is still relevant and I wish it would get more attention, particularly in my corner of the United States. For what I would consider a short book, it has left quite the impact on me and has opened my eyes to a whole new world. This is definitely not in my usual genre and I am glad that I ventured out and read it anyway. I would love to read more by this author, but I appreciate the fact that she wrote a novel on something she fully understood and then stopped there. Her writing style is beautiful, though; I can only hope that she eventually decides to write another novel about something she cares about.