Rating: 4/5

The Lord Won't Mind by Gordon Merrick - First book in the trilogy

Peter Martin is coming to visit Charlie Mills in the family's country house in New Jersey. Charlie's grandmother, Armira Barton Collinge - C. B. - has arranged it. Soon they are in love. Charlie is older: he has just finished college (Princeton) and is about to start a job in New York City the next fall. Peter is nineteen, just graduated from high school and was supposed to start West Point in the fall. C. B. wants Peter to go to Princeton, so she's counting on Charlie to dissuade him from entering the armed forces. "Friendship is much more important to a man than marriage. A man can never be friends with his wife." So she's very happy to hear that Peter wants to go to Columbia instead. The boys have decided since they are going to be together forever, Peter will move to New York and attend Columbia while Charlie works for the publishing company C. B. has arranged. C. B. suggest that they move in together in Charlie's apartment in Manhattan. 

As summer ends and they move to New York City, the idyllic relationship runs into trouble. Charlie has problems dealing with his sexuality and starts dating Harriet (Hattie) Donaldson. Peter is too busy with school and too tired to be with Charlie. As Peter comes out to C. B. Charlie kicks him out of their apartment and decides to marry Hattie. All of Charlie's actions are done to please C. B. and to make sure he doesn't lose her allowance. 

Peter survives the streets by having sex with men who give him presents, which he sells for money. Until he meets the millionaire eccentric Walter Pitney, who sets him up with a large sun of money and an apartment. Peter falls in love with a successful lawyer, Timothy (Tim) Thornton. 

But Hattie figures out Charlie's true nature and they fight. In a night of rage, Hattie bites off Charlie's dick and Charlie in turn beats up Hattie. Charlie runs up to Peter who has to save him from his demons. A reconciliation that has been long overdue happens. 

The book is a fun read, addictive, sexy - the closest thing to erotica that the 70's allowed. During most of Merrick's life, homosexuality was still viewed in the American culture as a moral outrage. Editors and film censors demanded that gay men be depicted objectionably, and that gay relationships end tragically in literature and on film. Merrick, however, wrote stories which depicted well-adjusted gay men engaged in romantic relationships. He even made them have a happy ending....

The book is told from the third person point of view; however, Merrick uses the first person point of view both at the beginning and at the end as to make the book "autobiographical." His point of view is interchanged many times between Peter and Charlie to the point that sometimes it is hard to know who is doing the narrating. 

The book deals with race in the forties. C. B. wants to keep Charlie celibate because the family has black blood and she doesn't want the world to know about it. C. B. thinks that African Americans are: "...like children or very nice animals. It's a scientific fact that their craniums are smaller than ours." When Charlie walks up to a party in Harlem, his blood raises because white men and "Negroes" are sharing the same space, even touching each other. 

Misogynistic episodes also abound the book. When Charlie exposes himself to Betty Pringle, the male club members fault her for doing so because Charlie had a reputation of being well endowed. Hattie, who uses a diaphragm, wants a career, will sleep with men to get it, and says she'll marry several times does not have a good ending. When Charlie beats up Hattie, her family forces her to keep quiet because it would ruin her reputation if it were to become public. For that matter, none of the women do. C. B., for all her independence, ends up alone and miserable. Exposed for what she is: a manipulative bigot.

Love is treated like a commodity that you can trade as easily as stocks. After one sexual encounter, Peter and Charlie are declaring their love for each other and promising eternal faithfulness - not to mention that they are willing to move in together. After one sexual encounter, Charlie trades Hattie for Peter and marries her. Peter falls for Tim, but as soon as Charlie comes back, it's back with Charlie. 

Homosexuality is dealt through the characters. it is through Charlie's anguish that the reader catches a glimpse of Merrick's interest in the problems the gay male experiences establishing an identity. Charlie's socially imposed resistance is in contrast to Peter's childlike innocence. When Charlie eventually throws Peter out and marries a Hattie to protect his reputation, every reader, straight or gay, can detest his duplicity and weakness, but must also empathize with the situation that Charlie has had forced upon him by the intolerant society of the times. As Charlie works through the aftermath of the violence with Hattie, he slowly comes to realize that honesty and self-acceptance are the only way out. Merrick presents this self-isolation as a necessary first step on the road to self-realization. 

Then there is Walter Pitney. Here Merrick presents one side of "older" gay: the one who's very rich but is unable to "love," one who's unable to have physical intimacy. 

A wonderful study of society in the late forties: especially on its views on race, love, homosexuality, and women. 

A good read!