Rating: 4/5

Pulp history

I always wanted to be a G-man.

Burrough's treatment of 1930s crime is only a few generations away from the books I devoured as a kid. Books chock full of hoods, coppers, molls and bullets. Mel Purvis bringing down Dillinger &amp; and Ma Barker dying with a machine gun in her hands. 

Public Enemies and the books I used to read have the same source - the FBI itself.

The key difference is that while my childhood books relied on the FBI's PR wing, Burroughs relies on internal FBI reports that were only declassified in the last few decades.

Needless to say, the internal reports are nothing like the idealized history I know.

Ma Barker did not die with a machine gun in her hands, and Mel Purvis wasn't much of a sleuth.

Burrough supplements his FBI sources with manuscripts and interviews, and he says all the right things in the first few pages. If he does not know something (he writes in the intro) - he will say so.

The omniscient tone of the narrative suggests there is little Burrough does not know. He takes you into the private meetings of G-men and criminals - into alleyways and roadhouses. He weaves the stories of multiple gangs together over a more or less continuous timeline. This makes for a great story, but also helps you appreciate how many of these underworld figures rose and fell in less than two years.

Burrough clearly enjoys demolishing established myths of the gangland era. There are no shortages of targets. 

Burrough singles out Bonnie &amp; Clyde for a particularly vehement takedown. Absent the movie, he claims, these two nobodys would have faded into the ignominy they so richly deserved.

Public Enemies does one thing better than any other book I've read on this subject: it makes you appreciate the how different the 1930s were. Seven decades ago, a fast car would allow criminals to escape police – and the outcome of a shootout between the police and trapped gangsters was often in doubt. To the modern mind, these ideas make no sense - but a few chapters into Public Enemies, they start to sink in. It was an entirely different world then - and those differences spawned criminals who in turn spawned a national police force that struggled (mostly against its own incompetence) to bring them down.

Great stuff.