Rating: 5/5

One of the best stories I’ve read about the Civil War. Mr. McElroy speaks his mind as a prisoner of Andersonville and a few other Confederate prisons he was kept at. 

How many have heard over the years that the holocaust could never happen again? The treatment of Union soldiers and the lack of humanity show them will have readers seeing the seeds of what the world would witness seventy years later in Nazi Germany. No, I’m not making a comparison to the Confederacy and Nazi Germany. I’m pointing out that men of unstable mental status when put in power over others will not only abuse their power, but when called to trial will say, “We were only following orders.” 

The story is not for the weak of heart. The prisoners were provided no shelter or sanitation facilities. Andersonville was a terrible place run by a tyrant, Wirz. The author paints an extremely vivid and at times horrendous picture of the everyday struggle to survive. In the beginning, he would lament over the loss of comrades but as time marched on and the losses mounted, he became less traumatized and more interested in what clothing or useful items he could obtain from his passed brethren. On the average, at least twenty men would die from disease, infection, starvation or loss of hope each day. Sound familiar? 

What is even more fascinating is his descriptions of the different factions that formed in the prison. The “New Yorkers” were the most notorious. They preyed on any and every one they determined were weak or needed to be relieved of their valuables. 

After reading this, one might not picture the confederate prison guards in a fair light. I know I did at times. How could men shoot defenceless prisoners for sport, simple whims or justification with no penalty? Top the squalor, lice and hopelessness of the confined and you will feel as depressed as they were. How the author survived is a true testament to self-survival. 

In all fairness, I’ll be seeking out works detailing with the Union prison camps. Appears Camp Douglas had many of the same deadly problems. 

Some readers might not be keen on the language of the time. This is written with the words of the late Nineteenth Century which can be a bit off. There are some grammatical and formatting issues but nothing to detract from this honest memoir. 

An excellent addition for Civil War buffs. 

Five stars