Rating: 3/5

An immensely frustrating read. Part of me is reluctant to rate it low, because there's plenty of good information and many beautiful pictures, but it's just not well assembled. The space devoted to sections on "furniture" and "lifestyle" is beyond excessive, reserving more than half of the text for things that are not drapery: this would be a forgivable indulgence were it not for the constant occurrence of "missing images," or things described cryptically or obscurely in the text that are not given an accompanying illustration. The book seems to have been written half for a beginner audience who know nothing about historical periods and need their hands held with the most basic background information, and half for an audience of experts who will simply already be familiar with the "scallop technique" used on certain 18th century upholstery.

The last chapter, devoted to practical advice on selecting drapery, was frustrating for other reasons. It is also under-illustrated, though not quite to the same degree. But Gibbs, who has been an admirably neutral chronicler of design for most of the book, tips her hand a bit when she approvingly refers to certain drapery treatments and details as "interesting" or "adding interest." This is a middle-Victorian sentiment from which the thoughtful client should run screaming. It is the path not only to clutter, but dull clutter. It means you have lost a coherent vision for the space that would guide you toward what is truly appropriate. The problem is not so much that the treatments are ugly (which is not only a subjective judgment but irrelevant, as ugly things may be passionately loved and therefore welcome in a home), as it is with the fact that even the person recommending them cannot summon any words of praise stronger than "interesting." Things which are merely interesting are bric-a-brac.

Also she says viscose is easy-clean and less absorbent than natural fibers, which is crazy, but I'm just kvetching now. This book has lots of useful content and will stay on my shelf - it just won't be the first reference I reach for.