Rating: 1/5

Hadrian VII is one of those books that sound more interesting than they are, at least for someone like me who delights in eccentrics, ornate writing, decadence, bitter old queens, and the pomp and politics of the Catholic Church. Yet Frederick Rolfe's book is so self-indulgent, and the personality it reveals so repellent, that the very act of completing it became a distasteful chore.

A brief biography can make Rolfe sound like a fascinating man. Born in London in 1860 of a prosperous Protestant family, he taught at the prestigious Grantham School (where allegedly Isaac Newton's youthful signature may still be seen, carved on the wall of the library). An unabashed homosexual and confirmed ephebephile, Rolfe apparently kept his hands off his pupils, contenting himself with young adult friends in England and—later—with the gondoliers of Venice.

Rolfe converted to Catholicism at twenty-six, convinced he was destined to become a priest, but was thrown out of two separate seminaries for his lack of concentration and his unpredictable behavior. He regretted the loss of the priesthood all his life, habitually referring to himself as “Fr Rolfe,” hoping the “Fr” for “Frederick” might be taken for “Father.”

Although he eked out a living as a writer, he was frequently compelled to rely on the kindness of patrons, most of whom he managed to alienate. One of these patrons was the Duchess Sforza Severini, who invited him to summer at her estate near Rome (where, having formed friendships with the local youths, he soon immersed himself in the local culture), and who subsequently granted him a monthly allowance to pursue his authorial ambitions. She soon withdrew her allowance, however, but not before—or at least so Rolfe claimed—she not only adopted him as her grandson but also granted him the privilege of referring to himself as “Baron Corvo,” a title he used as his principal nom de plume.” He died of a stroke in Venice, at the age of fifty-three.

Hadrian VII begins as a fictionalized and expanded version of Rolfe's journalistic account of the 1903 papal election, but it soon becomes a monument to his own ego and a shameless piece of wish-fulfillment. The protagonist George Arthur Rose--an impoverished middle-aged English writer living in a tiny London apartment with his little yellow cat--is contemplating what his life has become when three Catholic cardinals visit him unexpectedly. They apologize for the injustice perpetrated upon him years before when he was expelled from seminary, and ask him if he wishes to be ordained as soon as possible, become secretary to one of the three cardinals, and attend the papal conclave. Soon Father Rose is in Rome, where, the conclave having become deadlocked, he is elected pope.

Up to this point, the book has a certain charm. Rolfe shows self-knowledge in his initial portrait of Rose, and his account of the politics of the papal election is interesting. It soon becomes clear, however, that Rolphe knows himself so well only because he loves himself so much, and that he believes that every injury done to him was unmerited, that each of his virtues is extraordinary, that every idea he has ever had is original and useful, and that if he only had a decent platform—if, say, for example, he was the pope—he could solve not only the problems of the church but also fix the political mess in Central Europe. He also believes he could do so in such a manner that everyone—excluding only his natural enemies, the predatory female and the working-class socialist—would love him as a saint and venerate him as a martyr. 

Nowhere in this fantasy can I discern any irony or saving perspective. If he is not admiring himself, then he is settling old scores. Baron Corvo is in love with himself, and he expects us to be too.

I was also disappointed in Rolfe's style. I expected faux fin-de-siecle, redolent of Ruskin, Pater, and Wilde, sonorous and colorful—a British version of Clark Ashton Smith; I received instead a dry-as-dust, unmusical prose, distinguished only by a bizarre latinate vocabulary.

Yes, Hadrian VII was a big disappointment. But I should know better by now. Once again, I made the same mistake I have been making in books and music--and friends--ever since I was a boy: if it is obscure and bizarre, it's gotta be good.