Rating: 5/5

Farley Mowat is remembered for his genial, often humorous natural history books such as Never Cry Wolf and Owls in the Family. He wrote with an engaging style and had the ability to artfully describe situations while giving the reader useful and interesting insights into the natural world. 

This book is nothing like those. This is a Coming of Age Under Fire book, written in a style reminiscent of World War One memoirs such as Guy Chapman’s A Passionate Prodigality and Robert Graves’s Good-Bye to All That. It starts with youthful enthusiasm and high spirits and ends with shattering despair in the rain-swept, corpse-strewn Italian mountains. He only survived because once he reached the end of his endurance as an infantry platoon leader he was transferred to staff positions at the battalion and later division levels. 

Nothing about his behavior should be seen as failure. He had reached the point that all infantrymen reach, if they live long enough. Combat destroys minds as well as bodies. In 1946 the U.S. Army released a Report of the Special Commission of Civilian Psychiatrists Covering Psychiatric Policy and Practice in the U. S. Army Medical Corps, ETO, and stated

Psychiatric casualties are as inevitable as gunshot and shrapnel wounds in warfare…Most men were ineffective after 180 or even 140 days. The general consensus was that a man reached his peak of effectiveness in the first 90 days of combat, that after that his efficiency began to fall off, and that he became steadily less valuable thereafter until he was completely useless…The number of men on duty after 200 to 240 days of combat was small and their value to their units negligible. 

Mowat was in the Hastings and Prince Edward Regiment of the 1st Canadian Division, which was among the first wave of troops to land in Sicily in July 1943. His battalion was quickly engaged in bitter fighting against well-equipped German troops. By this time many of the Italian soldiers had had enough of the war, but they too put up stubborn resistance in many cases. Mowat watched as casualties mounted and the strains of combat began to tell on himself and everyone around him. He also noted the absurdities of war, such as

Alex, who had come up unseen behind us, was flushed and furious. “There’ll be no killing prisoners! Try anything like that and I’ll see you court-martialled on a murder charge!” The anomaly of hearing such sentiments voiced by a man who had just butchered twenty or thirty Germans did not strike me at the time. It does now. The line between brutal murder and heroic slaughter flickers and wavers... and becomes invisible.

He had the usual front-line soldier’s disdain for the higher echelon troops, who were safe from the fighting but nevertheless always managed to get the best billets and most comfortable conditions. One time General Montgomery himself reviewed the troops, and Mowat was not impressed: “It was not God who came; it was his self-anointed deputy. General Bernard Montgomery, fabled commander of the Eighth Army, descended upon us in a long, open Bentley limousine. We came to attention, presented arms, and then were told to “gather round” while the ferret-faced little man in his black beret stood up on the back seat of his car waving an Egyptian flyswatter, and gave us the Word.”

He also describes his first encounter with one of the terrible new weapons of the war:

I had scarcely rejoined the platoon when the day was rent by a rasping, metallic screeching that rose to an ear-splitting pitch and volume, culminating in a series of stupendous explosions that shook the solid rock beneath my cringing flesh. A blast of furnace-hot air buffeted me, and six coiling plumes of smoke and dust sprang, towering, above the castle ruins. This was our introduction to the chief horror of the front-line soldier’s life in World War II, the rocket artillery which the Germans had misleadingly code-named Nebelwerfer—smoke thrower—and which the Eighth Army, encountering it during the last stages of the North Africa campaign, christened Moaning Minnie.

Within a few weeks of landing in Sicily his regiment had lost one-quarter of its fighting strength, and the soldiers were beginning to understand that the lives of combat infantrymen are short and end violently. The strain was beginning to tell, and on returning to his unit after a bout of illness he writes, “It was not that I felt myself physically incapable of returning to battle—the truth was that I did not ever again want to have to taste the terror which had overwhelmed me at Assoro. The desire for action which had been my ruling passion since enlistment had collapsed like a pricked balloon—to be replaced by a swelling sense of dread.”

As more and more of Sicily was taken by the Allies, the Germans made a stand behind a well fortified position in the north-east of the island. There was no obvious or easy way to prise them out, and Mowat was part of a small group that climbed a nearly vertical slope that was only lightly defended to get behind them. One reason it was so lightly defended was that the Germans knew that anyone coming that way would have no line of retreat if the attack failed, so it was almost a suicide mission. And indeed, after first surprising the Germans their counterattack pushed the Canadians into an impossible situation where they would have been annihilated except for the timely arrival of a heavy artillery barrage which forced the Germans to pull back. It was a very close thing and casualties were heavy on both sides.

Once Sicily was secured the Allies moved to mainland Italy in September 1943 and the Germans retreated to prepared defensive positions, where they had to be pushed out repeatedly, each time falling back to another line. The Allies threw men against these positions again and again, suffering appalling casualties as fall and winter brought torrential rains and freezing conditions. “It was a time for plants to die, for birds to flee, for small animals to burrow deep into the earth, and for human beings to huddle by charcoal braziers and wait the winter out. It was assuredly neither the time nor place for waging war.”

Mowat’s descriptions of the fighting are horrific, and he was palpably disgusted by orders issued by higher-up who had no idea of the conditions into which they were sending men to die. Some of the fighting he describes sounded like accounts of the battles in the mud of Passchendaele in the First World War.

As one futile assault after another was repulsed, and Mowat watched more and more of his friends die he felt himself gazing into the abyss of madness and terror which all soldiers eventually face, “Four months earlier I would have welcomed the chance to make a patrol like this. Two months past and I would have accepted it as a risky job that had to be done. But on this December day I would have given everything I was, or ever hoped to be, for a way out. There was none.”

His descriptions of the fighting become almost hallucinogenic, and reminded me of the famous scene at the bridge in the movie Apocalypse Now:

What followed was the kind of night men dream about in afteryears, waking in a cold sweat to a surge of gratitude that it is but a dream. It was a delirium of sustained violence. Small pockets of Germans that had been cut off throughout our bridgehead fired their automatic weapons in hysterical dismay at every shadow. The grind of enemy tanks and self-propelled guns working their way along the crest was multiplied by echoes until it sounded like an entire Panzer army. Illuminating flares flamed in darkness with a sick radiance. The snap and scream of high-velocity tank shells pierced the brutal guttural of an endless cannonade from both German and Canadian artillery. Moaning Minnie projectiles whumped down like thunderbolts, searching for our hurriedly dug foxholes. Soldiers of both sides, blundering through the vineyards, fired with panicky impartiality in all directions. And it began to rain again, a bitter, penetrating winter rain.

The book ends with the death of his company commander and close friend, which might have been suicide with the way he exposed himself to fire. The battalion’s companies had been reduced to platoon size, and Mowat could feel his mind fracturing, “I was staring down a vertiginous tunnel where all was dark and bloody and the great wind of ultimate desolation howled and hungered.” He saw a draft of half-trained replacements marching toward the front line, and as they moved forward through the increasingly devastated land he could see in their faces that they were starting to realize the fate that was in store for them.

World War II is not known for its memoirs in the way that World War I was, but this is a remarkable book, equal to the best of the Great War accounts. Although it has flashes of the wry humor that would become a large part of Mowat’s later natural history books, it pulls no punches in its descriptions of combat in both its physical and mental horrors. Anyone with an interest in this part of the Second World War might want to start by reading Rick Atkinson’s Day of Battle: The War in Sicily and Italy, 1943-1944, which provides a useful perspective to get the most out of this book.