Rating: 3/5

I wasn't initially planning to write a review for Summer Blonde, but thought it necessary to share my thoughts - both on this collection and on general meaning in literature - after seeing some rather negative feedback from fellow readers on this graphic novel. 

Summer Blonde is the first piece I've read by Adrian Tomine. It consists of four short stories following the everyday lives of four different characters, all equally flawed and unlikeable, yet tied together by their feelings of loneliness and alienation. A quiet middle-aged man who falls for the girl working the register at the local greeting card shop. A recent graduate working as a phone operator, who struggles with her relationship with her roommate, her parents, and her successful sister. 

One facet of this collection which many have listed as a major point of criticism is the fact that none of these stories end on a positive note. In fact, each story cuts off abruptly without much of an ending at all - there is no grandiose metaphor, no definitive resolution, no message to behold. If you're looking for a conventional plot structure, you won't find it here. Just as Tomine drops us right into the lives of these characters at the beginning of each story, so the endings have a similarly jarring quality to them. Things happen to these characters - the plot progresses, internal conflict becomes clear, tensions rise with each turn of the page. But, for the most part, the characters remain wholly emotionally unchanged despite this progression. 

The lack of emotional development, though albeit frustrating for the reader, makes Tomine's work arguably far more memorable and realistic than most. The subtle experiences he presents us with are but a few of many experiences which make up the entirety of our long lives. And that's exactly what this book is: it is subtle and it is quiet. It is a snippet into the unchanging nature of our existence. But through it all, Summer Blonde remains unarguably real and that is its power. 

Yes, it is probably unlike most graphic novels you've read. Yes, Tomine has chosen - objectively - to craft a piece which is devoid of an identifiable overarching theme or metaphor. But, to quote Leigh Bardugo in her review of This One Summer, a brilliant graphic novel by the Tamaki's which faced similar criticism, this lack of an ending "is exactly as it should be." My only criticism is that, collectively, though tied together by similar emotions and experiences, these stories lacked a sense of flow between them (possibly stemming from the main characters' similar personalities).

Though it certainly isn't for everyone, I will say that this collection has stayed with me longer than most graphic novels I've read. I must recommend Tomine to all graphic novel enthusiasts as a must-read author. I'm looking forward to exploring the rest of his work in the near future.