Rating: 5/5

Charlie Chopra and The Mystery of the Solang Valley.

Agatha Christie’s The Sittaford Mystery was first published in the US by Dodd, Mead, and Company in 1931 under the title The Murder at Hazelmoor and in UK by the Collins Crime Club on 7 September 1931 under Christie's original title. It is the first Christie novel to be given a different title for the US market. 

Vishal Bhardwaj in the past has done brilliant adaptations of Shakespear’s play into Bollywood hits- Macbeth as Maqbool, Othello as Omkara and Hamlet as Haider. This time he comes up with brilliant adaptation of Agatha Christie’s The Sittaford mystery as Charlie Chopra and The Mystery of the Solang Valley.

The six-episode series was shot extensively in Solang Valley which is very similar in look and eerie feel of the tiny village of Sittaford in the book. The city of Manali doubles up as Exhampton. The snowy Manali and the picturesque Solang Valley with its ski resort make for a chilling atmosphere, thanks to cinematographer Tassaduq Hussain who manages to create a desolate and haunted feel to the place.

Unlike some recent Christie adaptations, the screenplay by Vishal Bhardwaj, Anjum Rajabali and Jyotsna Hariharan remains faithful to the original story. Vishal has however added his own twist to climax which appeals to his loyal audience. 

Paoli Dam plays the role of Sylvia (Saloni Dabral) who is married to author Martin Dering (Manas Dabral) played by Chandan Roy Sanyal. James Pearson who is an insurance agent (Jimmy Nautiyal) is played by Vivaan Shah. He is engaged to Emily Trefusis (Charlie Chopra) played by Wamiqa Gabbi). In the adaptation however Jimmy has a start-up which is facing financial hurdles. Brain Pearson, nephew of Mrs. Gardener is Billu Nautiyal, played by Imaaduddin Shah

Captain Trevelyan (Meharbaan Singh Rawat) who is murdered is played by Bollywood veteran baddie Gulshan Grove. Mrs. Gardner’s role is played by Neena Gupta. However unlike in the book, her husband is not invalid but rather retired Prof Mohan Rawat (played by Lalit Parimoo). Major Burnaby (Col Anand Barua) role is played by Baharul Islam. Charles Enderby who is correspondent for the Daily Wire in the book is journalist Sitaram Bhist for News Bharat in the adaptation. The role is played by Priyanshu Painyuli. Mrs Willet (Vilayat Hussain) is played by Lara Dutta and her daughter Miss Voilet (Wasima Hussain) is played by Bhagyashree Tarke.

The table turning in the book is replaced by Séance conducted by Bollywood veteran Nasiruddin Shah.

In an interview Vishal Bhardwaj had once said, "I grew up devouring all Agatha Christie mysterious tales. Her plots, characters and setting remain unparalleled in the genre and continue to excite storytellers even today”. With this adaptation he has excelled once more as a master story teller.