There was a song in the 1960’s sung the the Trashmen. It was called Surfin’ Bird and had the lyrics, “A well a bird, bird, bird, the bird is the word.” Well the bird is truly the word, and this is certainly one of the amazing books that has crossed my desk in a while. Spread the word about the birds in the book, because it is a one-of-a-kind edition, that will appeal not only to the lovers of birds, but anyone craving a book that is filled with a mountain of information, along with spectacular photography and illustrations about every bird imaginable. 
A version of this book was first released in 2003, but now this is the latest and greatest, an edition that is more than worth the price. The sheer size of the book is impressive as well, and it is obvious this book was not put together in a month or so. It would likely take years to compile the information about every type of bird and species in the world. It boasts more than 1,000 photographs taking us up close and personal with birds, almost as if you could reach out your hand and the bird would fly into it. 
It also notes the list of contributors, filling two pages of the book with literally hundreds of names of those who added to the descriptions and stories of the birds. For every bird listed, it also specifies what order and family of birds it originates from. There is also mention of distribution (where it is found), habitat, size, plumage, voice, nest, eggs, diet, and conservation status. It begins with the Ostrich. It tells us contrary to popular thought, this bird does not bury its head in the sand. Instead when they are threatened they run quickly, using their long legs to flee predators. The ostrich also is known as the world’s largest bird. 
It is information like this, that makes every page of book totally fascinating, giving readers of all ages, a knowledgeable trip down bird land so to speak. There are many birds we may not be familiar with, such as the Pharlarope, Potoos, Oilbird, Mesites, Diving Petrels, Sheathbills, Lyrebirds, Frogmouths, Honeyguides, Woodcreepers, Vireos, and hundreds more. You may never view a bird the same way again after viewing this book, learning every aspect of so many species. FIREFLY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF BIRDS soars to astounding heights, courtesy of this classic edition.