Rating: 5/5

...people who cannot forgive themselves are unable to forgive anyone else; forgiveness, like charity, starts at home.

Another masterpiece of historical fiction by Norah Lofts. Like I have written in my review of 'The Town House' also this family saga (that took thread dozens of years after the end of previous part of series) was 
  gripping with historical details and accuracy. It was a great journey through the everyday life of the common people
, this time the story started at the end of XV century and ended almost at the end of XVII. Again, I was not at the court or on the battlefield, I was in the house of a tradesman, an innkeeper, a schoolmaster - in other words amongst common people.

Of course, their life was touched by big events, like religious movements and changes (English Reformation), the plague, English Civil War. Nonetheless, more important to them were their home, food, children, first love, broken hearts...

  That was the year 1485, the year of great changes in the outside world. Even we, on our Flaxham farm, beard in due time news of the Battle of Bosworth, and how the crown had fallen from King Richard's head and landed in a thornbush, whence Henry Tudor plucked it as though it was a berry, and set it on his own head. To us it was a story of no importance; to us all kings were tax-extorters and one no better than the next. Much more important to us, in the autumn of that year, was the news that Lady Maude Rancon was to set about reviving a dead business and, late as it was in the season, was hunting all over the countryside for wool.

I adore Norah Lofts' storytelling, the way she intermingled lives of people, how their lots mingled also through their descendants.

  ...I learned it myself, the hard way, when you do things in anger you're more like to hurt yourself than anybody else - in the long run.

And her characters were flesh and blood.

  So I looked at her with fury and hatred, and respect and admiration which was painfully near to love. "Cod knows how you do it," I said, "but you always strike the right note. You're old," I said brutally, "old and mined, beaten to your knees. Anybody else would be done for. But you're struggling up, ready to fight again. What else, by the flames of Hell, can I do but come in and fight alongside?"

I think you must simply try The Town House (the first novel of the series). I am sure that after a dozen of pages you will know that you love it. 

Here is an example of historical information she put in her books:

  Once upon a time, Mother said, dues had been paid at the gateway but the town walls were breaking down and people would squeeze in and set up in the market without paying, so nowadays a monk and another man walked around the market all the time. They took two of our cockerels and at least half of the apples and in exchange gave Mother a token, a piece of metal stamped with a pattern, which could be shown if, when they made their next round, they asked for the dues again. All these pieces of metal had to be put into a box when the market was over. "And it's no use taking it home because they have tokens of different sorts and if you show the wrong one, ever, you can never trade on this market again," Mother explained.

PS You can read the book as a standalone but I recommend to start with 'The Town House' - you will be able to find some connections and references.