Rating: 3/5

Claude McKay was a defining poet of the Harlem Renaissance; he was somewhat less great at writing novels, but this one is pretty good.

There was a central conflict between the major players in the Harlem Renaissance. Some, following Alain Locke and his landmark anthology The New Negro, were concerned with what black folks might be; they advocated education to uplift the race. Others were more concerned with just talking about what black people were right now. They were led by Zora Neale Hurston and Langston Hughes, among others, and they called themselves the "Niggerati," which is a great name for a band that doesn't have me in it, and I'm going to refer to them as Hurston's gang for the rest of this review.

More Awesome Names For Bands I'm Not In
The Vagina Monster Hogs
Klezmerotica
Chumbawumba

The two groups occasionally came into conflict because the, let's call them the New Negroes thought Hurston's crew weren't concerned enough with "racial uplift" and Hurston's group thought the New Negroes were too white-facing, too willing to accept outside definitions of what uplift means. So, like, Richard Wright savaged Their Eyes Were Watching God, comparing Hurston's dialect to "the minstrel technique that makes the 'white folks' laugh." 

Claude McKay falls with the first crew, although Home to Harlem straddles the line a bit. It describes Harlem in terrific, specific detail, the good and the bad equally. His characters speak in a variety of dialects. There are even pimps! And they call them "sweet-backs"! Jake, "McKay's symbol of primitive Afro-American decency and vitality" according to my edition's intro, actually returns to Harlem twice over the course of the novel. "Good old Harlem! Chocolate Harlem! Sweet Harlem!" But also, "This here Harlem is a stinking sink of iniquity. N---r hell!" 

The worst of Harlem's culture is described unflinchingly. One of Jake's girlfriends "was disappointed in Jake. She had wanted him to live in the usual sweet way, to be brutal and beat her up a little, and take away her money from her." And another character, Strawberry Lips (!), is described as typically the stage Negro. He was proof that a generalization has some foundation in truth...You might live your life in many black belts and arrive at the conclusion that there is no such thing as a typical Negro - no minstrel coon off the stage... no lineal descendant of Uncle Tom. Then one day your theory may be upset through meeting with a type by far more perfect than any created counterpart.I think it's telling that, in the end, Jake leaves Harlem for good. But McKay makes no secret of his affection for Harlem at its best, too; on balance, this is less an indictment than a love letter to "the contagious fever of Harlem. Burning everywhere in dark-eyed Harlem…" All this reflects Hurston's worldview.

But the New Negro is represented by Jake's best friend, educated Ray, a stand-in for McKay himself. Ray lectures about Abbysinia, "the only nation that has existed free and independent from the earliest records of history until today," and is given to quoting Goethe. At one point he saysWe ought to get something new, we Negroes. But we get our education like - like our houses. When the white move out, we move in and take possession of the old dead stuff. Dead stuff that this age has no use for.And it seems like McKay is talking about himself, because McKay writes sonnets, which are pretty much the oldest, deadest, whitest thing there is. (On the other hand, he fuckin' owns them.)

Home to Harlem isn't a great book. It's meandering and shapeless. But it's great for conveying the flavor of Harlem during the Jazz Age. It's a good second-tier Harlem Renaissance entry.