Rating: 5/5

If you're looking for a pithy review, that's about plot and characters, look elsewhere.

If you want to read a meandering review about how it reminded me of my teenaged best friend, and my marriage, then you're in the right place.

I decided to read this because of a lot of people had been 'talking' about it, which then developed into a BR, but I didn't expect the book to affect me as much as it did.

When I started reading it I cried, not those engineered ugly tears, but a quiet trickle, I was on my way to work and didn't actually realise I WAS crying for a while. It's not that this is particularly a sad book, but that it initially reminded me so much of my bf when I was school, Rob. 

Dan in the book shares a lot of personality traits with Rob, and I found this quite difficult to read in places. I don't know what it was like in America, but to come out in the UK in the 1980's was extremely difficult if you didn't live in a big city (and we didn't) and the promiscuous club culture and/or comedy camp gay was what most people associated with gay men. The spectre of HIV/ AIDS haunts many from that time, and Rob was no exception.

As I read on, I thought about my own marriage, and the response of my parents to my husband. When I met him I was 23, and I was still 23 when we got married. My parents did not approve of his ethnicity (he is half Indian)or his perceived lack of direction. He was not made welcome in my parents home, and 20 years later is still only tolerated.

We all want our own version of a happy ending, whatever that means for us. For me, it meant to live my life with the person I love while keeping the love of my family. That hasn't always been possible for me, and no matter how much romance novels tell you that the one big love is all you need, in my reality I wanted my parents to be as happy and invested in my relationship as they had been invested and happy in my life when I was single.

The beautiful quiet understated writing in this book I would have found moving without any kind of personal connection, that just made it more for me.

For me it started shrouded in melancholy, then the daily beauty of being in love, and building a loving relationship brought hope and joy.

It was a pleasure to read, and thank you to my fellow readers for enhancing it for me.