Rating: 3/5

The late Jacob Bronowski, the thinker, the interpreter of western thought and scientific achievement has been a person I have long admired. I turn to him as a writer and speaker who has a passion for his topics and for his fellow humans. He started his professional life as a Mathematician. Later he escape Nazi persecution and participated in projects that became the atomic bomb. He ended his career as a humanist and philosopher. My hope is that The Identity of Man is not your only contact with Dr. Bronowski. 

My copy is the American Museum of Science edition, annotated as Revised. Revised means that there is an addition of a supplement bringing the total page count to 140. The bulk of the book is taken from a series of four lectures presented by the American Museum in March of 1965,

The goal of his talks was to demonstrate his case for the Human as first an animal, or as he would have it an electro chemical machine but one with a mind that defies any definition limited to one that better fits a existing or future machine. He will make appeals to art, especially poetry and science. The basis of his argument in favor as man being more than machine is based on self-awareness and the unpredictability of the mind. Give a machine a set of instructions, of course written in a language the machine ‘understands and the machine will execute exactly those instructions. A human may or may not follow instructions and indeed may even exceed them.

Allowing that we know a great deal more about the mechanics of the human mind and have machines that can very closely mimic human traits. We have to allow that Bronowski was hampered by the degree to which he could imagine what the advances in brain science and machine science might achieve. 

This however is not the bases of my disappointment with this book. 

Bronowshi never completes his arguments. Present are his wonderful sentences and his love of the human. What is not present is a cogent logical case, build from the evidence, linking logical and necessary arguments into a cohesive and finished whole. Readers will find enough to identify with and accept his conclusions, but…

Too many of his arguments are in too many directions and were the human and the human mind not know to me, it would be hard to understand what he means for us to conclude. It is not enough that Bronowski argues for what may be a popular conclusion, but the lectures do not bring us the more finely constructed histories and philosophies I have savored in other of his writings.