Rating: 4/5

It's fair to say that I take what previously I would have called a guilty pleasure in reading books about foreigners who go to France (or Spain) and rehabilitate dilapidated farms. It's a guilty pleasure because of course there's a level of exoticising what for the people these foreigners encounter is just their daily life, and a degree of Othering that I'm uncomfortable with. However, I'm not calling such things guilty pleasures anymore. Problematic, perhaps. It is a pleasure; I'll not call it guilty anymore. If I keep the problematic nature in mind, and remind myself that these are deliberately romanticised narratives, then I think I'm doing ok.
The Olive Season is the second in a series. I've not read the first; I found this in a second hand shop, and while I considered buying the first I decided it didn't matter. All I need to know is that Carol fell in love with Michel and they bought a near-derelict farm with a few olive trees. Right, got it. 
Basically if you've read one of the Tuscany books you have a sense for what happens here. Water issues! Planting problems! Madcap guests! However things do get awfully real, too, as Carol experiences some very real and significant tragedy. Her honesty in the way she discusses these in the book is bracing, and a bit heart breaking, and could probably be a bit much for those who have experienced similar things. And it's appropriate too, since this is a memoir, not a story of a farm. As someone on the outside of such things I respected the way Carol worked through some of the problems in her writing, and the way she also integrated her discussion of the farm, and what it means to her, and how physically working helped her headspace. 
Look, the book is set in Provence, and written by someone who loves the place. Of course it makes it sound like it's a marvelous place to be. There's no denying the hard work that's involved in the olive farm, and Carol doesn't try to downplay it, but nonetheless... she can't, and the reader can't, get away from the fact that: this is Provence, and that will always have certain overtones for the non-Provençal. 
I enjoyed this book a lot as a holiday read. I won't go out of my way to find the other books, but if I find them by serendipity I'll happily grab them.