Rating: 2/5

Read August 24th, 2018

Um. This was interesting. I’m not even sure what I would classify this as? Short-story-graphic-novels? Is that a thing. ? Well Summer Blonde (Optic Care novels) made it one if it wasn’t one already.

I read a review that said that Summer Blonde perfectly embodies that nostalgia-for-summer feeling. Nostalgia for summers gone by, time gone by, life gone by. And I thought, YES. I need that! That sounds right up my alley. Nostalgia being one of my most favorite-least-favorite feelings:) Such a strange sentiment- that bittersweet yearning for a time that has passed, that sorta painful but nearly enjoyable longing for a moment in time. It’s always better in our memories isn’t it, because nostalgia can tint a memory with gold, shimmer and sparkles. We rarely appreciate the moment while we are IN it, but once it’s out of our grasp we see it for what it really was. A beautiful moment in our life that we will never get back, never be able to replicate, something we ache for because it is the very embodiment of the circle of life. Nostalgia. It sure is a tricky fucker. Is it a good or bad feeling? Who knows. 

I love a good book that will get my nostalgic juices flowing. But this is not said book. And while I understand sort of what the person was getting at when they described this book as dripping with nostalgic feelings, I personally would categorize this as more....depressive? Strange? Blunt? And yet none of them would capture the essence of what I mean. They just feel unfinished. There are 4 short stories. 

In the first a writer who has achieved some relative success with his first book struggled with the pressure of releasing the follow up. When he gets some fan mail from a Samantha with no last name or return address, he’s convinced it was the Samantha from high school that he pined for for years trying to reach him &amp; he is desperate to locate her, thinking that finally attaining her will be the answer to all his writerly problems and will unlock his creative juices. When he searches for her tho, he finds her younger sister who’s still in HS instead and ultimately develops a sort of relationship with her. His girlfriend ends up finding out about it all and leaves him, which then leaves him even more sad and lonely than he started out. 

The next story follows an older, &amp; in-every-way-average guy as he frequents a local card shop in order to talk to a pretty young girl. Then we watch as Carlo, a classically good looking guy moves in next door who has a rotation of beautiful women coming in and out of his house. When he spots the girl from the card shop leaving his house, he throws a fit and reports this event to his therapist. When he sees the same young girl at a grocery store buying an e.p.t test, he tries to comfort her but she reacts harshly, yelling at him to get away from her which dashes his hopes of her attainability. He continues to watch the goings on of his neighbor next door with sadness and disdain. Paralyzed by his own anxieties. 

Next, a lonely, overweight Asian girl with a going nowhere job starts making prank phone calls out of boredom. Her mother is a traditional Asian mother with words like barbs disguised as concern. The prank calls start to take a cruel turn as she watches from the window and says things like, you fat pig. You ugly P.O.S. One day, a guy that she tries to prank calls her out. Asks her which window she’s in. She tells him, and allows him to catch a glimpse of her, then allows herself to be convinced to meet up for coffee. When coffee turns to kissing that turns to sex, it seems as if they have a connection and she asks him to accompany her to her grandmas funeral. He seems more than willing. The story ends as she gets ready for the funeral, noting that he’s already half an hour late. Wondering, but not entirely caring whether he’ll show up or not.

The last story is about Scotty, a teenage boy. He’s a bit different from everyone else, doesn’t seem to have very many friends. Alex, the one single friend he does have shows him pornographic videos and rather than the excitement a normal teenage boy would typically feel, Scotty seems awkward, put off. Scotty befriends a girl Cammy after she gets so drunk at a party she loses control of her bowels. When she runs for student counsel, kids cruelly poke fun at her by throwing toilet paper. Scotty’s overly emotional sympathetic response seems strange to her, &amp; she makes fun of him for it. When she ultimately informs him of her impending departure from their town, he’s upset. He shares with her his story about Alex, claiming that not only did he show him the porn, but later Scotty was awakened by Alex trying to unbotton his jeans. Whether or not this is true is questionable as we see later that Alex writes him a note implying that there may have been something more reciprocal that went on. When Cammy comes on to Scotty at the end, Scotty hesitates, and the story basically cuts to black with Scotty tangled in an embrace with Cammy, his face a frozen expression of fear and awkwardness, obviously not the face you’d expect a teenage boy to be making in that situation.

These were apparently comics that were part of a series that both began before and continued after this, but I have no intention of following these any further. They are single isolated stories with no connection to each other whatsoever, and I personally found them rather....odd. Like I mentioned earlier, I’d heard people mention the way these stories capture the essence of summer and youth and nostalgia, but I found them to be rather dry and boring. Rather than evoke feelings of nostalgia or connection to these stories, they struck me as depressive and bleak. There didn’t seem to be any point other than to serve as a sort of snapshot into the every day lives of very average people. There was no plot. No point. Nothing. It all felt more than a little anti climactic to me. I guess that was maybe the point, a little bit of a slice of life type of thing, a nice dose of reality and the endless disappointments and cruelties that are the lives of the average and in that way it was nice. Something unique, something refreshingly REAL rather than your typical stories with your flawless beauties as heroines, your dashing long haired, stout of heart heroes. Instead these stories looked familiar to us because they ARE us. Average, awkward, flawed...lonely. But that was really the only thing these stories had going for them, other than that each was a little more droll than the former and equally as pathetic as the last. I didn’t really understand where the ‘Summer Blonde’ thing came into play, that title implies sunshine, and fun, neither of which made an appearance in any of the stories. And, my absolute least favorite part about every story was their endings-or more so their lack thereof. Each story just sort of ended, with literally no conclusion of any sort, just a quick cut to black in the middle of a dry, depressing snapshot of random, unhappy people’s lives.