Rating: 2/5

"Trino's Choice"by Diane Gonzales Bertrand is an emotional story that teaches you how to appreciate what you have in life, and not to take it for granted. I chose this book because I saw it on the bookshelf of my classroom and thought the name was interesting. This story describes the Life of thirteen-year-old Trino, who lives in Southern Texas. He lives with a very poor family consisting of his mother and his three young brothers. 
Trino’s problems all begin after witnessing a brutal attack of an old business-owner by one of his classmates, Rosca. Rosca has always intimidated Trino because of his gang-like behavior, but he is especially frightened now that Rosca is willing to hurt him to make sure the word of the attack does not leak. After Trino’s mother meets a rich young man, Nick, who treats her and the whole family well with money and food, Trino has another problem on his hands. He feels that Nick is actually a fraud who is trying to make his way into the family simply because of his feelings for Trino’s mother. Trino also struggles to impress a girl, Lisana, who is nearly a polar opposite of him. She enjoys school, poetry, and has decent wealth. One day, when Trino has run almost completely out of luck after his mother loses her job, he turns to Rosca to make him some easy cash. Rosca simply tells him to meet him at the local carwash. That night, Trino sneaks out to the carwash only to see a man exit the building and fire two fatal shots, killing one of his friends for robbing the vacuum machines. Trino’s life is forever changed for the worse.
I was slightly disappointed with the ending of the novel because it left so many large conflicts unfinished. We never hear about Trino’s arrested friend or the future of his family and Nick. It is a cute ending though, with him asking to walk home with Lisana and being invited to a party. My favorite part of the story is the climax, when Trino witnesses his friend’s murder at the carwash. 
I personally enjoyed the book halfway through, after more action made its way into the plot. I feel that more exciting activities could have taken place in the first half, other than just reading poems and trying to talk to a girl at lunch. I feel like this book is quite similar to “Buried Onions,” by Gary Soto, because of its Hispanic and Latino background. I believe that readers who enjoy shorter novels, Latino themes, or the life and struggles of teenage boys would find this novel appealing.