Rating: 4/5

The final book of the trio, House at Sunset- is my least favorite of the three for this Old Vine building. BUT it is still 3.5 star and I rounded it up for the skill in which Norah Lofts changes the narrators' sensibilities as the centuries turn. The 18th century, it still has far more "thought hours" concerned with food/shelter- basic work, than it does with more what we would call First World Problems of today (anxiety, depression, desires unfulfilled, education or fame as a goal- all those kinds of problems). Before this, the class status (fixed for the majority) of work purpose to eat and sleep, that was always number #1 coupled with manipulative power of influence to control those first two essentials (food and shelter). 

NOW- not at all. Beginning in the 1800's and definitely in the latter parts of that century, food availability seems a given. Even if you DO have to steal it. Regardless, it is THERE. 

And that exact difference is what Lofts grabs in this last novel of the trio. But it is my least favorite because it is so sad. Sad, not only in decline of the building, but also in its division and in the entire comprehension of what it means to its occupants. Until this last 150 years (this ends just after WWII) of the saga- there is always some human who seems to hold OLD VINE house as his/her core. Not now. Not even the inspector from the Baildon's Building Code bureaucracy feels any depth to or for it, IMHO.

Lofts is best before about 1850. Her Felicity here!! And the character David. Both are rather departures in the modern sense of being, more or less, all of one-piece personalities. Now it has become all about druthers and escapades (or should I really say escapes). Individuals have some choices? And Lofts doesn't do the moderns to the depths as she does for the characters of simpler times, wants, needs, and power structures of far smaller size.

Lofts tries to make this one a circle, so that some of the end characters revert back to something tied to the very beginning of the building. So we have a return to an Abbey, for instance. And another black haired stranger. Other minutia, too. Which is interesting for those who think of karma or growing/shrinking over and over again, or some kind of balance as a life force or history circle. Certainly some of the very threads of this house's history of conflicts are repeated. But in this particular book, I do think the connections for all symbolism; it tended to break. In fact, during the last 100 years we are not seeing a descendant at all. It is more just a history of buyers or traders for the house. 

Sad too.

One thing I absolutely do know. Few writers grab little girls with too much imagination or ego as Norah Lofts did. Not in any age for the writing OR for the character written. 

She does better on older men than most writers too. And in siblings, if they "fit" or "not"- especially after adulthood. 

This is not the Lofts book that should be read as a stand alone, IMHO. 

As we leave Baildon, it now has 20,000 residents. And for the first time, not everyone native knows everyone, nor their extended families. The railway is not as important because vehicles can take you anywhere. And because of that the Station Street, Southgate, Abbot's Walk and all else is worth a pittance to what it was. Location, location, location. 

Some of us know all about that bugger that is the real in real estate. So a lifetime of industry and work may result in being "underwater" for the longest staying. One of the lessons here that once again rolls around on the wheel of fortune. Again and again. Maybe the answer for the wise is to keep moving on. A slight spoiler. Ironically in this last book, most of the narrators do. Not as in former centuries where some lived and died in the same house. 

One thing I did notice. I believe both series and most of her books have a Plant (surname)in them. And that person always seems to have dreams of moving away. And yet, they never seem to have accomplished that at all when you are reading 200 years later in the history.