Rating: 4/5

"Women are the ones who knows what's going on," she said quietly . "They are the ones with eyes. Have you not heard of Agatha Christie?"
 I love Mma Ramotswe. She is funny, wonderful, brave, and unapologetically a feminist. Sure, she's made mistakes. Sure, she's done stupid things, but then again, that just gives her more character. 
  Detective agencies rely on human intuition and intelligence, both of which Mma Ramotswe had in abundance. No inventory would ever include those, of course.

I was born in Botswana; my parents lived there for about four years together, and my father had lived there for about six years before he got married. And so, for some reason, because I've heard so many stories about life and the people there, things in this book did not come as a culture shock to me. Even such things as finding a cobra in your car, because my father once found a black mamba in his. My parents regaled me with tales of what, according to them, was the nicest country in the world. They told me about the warm people of Botswana, with big hearts, about the easy life there, about the vegetable gardens, about the Kalahari. After all, 
  people want to be left alone to look after their cattle.

And so, reading this book, in some ways was kind of nostalgic, I guess, even though I personally have no memory of anything. But Mma Ramotswe reminded me of every Motswana woman my parents ever told me about - the maid, the cook, the neighbour - large in body and heart, and always willing to help. Sure, the mysteries here aren't really the Sherlock Holmes kinds that we usually read, but smaller mysteries involving cheats and philanderers, and the occasional witchcraft. But then again, that is the point, because Botswana, at least the Botswana portrayed in the book, the Botswana of the by-gone eras, wasn't really much plagued by crimes like rape and murder as it was by crimes like petty theft and fraud. My parents, in fact, recall tales of having had their tyres and/or fuel stolen from their cars in the middle of the night. The No. 1 Ladies Detective Agency is a warm, cosy story written beautifully. The language is simple, as are the characters, but sometimes, there is beauty in simplicity, and this book is an instance of that. Because sometimes, it's just best to admire the simple things in life. Like pumpkin. 
  It was time to take the pumpkin out of the pot and eat it. In the final analysis, that was what solved these big problems of life. You could think and think and get nowhere, but you still had to eat your pumpkin. That brought you down to earth. That gave you a reason for going on. Pumpkin.