Rating: 4/5

I’ve never been to Wyoming except through books and internet pictures of rugged mountains and windswept lakes, but this place hold a particular fascination for me. I like the idea of one of the last wilderness places where settlements are few and far apart, where people are comfortable in their loneliness and closer to the natural rhythms of air and rock and forest. I’ve been reading Craig Johnson’s crime novels on and off for a few years, mostly for the setting and the Native American angle, but I think  An Unfinished Life  is several classes above him.

This Mark Spragg book has been waiting its turn on my TBR stack for more than 10 years but, like the other almost lost recommendation I’ve tried this summer [ The Visitors ] it surpassed my expectations right from the first chapter.
Spragg sure knows how to tell a story. Looking just at the main plot, this is a thriller: a woman runs away from an abusive boyfriend with her quiet but observant daughter. They end up somewhere in Wyoming, at the ranch of the woman’s father-in-law Einar, who doesn’t even know he is a grandfather and who blames the woman for the death of his only son in a car crash a decade ago.
At the ranch, the elderly Einar is taking care of his best friend Mitch, a black man he met in the war [Korean or Vietnam, I’m not sure which]. Mitch has been crippled in a bear mauling when the two ranchers were trying to drive the beast off from a cattle kill.
Jean, the girl Griff, Einar and Mitch try to live together at the ranch while the past traumatic events threaten to disrupt their fragile attempts at reconciliation. In an effort to become independent of Einar’s goodwill, Jean gets a job as a waitress in the nearby town where she befriends a co-worker and the local sheriff.
The return of Jean’s sadistic boyfriend, who has stalked her across several states, precipitates the crisis that brings all the dark secrets of the past into the light.

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

For me though, this novel doesn’t read as a thriller, but as a character study about resilience and forgiveness and the role of friendship and family in survival of trauma. It is very well written, despite the fact that I apparently didn’t bookmark any particular passage or dialogue from the text. There is a quality of restraint, of dignity and fairness in adversity that is passed down from one generation to the next, from Einar and Mitch to the young Griff by way of her mother Jean, that elevates the novel above genre restrictions.

I saw now, as I was looking up what else I can read by Mark Spragg, that he collaborated on the script for the movie adaptation of his novel. I hope I will find the movie soon, because I can’t imagine a better director than Lasse Hallstrom for this poignant story about strife and forgiveness.