Rating: 5/5

The Pacific and Other Stories is the magical compilation of sixteen imaginative and varied stories emphasizing why Mark Helprin is one of my favorite writers as he presents this glorious and richly written collection taking place various locations such as in New York City, Canada, Italy, France, Israel and in an orange grove on the Pacific Coast. First published in 2004, many of the stories had previously appeared in The New Yorker, The Atlantic, Esquire, The Wall Street Journal,  and in Forbes ASAP. 

Some of my favorite stories included the richly imaginative and entertaining story about a young Hasidic boy from 1958 Brooklyn making his way to the Bronx, believing that only he will be able to save Mickey Mantle and the New York Yankees. It is a glorious tale of baseball mixed with faith and magical realism that elevates Perfection. But one of my favorite stories was Monday, the story of a contractor when realizing that a former client had lost her husband on September 11, is determined to renovate her new home at no cost. What transpires in this beautiful and haunting tale is one of love and loss and the power to do good in the face of evil. Other stories in this remarkable collection include tales exploring loss, regret and retribution. But many of the tales are tender and moving such as Passchendaele, Last Tea with the Armorers, and Prelude. And another beautiful story of a life of a sailor coming to a close in the unforgettable Sail Shining in White. This was a lovely and unforgettable collection of stories by one of our most talented contemporary writers.

   “In the gondola, on the Grand Canal, I felt that I was borne back toward where I had started, not by the power of the gondolier and not merely with the gentle flow of the tide, but as if on a river that, though running into darkness and oblivion, was running swift and bright.”

“And as I passed over the waters and heard this song that she sang on a side street, it said to me that no matter where you lead or you are led, no matter how the waves may break upon you, and what sins you may unknowingly commit, it is true that by the grace of God you can sometimes make amends.”

“That they could move on that day almost as airborne as angels was because the idea that France would be free was more beautiful even than the idea of France itself.”

“What had happened was but a single, lovely note in an always urgent song that he had been brought up to sing, like those before him, in protest of mortality, hope of survival, and love of God.”

“But as he walked under the summer stars—of June, 1913–his memory of the redness of the rose made his heart as light as moonlight, and floated him above all disappointments.”

“The lamp on that blonde table, and the photograph of his wife, had become the center of a life that found itself migrating more and more toward the sea. She was gone, but he loved her so much in memory it was if she were an angel perpetually rising from the waves.”