Rating: 5/5

'Sacred Country' (1992) has rocketed into the list of my all time favourite books. 

Part of my motivation for reading 'Sacred Country' was the announcement that it has been chosen by City Reads in 2018. City Reads is Brighton &amp; Hove's annual citywide reading festival: one book by one author is selected for the whole community to read, discuss, debate and creatively engage with in a series of special events, workshops and performances. 

A lot of the reviews and summaries characterise 'Sacred Country' as a tale about a transgender person... 

Beginning in a Suffolk village in the early 1950s and moving through three decades, we come to know not only our central character Mary/Martin born as a girl into the wrong body, but also the family and characters within that small community; those who find happiness and their place in the world and those who struggle to do so.

In actual fact the Mary/Martin narrative is just one of a dozen or so different narratives. Each of the small-town characters hails from the area around the fictional village of Swaithey in rural Suffolk. The stories start in the early 1950s and end in 1980. The overlapping narratives are told in a series of short chapters, which switch from the perspective of the various characters. 

Mary/Martin's tale is wonderful - but so are the other stories and characters that Rose describes. Outwardly these are fairly insignificant people going about their quiet existences, however all have interesting and rich inner lives, and this is what makes the book so compelling. By the end of 'Sacred Country' I had fallen in love with Estelle Ward, Walter Loomis, Pearl Harker, Thomas Cord, and Edward Harker, and was also fascinated by the large supporting cast that includes Sonny, Gilbert, Stern, Cleo, Pete, and many more.

'Sacred Country' features a lot of tragedy and drama, however it is also extremely playful and humorous, and very poignant. 

It's beautifully written, awash with memorable characters, firmly rooted in the different times and places that feature across a three decade narrative, and slowly but surely builds to a powerful and emotional conclusion.

I'm so glad I read it. I adored it. I look forward to reading more of Rose Tremain's work.

Wondrous

* * * * * 

Rose Tremain's best-selling novels have won many awards, including the Baileys Women's Prize, the Whitbread Novel of the Year, the James Tait Black Memorial Prize, and the Prix Femina Etranger. Restoration, the first of her novels to feature Robert Merivel, was shortlisted for the Booker Prize. She lives in Norfolk and London with the biographer Richard Holmes.

http://rosetremain.co.uk/

* * * * *