Rating: 2/5

✨This is a review for the The Turn of the Screw ONLY✨

  “Of course I was under the spell, and the wonderful part is that, even at the time, I perfectly knew I was. But I gave myself up to it; it was an antidote to any pain, and I had more pains than one.”

Rating: ⭐⭐

❗This review contains spoilers❗

Everything starts out so well...There is mystery, suspense, and that classic eerie atmosphere that only old-ass books can pull off with absolute perfection and yet, that's pretty much where the fun ends. I feel so disappointed, almost guilty, when I read a classic novel and it turns out that I hate it. Not just dislike it, hate it. I know I'm not obligated to enjoy every single classic book there is, but I still can't help feeling like I'm betraying literature somehow. I feel as if I don't appreciate the work that shapes pop culture to this day. I think that mostly comes from how overhyped most classics are, and all the judgement that comes with it. However, I hate it even more when I discover that I like the movie or series more than the book it was adapted from. That sucks most of all.

To begin with, as I have already mentioned, there are some good qualities to this novel. The story is deeply compelling, and it had me hooked from the beginning. The way the plot is developed slowly and methodically to create intrigue and suspense is exquisite. Also, the book itself is quite short, the chapters are no more than 10 pages long making it incredibly easy to read, in spite of the difficult language. Besides, while it isn't particularly scary, not that I have read any books so far that spooked me (still looking though), I still appreciated the effects of the gothic, uncanny atmosphere it has going on. All of these are the premises for a literary masterpiece, which makes it all the more disappointing that the execution flopped. 

First of all, there is only a minute part of the mystery that is answered in any way, shape, or form. To make matters worse, none of the conflicts are truly resolved by the end of the book, in fact, they become even worse, in my opinion, as Miles just drops dead in the last line, as he is held by his unnamed governess. On the whole, the ending is tremendously anticlimactic and dissatisfying, causing the rest of the book to become equally inadequate.

In addition, I found the Netflix adaptation to be much more gratifying and entertaining. The plot is more complex and interesting, the mystery and conflict are more suspenseful and striking, and I actually felt fear while watching it. Not to mention, The Haunting of Bly Manor has a satisfying ending that, while bittersweet, is meaningful and has closure. There are also greater, more detailed backstories for every single character, including the house itself, making the whole viewing experience feel more complex and authentic.

Furthermore, similar to the rest of the book, the characters are equally promising in the beginning and remain so for a large part of the story. Ignoring the characters in the prologue as they had little to do with the actual story other than passing it along, the main character and narrator, the unnamed governess, showed plenty of resilience, and bravery in the face of malevolent apparitions that impressed me deeply, although she is frustratingly indecisive as well. Unfortunately, that didn't last long. This governess's behaviour, while normal with Flora, the young girl she takes care of, becomes questionable when it comes to Miles, Flora's 10-year-old brother, in a way that made me really uncomfortable. There are moments when I can't understand if her affection for the boy stems solely from her duty to protect him, or something more. One of the characters in the prologue even stated that he had fallen in love with her while she was his sister's governess and he was a young boy. I looked past that at first, marking it as an innocent infatuation of a young boy, but given the context later on, it makes it all the more questionable. She is definitely nothing like her series counterpart.

Moreover, two other questionable characters in this novel are Peter Quint and Miss Jessel. Neither of them is any closer to their Netflix counterparts than the governess, much less Miss Jessel. Both apparitions are, quite plainly, evil. Their unseemely relationship couldn't be further from their misdeeds. What is truly disturbing about them, however, is that both in life and in death, they have a sickening obsession with the children. It is repeatedly insinuated that Flora and Miles were assaulted by Miss Jessel and Peter Quint, respectively, and their need to possess the young siblings followed them in death. The children even shared a disturbing bond with them, the way victims often share with their abusers and are under their full control long after Quint and Jessel died.

All in all, this is not what I expected and, as it turns out, it is definitely not the classic for me. Even though it sated my curiosity as I have been planning to read this book for a while now, I wish it weren't so disappointing. I definitely would not recommend it.

✨What did you think of The Turn of the Screw?✨