Rating: 3/5

Having a puta of a day? Mayhap the carburettor finally conked. (On the M25, where else?). Perhaps as one is artfully manoeuvring between two lanes and so blocks both, the other two of course being cordoned off for road works, whose estimated completion may or may not supersede the Apocalypse. Manage to survive the road rage just before you’re road kill, rush to work: Is that Fat Nelly with your coffee cup, AGAIN, because she probably ate hers for breakfast? Hell, coffee is overrated anyway. But wait, the tights have won at ‘snakes and ladders’ yet again just before the ten o’clock and the blackberry has gone into lockdown: no amount of coaxing is gonna get that baby up and running for the presentation. Which you don’t have anyway because the dog ate your homework. And it only 10.30 in the morning: is life even worth it?

Wait, don’t dial a friend: no one wants to hear your shit anyway. Instead open up Akenfield (obviously prop it between the quarterly sales ledger and put a few furrows on your forehead for authenticity). This stuff is way better than therapy, and needless to say, cheaper. Who can fail to feel assuaged and cocooned in a feel-good miasma after reading about the totally crappy, senseless, pointless, exploited lives of Ackenfiled’s residents in the early 20c. In as much as everyone needs a smaller flea to pick on, this here is the ultimate jackpot. The sheer degradation, humiliation, poverty and ignorance on display are not without their wow factor. Yes, of course, we all know it was tough back in the day, but following this docudrama as residents recall their lives (the book was published in 1960), had me hook, line and sinker. I now understand (a little bit) how anyone can watch Big Brother: am I not as guilty in immersing in these wretched lives and lapping it all up in a show of gross voyeurism? 
The lives rendered bare are too many to recount: go read them yourself. The message I take with me though is that if despite all their hardships these people somehow managed to cherish life and find happiness, then I have no excuse for sitting on the moaning mini chair. (Although I can kvetch standing up, too....)