Rating: 4/5

(Zero spoiler review for the series as a whole and the score for the individual volume)
So I am writing this literally a few minutes after finishing this story, and it all feels a little bit raw and unexpected. Unexpected for the fact that I thought a had a couple of hundred pages to go. I had been powering through the second book for the last two days, and I stopped after a binge read this morning. When I came back to it just now, I read a page, turned another one, and found the story abruptly ended. A few days before, I had carefully flipped through to the last few pages to see how long it was, so I knew how much I had to read and look forward to. It seemed like there was no added content at the end, and the story went to the final page. Good I thought, and returned to my reading. To say the end of the story hit me like a tone of bricks would be an understatement. Its true the story had sort of reached a natural conclusion, although going off the little twist in the middle of the book, I kind of thought there was one more arc to come, although maybe I need to go back and read it again. I kind of feel like I was robbed of something. I read 200 pages today, and then somehow stopped two pages before the end without realising it. I settled in for another 200 pages, to find I only had 2 left. I don't really feel like reading the additional content. Most of it isn't the story itself, and I don't want to add those memories to what is something pretty close and personal right now. I think I'll sit with it and let it gestate before I delve into it, if I ever do. Let the grieving process commence.
So what's the story like? It's certainly not perfect, although I just can't imagine finding another graphic novel that will ever come close to doing what this one did. In a medium that is overflowing with easily digestible content and two bit superheroes, Strangers in Paradise stands apart as something pretty damn special. Francine and Katchoo, and the small but memorable cast of side characters will stay with me for a considerable time to come. Yes, the conspiratorial/crime aspects of the story were a little far fetched and weak at times (especially in the first half of the story where it was most prominent). Pretty much every male character played second fiddle to the female cast. Very one dimensional, with the slight exception of David, who was obviously more fleshed out, although always came across as subservient to the women around him. You can tell Terry Moore leans very much to the left, although I could have done without much of the modern day identitarianism that reared its head throughout. Whilst the females characters were flawed, they were never portrayed as the sexist Neanderthals most of the men were. It was at times, grossly stereotypical. Moore might have been going for humour, although it just soured a wonderful story somewhat. In fact, if I wasn't so invested in the story, you would be looking at lesser marks, and a much more critical review from me. Not to mention that every female character seems to be a lesbian. I guess I'm still a big softie at heart, that this rather lovely tale about love shone through, despite the flaws. Moore's artwork was near to faultless throughout. Some of his panels I just lingered on, feeling the emotions dripping off of the page. True, he occasionally over reached, like the excessive poetry and lyrics, although when he nailed it, it was pretty damn memorable. I've read Echo, which was written after this, as far as I know, and the art just didn't resonate the same way as it did here. Though Echo will never be as adored or heralded as SiP is. Even the title is one of the most poignant and evocative titles a work of fiction has ever had. I really miss that this is over. You absolutely need to read this, now! 4.75/5

OmniBen.