Rating: 3/5

Edward Lytton Bulwer-Lytton's "The Last Days of Pompeii" (1834) is a rather peculiar novel. As the title indicates it is set in the period leading up to the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD that drove the inhabitants of Pompey from their city. Excavations at the site were begun in the middle of the eighteenth century. By the time, that Bulwer-Lytton was writing the findings were starting to transform the way that Europeans regarded their history.
Prior to the rediscovery of Pompeii, Classical antiquity was regarded as an era of great poets (Juvenal, Virgil, etc.) , philosophers (Plato, Epicurus, etc. ) and political leaders (Augustus, Caesar, etc.). Little thought was given to ordinary people until the excavations at Pompeii provided a dramatic picture of what they were like. The murals and other artifacts found in the homes revealed a great deal about the taste and religious values of the Pompeians. Bulwer-Lytton in his novel decided to focus on the lifestyles beliefs of the "common people" of Antiquity. Much space is devoted to the struggle between two new religions (i.e. the Cult of Isis and Christianity) for the souls of the Pompeians.
Bulwer-Lytton confines his action to the city of Pompeii. Most of characters come from the affluent classes of minor nobles and merchants who owned the homes excavated at Pompeii. None of the characters are of any importance outside of the city. 
Bulwer-Lytton succeeds brilliantly in showing to a reading public familiar with the literature and histories of classical antiquity, how the archeological work at Pompeii has forced us to view the era in a new way. Unfortunately Bulwer-Lytton's approach has perverse effects. There are many long passages devoted to describing atria, peristyles, impluvia, triclinia and other features of the city's architecture. Character development suffers. The young lovers at the centre of the plot Glaucus and Ione are ciphers. None of the characters display any exceptional talent or ambition
The biggest problem with the novel however is that the villain Arbaces, a high priest of Isis, is absolutely grotesque. As a Roman Catholic, I am of course happy that Christianity ultimately triumphed over the cult of Isis. At the same time I am repelled by the portrait that Bulwer-Lytton makes of the Cult of Isis and its followers. "The Golden Ass" by Apuleius provides a much different picture of the Isis Cult. 
The footnotes reveal the depth and rigour of Bulwer-Lytton's research. He cites Apuleius, Dion Cassius, Pliny the Younger, and Plutarch as major sources. He also appears to be fully informed on the progress of the archeological excavations stating at one point: "At the current time (1834) roughly 350 to 400 skeletons have been found at Pompey but as a major part of the city has yet to be excavated, the number is likely to grow."
"The Last Days of Pompeii" is a very ambitious work where Bulwer-Lytton displays a certain mastery of the sources available during his era. His fascination with architecture however undermines the literary quality of the text. It should be noted that most of the successful authors (including Robert Graves, Marguerite Yourcenar and Gore Vida)l to have written novels set in Greek and Roman Antiquity have based their works primarily on the written histories and literature of the era.