Rating: 4/5

The Colour Out of Space: Tales of Cosmic Horror by Lovecraft, Blackwood, Machen, Poe, and Other Masters of the Weird, edited by D. Thin. 2002.

This is an anthology of cosmic horror tales, which includes short stories from many of the foundational authors of the genre. 

Here is the table of contents (I added the publication years as these were omitted in the text but I think they are important to know):

MS. Found in a Bottle by Edgar Allan Poe (1833).
The Squaw by Bram Stoker (1893).
Moxon's Master by Ambrose Bierce (1899).
The Damned Thing by Ambrose Bierce (1893).
An Inhabitant of Carcosa by Ambrose Bierce (1886).
The Repairer of Reputations by R. W. Chambers (1895).
The House of Sounds by M. P. Shiel (1911).
The White People by Arthur Machen (1904).
The Willows by Algernon Blackwood (1907).
The Jolly Corner by Henry James (1908).
Seaton's Aunt by Walter de la Mare (1923).
The Colour Out of Space by H. P. Lovercraft (1927).

My approach to reading this particular anthology was to limit myself to one story per day, even though several of the stories were quite short. This gave me time to sit with each story after reading it rather than plowing through the entire anthology. This worked well for me. It allowed the uncanny nature of the tales to percolate in my subconscious. 

As with most anthologies, some stories hit home more than others. My personal favorites were Bierce's Moxon's Master and The Damned Thing, R. W. Chambers' The Repairer of Reputations, Arthur Machen's The White People, Algernon Blackwood's The Willows, and the titular Lovecraft story (which was the only one from the collection I had previously read), The Colour Out of Space. My least favorite was The Jolly Corner by Henry James. I really had to push myself to finish that one. Which was surprising to me because I've seen it positively reviewed across multiple sources. 

I definitely want to read more Bierce, Chambers, Machen and Blackwood. I've been reading Lovecraft since I was young. This collection is essentially authors he referenced in his essays and other literary criticism as some of his main influences. After reading this selection, I can see why.