Rating: 3/5

The Turn of the Screw is a classic horror story written by Henry James. It tells a story of a young governess and who watches after two children. While taking care of them, she begins to encounter a couple ghost-like beings. Written purely for entertainment, the author walks the reader through this woman’s terrifying experiences. This book is geared towards teenagers and adults who like a traditional ghost story.
	Being that this book is a ghost story, one of the most prevalent themes is that of ghosts. When the governess first arrives at Bly, she recalls hearing the faint “cry of a child” and the sound of “a light footstep” outside her door. As the story progresses, she begins to see a man and woman around the house. Although it is confirmed that the people see keeps seeing are dead, she makes a point to mention that they look very real and human like as opposed to looking ghostly. 
	This book would definitely be considered to be a description. It is explaining certain events that the narrator was told about. He is recalling what happened from a written journal left by the governess who had experienced these occurrences. The story he is reading has such great detail, that the reader can picture exactly what is happening and feel like they are there.
	This book was very good. It kept you on the edge of your seat most of the time and made the reader want to keep reading. I liked how when I was reading it, I felt like I was right there, experiencing what was going on. It was unlike any book I have read before considering after reading it, I was sad it was over. It leaves the reader wanting more.

Daisy Miller is a short story written by Henry James. It follows a young American, named Winterbourne, traveling Europe and meeting another American named Daisy. Winterbourne becomes very fond of Daisy, but he isn't sure if she feels the same way about him. Written for entertainment, Henry tells the story of a young man and woman who become great friends. This book would be best for teenagers or adults who like stories about love and friendship.
 One obvious theme in this book is love. In the beginning, Winterbourne has an immediate attraction to Daisy. However, he is not sure if she feels the same way about him. He later finds her with another man who she claims to be engaged to. Not sure if she is telling the truth or not, he decides to leave the matter alone and move on. Later, when Daisy dies, he finds out that she really did care about him.
 This book is considered to be a narration. It tells the story of Winterbourne through a chronological series of events. It shows the reader how Winterbourne and Daisy meet, how they become close, and how Daisy ends up passing away. There are not a lot holes for the reader to fill in. They are told the whole story from beginning to end.
 In my opinion, this book was just okay. It wasn't very exciting and didn't keep my attention very well. I had to really focus to understand what was going on. I wouldn't say this book was awful but I would not recommend it to anybody. Compared to other books written by Henry James, this was not one of his best works.