Rating: 5/5

What IS it about that iconic Endurance of Beethoven - or the majestic marbles of Michelangelo, for that matter - that have made their legendary INDOMINATABILITY so Legendary?

Simple, it’s The Beethoven Factor. 

This Book says it is, anyway... 

Or IS it? Let’s take a look -

First, on the naysayers’ side...

So many of us have grown TIRED of this too-happy “factor.” His music can drive us mad: the density of it; the Loudness of its climaxes; the unevenness of those many potboilers Beethoven churned out.

And there IS truth to that.

We may put his attraction down to the apparent self-pity we so identified with as teens. Or to our aversion to his sycophantic desire to please (especially those butt-kissing early crowd pleasers he wrote when young, or, later, impoverished.)

And there’s something else...

Beethoven’s music is frankly daemonic at times: his reiterative one-upmanship. His Victory At All Costs attitude. His superficial mindset in the barn-burning potboilers.
***

Be that as it may, on the positive side, how often has he Saved us from Negativity and Depression? 

Probably more times than we can remember.

And That’s the thesis of this remarkable book.

More often than not, he has cheered us up.

And we have to put it down to his Dogged Indomitability.

It’s a real lifesaver, or can be, for THAT’s the Beethoven Factor. 

Like a stranger’s kind words to us on a gloomy day. 

You see, it doesn’t have to be an ego-driven thing.

Now, at our coming of age, the Negative Side of life can take precedence for the rest of our lives.

But it doesn’t HAVE to be like that!

For to live Well-Balanced Lives we MUST -

Live the BEETHOVEN FACTOR.

Another rainy day?

OutSHINE it.

More ugly world news?

OutSHINE it.

Pandemic Lockdown?

OutSHINE it...

The Positive Thinking BEETHOVEN FACTOR WORKS -

And all it takes is the Power to say YES to Life!
***

How did Professor Paul Pearsall KNOW all this?

Simple. He was a CARDIAC NEUROLOGIST!

And the Heart has EMOTIONS of its OWN:

https://youtu.be/LelkiUDS0yM