Rating: 4/5

(Audiobook) This book is an older history of the Civil War (mid-1950s), but it still has relevance and value today. Much of the Civil War and the associated telling of the history of those events leading up to, during and after have entered into the polarized realm of our current society. This work is not an attempt to define the entire Civil War, but to tell the tale of the war from the Union perspective, with the main focus on the military actions, especially those of the commanders. Thus, the generals feature prominently in the work, with various accounts from the rank and file soldiers. The writing is of high quality and Catton strikes the balance of technical military details and personal stories. 

While this is a book of the 1950s, Catton does offer insights and discussions about those issues which are very relevant in today’s debate about the war. For him, slavery is at the core of the cause of the war, but he does not paint the Union as “all-in” for emancipation or equality. He is honest on Lincoln’s views on slavery and future integration, as Lincoln did not completely embrace full emancipation and immediate equality between the races. Others in the Union had similar views, from the rank and file who fought in the battles to those on the home front who had divergent views on emancipation and equality. The Union Army was happy to leverage the slaves to weaken the Confederacy, but when it came to seeing and treating them as equals...that was something else. 

The audiobook is good and the reader doesn’t add to detract from the narrative (probably could have done without the singing parts). I don’t know if this particular book would be published like this in 2019. It is still worthy to reside on any student’s shelf in the study of the Civil War, but would it stand up in today’s polarized political environment, especially since it is just on the military men for the Union, with only some contextual inputs on the Confederate actions? I guess the reader will have to make that call.