Rating: 5/5

This is a wonderfully rewarding read, although at times the story seems impenetrable, but stay with it as the book will become a personal favourite, that repays frequent revisits.

The beguiling, irresistible and utterly compelling, Sylvia Tietjens is described, ' immensely tall, slight… reddish, very fair hair in great bandeaux right over her ears. Her very oval, regular face had an expression of virginal lack of interest such as used to be worn by fashionable Paris courtesans a decade before that time.”
A beautiful, sensual woman.

Sylvia has enjoyed a colourful past and learned the hard way that surrendering to impulse is damaging and disastrous, and knows through bitter experience the yearning of flaming passion and desire, 'that dreadful feeling' that always leads to awkwardness and unexpected repercussions. It is Sylvia's colourful story that injects the volume with mischief and unexpected twists and turns. She is the unconventional heroine of this multi layered convoluted story. 

A troubled Catholic and a reckless adulteress, Sylvia was already pregnant when she married Christopher Tjetjeans and the child probably wasn’t his, but as a man of complete honesty and integrity he does the decent thing, of course. Sylvia is completely self obsessed and all knowing. for example, she 'knew she was displaying indolent and gracious beauty', as she entered the room, but she has an affected insouciance designed to deter but which has the opposite effect as men, of all ages and social classes are entranced by her beauty.

 ' She had purposely increased her air of scornful insolence. That was because she felt that her hold over men increased to the measure of her coldness. Someone she knew, had once said of a dangerous woman, that when she entered the room every woman kept her husband on the leash. It was Sylvia's pleasure to think that, before she went out of that room, all women in it realised with mortification - that they needn't!'

'To know everything about a person is to be bored, bored, bored,' she protests. She treats all men with disdain, ' Taking up with a man was like reading a book you had read when you had forgotten that you had read it. You had not been for ten minutes in any sort of intimacy with a man before you said: "But I've read all this before."

Men are like putty in her hands entranced at first sight, captivated within moments of their first encounter, 
' She could, she flattered herself, tell the amount of empressment which a man would develop about herself at the first glance - the amount and the quality too.'

Julian Barnes has written a definitive introduction to the Penguin Classics edition (2012) in which he says :
'For Graham Greene , Sylvia Tietjeans is surely the most possesssed evil character in the modern novel. A wife who is bored, promiscuous and up-to-date,tied to a husband who is omniscient, chaste and antique; there's a marriage made in hell.' Certainly Sylvia does not suffer fools gladly; she can be mean, at times sadistically cruel, with a lacerating tongue and utterly self centred.

Sylvia reluctantly admits, 'She was by that time tired of men, or imagined that she was' as the men in her acquaintance never fulfilled expectations.' So she remains filled with an inexpressible love for her emotionally repressed husband.

Parade’s End – made up of four novels published between 1924 and 1928 – explores post-Freudian female sexual desire and Sylvia Tietjens represents the unfettered, repressed, but now viewed as zany, women unleashed by the 'Boom &amp; Bust ' decade, rationalising their intemperate, conflicting but passionate desires.
Standing naked before her husband, Sylvia darkly exclaims, “Higher than the beasts, lower than the angels: stuck between the two in our idiots’ Eden. God, I’m so bored of it all. Guarding or granting permission to a temple no decent butcher would give to his offal tray. I’d rather be a cow in a field…”

Promiscuity and serial adultery lacks the intimacy for which she is searching, and doesn't fill the aching void in her soul, revealed in her stream of consciousness admission, 'Blessed Virgin, mother of God, make him take me, before midnight...He's my husband, it is not a sin.'