Rating: 4/5

This was a buddy read with Rosalinda. Thank you so much for not only recommending this book, but also holding my hand throughout the journey. 

The World of Normal Boys takes place in 1978 when our protagonist, Robin, is 13 years old. I turned 12 that same year. What an amazing blast from the past! K.M. Soehnlein does a fantastic job bringing to life the sights, sounds, scents, fads and feel of the life of an adolescent in the US during that time. I was happily and embarrassingly transported back to the angst and awkwardness of my teens for the duration of the ride. 

The characters are painted with such a rich and nuanced brush. They are flawed and frustrating and infuriating and complex and so very real. Even as they infuriated or frustrated me, I understood and empathized with them. Mostly. There were characters that I simply hated. But it was hate with and for good reason. Those characters weren’t there simply to imbue conflict. They were integral to understanding how and why the flawed characters that I loved were the way they were. They’re the kind of people we know and see and interact with in our day to day lives. They’re the kind of people who, if they’re significant players in our lives, shape us and hopefully influence us to grow into stronger, smarter, better versions of ourselves. This is the case with the characters in TWONB. Each has an important and integral part in shaping the others. For me, that is the essence of this book, because, like Rosalinda says in her review, “...you literally suffer with every new chapter, you literally get the butterflies and you desperately don’t want this incredible journey to end but when it does you are slapped with reality. It’s just there, in your face. And you just love it and think that’s the best way to end a book. It was actually not an ending, it was a beginning. A powerful one.” I loved that about TWONB, it was a lovely journey in and of itself, but it’s ending is really a new beginning, not only for Robin and his sister Ruby, but their mother as well. 

It’s been nearly a month since I finished The World of Normal Boys. I don’t usually write reviews more than a week or two after having finished a book, but this was such an unexpected, difficult and lovely read that I wanted to at least say this much.