Rating: 5/5

Terrifying and awesome. The sea is an adversary with power beyond most landlubbers' imagining. 

This is the story of the men and the ocean-going tugboats whose mission is to save ships, cargoes and crew in distress from stormy seas or the horrors of lee shores that can kill with ruthless inevitability. 

At the heart of these true tales of courage lies Canada's Foundation Maritime and the salvage tug Foundation Franklin. Here she is on a daring mission to save half of a Liberty Ship, the Joel R. Poinsett, which broke apart in a North Atlantic storm. In 1945, in the midst of a desperate sea war, even half a ship was something to rescue if it could possibly be done. 

 

"Suddenly the high grey hulk of half a ship loomed up ahead. 'She was a terror to behold'." Her Captain Harry Brushett had to pilot his tug along side, and eventually underneath the tilting, heaving monster, while a volunteer crew in a dory attempted to scale the sheer side of the wreck to catch and secure a towing line. 

The salvage tugs went out alone, braving not only the seas and storms, but also German U-boats. They worked with only primitive Direction Finding (DF) equipment, with very short ranges. No radar. In radio silence for fear of the listening U-boats. The North Atlantic's already treacherous coastline was more so in war as cities (and navigation lights) went dark. Friends at sea could be as dangerous as foe--it may be that more merchant ships were damaged in convoy maneuvers than were destroyed by German fire. 

Still there was something especially sinister about the German sea wolves prowling the cold grey waters. In one deeply spooky scene, the Franklin is hove to in a little open spot, anchored in the midst of dense pack ice, engines off, when the lookout whispers to Captain Brushett. There, in the "still night, silhouetted against white ice and against the swishing yellow of the northern lights" was the outline of a submarine's conning tower and periscope. To find out more, read the book!

Foundation Franklin, was made of iron, not steel; built in Aberdeen in 1918, she burned coal--a lot of coal. The "Blacks" who worked her engine rooms were perpetually coated in coal dust. It was an unenviable job, but if they were often broiling from the heat it was perhaps better than the bridge on one of those icy days for which the North Atlantic is famous. 

 

This is Foundation Maritime's Capt. Dykeman on the iced-up bridge of a tug off Sable Island, the 'graveyard of the Atlantic'.

Among the most terrifying jobs was that of the divers, who would go down into the holds of the sinking ships to assess damage and sometimes, working in the dark by feel alone, patching holes and building bulkheads to help refloat the ship.

Even before the war the seas took their toll. This is the Franklin trying to salvage whatever could be saved from the British-registered Marsden hard aground on Ship Rock near St. John harbor. 

There is a lot of machinery breaking down in the first half and it took a while to get used to the lingo, but even before the war broke out I was totally hooked. A must for sea-buffs and those interested in naval history. 

And don't miss this terrific web site, hazegrey.org with photos of many of Foundation Maritime's tugs and operations. http://www.hazegray.org/navhist/canad...