"Recovery is truly a gift. It means having humility instead of being a victim. It means being grateful rather than grandiose. Recovery means being powerful and respectful, not cruel. 
For many of us, moving towards health feels cruel at first because we never learned the difference between enabling and respectful love as we grew up in our families" (16). 

"Expect to feel guilty when you try to set boundaries" (38). 

"Healthy play is a celebration of our spirit and our humanity. Play is what helps us to be creative and to solve problems in new and more efficient ways. Play helps us to keep a solid balance in our lives. And play requires that we have a lot of trust in ourselves and in life, because to play we must let go of our tight grip over life for a moment" (71). 

"Remember, at some level in our bodies and in our unconscious, we do have awareness of being shamed or abused. It is our job to notice what's going on inside of ourselves. No one can do it for us" (138).

"We suggest that you stop trying to figure out people's motives, stop trying to decide if they're malicious or not and start taking care of yourself" (141). 

"Having a clear identity means that we are at relative peace with ourselves, we are comfortable, natural, genuine, clear, honest without being boundaryless, we know when to stand up for ourselves and when to let go, we like who we are, we like what we do, we like how we live, and we have come to this point via a personal search and questioning. In other words, we didn't just fall into this lifestyle by continuing our childhood beliefs and the commands of our parents" (154).

"Some of us who grew up in dysfunctional families, perhaps many of us, never learned any social intelligence. We may have tested IQs of 150 but not know how to carry on a conversation for more than five minutes without boring the other person to death. We may not know what to share, with whom, where or how much" (193). 

"A recovering person knows that he or she can't be around unrecovering groups for any length of time, especially if they're family members" (206).