Rating: 4/5

I found this book in a lonely mountainside cabin... nah, only kidding. It was £1 in a bargain basement book sale, so who could say no to that? It went onto the frankly vertiginous and ridiculous pile of books behind the sofa and was forgotten about for sometime. Then, a few days ago I was working on a site in the former medieval area of Liverpool.

Everybody was busily engaged in day to day construction/demolition mayhem; I was watching a twenty ton digger, a crane was rolling across site moving steel girders and there were lots of men leaning on shovels when suddenly part of the ground fell away to reveal a yawning void. Well, well... it's a well. Everyone immediately ran to over to the collapsed area and had tried to have a look down it. I poked it with a Sopwith Staff and met with no resistance. Everyone lay around the broken well capping trying to see if they could discern anything in the pitch blackness. Finally we lowered a series of cage lights down and got a perfect view of a 25m deep vertical brick lined shaft, at which point one of the builders shouted "if that fucking girl from The Ring with the messed up hair crawls up the lighting flex, I'm out of here". And I thought, "Oh yeah I must read that book sometime soon."

So I did.

For the first time ever, I have to say I think I liked the film better (Ringu, not The Grudge), but only because I suspect that something has been lost in translation. The prose has moments of grace but is generally a bit stodgy around the edges - the premise is good and sleek but the delivery is clunky, like someone has tied a load of tin cans and lead weights to back of a Bugatti Veyron.

The story is basically the same though - sylph-like youth, Sadako Yamamura is raped and murdered and stuffed into a well. In life she exhibited unusual mental prowess and in death Sadako uses these powers to hijack the airwaves, sending out her cursed visions through the medium of the telly-box to kill off hapless youths in a sort of viral VHS revenge. Kazayuki Asakawa faces a race against the clock to find a "cure" for the curse before he faces the same terrible fate that caused cardiac arrest in four high school students.

This story did not scare me. It mainly me realise that this book is an excellent example of how technological innovation makes authors equally cursed, and blessed. The advent of the mobile phone, netbook, Twitter, Facebook, IM, tablets and any other mode of ceaseless cyber jabber are great ways to bring new elements into the plot. Characters can communicate efficiently and quickly, dilemmas can be solved by simply googling the problem and shamelessly name dropping shiny gizmos is a great way of showing how hip and down-with-the-kids you are even if you're some aging hipster banging out your novel on a Smith-Corona. 

However these things will date your work. You will be antiquated and outmoded and your words run the risk of never being converted into e-book because they will be sceptically examined by people who will LOL (yes, I hate text speak and other proto computer prattle but I use it here to illustrate the point cos its youth innit?) at your antiquarian references to VHS and word processors. 

Why is this a problem? People don't ignore Austen because her characters main mode of locomotion was a horse and carriage and not an E Class Mercedes. Similarly, Gaskell is not shunned despite her references to mills, shuttle looms and sail ships. I actually can't explain it but it probably boils down to the fact that technology changes so fast, is so accessible and is so status driven, perhaps were ashamed to admit we ever used or owned such outmoded items. Maybe we are afraid that by admitting to remembering these things, we are dating ourselves?