Rating: 3/5

With the recent resurgence in Abbamania, I grabbed this from my dad’s bookcase to read. I grew up on the ABBA Gold album, since ABBA had disbanded before I was born. But with the announcement of their first new album in years and a tour (albeit using ABBA-tars), I’m officially immersing myself in all things ABBA. 

I was looking at their Bright Lights, Dark Shadows 600-page biography, but I am reluctant to spend £17 on a paperback, so I thought this book would tide me over. 

It is a well researched book, covering their individual lives before, during and after ABBA (it was published in 1994, so it is a considerably old book by now - there’s no mention of Mamma Mia stage show/film or Muriel’s Wedding for example). And there’s a lot of great colour and black and white photos, featuring all four members. There are no personal photos, these seem to be majorly from the ABBA archives, or ones that are readily available. There are some double page spreads, which fail due to that dreaded spine on books - this has resulted in a few really good shots getting messed up as they disappear into the spine. 

Some of the text is also paired with the most eye sore backgrounds - instead of just plain white, it’s patterned on some alternative pages, which makes the text really difficult to read. Whoever thought up that idea should have been fired. 

The numerous spelling mistakes really bring this book down, and it is quite disappointing, as most of them are silly and could have easily been caught by a proof reader. At one point, Frida is referred to as Friday, ABBA is called Aba, and “pounds” is used instead of points, despite points being used twice more in the same sentence. You will be gritting your teeth at this obvious spelling mistakes, and they are quite detracting from the book. 

The author also relies heavily on repeating interviews with the band, particularly in the latter half of the book - I’m not sure if these have been lifted directly from print interviews or transcribed, but they also feature some annoying spelling mistakes. 

The book can also get quite repetitive, with the frequent mentions about what chart position a single/album got to in which country, and what the names of the people who were appearing as their backing musicians etc. Particularly after ABBA had disbanded, track listings and song writing credits from their individual solo ventures appear, along with the Chess track listing. Personally, I don’t think these should have been included in the main text of the book, and could have perhaps been left to the end of the book. 

I don’t know if this book has been republished since 1994, to eliminate these errors, and I think there are possibly better ABBA books out there. This is for the die hard ABBA fans only, if you can ignore all the glaring mistakes. The good news is that it is still in print and relatively cheap to get a hold of. 

As a last note, quote of the book goes to Bjorn:

“When we split up in 1982, that was it. And that is how it is going to stay. I don’t believe in making any half-assed comebacks. I think that it is quite pathetic when old bands who have broken up, go back on the road. We still have a lot of credibility and that’s the way I want it to stay.”