Rating: 4/5

Barry Yourgrau is a unique voice in literary world. Whose world observes the fantastic in the mundane with heightened vividness and also observes the natural world with its peculiar absurdity. You get a dichotomy. One may take sometime to get used to this world, but once you are taken into it and respond to its rhythms, you will crave for more. Though I write under "A man jumps out of an airplane", I am also thinking about "Wearing dad's head" while I write this. Perhaps the duality of his writing content is best shines in one story according to me. 

Check this:

Ars Poetica 
 
A man comes in. He has a glass throat. You can see his larynx in there: a microphone 
disk, a little speaker horn. A mailman comes in with his big bag. He opens the small transparent 
hatch in the man's throat and pushes in a couple of blue air letters. The man begins to recite -- a 
wonderful poem about being jealous of the clouds; then another poem, not quite as good, about a 
forbidden voyage. 
 "So this is how poetry is made," I think. "What are some other ways?" 
 A man in a baggy checkered suit climbs down a ladder from the ceiling. He carries a 
bucket. In the bucket, beautifully colored fish are swimming. They have been painted. The water 
rumbles with their brightness. The man crouches and rolls his eyes about and manipulates his 
hands mysteriously over the bucket. He murmurs in a strange tongue. Nothing at all happens, but 
it's really quite marvelous just the same.

His world is like some knead, where humans turn into opposite sexes, shrinks, expands, animals takes human qualities, inanimate changes to animate. Reality dissolves. perhaps dissolves isn't the right word. There is no yardstick to match his world with the reality we live. 

Check this beautiful story:

Primavera 

I go for a walk at night in a school yard in the country. It's early spring. I come around the 
corner of one of the old wooden buildings, and this is what I see: a hurricane lamp hangs glowing 
from a tree. In its light a naked man is bent over a naked young girl whose head is in a metal 
washtub. At first I think, blushing, that they're doing some sex thing bobbing for apples, and I 
turn to go away; but then I see the guy is in fact holding down the girl's head in the tub: she 
squirms around, like she's choking. 
I hurry towards them yelling. The guy turns around. He smiles as I come up. He's 
middle-aged and healthy-looking. He holds one hand on the girl's neck and gestures with the 
other. "It's a fertility rite," he explains pleasantly. "Are you kidding?" I tell him. The girl's hair is 
spread out in the water, and she squirms and grunts and paws softly at the grass. I reach out for 
his wrist to make him let go, and he gives a cry and tries to ward me off, and we get involved in 
an awkward, shifting, tugging struggle, made all the more bizarre there under the lamp by his 
nakedness. Finally we lose our balance together and sprawl violently over the girl and the tub, 
knocking everything all over the place. 
 I manage to pull free out of the tangle and get to my knees. The tub is upended on its side 
in front of an expanding, glistening pool; the girl droops in the grass, hacking, her skinny chest 
heaving. I stare at her, dumbfounded: with each watery cough of hers, the air fills with tiny fruits 
and flowers. They sift around her onto the grass, pale and stunted, a garden of puny litter. 
 "See what you've done?" the guy says. He sits next to me, rubbing his shoulder. He looks 
miserable. "Will you look at that measly stuff! Man," he groans, "don't you know anything about 
the seasons?" 

And is there better way to portray Texas (I have never read one like this) :

Texas

Some guys are driving through Texas. They're groggy and dazed from all the hours, the 
awesome monotony. On all sides, they see nothing: scrub plain, as if the earth were flat. There is 
a smooth line drawn in the dust under the sky. It's the horizon. They drive towards it. The engine 
drones. Sometimes, a small, single shape appears in the distance. They watch it as it grows, 
mysteriously. It reproduces. It enlarges, upwards, in creeping increments. Suddenly, it acquires 
detail: it becomes buildings: a city. For a few strange minutes, they're in it. The fact of scale 
dazzles them. They crane their necks, watching through the rear window as first the details go. 
They watch the shapes begin to sink, by gradual increments, all the way into the distance -- until 
there's only the horizon, smooth, dusty, and they're back in the center of a flat world. 
 This is Texas. Their eyes glaze. They look at each other. They stare blankly and rub their 
cheeks. They have nothing to say. They see miles of scrub desert in the windows. They stare off 
ahead, stupefied, waiting for the next speck to appear, to start to reproduce and rise. 
 Way down near Galveston, a scrawny, crewcut kid in Levis and pointed boots gets tired. 
The sun's high. His hands are all torn up from turning the big crank handle. He decides to sneak 
off and go swimming. He pulls off his clothes and jumps into the Gulf. He floats on his back, 
spouting water. His blisters sting. He thinks: "To hell with those guys in the car!" 

Have a good laugh at this:

Domestic Farce 
 
A man comes home and finds his wife in bed with a squirrel. He stands in the bedroom 
doorway, gaping at them. The wife stares back in fright over the covers, which are drawn up over 
her nose. The squirrel's little head peeps out similarly beside her. The culprits look so idiotic 
together that the man can't help himself, he bursts out laughing. He sees the nuts strewn all over 
his wife's clothes on the floor and the sight makes him positively howl so he has to clutch onto 
the door frame to support himself. The wife and the squirrel exchange wide-eyed glances; but 
then they catch the bug themselves, and slowly they start to chuckle -- the wife in fearful, 
whimpering surges, the squirrel in its high, hysterical tweeting. Soon all restraints are by the 
boards; the room rocks with the jangle and din of mirth going full blast. 
 Then abruptly the husband stops laughing. His face turns ashen. He disappears from the 
doorway. The wife sits up; she calls out his name. There's no answer. She darts a look of terrible 
concern at the squirrel and she clambers out of bed and rushes naked out the door. The squirrel 
twitches in the bedclothes. It hears voices, shouts, and it hops up onto the pillow, down onto the 
floor, grabs up an armful of nuts, leaps onto the window sill, pauses dead still in attentive silence, 
and then hops onto the fire escape. At this exact instant the blade of an axe crashes down onto the 
window ledge. The squirrel bolts onto a nearby tree limb, spraying nuts everywhere. "You and 
your goddamned pets!" the man screams in the bedroom, above the caterwaul of sobbing. The 
squirrel races from tree to tree until it is far away down the block. It fetches up finally in some 
top branches to catch its breath. Its little heart pitter-patters. The wind carries up to it the scraps 
of agitated voices; the sunlight makes a glinting speck of the axe head in the distant window. The 
squirrel sits among the leaves, switching its tail back and forth. It thinks, "Where the hell does he 
get off calling me a 'pet'!" 

The title story: 

Soup bone 

A man jumps out of an airplane. Sobbing, he empties a shoe box of love letters into the 
whooshing air. The letters shoot up and stick against the puffy bottoms of some clouds. The man 
looks, and groans unhappily, but then gets caught back up in the tumult of falling. He gulps and 
clutches at his head but his hat is long since gone. A cloud rushes up under his feet and the man 
cringes and crashes into it. The cloud flings him up into the air, as if it were foam rubber. He 
sprawls back down onto it in a heap. It's a tiny cloud and the man clings to it, desperately, like a 
shipwreck survivor hanging on to the side of a barrel. 
 He looks around. Out of nowhere, something hits right next to him and bounces away into 
the sky: it's a big soup bone, the kind dogs love. The man looks up and sees the looming, 
onrushing image of a dalmatian hurtling towards him. The dog barks and flails as if skidding on 
vertical ice. Its tongue trails up over its nose, its ears stream straight up. The man gives a shout 
and frantically flaps his feet to try to maneuver out of the way. The dog crashes right on top of 
him. The cloud heaves violently. The man almost loses his grip. The dog scrambles and slides 
down the man's leg and hangs on to an ankle. "Let go, let go," the man shouts at it. He kicks 
furiously with the leg but the dog hangs on for dear life, whining, eyes shut tight. "You dumb 
mutt, let go!" the man screams. He feels his aching fingers slipping. He gives a terrific leg shake 
and then frantically lets go with one hand to deliver a wild, desperate punch. He misses. The 
cloud capsizes and pops loose. Screaming and whining and barking, the man and the dog tumble 
headlong into the wide blue sky. 

I should thank Glen Russel, whose review I read years back and made a bookmark of this writer. Else I wouldn't have discovered this amazing and unique writer.