Rating: 5/5

"If the spiritual relationships you have in Jesus' name don't give you rest, but rather make you more tired as time goes on, then they aren't representing Jesus' purpose accurately. He came to lift from the backs of tired people the burden of trying hard to earn God's approval."

This book was recommended to me at exactly the right time (thanks, Rachel!). My formative teenage years were spent being drawn into legalistic Christian systems, and my biggest church influences during that time were very focused on the external application of God's standards as they interpreted them. The process I went through to shed those influences is too long to write here, but in the end I had to tear down almost everything I believed about God's character and relearn who He really is. During all the time that I was living the "perfect" Christian life externally, I struggled to truly love people, and I don't know that I really believed that God loved me. As much as I tried to please him, I still felt He must be dissatisfied with me.

I was so surprised when I moved back into mainstream evangelical circles to run into what seemed like legalism 2.0. Instead of measuring how long your hems were, you were being judged by the length of your Bible study. How many theology books you were reading. How submissive you were. How committed you were to the church. Every Sunday there seemed to be more promptings to analyze our shortcomings and realize how disappointing we are to God. It was tempting for me to think that it was just my problem -- that I was so "damaged" by my legalistic past that I was just overly sensitive to anything that reminded me of it.

This book was a breath of fresh air for me, because it makes clear that unhealthy patterns of spiritual "mis-"guidance can appear in any setting. It lays out how spiritual abuse can occur, what it looks like, how the Bible can be used to beat down people, and how to renew your thinking when you realize you've been weighed down with burdens you're not called to bear. I also appreciated how it addresses those who are misusing their spiritual authority -- it acknowledges that most of the time those leaders aren't trying to break down their people but may be caught in unhealthy patterns themselves. Nonetheless, it doesn't downplay the seriousness of how improper spiritual authority can damage peoples' relationship with God.

"The bait in a spiritually abusive system is the promise of a relationship with God, rest for the soul, forgiveness of sins, and nothing less than a brand-new identity in Christ Jesus. And best of all, it's free. It comes by grace through faith. 

The switch takes place when, upon arriving, we receive a heavy load of new rules and external performances to live up to. We still hear words and sing songs about grace and life, but there seems so little of the genuine article. There is no life-giving reign of God, only a substitute God who suddenly demands a great deal of activity from us to 'prove' we are 'worthy servants'. In fact, God-talk is used to drive people. We end up with a facsimile of what we came for."

I bookmarked so many passages and will be using it as a reference often. I only had one big complaint about the book: I wish the title was different. I truly believe this book would benefit anyone who has resonated with the first paragraph I wrote. But I'm afraid some wouldn't even pick it up because of the title -- maybe they don't even believe spiritual abuse is a real thing. Or that it surely wouldn't apply to their "normal" church. Regardless, this is a necessary book and an important resource for anyone connected with conservative church culture.