Rating: 3/5

People of Goodreads, I don't get it. I don't share the excitement, not for the great Russian authors in general nor this title specifically. They tell me of its its great literary and historical importance and I guess I've got to respect that, but I don't feel the love.

Sitting through page after page I got the feeling I was the victim of the world's longest "I told you that story so I could tell you this one" gag. I also had a strange sense of deja vu at times - a case has been made that every significant Western novel from 1880 on had some sort of germinating seed sown here. Any dialogue on the subject of morality, any debate on the goodness of God or the need for religion in modern times, any courtroom drama – they're all in development here, and reading this book later in my reading career is like visiting with old friends and having their mom pull out the embarassing photos of their awkward teen years.

Really, what's so great about it? We've got some weighty philosophical questions to deal with, but they're handled so clunkily. I don't mind grappling with big ideas, but the presentation puts me off. Long-winded doesn't even begin to describe it! And I take issue wtih Dostoyevsky's habit of introducing a minor character then launching into a longish backstory about them. "We must pause to say a few words about..." or "I really must mention..." —no, really, you needn't and mustn't do anything seeing as how YOU're the author here and the one calling the shots. I don't need all this padding, just the primary story is enough, thanks.

Oh, how I detest the dull formalities of high society, the blowhard dialogue, the pages and pages spent detailing bricks on walkways, print on wallpaper, buttons on overcoats. This maximal prose style wears me out and runs counter to something I love most in my literature, which is to say: brevity. Knock me out with a sentence or two, and spare me the exposition!

Somewhere beneath the bulk is a slender novel a few hundred pages shorter that makes its points quicker and repeats itself less. I'd probably have liked to read that abridgement much more.

3 stars. I made myself sit through to the end.