Rating: 5/5

As has already been stated in many of the the prior reviews for this work, it is quite apparent that this is the likeliness candidate to be considered Mr. Snyder's magnum opus, his master work. Throughout the book many sweeping themes and references to many universal or deep concepts arise, intermingle, and blur. This intertwining of vines of meaning leads to a highly engaging series of poems both long and short that send the reader around the world and off into the depths of the poet's mind and beyond into worlds we can only grasp in a distant sense if we are not very familiar with the source material they are formed in. In particular, two concepts and themes drew my attention more than the others throughout this work.

 The first concept is that of Zen Buddhism through the eyes of a Western mind. The concepts of Zen Buddhism in particular and Buddhism in general, are highly abstract and foreign to most Americans. The way that Snyder presents the concepts begins right off the bat, even if not blatantly calling it out. The first poem, Endless Streams and Mountains, is the poet's imagination calling up account after account of stories within and behind a certain Chinese painting. It is clear not from the images themselves so much that one of the inspirations for the author's viewpoints is Zen Buddhism, but more-so in the way they are presented, timeless and eternal while at once fleeting and temporary. This also serves as a history lesson for the hands that the painting has passed through until he finally saw it himself. The line where these cross is not quite clear however, and yet the transition does not seem out of place, but natural. I a not entirely certain how he has accomplished this feat, but it is a great inspiration for a budding author and poet such as myself to strive for. 
 The way he accomplishes so much throughout a single poem is not singular to the opening poet however. Another such example is the poem titled Boat of a Billion Years. In this poem, there are many, many overt mentions of Buddhist concepts and deities. At the same time, there also appears to be an intermingling of Native American figures and images interspersed throughout the same part of the work. The way it is engaged is also so natural, that unless one is searching for differing sources of imagery, it is near impossible to see where they occur. Another aspect to this poem that while somewhat brief and subtle serves to make the latter portion of the poem open to the more wary reader. This is beginning the poem with the image of the poet on a tanker in the Red Sea watching a Dutch freighter pass in the distance. He uses this concept of distance and the at least somewhat more familiar reference of the Red Sea to draw the reader in, and the oil tanker to put a familiar image of something commonly thought of by a Western mind in that region to slip the reader into first a bit of a daydream and then diving deep into Buddhist references and musings on these references. In short, he utilizes the setting to expand his reader-base substantially with a subtle usage of common images giving way to more distant and abstract ones. For me, this shows many good examples for how to blend disparate images together to create a unique journey into the musings and perhaps beliefs of the poet. This is important as a fiction writer as there are times when a writer must create cultures and even whole worlds, and this is in one way or another done by drawing on one or more sources and adapting them to the setting of the story as desired. 

 The second concept that stood out throughout the work is that of the long journey along a road. For me, this theme and the emotions it invokes have a deep personal meaning. I have always viewed life itself as a journey, and the image of the wandering hero or adventurer has been one I feel great attachment to. In Snyder's book, this is presented most explicitly in the poem titled Night Highway 99 where he recounts his journey north along Highway 99 to Portland. At this time, he is evidently hitchhiking his way north and recounts some of the activities or sights he encounters at various cities along the way. This poem reads out much like a stylized travel log and is in stark contrast to poems referenced previously. Whereas, those two focus on bringing out abstract images to awaken the reader's deepest imagination, this work attempts to convey the changing emotions Snyder must have felt on the trip. All the same, there is a constant drive forward, a want, no a need to make it to the end of his journey. The poem is long, but this helps to add to the feeling of a long-drawn out endevour to reach the end of the road. The reader longs along with Snyder to make it to the next city the next verse and ultimately, to the end of the poem. As we go about in life, we are ever on the move, it is rare and perhaps impossible to remain fully stopped in life for long. Even if we do not move, the world around us will change and force our hand to move forward, or be lost in the rising tide of change. These images and many more are shown on the reader's guided tour of Highway 99. The journey, is also the oldest archetype for a plot and some believe, the source of all other plots. As a fantasy writer, I enjoy engaging my characters on the quest that is the base framework for the plot of most good fantasy works. Mr.Snyder's poem has no doubt added to my toolbox of elements I may add to enrich this oldest of literary traditions.

 I highly recommend this book to anyone who enjoys poetry.