Rating: 5/5

[Revised, spoilers hidden 9/11/23]

Sixteen short stories, several set in times past, many during WW II. I thought the two best were the bookends; the first and the last. In the first story, Il Colore Ritrovato, an Italian opera agent, approaches a young couple who are street singers. The young woman has great talent but the agent, getting on in years, has regrets about how his actions changed people’s lives -- maybe not for the better. To illustrate the strength of the writing, here are a few lines taken just from this first story: 

“I didn’t go to Venice of my own accord. I was sent there, forced to go, by that…that woman…”

“I asked one of her colleagues, a woman who looked distressingly not so much like a Picasso as like Picasso himself. “

“And, whereas in Milan beauty is overcome by futility, in Venice futility is overcome by beauty.”
 
“People are clever, and just as they find comets and shooting stars of more interest than simple pinpoints of light, they wisely ignore the fixed points of a career in favor of its trajectory.”

“[he had] that masterful English bearing that Italians find entertaining even though they consider the same quality in Germans insufferable.”

In the story Monday, a contractor gets his workers, other contractors and suppliers to fix up a condo for free for a 9/11 widow.  Of course he’s falling in love with her. 

Perfection set in 1956 uses magical realism. A frail, bookish Jewish boy who at first does not even know what baseball is, becomes obsessed with “The House of Ruth,”  and with God’s help becomes a superstar for the Yankees. 

In Vandevere’s House, a master of the universe spends more time with his palatial house than with his wife. He watches as the problem finally solves itself.

A Brilliant Idea and His Own is a WW II story of a soldier who parachutes in behind enemy lines. He is hurt on his landing.  He is probably mortally wounded, and calls in Allied fire on his own position. 

In Mar Nueva, an old man revisits an unnamed Caribbean country where he grew up. The dictator at the time extracted a horrendous toll on the old man's family for some flippant words said to him. 

In Passchendaele a British Columbia rancher has loved his neighbor’s wife almost all his life. The farmsteads are so distant that he sees her just once a year with only time to say hello. 

In Jacob Bayer and the Telephone, set at the time of the introduction of the phone, Jacob is an itinerant Jewish scholar. He rails against the new technology at a community meeting but we start to realize  he’s really talking about computers. 

Sail Shining in White features an 82-year-old man who decides to sail a small boat out into a hurricane knowing he will die. He is still fascinated by memories of the days when he sailed with his beautiful wife who has died. 

Last Tea with the Armorers is set in Israel. An elderly Jewish widower wants his daughter to marry so she won’t be alone after he dies. Some lines I liked: 
 
“You do want me to marry, don’t you?”
“Of course I do, and it’s not too late.”
But, still,” Annalise said, “it’s almost a matter of minutes.” 

The Pacific, the title and final story, is set in WW II. A young couple in California is deeply in love. The woman works in a war factory; the husband is away in the Navy, out in the Pacific which she can see from where she lives. Every day some women get accompanied from the factory work floor to the office and we all know what news has arrived. Her only prayer is that her husband return.  But sometimes we ask for too much. 

Here are a few other lines from various stories that I liked:

“I now was in love with her in the way that old men can briefly be in love with youth, which is like standing on the platform as an express train that doesn’t stop at your station goes by at full speed. It’s exciting, the wind comes up, your clothes whistle in the air, you awaken, and then it’s gone, without even having seen you.”

“Her peculiar beauty was so strong that it was almost frightening.”

“The most difficult of the dinner parties I ruin are usually around Christmas, and always those of younger members of the firm.”
 
“[I] encourage them to do well and spend more time with their children than I spent with mine. They won’t. I didn’t. They can’t. I couldn’t.”

One of the author’s strengths is the concrete detail he infuses into every story. In a past life you feel that he must have been a cattle rancher mending fences, a WW II parachutist, a condo construction contractor in NYC and an Italian opera agent. 
 
The quality of the stories is mixed as in any collection; a couple of yawns, but no real duds and some gems as noted. You can see from my quotes that I was really impressed with the writing. 

The author is probably best known for his 1983 novel Winter’s Tale.

Top photo from wallpaperup.com
The author from theparisreview.org