Rating: 5/5

Well, when I decided I wanted to read this book, I assumed it was a nonfiction book ABOUT fishing BY Hemingway. As I think Hemingway's nonfiction is debatably more fun to read than alot of his fiction, that sounded interesting; I was a little disappointed, when I started reading, to find that it was an anthology of writings by him that mention fishing. However, as the misunderstanding is entirely mine, and it's hardly the editors' fault that Hemingway never actually wrote that other book, it's hardly worth a star deduction. After all, the product they put out instead is still a whole lot of damn fun. The first part, consisting of short stories and excerpts, is okay if not perfect (way too many Nick Adams stories right in a row for my taste, and some of the stories seem to have been included simply because at some point a character mentions fishing or thinks about fishing or happens to be in the middle of fishing at some brief point in the course of a story that's actually about something completely unrelated), but the second part, consisting of magazine articles, MAKES the book: unless it turns out Hemingway's estate's been holding out on us, it's the closest I'm going to get to that Hemingway version of 'The Compleat Angler' I was talking about (and, unlike the short stories, isn't already published in fifty other readily-available collections). It's Hemingway at his gritty, snarky, grumpy, conversational, avuncular, funny storytelling best, and more personal than most of his fiction because we know that the first-person narrator is HIM, and not some character whose exact autobiographical status is open for debate. The rest of the book consists of longer excerpts that are well worth it. I remembered the fishing trip in 'Islands in the Stream' being good, but I'd forgotten HOW good; and, as far as I'm concerned, they could have just reprinted all of the goddamn 'Old Man and the Sea.' If you go in knowing what you're getting into, and you like Hemingway, then go right ahead: enjoy. And let me know if you get the same weird cravings for trout I've been dealing with.