Rating: 4/5

Not Quite Augustine
10 November 2025

	Well, the two things I get from this book is “don’t do drugs” and “don’t do crime”. Actually, it is a bit more of a tell all from a self-confessed standover man, namely some guy who beat up drug dealers and the like and stole their money. Mind you, why not? Who are they going to complain to? The police? Well to be honest a lot of the bigger crims probably have the police in their pocket, but the thing is that a lot of them simply don’t like getting the fuzz involved.

	Mind you, one thing that he continues to emphasize is that gaol is really, really boring. Honestly, I get it. You are basically confined to a small area and pretty much have little to nothing to do all day. Well, not true because when you are in gaol you are put to work, and sure, there are people that claim making prisoners work is tantamount to slave labour, but when you consider the cost of keeping people in gaol, and the cost of the damage they have done to society, it kinda adds up (mind you that is an entirely different rabbit hole to go down).

	I get the impression that Chopper really doesn’t like drugs. Personally I don’t blame him. At least a single beer doesn’t knock you out cold. That isn’t the case with drugs, and the thing is that when you take drugs, it isn’t as if you are happy with a simple, small buzz, but rather the attitude is to basically become as disconnected from reality as possible. Well, okay, some people also do that with alcohol, and there is a lot of defence from certain quarters regarding drug use (and I certainly wouldn’t be locking users or low level dealers up), but the reality is that drugs knock you around just as much as alcohol, and if people claim that drug addicts aren’t as violent as piss-heads, they haven’t seen someone off their nut on speed whose grip on reality is close to falling apart (or a junkie who hasn’t had a hit for two days, and will literally do anything, include killing a rando on the street, for some).

	So, Chopper does tell a few stories, especially about life inside, in particular the overcoat war, where his gang was at war with the Painters &amp; Dockers, and the tactics that he would use to get at them (such as slipping razor blades into the soap, so that they would end up cutting themselves, and apparently it got to a point where none of them were willing to ever take a shower). However, he does point out that gaol is actually really, really boring, which I can understand, since most of the time you spend in your cell, and you pretty much have little to do in your cell, unless you are lucky enough to have a television (and maybe a computer, but as of yet it looks like they won’t let you, and they definitely won’t let you have internet access).

	The last section of the book, Chopper goes through a number of what you could call celebrity criminals, including the Hoddle Street murderer (who went on a killing spree outside Clifton Hill Railway Station) and the Russell Street bombers (who detonated a bomb inside Russell Street Police Station). Oh, and also the Walsh Street murderers, some crims who called the cops to a house at Walsh Street and then ambushed them. Yeah, there does seem to be this attitude of there being a war between the police and the criminal underworld, but the problem is that when you have cops that are crooked, or the cops are actually zealously imposing a facist state (like the SS, or ICE) one starts to wonder where the line is drawn.

	Mind you, the criminal underworld is an incredibly violent place to be, and multiple factions are constantly warring against themselves. However, it is interesting to note that there are an awful lot of legitimate businesses that are being used by these organisations as well (and there has always been ‘massage parlours’, though they are much more visible these days). Yet, Chopper had some opinions on these people, to the point where we would intimidate them by doing things like walking into their clubs with a stick of dynamite in his mouth. In fact it also makes me wonder how many of those restaurants on Lygon Street are actually a front for the mafia, though I suspect things have changed a lot in the forty-five odd years since the events in the book.

	Still, it’s a pretty good read, and it is a shame that the politicians do their best to try and restrict criminal’s abilities to become quiet members of society after their release from gaol. In fact, it almost seems as if the ultimate goal is to get as many people into gaol as possible, and keep them there – a much cheaper workforce than outside. I also kinda wonder what it would have been like if Chopper had rose to fame during the internet era, whether he would have been more like Spanian, though I suspect he would have been much more of a joker.