Rating: 5/5

My favourite Tomine, the first of Tomine.
If you don't know Tomine, start here.

*plotless review, avoid looking elsewhere as blurbs about short stories tend unsurprisingly to spoil the plot of short stories*

Tomine's Optic Nerve Series:
#1-4 = Sleepwalk (sad and longing)
#5-8 = Summer Blonde (apathetic and jaded)
#9-11 = Shortcomings (jealous and frustrated) 
#12-14 = Killing &amp; Dying (realistic and fairly balanced)

On Sleepwalk:
For once, longer comic strips aren't always as good as shorter ones. For once, black and white seems to add to a comic. Normally it bothers me; colour is another level of detail. But this is more a narrative with pictures than pictures with a narrative, in reading the narrator's voice you want to have just enough to see the fundamentals of the scene and to let your imagination fill in the blanks. Colour here would be too intrusive, it would be too objective, it would make the reader feel that what they were being given a realistic depiction of narrator's reality and not one that had been passed through a messy emotional lens. Speaking of, the black and white suits the seemingly perpetual, immutable, undesirable emotion that the protagonist of each of these stories encounters (especially in the title story, Sleepwalk). The common thread in each story is not the severity or type of sadness, but the perceived permanence of some level of dissatisfaction. There are no profound thoughts here, but the scenes are true to life due to the 'camera' angles used—this is good directing. 

In context of Optic Nerve:
I'll suggest that the ambience and protagonist perspective has emotionally matured throughout the series as I guess Tomine has with the years he has taken to make them. In this sense I like Sleepwalk as it feels more emotionally raw (like the emotional turbulence of puberty) than his later works. In Summer Blonde &amp; Shortcomings there are more anti-heroes who cannot see their own flaws—the reader sees flaws in the personality or actions of the main character which the character themselves are unaware of (often until a pending consequence)—and to me this creates an undesirable distance from the character. In Sleepwalk, we are closer to home. 

Killing &amp; Dying on the other hand is a return to form (or... non-anti-heroes), but when compared with Sleepwalk, the characters are realistic, the tone is balanced, the rambling is gone and the action is refined. In summary, comparing Sleepwalk with Killing &amp; Dying is like comparing the early work of many writers/artists: the former emotionally obtuse, non-linear/postmodernesque, visionary but inefficient vs. the latter more restrained, fastly linear, direct and efficient. At the moment, I'm a fan of the former.

Sleepwalk stories in Order of Preference:
Best
Sleepwalk (ON1)
Lunch Break (ON1)
Hazel Eyes (ON3)
Supermarket (ON3)
Layover (ON2)
Six Day Cold (ON3)

Good
Drop (ON1)
Echo Ave. (ON1)
Dylan &amp; Donovan (ON3)
The Connecting Thread (ON2)

Ok
Pink Frosting (ON2)
Hostage Situation (ON3)
Unfaded (ON3)
Long Distance (ON1)
Summer Job (ON1)
Fourth of July (ON3)