Rating: 2/5

Well… that was disappointing. I guess I should start by saying that Ring is not a bad novel. It is simply and okay time killer. There’s some entertainment to be had with it and a few interesting twists and turns.

It is also one of those rare examples where the film (in this case I’m referring to the original Ringu rather than the American remake) is significantly better. Not only does the film have more tension, but several of the changes from novel to screen actually improved the story in a significant way. 

Rather than do a full plot based review, I’ve decided to do a little compare and contrast from book to film. Just as a heads up, there will be some spoilers, but most of them are already pretty well known plot points, but just in case you know nothing about the plot, consider yourself warned.

First lets talk about fear. Fear, much like beauty, is in the eye of the beholder. So, I obviously can’t speak for everyone, but to me this novel was about as unnerving as my one year old daughter trying to pull off an evil laugh. More than anything, its a little silly and kind of cute in how scary it thinks it’s being. In the film Sadako is an overwhelming force, she's not seen much but her presence is in every scene. When we finally do see her, it is one of the most shocking (and now imitated and parodied) scene in the film. Here so much time is spent on the investigation and getting to know who Sadako was, that there's less mystery to her. Sometimes (especially in a horror story) less is more.

In comparison in terms of fear the character presents:

Sadako of the movie:
 

Sadako in the book:
 

Second: in the film Asakawa (our protagonist) is a woman named Reiko and in the book though Asakawa is a man named Kazuyuki. This one I feel is another positive change, as it also becomes about a mother trying to save her child. While Asakawa of the novel also tries to save his family, there is something more powerful about the way the film presents this (and I say this as a father with a young daughter as well). This is also helped by the third point.

Third: In the film, Ryuji (our secondary protagonist aiding Asakawa in finding out the secret of the tape) is her ex-husband. This works well in the film, as although they are separated Ryuji also is trying to save his son as well. Again our two leads have a strong connection of a family bond and are not only protecting themselves but their child. In the book though, Ryuji is an academic who is a darkly snarky character and has a backstory in which he claims to have raped three girls. He is only helping because he finds the idea of the tape fascinating and wants to be a part of something that could potentially bring about such chaos. He is an unpleasant character who in his own words "wants front row seats for the end of the world." While I'm all for despicable characters, I think this is another case where it worked better in the film in terms of motivation and capturing a further sense of urgency (because frankly, do we really care if this guy dies in the novel? He comes off as slasher film cannon fodder).

Finally they explain way too much here. They try to give everything a scientific explanation (at least science mixed with supernatural). In the film, it's a ghost story with little explanation. Here they want to give you answers to why this is happening... and again, this may just be me, but not knowing the full "why" is much more frightening. I don't care that the tape acts like a sort of virus, all that's needed is that it's an evil tape and a ghost kills you if you watch it. What more does one really need to know?

There are several other differences (mostly in Sadako's backstory). While some of the differences are interesting, most really don't change my opinion in terms of story quality. More than anything they add a reason to actually read the novel, as you get a different take on the person behind the curse.

In terms of other points about the book, I have very little to offer. The translation is fine, though there feels like some awkward phrasings occasionally. I don't know if the novel was originally written in a similar way or if that is a translation issue, but it's not cause to deter a reader as it's perfectly serviceable.

In closing: the book is decent at best. There's interesting ideas, but this is one of those extremely rare cases where I can honestly say that the book is entirely skippable if you've seen the superior film. 2/5 stars for being adequate.