Rating: 3/5

I read this book to see whether it would be good for my 15-year-old son.
It was hard to choose a rating because the good parts in this book were really good but the lacking parts really disappointed me.
Anyway, here is my two penneth.
Good parts: 
+Explains very clearly what God's expectations are yet does not heap condemnation or shame. Seeks to produce only godly sorrow which leads to repentance and which nobody regrets. I thought the balance was really good.
+Had some good practical advice on building a line of defence with the eyes. 

+Was not dictatorial in areas where there might be differences of opinion/ interpretation yet it did offer an opinion with reasons.

+It was very real and down to earth, written by people who understand the struggle.

Not so good parts (IMO)

-Doesn't go into what God truly intends and desires in a relationship between a man and a woman. (It gives it some lip service but doesn't go very deep.)

-Somewhat related to previous comment but the book doesn't explain fully WHY God has standards of purity. I think a proper explanation is necessary. I appreciate that in the Bible an explicit explanation isn't given but I think it can be extrapolated. In any case, we have to have a reasonable answer to "why". Not just "Because God says.." (Of course that is a reasonable answer to a committed believer, but not to those who are wavering.)

-On page 140 it says you have to build a line of defense with
1. your eyes
2.your mind
3. your heart
I felt that the "how to" instructions for the eyes was very good, the heart a bit lacking (not deep enough) and the mind very lacking. (But maybe it's just me..)

-The first 91 pages were about trying to persuade young men that they ought to be obeying God. That may be a strong point, I suppose, but I thought I was getting a book about how to fight the battle, not perusading me that the battle needs to be joined. That was 91 pages out of 239 pages.

-Another minus for me is that it is a bit gruesome. Not sure if I want to give it to my son unless he has already fallen into terrible habits. I was rather hoping for something to prevent his downfall. This book is for someone who has already gone off the deep end.

In all, however it was good. I have ordered another of his books to see what else he has to say.