Rating: 5/5

Patrick Harpur is a remarkable author and philosopher. In "The Philosopher's Secret Fire" he sets himself the task of deconstructing and reconstructing the Imagination itself. Imagination, we soon learn, has been rudely demoted and infantilized in our modern world. Harpur's eloquent prose is here to change that. We are taken on a magical tour of the imagination from mythical Iceland and the realm of trolls and elves, to the fairy kingdoms and the realm of the Sidthe. The realm of imagination has been no laughing matter through most of human history. Harpur's great versatility with philosophy, myth and literature from the ancient Greeks, to the neoplatonists and gnostics to the renaissance and romantic poets and mystics makes this work at once a true tour de force and an absolute delight to read. I found myself cradled in the words of the great artists and story tellers of the ages as I encountered the fearsome and wonderful beings that haunted and resourced the minds and hearts of people throughout the history of the western world and beyond. Harpur introduces us to the concept of the daimonic, that world of "little people", fairies and trolls that have been drawn on by shamans for spiritual power and inspired fear, wonder and respect in common folk over the ages. He explains how the arrival of Christianity attempted to banish the daimonic, and ultimately polarized it into the angelic and demonic. The advent of the enlightenment and the rational worldview further attempted to "sterilize" the world of "irrational" imaginary elements and the daimonic forces receded further until they were discovered once again by the great shamans of the depth psychology movement, Freud and Jung, residing in our unconscious, our dreams and our "active imaginations". The realm of science claims to have no such fanciful elements but Harpur has us question the "dark matter", the quantum and the cosmic entities that we are asked to believe in as possible manifestations of the daimonic, protean shape shifters that they have always been. This is a wonderful book, that I will almost certainly reread very soon. I recommend it for all of you with a curious imagination and a sense of awe about the imagination itself, especially any of you interested in learning more and being entertained by the poets and shamans of the ages.