Rating: 3/5

Postern of Fate (1973)--Oh, you wanted to know what a postern is?! So did I: “A postern is a secondary door or gate in a fortification such as a city wall or castle curtain wall”--# 5 (of 5) in the Tommy &amp; Tuppence series by Agatha Christie is the very last novel we have from the Auld Dame. Her last Poirot as you may know was published as she intended after her death. But this book is basically vilified by the Goodreads crowd: 3.18 rating over all! Loathed it! So I, sometimes the contrarian, expecting to also hate it, came to like it quite a bit!

Tommy and Tuppence Beresford, now in their seventies and still goofily in love, have moved into an old house in an English village. In the house there are books, and in one there is a mysterious message: "Mary Jordan did not die naturally." Over time we find she did die 60 years ago, but this does not stop T &amp; T from investigating the crime, talking to as many old people as they can. And for some reason, those still connected to the crime don’t want the case solved, so Tuppence is in danger; she’s actually shot, though not seriously, and being the feisty gal she is, this does not dissuade her. 

Along the way, many people in the area recall T &amp; T and they reference earlier cases from the previous books, so it’s kind of an encore process. Also along the way, their dog helps solve the crime. 

Ta ta, Agatha Christie! So this completes my having now read all of the Poirots, Marples, Olivers, Races, Battles, and Tommy and Tuppences. I also read several--most?--of the non-series books she wrote and largely herself preferred over her series books. I only have now not read some of the collections of stories, which I may or may not do. By my rough count that is about 70 Christie books, which I do believe hundreds of thousands if not millions have done at this point. I'm glad to be part of the Christie (roughly) completist club. This year I also climbed another related mystery mountain, having finished all 75 of the Inspector Maigret books but Georges Simenon, and a few non-Maigret roman durs from him that he and most critics preferred.