Rating: 3/5

At a time when I followed sports &amp; especially baseball a bit more thoroughly, I remember the famous article detailing the mysterious Sidd Finch in Sports-Illustrated 35 years ago, the April Fool's Day cover story as it turned out. When the novel appeared somewhat later, expanding the story &amp; by the publishing company I worked for, I got a copy. It has lingered unread on a shelf with other baseball books I'd read ever since. But a global pandemic can cause one to look backward, turning to books long postponed from being read &amp; such was the case with George Plimpton's The Curious Case of Sidd Finch. 

For starters, Hayden Sydney-White Finch was an orphan, adopted by a wealthy British family, with his father a rather well-regarded anthropologist dying in a plane crash in Nepal where he'd been doing research &amp; his mother in a freak accident in the same country. 

What I'd forgotten is the context for how Plimpton in expanding the magazine story into a novel embedded the story of Sidd Finch within that of the man who narrates the tale, Robert Temple, a stand-in for the author, who in the book is suffering from Post Traumatic Shock, following many helicopter missions, referred to as "joy-pops", during his time in Vietnam. Mr. Temple is in the midst of a long period of convalescence, spending a great deal of time exploring his consciousness, said to be time "between the dog &amp; the wolf", also seen as "a master plan of idleness, a cocoon of darkness." 

At this point, who should appear in his life but Sidd Finch, having fled a brief stint at Harvard following graduation from his elite British boarding school, also seemingly in a kind of limbo after his father's death, when he had spent time in Nepal, Bhutan &amp; Tibet, living as a disciple of the great 11th century Buddhist poet-saint Lama Milarepa, "learning to achieve a parallelism of thought &amp; movement, an astonishing rhythm that gathers a tremendous amount of cosmic force." 

While living at Harvard &amp; living in Cambridge, Sidd attended a baseball game at Fenway Park &amp; he has come to view a baseball diamond as a modified mandala. It seems that with meditation, concentration &amp; contemplation of mind &amp; soul on a certain objective, Sidd has learned to throw a baseball 165 MPH with absolute accuracy at a target, breathing to produce inner heat &amp; clear lungs while inhaling 5 wisdoms. Oh, and Sidd is a master of the French Horn &amp; wears only one boot when pitching, with the other foot bare. Are you still with me on all of this...?
 
Yes, one must suspend disbelief to keep score in the midst of George Plimpton's baseball fable, much as we were asked to do by Bernard Malamud in The Natural, though perhaps to a lesser degree than is necessary with the story of Roy Hobbs. But alas, "baseball is the perfect game for the mystical mind, a game that can go on indefinitely, with no clocks &amp; foul lines that stretch to infinity." And how did Sidd Finch initially master his accuracy with a baseball? He did it by tossing stones at snow leopards in Nepal in an effort to protect yaks from being preyed upon. 

Remembering that Roy Hobbs fashioned his own special bat, Wonderboy from a tree struck by lightning, I suggest that almost anything is possible when you suspend disbelief &amp; so, why not Sidd Finch? After all, I recall attending a White Sox Game vs. the Detroit Tigers where the remarkable Mark Fidrych would pace about the pitching mound and speak to the baseball he was about to toss in an attempt to motivate both himself &amp; the ball prior to hurling it. 

Quite naturally, Sidd Finch (with his surname oddly enough being an old English word for lie or fib) becomes a secret weapon for the New York Mets who sign him but have difficulty maintaining his full attention, particularly after he pitches a perfect game in his first outing &amp; the league president &amp; other forces worry about retaining competitive balance in the face of such a seemingly mechanical, unhittable force. 

That said, Sidd has no inkling about other aspects of the game, including hitting, running the bases, the ritual hazing that befalls new players and the routine practice of being ignored by his fellow teammates as he approaches a no-hitter (not wishing to jinx their pitcher). Also, Finch can't drive a car or toss a Frisbee or perform other fairly routine functions in life. 

What is interesting about the novel is that Plimpton uses real names, including that of Chub Feeney (National League President at the time), players on the Mets of the mid-1980s, Nelson Doubleday (whose family association with baseball goes back to its founding) &amp; Mike Marshall, a former player who went on to get a PhD in physiological psychology &amp; who intones within the novel about muscle structure &amp; everything necessary to toss a baseball at great speed while retaining accuracy. All of these associations add something concrete to the story of Sidd Finch, who is soon referred to as "Shoeless Sidd", "the Yeti" &amp; the "Kathmandu fireballer". For...Sidd was changing the properties &amp; essences of the ball &amp; the game itself. It struck me how often a ball is inspected during a game, with a pitcher comforting his fingers with the texture of the ball. Football players do not have this kinship with their ball &amp; most of the players never even touch it during the course of the game. Neither do basketball players look at the ball rather than at the rim of the basket. Tennis players are taught to keep their eye on the ball but have no particularly affection for it. But Sidd has done something to the ball of baseball &amp; somehow removed it from its familiar associations.Beyond his seeming aloofness from the game, Finch does have a sort of hippie girlfriend, Debbie-Sue, who walked ashore one day while surfing when Sidd &amp; the narrator, Robert Temple, were in Florida where the Mets conduct spring training. Sidd participates in tantric sexual calisthenics with Debbie-Sue &amp; is questioned about just how this fits with his interest in Buddhism. The book did fall into some disarray with highly implausible events late in the novel, including when a Mafia hit-man is introduced because Sidd Finch's heroics with a baseball somehow cut into national betting odds. 

Curiously, I write this review just as Hall-of-Fame pitcher Tom Seaver passed away at 75, a man known as "Tom Terrific" and "The Franchise". I attended Seaver's 300th victory at Yankee Stadium when Seaver pitched not for the Mets but for the Chicago White Sox, with Carleton Fisk as his catcher. He seemed to have every possible positive component in life--talent, good looks, emotional stability, wonderful family and even his own vineyard in California but was laid low by a combination of early-onset dementia &amp; the coronavirus. In the face of such news, why not envision a kind of paranormal pitcher but one with the all-around persona of Tom Seaver, even though he couldn't quite toss a baseball 160+ MPH!

 

Tom Seaver &amp; the improbable, fictional Sidd Finch were both Mets. As the French-American scholar &amp; author, the late Jacques Barzun once put it: Anyone who wants to know the heart &amp; mind of America, had better learn baseball. George Plimpton's novel The Curious Case of Sidd Finch is perhaps not in a class with Malamud's baseball tale but if one enjoys the game of baseball &amp; a good but somewhat farfetched yarn, George Plimpton's book is quite worth reading.

*The 1st photo image is of the author; the 2nd is of the man who posed as Sidd Finch for the novel's cover; the 3rd image is of the late Tom Seaver during his tenure with the Mets.