Rating: 5/5

Shakespeare wrote two titanic tetralogies at the start of his career, spanning through the dynasties of 15th-century kings of England, from Edward III down to Henry VII. The second half of this gigantic saga (Henry VI, Parts 1, 2 and 3 + Richard III) has a general downward and inward movement.

Downward because it illustrates the collapse of a nation into political chaos. While Henry V was the apotheosis of a heroic king sent from heaven, all of Henry VI was a slow descent, and finally Richard III, the cursed king, last of the Plantagenets, is like a monster out of hell. In a way, it is urgent to re-read these plays today. They are like a cautionary tale, in a time when a general lack of purpose and justice would have us agree to let an impostor with despotic ambitions access political power.

Inward because it gradually shrinks down, from the width of two nations (England and France) under one king, down to one country (England alone), down again to two houses (Lancaster and Plantagenet), down still to one house (York), and now down to one single individual: Richard, the dog. As a result, while Henry V was an epic play spanning across Europe, Richard III feels like a constrained nightmare, an introspection into a deranged, sadistic mind. The periodic monologues addressed to the public actively contribute to this effect. The other characters are only there to be abused or killed. The people Richard rules over barely exists anymore, except for a couple of cutthroats and some gullible worthies. His kingdom even is worth less than a horse when his death draws near.

The tone in this play is quite different from the rest of Shakespeare’s “Histories”: very dark and with almost no comic relief throughout its four hours running time. Richard is evil in a fantastic, insane way. He is truly one of a kind, or as he says “I am myself alone” (HVI, V, 7, 83). From the beginning, cursed with a wretched body (a sort of “Hunchback of Westminster Abbey”), he vows to “prove a villain” (I, 1, 30) and become the king. There is only a dim spark of hope at the very end, the eve of the battle of Bosworth, when he meets the spectres of his victims, who urge him to “despair and die” (V, 3, 121 sqq.), and he finally admits “I fear, I fear” (V, 3, 215). Shakespeare’s tour de force in this play is to have probably one of the worst unredeemable supervillains in literary history be the protagonist of one of his longest — and possibly best — plays. So much for the convention to have a “likeable” hero. However, it is quite clear that Shakespeare’s Richard is a fabricated, excessive, almost mythical version of the eponymous king — possibly, by contrast, to show Henry Tudor (the grandfather of Elizabeth I, Shakespeare’s patroness) in the best possible light.

Never again did Shakespeare give the prominent role to such a shocking psychopath: Iago (Othello) and Edmund (King Lear) are supporting characters. Even Macbeth — for which Richard III is a sort of first draft — is, in a way more humane, sensible, torn inside by guilt and a sense of vanity. Richard is just a bloc of abyss. (Next to him, George R.R. Martin’s Joffrey Baratheon is just a punchable whippersnapper.)

Edit: Just watched the last part of The Hollow Crown TV series, which is an adaptation of Shakespeare's play. The reshaping of the text and plot is very cleverly done and brings more sense and clarity to the material. The film is also visually stunning. But the cast is what really stands out, especially Benedict Cumberbatch, who plays a particularly intense Richard. The four women, Judi Dench (Cecily), Sophie Okonedo (Margaret), Keeley Hawes (Elizabeth) and Phoebe Fox (Anne) are all amazing.

In a way, Al Pacino’s part in The Godfather or Kevin Spacey’s in House of Cards are distant descendents of Richard III.

&gt; Previous play in The War of the Roses: King Henry VI, Part 3