Rating: 4/5

A small collection of thoughts on how powerful our minds truly are, this is book you'll want to turn to again and again because though it's short, it's deep with meaning. There is no fluff to distract our brains from epiphany to epiphany. Some of my favorite quotes:
Thought and character are one. 
The dreamers are the saviors of the world. 
In all human affairs there are efforts, and there are results, and the strength of the effort is the measure of the result. Chance is not. 
A man is literally what he thinks, his character being the complete sum of all his thoughts.
Act is the blossom of thought, and joy and suffering are its fruits. 
Circumstance does not make the man; it reveals him to himself. 
Men do not attract that which they want, but that which they are. 
Indigence and indulgence are the two extremes of wretchedness.
He who has conquered doubt and fear has conquered failure. 
Thought allied fearlessly to purpose becomes creative force. 
They who have no central purpose in their life fall an easy prey to petty worries, fears, troubles, and self-pityings. 
Victories attained by right thought can only be maintained by watchfulness. 
Men imagine that thought can be kept secret, but it cannot; it rapidly crystallizes into habit, and habit solidifies into circumstance. 
There is no physician like cheerful thought for dissipating the ills of the body; there is no comforter to compare with good will for dispersing the shadows of grief and sorrow. 
A man cannot directly choose his circumstances, but he can choose his thoughts, and so indirectly, yet surely, shape is circumstances. 

Why the four stars? There are a few statements that did not quite win me over. Such as: 
Wrinkles are not manifestations of age but poor character, and health issues are manifestations of a poor mind. I'm not denying that thought affects health, but it is not the only cursor for poor health.
Suffering is always the effect of wrong thought in some direction. Only most of the time. Sometimes we suffer most in our vulnerability to those we love when they do wrong or hurt us or suffer themselves. This godly sorrow may not be what he means by suffering, but I also can't imagine suffering at the unforseen death of a loved one to be suffering of our own making, unless you are considering it to be a challenge in life you chose to encounter. 
Calmness is a virtue every human should aspire. While steady demeanor is a worthy goal, there is much to be said for enthusiasm, emotion, and variety in personalities. While tempers and impatience are not good qualities, neither is a lack of emotion, and there is nothing wrong with a happy animated person, a person I would never describe as calm. Calm is a great quality, but it's not the all-inclusive. If he had said peace, I would understand.