Rating: 4/5

I would not be mistaken if I think that many of us would have just eschewed this book by just seeing the first few words of the title. SORROW: the very word instigates a sense of a confused horror in us. Sorrow is one of the emotions which every great man cannot escape in their lives, as Dostoevsky says. Sorrow brings a state of helplessness from which the unfortunate weak ones cannot free themselves. Though the events of this story can be considered as unfortunate for our Werther, but it can be accepted that Werther is not a weak one, at least not in common sense.

The mere idea of reading letters brings a happy amusement to most of us. But what if those letters brim with sorrow? Through this brilliant epistolary novel, Goethe makes us read the most compelling letters of sorrowful experience of Werther in his young age. 

“I am proud of my heart alone, it is the sole source of everything, all our strength, happiness and misery. All the knowledge I possess everyone else can acquire, but my heart is all my own” 

Werther is not the one who despises living or humans; but he is one of those great men who loves the simplicity of the common man; a kind hearted man who weeps for the unfortunate of his fellow men, even for those who are unfamiliar to him. He values everyone equally and respects everyone’s emotions; He even scorns at one’s indifference and apathy. But what befalls him later is something inexorable!

“It's true that nothing in this world makes us so necessary to others as the affection we have for them.” 

Young Werther falls in love with irresistible Lotte! But Lotte is to be married to Albert, another gentleman with whom Werther makes an in-good-terms friendship. While the marriage between L and A seems to last, the friendship between W and A is enfeebled by the unconventional ideas of Werther. 

“Is this the destiny of man? Is he only happy before he has acquired his reason or after he has lost it?” 

Love that all he needs and that is widely believed to conquer us and set us free from material contaminations, he felt, is purloined from his lady-love. Stricken with sorrow, he walks endlessly in search of himself, for which Sorrow also alienates individuals from the rest. But wherever he goes, in some way or the other, the memory of his lady-love wakes him up from his somber sojourn. How can the bright figures and brilliant landscapes amuse a prisoner of life?

I don’t think that I really have to tell what might have happened to Werther.

“There is but one truly serious philosophical problem and that is suicide. ”
-	Albert Camus ”

Suicide is something with which most of us disagree, without even weighing the events which might have burdened the victim to the extent to make him or her think that this is the only last resort one could hope for. Does this story offer an alternate view on the subject? I think, YES. There is no argument of success or failure of Geothe’s attempt on this subject: but a compelling alternate view.

“The suffering may be moral or physical; and in my opinion it is just as absurd to call a man a coward who destroys himself, as to call a man a coward who dies of a malignant fever.”