Rating: 4/5

This is the story of a young man who dreamed of being a "mountain man" all his life. At age 20 he is offered a job as the winter babysitter of some salmon eggs in a remote stream in Idaho. He jumps at the chance to live his dream, without really understanding much about what is required of someone living so remotely.

With naive young dreams in tow, he arrives at the tent where he will spend the next 7 months. He tells of how he learned to cut wood and use snowshoes, learned to feel comfortable alone in the wilderness, dealt with boredom and loneliness, was violently sick with food poisoning without anyone to help, had to learn to cook and preserve food, and how he learned to hunt. He tells how it feels to kill an animal, and the sadness he felt when a beautiful creature dies to feed him. I loved how he honored the animals he killed by treasuring their skins.

Through the book you see him maturing and becoming more capable and respectful of nature. You also see him change from feeling inferior to the weekend yahoos in hunting camps, to seeing those same men as the shallow and careless fools they are. None of those hunters ever admired the worn teeth of a dead lynx, imagining the life it must have lived and feeling honored to end it's pain and suffering.

I loved every bit of the book up until the last chapter. I won't spoil it for those who haven't read it yet, but the last chapter was rushed and abrupt, and had an unsatisfactory ending that left me feeling like he had a publishing deadline to meet. I also didn't like the way he handled his dog's future.

But, the one-paragragh epilogue of the book explains that he has gone on to a career as a Fish and Game employee and that the period covered in this book shaped the rest of his life. Without that last little blurb (which I almost overlooked), the book would have been a letdown. Overall, it's an interesting, short book about growing up and learning to be comfortable in our skins, and definitely one to read if you are a fan of outdoor living or just dream of living off the land.