Rating: 3/5

Let's get one thing out of the way, because this will be important to people soon: This is not the story that the new movie starring Helen Mirren and Alan Rickman was based on. Please do not think that Alan Rickman's final role was in a science fiction story; as cool as that would have been, this is just not the case.

Sorry to break your hearts.

This novel, written in 1957 by Philip K. Dick, is kinda sorta like a lot of Dick's novels in that there's always this paranoia of McCarthyism throughout, and this one is no exception. It doesn't seem like there should be all of that, but there is. Because Dick.

The story is actually sort of cool in that eight guests visiting a particle accelerator called the Bevatron are thrown into a series of alternate realities and worlds when the accelerator has a boo-boo. And because it's Dick here, shit gets pretty weird and you're not really sure what's going on. At least, I didn't always know what was going on. As my brother pointed out (when I was already over halfway through the story), Philip K. Dick may not be the best author to listen to in an audio format. He was probably right. But I wasn't upset by not really keeping up with it because it was written well and it kept my interest. Whatever I didn't get I just assume is some made-up bullshit, like science.

As with most of Dick's novels (and I don't think I've even read that many), he (like Heinlein and many others in the field) had a huuuuuuge problem writing women. It's not simple enough to say "Well, yeah, but they're not women, so..." because that's dumb. Plenty of men can write realistic female characters. Dick was not one of them. Jack Hamilton's wife, Marsha, is probably one of the most annoying women in science fiction, just because Dick really made her pretty stupid. It was unnecessary. It didn't help that the narrator did a falsetto to portray her dialogue and it just gave the whole thing a sort of mocking tone. Maybe Marsha wasn't as stupid in print as she is in audio.

In any case, it was a good book to have while walking the beastlies, and I would recommend it to others who a) are into science fiction and b) are into Philip K. Dick. It might be better to read it rather than listen to it, but that's probably just a personal thing.

Strangely, this is the second book I read recently that discussed the tetragrammaton. How often does that word come up in literature anyway? I can tell you it came up here in this book, and it also came up in one of the stories in Ficciones that I was reading during the same period. That's just sort of fucked up, and seems like a detail that should come up in a different Philip K. Dick novel. Along with all sorts of other mind-fuckery that makes me question where I am while I'm even walking the dogs in my own neighborhood.

Or maybe I'm just living inside someone else's reality.

Oh, shit.