Rating: 5/5

A classic BDSM romance from the late 70s, this novel is every bit as powerful today, but definitely not a read for the squeamish.

Narrated by Jamie, now Mr Benson’s slave, it tells of their early history when cocky twenty-five year Jamie first approached Mr Benson in a leather bar. After a night together that tests Jamie’s limits, Mr Benson gives him a choice – to go away and think things through, but only to come back if he is willing to give himself over completely, abandoning everything from his previous life. As Jamie becomes the perfect submissive under Mr Benson’s training, rumours reach him of other young men like himself going missing from the streets of New York, and Mr Benson is determined to solve the mystery.

If you’re expecting a BDSM romance along the same lines as the rather romantic offerings from m/m authors, then you’ll be in for a shock with this one. Jamie is most definitely a slave, eager to fulfil Mr Benson’s will, but still in need of plenty of discipline and training. This involves an awful lot of piss drinking. If that’s something you find repulsive to read about (along with licking toilet seats and boots), I would steer well clear of this novel. However, if you can tolerate (or even enjoy) reading about such activities, then there is much to recommend this story. I was captivated by Jamie’s narrative and his frank, if rather naive way of putting things. It was remarkably easy to understand what he was getting out of the relationship, despite his utter servitude. Indeed, I think the real strength of this novel isn’t in the more overtly sexual scenes (which are often underplayed), but in showing how Jamie and Mr Benson grow to depend on one another through their daily rituals.

The mystery plot was rather far-fetched but I was carried along by the momentum of the narrative and found it very hard to put the book down. And as far as I was concerned, the crowning glory was the short epilogue from Mr Benson himself, which threw a different cast over certain aspects of Jamie’s story, and revealed the true purpose of the gruesome nipple training he forced Jamie to undergo, which was far more romantic than I would have imagined. As Mr Benson himself confesses: “I’m man enough to admit that I love the little bastard.”

A powerful story and a true classic, recommended to anyone interested in the BDSM genre (provided they can cope with all the piss drinking!)