Rating: 4/5

I still remember when I was 11 years old and this book accidentally fell from the school library shelf starting my life long journey into the occult. It was just a very limited and “elementary” library after all. So what the hell was this doing in it? Maybe there were only 200 books in it total. I was just looking for books on magic tricks on the shelf below when it oddly fell out from above on it’s own. They were sturdy shelves.

I remember reading it all night, I slept on the third story all alone from my family, window facing a vast wood with owls hooting by my window. I was scared witless with my hair standing up but I couldn’t stop, I was obsessed. 

Things were different back in the 80’s in a way post millenials may never experience, there was still a real fear of hell and the supernatural and the devil (I’m still very interested in all of these, though certainly not as a modern exoteric Christian like this fellow). In the 80’s though it was like the world was still going through it’s early psychic teenage years after it’s innocent flowering 60’s and 70’s youth and man was still afraid of the dark in a way that might actually start connecting you with things actually in the dark (like when a person 13 years of age can experience odd things). They are said by many ancient cultures to be the most mediumistic then. 

Even modern materialist scientists recognize a continuum between strange claims of psychic phenomena and there being statistically a 13 or 14 year old in the house. So many of them began saying children chemico-physiologically give off the strongest emotions at this point in their life and can effect objects magnetically or vibrationally around them (dark matter makes up 95% of the universe and it is not physically observable, so these studies are just beginning). 

Whatever is the case I know this period was one of magnetic attraction to the unknowable for me and this started it. Now I should really like to read it again in my 40’s and give a totally different review than this one I am giving basically as an 11 year old and going so faintly from memory. 

If I recall, once having seen this book again in my 20’s, the author truly does seem delighted to know of the ways of magic but then condemns it as of the devil (yet seems half skeptical of all of it!)- a dangerously bad trifecta of a place to be in and pretty near the mentality of the inquisitors in medieval times who were some of the most revolting people. As Jesus said in the Gospel of Thomas: “They either condemn the tree but love the fruit or hate the fruit and praise only the tree, such are the misguided Pharisees.” To understand this, one must read my review on Thus Spake Zarathustra, particularly on Virility or Vril being a whole per Nietzsche but very different from popular morality.

Yes this book does go through some good examples of the history of witchcraft, but it focuses more on the medieval period overmuch. There have been many kinds of magic in every culture and in every century as far back as history goes and further. And as an esoteric historian by profession I can tell you magic becomes more predominant and central to all cultures in every corner of the globe the further back you look. 

So this book is just the tip of an iceberg rising out of the sea; yet the old rest of the iceberg is still quite buried in the waves of modernity; so I suppose there is some value to this work even presently. For as connection to the noumenal was lost over time, superstitious attachment to the mere mundane, the peripheral and chthonic dense phenomenal (modern increasing materialists identified with their senses) became the way of the day until now. A stilted, stagnant, stasis came over man slowly toward his own super-mundane and the super-mundane in all this “corpse of a world” (- Thomas the Contender). Man became “deannoyia” (Greek), paranoid and fragmented in mind instead of light seeing inner light. Super-stitious eytmologically originally meant stilted, irrational, static, fear of the unknown/the noumenal/the supra. This is what moderns have, not the ancients.

Moderns think the further back one looks the more superstitious and savage man was; primordial gnostic archaicists say the opposite: man began as light in touch with light experiencing the shamanic super-mundane noumenal in all: in themselves and in life. Then slowly man became dead to all this as they became more modern, which gave rise to their superstitious paranoic fears of any of those claiming to experience the invisible. Now the medieval witch hunt inquisitions (not ending till Napoleon officially shut their foul branch down) could rise up again easily in our age and become doubly worse if the new modern skeptics one step further dead than the inquisitors get fully in charge and wish to start plaguing the noumenalists even worse as “woo woo dangerous people.” 

Indeed Kissinger’s biographer laughed on a C-span recorded lecture when he said K. always realized to bring progress to any society one has to first kill all it’s priests, as they are the most dangerous to rousing men again.

So I recommend this book but more to those looking into just the medieval period and starting in a very elementary way in their search for magic. There are hundreds of books on the history of magic far better and more in depth than this half misguided and overly superstitious but intriguing work.