Rating: 3/5

Well-written, fascinating and disturbing. Would you like to hear some of it?

"As the boat came to a stop, I nodded to Carl, who leaned over the rail and grabbed the leader just below the snap. Standing up straight, Carl leaned into the rail with the tops of his legs nd hauled the leader, hand over hand, twisting his upper body to pull with his back and shoulders. Kenny and Ringo appeared at either side of Carl, each with a 16-foot-long-gaff. The gaff poles were 2-inch-diameter oak dowels, and each had a large shiny hook secured to one end. The gaffers were poised and staring into the water, looking for the fish that we all anticipated. Carl gave a long steady pull with his right hand, and the fish came into view a few feet below the surface. It was a sword. it was big. And it was alive. My pulse quickened. Swordfish are the most magnificent of all ocean creatures. A streamlined and muscular missile with a bayonet, the swordfish is strong, swift, and agile. 
The fish circled, swimming under the boat as they often do. Carl held the leader, no longer pulling; he waited. When the fish swam out from under us, Carl pulled in another fathom of leader. A dorsal fin cut the surface; then hell broke loose as the fish slashed wildly with its 3-foot-long sword. The fish's bill and back were lit up in blue and purple, and its sides flashed in silver and pink. With two short jerks, Kenny and Ringo sunk their gaff hooks into the head of the fish and pulled it toward the door in the rail. The fish thrashed, and the water flew. Grabbing a 24-inch steel meat hook, I reached through the door and placed the hook into one of the fish's eye sockets. Peter came from the stern with a second meat hook, and placed it in the eye socket with mine. Ringo grabbed the bill to prevent it from slashing as we all pulled together to drag the fish onto the deck."

"...we landed another sword, a small marker of about 110 pounds that was quite frisky but was quickly overcome by Carl's tenacity and Kenny's sharp gaff to the back of its head. Once on deck, the fish flopped on its side, raising head and tail into the air and slapping both down over and over, flogging the deck soundly. The flops got fewer and less vigorous, the up-and-down motion working like a pump, pushing the life from the fish, from torrent to trickle in a matter of minutes. The colors left the fish in the same way that a Polaroid picture develops, but in reverse. Sharp flashing silver lines and vivid colors yielded to fuzzy borders of blended shades of blues and purples that gave way to mottled patches of grays, blacks, and whites as the last of life dribbled from the defeated fish."

I must have been born without the hunting gene as I don't find this exciting or pleasurable. I can understand fishing and hunting for food, even for money. But the number of fish taken, by each boat and there are many out there, seems terrible excessive to me. The operating ethic, which certainly makes sense from an economic standpoint, is you don't come in until your fish hold is full and that means many, many thousands of pounds of fish. Captain Linda Greenlaw says, regarding the idea of overfishing and ocean depletion, that "in seventeen years of swordfishing, I have seen no evidence of depletion." Really? I thought there was evidence of overfishing, could I be wrong? She says, "If a problem with overfishing does develop, it is not the American fisherman who should be punished, but perhaps the fishermen from countries that currently have no regulations in place and continually exceed their allowable catch quota." Well politics are certainly going to play a part in which countries and fishermen and which fish are going to be allowed and in what quotas. But OK, even if I can accept the numbers in which these fish are being caught, can I accept the killing and the pleasure taken in that killing? Afraid not. You can call me a liberal, tree-hugging, animal-loving hippie if you want. Maybe you are right in some small way. In my heart I was rooting for the fish and totally LOVED THE FISH THAT GOT AWAY from 3 strong, experienced and determined fishermen, and then did a victory lap around the boat giving them all the evil eye. Captain Greenlaw is still bitter about that fish, told it F you at the time and every time she thinks about it gives the fish that got away another F you. 

I do admire how hard the fishermen work, it sounds like brutally hard work. 

Anyway, no matter where you stand on commercial fishing, swordfish, or any related topics, this is a very informative and interesting read.