Rating: 5/5

Incredibly fascinating portrait of a small community by interviews with a large proportion of its adult members. I'll leave aside questions about if it's good "history" or how "accurate" it is as I haven't researched that (although I should) - I'm not qualified to talk about it, it's a difficult subject and I didn't read it as "pure" history or whatever (to start with the village is a composite!) As something that shows a snapshot of time and place through many different perspectives, edited and filtered through another authorial perspective, it's the best I've ever read. Every person involved comes across as incredibly distinct, even with the editing creating a slightly more consistent voice. There are so many different ideas in each person's head that subtly change how they talk about the village, their lives and the changes that have taken place. It's kaleidoscopic. There's the ex-colonial army officer who now organises Civil Defence groups against The Bomb, the 66 year old sheep farmer who moved from Scotland 30 years before and still misses it, the bellringing tower captain, the retired farm worker who served in WW1, the district nurse who served a huge area and talks about how much better now is than the older times, the (female) magistrate with some frankly shocking views on sexual crimes and where particular women belong (while considering herself relatively liberal)... there's so many different parts of a village and part of society. 

As a snapshot of a particular moment in time it's really striking too. The changes from television are brought up quite a lot - people don't want to go to union meetings, less attendance at the WI, people don't want to just hang around and talk any more. There are a few comments where people are shocked about long hair - in 1968! People mention The Bomb, or with the WI president if only to emphasise that they *don't* talk about it. People are VERY split on the political persuasion of most of the village. Are they instinctive deferential conservatives or taught into a long history of rural socialist defiance? There's a combination of recognition of change and a sense of already accepting it that feels very real. 

The authorial voice obviously has its own agenda, but I enjoyed his additions, some of which are quite beautiful - the only place where he really stuck himself in was describing the ecstasy of bell ringers in quite astounding terms and I enjoyed that a lot.

It's difficult to precisely convey what's so great about this because so much of it is the joy of the whole thing. I was fascinated and compelled the whole way through. Trigger warning that Michael Poole's story is pretty clearly describing rape but there seems to be no acknowledgment of it. Christian Annersley the magistrate has some pretty shocking and upsetting views on incest, sexual assault, "tarts", etc. There's a couple of racist comments quoted (although a few people use "work like blacks" as a normal idiom!). Not an exhaustive list obviously, and it's kind of part and parcel of this kind of direct interview book.

Some quotes that particularly stuck with me, for better or worse:

"When we had a Questions Programme, seventy-five per cent of the questions were about the characters in telly adverts and the women knew all the answers. They knew the names of all the people in the Oxo and dog-food and detergent ads. I only switch over to I.T.A. about once a week so I didn’t know what they were talking about. I thought there was something wrong with me. They all came alive during this competition, rushing to shout out things like, “Leslie Fairy Snow!” and “Heinz meanz beanz!”" - Mrs. Tom Cooper, President of the W.I.

Marjorie Jope, district nurse:

"As for the old family doctor—he was for the old families, if you know what I mean."
“Certainly people were more neighbourly then. They went in and out of each other’s houses to help with what was needed, and thought themselves well-paid with a cup of tea, yet [a small smile at the paradox] it wasn’t better than now. It was worse, much, much worse.”"
"The old people were not taken care of. This is another thing which people like to think now, that grandfathers and grandmothers had an honoured place in the cottage. In fact, when they got old they were just neglected, pushed away into corners. I even found them in cupboards! Even in fairly clean and respectable houses you often found an old man or woman shoved out of sight in a dark niche"

"Mrs. Paul was a nurse in Nigeria—“They were beautiful, lovely people and marvellous where they had been left alone, but as soon as they got to learn about a few things they got a bit Bolshy, you know.” " - wife of an ex-colonial officer

"Television has changed the village people. I like the plays. I am always on the look-out for scenes showing ornamental ironwork. You may not have noticed, but telly plays are full of wonderful ornamental ironwork. There was this programme the other day about the fiftieth anniversary of the Russian Revolution which showed a pair of gates. Marvellous, they were. [The gates of the Winter Palace, St. Petersburg, in Eisenstein’s film, Battleship Potemkin.]" Francis Lambert, forge worker

"Work in front of the house had to be done secretly. About seven in the morning we would tiptoe about the terrace, sweeping the leaves, tying things up, never making a sound, so that nobody in the bedrooms could hear the work being done. This is what luxury means—perfect consideration. We gave, they took. It was the complete arrangement. This is luxury." - Christopher Falconer, gardener

"What they can’t understand is that work is just work—something to be done and paid for. Of course we know that the old men had art—because they had damn-all else! It kept them from despairing. And we young men have efficiency, and I’m not saying that efficiency is enough either. This tractor is efficient. A man is more than a tractor, isn’t he?" - Brian Newton, farm worker and student

“Of course,” said the deacon, “you’ll get those who can’t stop, as you might say. I remember a man who went on for over an hour and so someone got up and said, ‘Excuse me, but, with all respect, I think you have said enough’—‘And with all respect to you,’ answered the preacher, ‘I’d like you to know that God is still putting words into my mouth, so where do we go from here?’ And so we had to let him go on. He used up five people’s preaching time. I wouldn’t call that Christian.” - deacon at the Strict Baptist church

"The sea is near, yet, by Akenfield, quite unfelt. The tower is like a finger held up to test its existence. “No, I’ve never been up it,” said the ditcher born in the village in 1908. “I migh’n fancy what I’d find.”"

"At Christmas 1917 they took us to Germany, right down to Kiel. It was snowing and we were in rags. No shoes. They gave us wooden clogs. We dug on the Kiel railway, making a track to the Baltic for the big guns. Many people died. On November 5th 1918 some German sailors arrived and set us free. They cut all the barbed wire and left just one guard in charge. “You can leave if you like,” they said. “The war will soon be over. There is going to be a revolution, so keep off the roads. You could go and help the farmers pick up potatoes. That would be sensible.”

So this is what we did. " - Leonard Thompson, 71, farm worker, on his WW1 PoW experience