Rating: 4/5

A ceramics specialist involved in designing the nose-cones for MIRV missiles defects to the USSR, and the various intelligence organizations on both sides of the Iron Curtain attempt to evaluate the defection. Is it important? Is it a genuine defection or a US attempt to embarrass the Soviets or plant an agent among them? What could Lewinter know that might be of any significance? And so on and so forth, to endless ramification. Lewinter himself barely appears in the book, and we never discover the answer to any of these questions; the central character is really the swirling paranoia endemic on either side during the Cold War, and not just in the intelligence communities. We're shocked by the ruthlessness with which some of the Russians behave in service of this paranoia; but Littell portrays their US counterparts behaving equally coldbloodedly. These are the dimwits who spend an inordinate amount of our tax dollars on what they insist is realpolitik when in fact it's just buffoonery -- buffoonery that'd be hilarious if it didn't destroy so many lives and strangle at birth so many endeavours that might improve the human lot. Neither side is remotely interested in -- regards as entirely trivial -- what is, if it works, the item of real value that Lewinter bears: the technology for an improved and environmentally friendly method of waste disposal.

This isn't the masterpiece of the spy thriller genre promised on the cover, for the very good reason it's not a thriller at all, and clearly has no intention whatsoever of trying to be one. Instead, it's a satire -- quite often a very funny one, more often a very dark one. It's in no sense a gripping read; but I think it's probably a very good book. I'm glad I read it, and in due course I may very well read it again.

As an aside, Penguin should be ashamed of themselves. I read the 2003 reissue, which has clearly been OCRed and typeset from an earlier edition without the benefit of any competent proofreading. There's a secondary character whose surname I still don't know, because two different versions of it (Ferri and Fern) turn up with equal frequency. There are countless irritating minor literals (missing close-quotes are a frequent culprit), and in several places the text is so garbled as to be incomprehensible. This is beyond shoddy.