Rating: 4/5

"America's Greatest Crime Wave" says the title; "Ludicrously entertaining" says the front cover jacket blurb. Let's see.

Inspired by recently reading Go Down Together: The True, Untold Story of Bonnie and Clyde, I sought out this book to learn more about Bonnie and Clyde's contemporaries - John Dillinger, Baby-Face Nelson, Pretty Boy Floyd, Ma Barker, and Machine Gun Kelly. These were all names I grew up with as all were made infamous, more or less, by the popular media.

Burrough delivers on all of these purveyors of crime in the first half of the 1930s. (Note, Ma Barker was a creature of Hoover, she was the mother of the Barker brothers who along with Alvin Karpis pulled off kidnappings and bank robberies. Ma Barker herself was just an old woman who did jigsaw puzzles and complained a lot when her boys weren't around).

The book is lengthy and it makes an interesting, though confusing narrative choice. Burroughs tells the story chronologically, month-by-month skipping across sub-chapters from one gang to the next and back. As these were gangs consisting of several members, assorted girlfriends, and even more assorted criminal enablers (cops, mechanics, doctors, tavern keepers, go-fers, etc), it got confusing to the reader whether the Fred referred to in some subchapter was a Barker brother or was an old prison acquaintance who provided a hide-out room.

The author's theory of the case as it were is that the confluence of all this brazen gang activity sparked the emergence of the FBI as a national police force and thus the story has to be told chronologically. Yet, the organizational changes forced on the FBI by their initial haplessness don't quite get the prominence that a chronological narrative demands. Yes, as the reader hops around from one stakeout, robbery, escape, or kidnapping, we learn of changes made in the FBI but sort of obliquely, not backed up by details. 

By way of analogy, it would be like a story of how World War II gave birth to the modern intelligence state by citing code breaking victories leading to Axis defeats without ever really telling the story of how the codes were broken, the resources assembled to break the codes, and the apparatus set up to distribute the sensitive information.

The reader learns that the FBI got better but not really how and why they got better. 

But, for the reader, that's neither here nor there as the story unfolds particularly as it focuses on John Dillinger. Here the narrative gets tighter as there was less hopscotching around between different gangs. Nelson and Dillinger intersect. There were exciting moments when law enforcement closed in on Dillinger yet let him escape due to ineptness. 

The book made me think about the nature of crime 1930s style versus now. For the most part, there are no criminals today who capture the popular imagination, sticking it to the man (banks) who were foreclosing on family farms and small businesses. Equally, there are no law enforcement agents who make headlines in their pursuit of said gangs (e.g. Melvin Purvis in his pursuit of Dillinger). Bank robberies and kidnappings are less prominent now than then. Today's criminals conduct financial crime electronically whereas the 1930s were a cash society. I have to go back to JP Getty III and Patty Hearst to remember any high-profile kidnappings that captured the public's attention. Law enforcement today has way better communications than then, where surveillance would be interrupted trying to find a telephone.

Burrough includes Bonnie and Clyde solely for the marquee value and that they were contemporaries of the others. The FBI played little role in their demise. Burrough ignores organized crime except in so far as how organized crime wanted nothing to do with the gangsters who could bring unwanted attention upon the "syndicate". Any FBI attention spent on organized crime is omitted from this book.

Like Bonnie and Clyde, Dillinger, Nelson, Barker-Karpis, and Floyd spend an awful lot of time on the road evading law enforcement. Sleeping in cars, crashing in seedy apartments, stopping for a few nights in roadside tourist camps, and visiting their families seems part-and-parcel of a gangster's life. Somehow or another they could get word to each other for rendezvous.

The gangs had little compunction about killing police and G-men but generally didn't harm civilians. That said, civilians were frequent recipients of stray ricochets from the Thompson sub-machine guns used by the gangs and law enforcement. In the 1930s, there was a strange fascination with flocking to the scene of a bank robbery, standing outside as hostages were marched out and ducking for cover as trigger-happy cops and yeggs fired at each other. Hostages were made to stand on running boards of the escape car (can't do that today!)

Gangsters liked to take vacations (Florida, Hot Springs AR, and Nevada to mention a few). Local police forces were often corrupt with detectives assigned to a kidnapping feeding information back to the kidnappers, then later turning on the kidnappers to share in the reward money. Lots of drunkard gang members and gang doctors. The girlfriends were often young (under 18), extremely loyal to their man (and the loyalty went both ways). Hard men and hard women.

So, why read this book? For the same reason I did - to learn about these 1930s household names who still linger in the popular imagination. To put yourself back in time at the start of the FDR administration; to understand the roots of the FBI.

Multiple photos and a map highlighting key points in the story