Rating: 4/5

Would you recommend this audiobook to a friend? If so, why?
It's one of the better cozies I've come across. It's longer and holds more water.

How would you have changed the story to make it more enjoyable?
There were too many plot holes. Or maybe not accurate explanations. 

I'm not an expert, but it's not clear how it was determined Jolene had "definitely" been drugged with roofies via the capsules and not through dissolving in a drink. 

A car blows up and there's no ATF or othe government agency involved? No reporters? It could be stereotypical, but usually a reporter is involved in mysteries. Especially when it's public displays, dangers, or at businesses. 

Why did the real Hortense (sp?) feel inclined to expose and reveal her identity? Other than a waitress who "spilled the beans", nothing really jumped out she had to come clean to a stranger. She had already spoken to the Detective via a phone call. 

When Lindsey's injury comes to light, does Marla truly advertise her salon by saying her manicurist also cuts and dyes? I'm all anout taking advantage of a sales lead-in... but really?

When Cookie talks to them about her findings in Jolene's office, the conversation takes place outside of the salon on the sidewalk. Heck, if it's like that, she could have just publicly announced it at the door for everyone to hear. 

Maybe this is because this is the first book by this author I've come across, by why doesn't anyone other than Eloise know Marla and Detective Vail were dating? 

Eloise appears for her hair appointment, but never reaches out to her real estate business? Or was the other agent being coy? 

I don't understand why Marla thinks she's privy to information on an open investigation with Detective Vail. 

The foursome conversations involving Marla, Dalton, Archie, and "Jill" didn't feel real. Even Marla's thoughts were off key. 

The molotov. Why doesn't anyone in town know about this? Is there no gossip from the police department? The fire department comes to her home and no neighbors are lingering or asking questions or knocking on her door to be nosy? Actually, no one knows about it. (She explains it while in her salon - twice. Once, when explaining to Archie why she stayed at Dalton's the night before.) 

And what gentleman flaunts it (her night clothes) publicly anyway - since no one in the town knows?!

I'm aware the time line for this is probably late 90s, early 00's (an era pre-cell phone dominance and social media frenzy) but some of these situations don't gel. 

I'm still rating it a 4 star because despite the narrator's lack of varying voices and these issues with the plot and story, it is still tighter and better than most cozies I've come across with Indie authors. 

This was enjoyable and (obviously with the amount of higher ratings and reviews) a vast majority of audiences will like the characters and angles. 

Was this a book you wanted to listen to all in one sitting?
No. It's lengthy and not quite riveting. Interesting and multi-layered though.

This review is similar to the one I left on Audible.com