Impossible to rate this book. I found it slow-going and almost absent a real plot -- what plot there was seemed entirely incidental to the capturing of a slice of glorious Black life (in opposition to whiteness and respectability and death). I loved it for its stories and evocations of sights and smells and sounds, all the cadences of how people spoke and Harlem's most riotous living. Glimpses of Afro-American/Afro-Carribean (how intertwined these are on the East Coast which you forget on the West!) life on the trains and in speakeasies and kitchens and high society. A celebration of blackness in all of its shades -- and believe me, they are all listed here from high yellows to cocoa-browns to chocolate-browns to dim-browns to clear-browns to chestnuts and coppers to gleaming anthracites. It has a taste of the autobiographical in the character Ray, Haitian waiter on the trains forced to leave college due to American Imperialism causing a fall in his family's fortunes but who has never given up on his education. A taste of the longed-for in the character of Jake, admired and liked by all and taking life as it comes...

I like plots, I won't lie. I wnated this to be a novel or a collection of short stories and being in between it doesn't quite work I don't think. But I did love whole sections of it. 
Oh 'blues,' 'blues,' 'blues.' Black-framed white grinning. Finger-snapping. Undertone singing. The three men with women teasing the stags. Zeddy's gorilla feet dancing down the dark death lurking in his heart. Zeddy dancing with a pal. 'Blues,' 'blues,' 'blues.' Red moods, black moods, golden moods. Curious, syncopated slipping-over into one mood, back-sliding back to the first mood. Humming in harmony, barbaric harmony, joy-drunk, chasing out the shadow of the moment before (29-30)
The lovely trees of Seventh Avenue were a vivid flame-green. Children, lightly clad, skipped on the pavement. Light open coats prevailed and the smooth bare throats of brown girls were a token as charming as the first pussy-willows. Far and high above it all, the sky was a grand blue benediction, and beneath it the wonderful air of New York tasted like fine dry champagne. (146) 
And the last quote just because it's just what I'm working on
They had walked down Madison Avenue, turned on One Hundred and Thirtieth Street, passing the solid grey-grim mass of the whites' Presbyterian church, and were under the timidly whispering trees of the decorously silent and distinguished Block Beautiful .... The whites had not evacuated that block yet. The black invasion was threatening it from One Hundred and Thirty-first Street, from Fifth Avennue, even from behind in One Hundred and Twenty-ninth Street. But desperate, frightened, blanch-faced, the ancient sepulchral Respectability held on. And giving them moral courage, the Presbyterian church frowned on the corner like a fortress against the invasion. The Block Beautiful was worth a struggle. With its charming green lawns and quaint white-fronted houses, it preserved the most Arcadian atmosphere in all New York. ... The Ancient Respectability was getting ready to flee.' (158)