Rating: 4/5

8/3 - Book #1: "The Killer Inside Me"- Jim Thompson. This book is told from the perspective of the murderer and I found the main character to share some similarities to the title character in the television series "Dexter." However, instead of working as a forensic expert, this killer works for the local police department. Lou (like Dexter) is a likable character, even when he's doing not so likable things. Short, fun, pulpy, and particularly interesting for the genre.

8/11 - Book #2: "The Talented Mr Ripley"- Patricia Highsmith. I was physically tense while reading this book at times. Tom Ripley can be such a pathetic turd, but one still gets nervous wondering if he will get caught. I can't really say much more without giving things away. An enjoyable, unconventional mystery.

8/16 - Book #3: "Pick-Up"- Charles Willeford. Least compelling of the stories so far. Takes place in San Francisco and follows a failed artist working dead end jobs, and his girlfriend with whom he develops an intense relationship. The most conventional story so far, with the possible twist during the penultimate sentence of the entire story that depends entirely on the reader's conceived vision of the characters.

8/24 - Book #4: "Down There"- David Goodis. This novel was the basis for Truffaut's "Shoot the Piano Player." Eddie has a checkered past and two older brothers that can't stay out of trouble. On top of that, this dumb broad keeps wanting to hang out with him, all though she's only serving to make things harder for Eddie and unsafe for herself. Eddie is more like the protagonist of "Pick-Up" than the lead characters of "Ripley" or "Killer Inside Me", in the way that he's not really a bad guy, and is maybe only guilty of losing it a bit when he fights. 

8/27 - Book #5: "The Real Cool Killers"- Chester Himes. A story of cops, teenage gangs, racial tension, and perverts in Harlem. A man referred to as "the Greek" is shot at the beginning, and a young gang member is killed by the police. The rest of the story revolves around the police's search for the murderer...a search that crosses the paths of many characters and caricatures of Harlem.