Rating: 1/5

i was a teenager when i first read this, and no teenager should read it, and not for the reasons you think. this is also far from an unbiased review.

no comic has hated teen heroes to the degree this comic does without being on purpose, its almost comical. i consider this entire run deeply disrespectful to teen heroes as a very concept. worse, it pisses on the grave of young justice 98, and burns down everything that comic built up. 

i have no intentions to review this comic through the eyes of an adult, for every time i read it im mentally transported back to being 16 years old and feeling like nothing will ever get better, and also that i hope every adult in this comic dies. it is a truly miserable story that made me feel horrible and not in a good way. it preaches misery as an inherent part of the teen experience, while telling teens they deserve it for existing. there is no hope, but at least bart isnt a little autistic freak anymore because we fixed him (sarcasm). i genuinely think geoff johns, at least when he wrote this, truly hated teenagers.

anyways the funniest scene is the one where Cassie has a flashback to her younger self and goes on a tangent about how ugly and masculine she used to be. she needs to break up with her gay boyfriend and shave her head for her own good. 

i think this should have been a wake up call for dc twenty years ago that they were doing something terribly wrong, that it needed to even ask the question if teens should be allowed to be superheroes. you stupid bitch, superhero comics started as stories for children. if the genre has shifted to be so gritty and edgy and ~realistic~ that teenagers being superheroes is unacceptable child abuse, you have failed the entire genre. 

listen, one of my favorite comics is the 2011 animal man comic, i think there is a place for edgy superheroes, but even that made room for maxine, the small child that sits at the heart of the story and has genuine agency and drives the narrative. but if the only way for teen heroes to exist in dc requires rolling back the edge and blood? then so be it. at least with some forced restraints joker might be a good villain again. 

besides, realism in the superhero genre is a joke in itself. its a genre built around people with superpowers wearing colorful costumes fighting bad guys. you can take "realism" in superhero stories behind the shed and shoot it in the back of the head.

anyways, read young justice 1998, read impulse 1995, read static 1993, read robin 1991, read blue beetle 2006, show teen heroes some goddamn respect and not this trash.