Rating: 3/5

This is a book about India, but it could be about "oriental fatalism" more generally, which Naipaul never ceased to notice or despise. Naipaul criticizes the psychology of Hinduism from the perspective of someone who is culturally Hindu himself. He engages in his usual curmudgeonly tourism and shares his lacerating observations. The medieval squalor of Indian life is depicted in evocative terms. There are also extended attacks on Gandhi and certain Indian literary figures of the 1970s. The British are praised for intellectually stimulating India during their colonial enterprise. The world Naipaul is describing already seems to have been superseded.

I didn't like this book at first since it seemed to be irrelevant to present circumstances. After awhile though, its significance began to dawn on me. This is a book about one type of Hindu, or one type of Asian, killing another type. Naipaul hates what he sees as the decadent spirituality of India. He wants a new Hindu Indian, who is a man of action rather than one of Gandhian spirituality and self-cultivation. The latter, it is argued, has resigned Hindus to centuries of defeat, subjection, casteism and acceptance of suffering. Rather than a type of stoicism, spirituality is merely the minimum psychological tool for a defeated people to survive. He cherrypicks history to paint as bleak a picture as possible and has total faith in the West, which admittedly was still at its unchallengeable apex during his early lifetime. He did not see the good or the possibilities that may exist or had existed within a non-Western people. Nonetheless, as always, he was correct that something was wrong.

Naipaul wanted Hindu Indians to leave behind spiritual nonsense and stir to material action, rational calculation and race consciousness. Reading this book helped me understand Naipaul's own later support of Hindu nationalist movements, including violent ones. He laceratingly criticizes the traditional Hindu way of life and thought, in a way that would probably have struck some as offensive. For all his venom, it's intended as constructive criticism. He painfully wanted Hindus to thrive as a powerful modern people, rather than as bearers some ancient civilization. It seems like people did listen to him in India. They changed, and are changing. "The past has to be seen to be dead; or the past will kill," Naipaul wrote. There can be no continuity with any imagined antique harmony. I am starting to think that is a good message for Muslims to reflect on as well.

The Gandhian world that Naipaul loathed so much is in its death throes. In many ways Naipaul was really under-recognized as an anti-Gandhi. Some of his criticisms are no doubt true. But I feel that the jury is still out on his total hatred for metaphysics and embrace of Western materialism. If the process of psychological Westernizing the people of India and Asia ultimately leads them to material death — either through ecological collapse or nuclear annihilation — in my view that will be an important judgement to take into consideration.