Rating: 4/5

“One must admit when he makes a mistake, reading my below review I can see how ignorant I was to the studies that where conducted after Darwin’s work which proved the parts related to natural selection, yes there were mistakes in some of Darwins observations, but natural selection is not a theory any more and there is enough evidence to prove it right more than any other simplistic explanation for human existence, unless you believe that we are living in a simulation and all the archeological evidence is put there to fool us” 31 Dec 2018

Ok, I understand how important the work done in this book must have been at the time it was published, but now with the recent discoveries in this field many of the arguments and proves put forward could be scientifically argued. Also I couldn't help noticing the contradiction in his own work. I'm Not underestimating the work and arguments put forward as they are profound specially at that time but my issue is as scientist he would have gained my respect if he would have referred to his findings and encouraged further studies to be conducted, however instead he insisted that his findings are solid prove that Men descend from apes., and this should be considered as a fact Well a simple argument would be if all animals are subject to his evolution theory then shouldn't we see a different shapes of intelligent animals other than humans!

Also he has noticed that by practicing certain activities the shape of the human would develop during his life cycle, which had been proved in other studies, so in terms of percentage change if applied then the evolution should have been faster than he depicted! Specially with the developments achieved recent millennium, I think the human brain is processing more info than he ever did before!

One that a person would notice in reading Darwin his aristocratic views of humans from different classes, he referred to the Australian Barbarians, as more stupid form of humans and even more stupid than animals, I'm sure he would have had the same views about African tribes, well no comment!

He also argued whether humans are in the evolution cycle or devolution which was quite interesting for me, he argued that capitalism could be a reason for devolution where selection is not done based on individual qualities but how rich a man is. He also referred to the below Poem from 550B.C. This suits my taste :)

The Grecian poet, Theognis, who lived 550 B.C.
"With kine and horses, Kurnus! we proceed By reasonable rules, and choose a breed For profit and increase, at any price: Of a sound stock, without defect or vice. But, in the daily matches that we make, The price is everything: for money's sake, Men marry: women are in marriage given The churl or ruffian, that in wealth has thriven, May match his offspring with the proudest race: Thus everything is mix'd, noble and base! If then in outward manner, form, and mind, You find us a degraded, motley kind, Wonder no more, my friend! the cause is plain, And to lament the consequence is vain."

(The Works of J. Hookham Frere, vol. ii. 1872, p. 334.))