Rating: 4/5

I just finished this book, so I had to run right to Goodreads to post my review (and reaction to it). Just prior to finishing the last few pages I skimmed a few other reviews and was somewhat startled by how vehemently some readers hated this book. First, I have to admit I am a "new" Sherlock Holmes fan. I have only read one volume of a collection of Conan-Doyle's stories and two of the more famous longer works, including A Study in Scarlett and The Hound of the Baskervilles.
In other words, I don't have as much experience comparing the "real" Holmes to this author, Sam Sicilliano's new version. This lack of in-depth familiarity may be why I was not
as bothered by what others have deemed to be character inconsistencies. 
In any case, I have long enjoyed Leroux's Phantom of the Opera and as Sicilliano's The Angel of the Opera is somewhat of a hybrid of what could be deemed "fan fiction," I have to say this is one of the better books I have encountered. 

First, the language composition and the execution of plot elements is marvelous. (Without giving too much away, this is essentially a retelling of the Phantom of the Opera from the viewpoint of Sherlock Holmes and his assistant/cousin, Henry Vernier). It is by far one of the finest-written pieces of "fan fiction." 
I loved the background explanation of the operas framing the events of the plot, the most important of course being Faust. I know a little about Gounoud's Faust but this book expanded on my understanding of it and extended my appreciation for how it fits into Phantom's story. 

Second, I thought that Sicilliano does a great job of characterization.
Again (at least in regards to Phantom) he depicts Erik's character flawlessly, teasing out the details about him and his motivations with great subtlety. In this sense it is very true to Leroux's rendering. My one criticism is that we don't learn anything very new about Erik himself - he still remains the enigmatic, disfigured musical genius. Also, I am not sure I entirely accepted the explanation that he was disfigured by leprosy. 
I will say, however, that I thought it was a superb allusion on Sicilliano's part to compare Erik to The Hunchback of Notre Dame's Quasimodo, specifically by stating that Erik is the "soul" of the Palais Garnier as Quasimodo is the soul of the Notre Dame cathedral. 
Others have complained about the characterizations of the Persian and the Vicomte de Chagny. I have to disagree. Raoul, the Vicomte, is portrayed as effeminate and somewhat weak in the Leroux novel. He is often whiny as well, therefore Sicilliano really does not do anything radically different to this character - other than perhaps place a heavier emphasis on defects that are already known. 
In fact, when he shoots and kills a character during a scene in the book (I won't say who), this is really expanding on a "trigger happy" aspect of Raoul's character that was introduced in the Leroux novel. (In the original Phantom, Raoul, in a panic, actually fires his pistol at a pair of yellow eyes he imagines to be watching him outside his bedroom window). 
As for the Persian, we are given so little info about him in Leroux's book that I was not bothered by Sicilliano's departure from more refined interpretations of the Persian as generally benevolent and helpful. He is almost part villain in this book, but I didn't think this was far-fetched. We never really know much about him from Leroux, other than he was familiar with Erik during their days of association in the Shah's employ in Persia. He was a former police chief, or daroga, so it is feasible he might act more like a "Javert" for instance and stalk Erik. He certainly does have no qualms in Leroux's book about helping to lead Raoul to Erik's lair. 
Lastly, in terms of characterizing Sherlock, I have to say 
Sicilliano seems to get Sherlock's "voice" right and his physical description. In terms of his having attraction to women, but repressing this for the most part, I was not bothered by this idea. It's good to remember that Sherlock Holmes was written somewhat as a Victorian ideal - therefore it was only fitting for the time period that very little would be revealed about Holmes and that he did not necessarily enjoy the company of women. Conan-Doyle wrote him to confirm to the Victorian ideal of repressing sexual desire and so forth. 
I view Sicilliano's revelation that Holmes is actually very like most men and struggles with his attraction to women as being more realistic. 
This was very interesting to me and actually plays a key element in the plot itself. 

Now, there are some flaws, undoubtedly, in this book. First of all, like many others, I was somewhat annoyed with the Watson-bashing that occurs early on in the prologue (and sets up the introduction of Holmes' companion and assistant for this adventure, Henry Vernier). Once I got past that for the sake of the plot and story, it was really not a big deal. Vernier is even mildly amusing, especially with his vertigo (which becomes problematic when chasing Erik in the upper reaches of the Palais Garnier) and his observations about Holmes' various disguises. 
Other minor or major quibbles? Some scenes from Leroux's book that here include Holmes and Vernier seemed...well, forced. The most glaring example of this would be in the concluding lair scene. 
First of all, it is wild enough that Erik has the Persian and Raoul already chasing him, only to stumble into Erik's torture chamber. But then again, this is what happened in Leroux. 
BUT...to then have Holmes and Vernier also end up in the scene just seemed....not quite believable. Threes a crowd as they say, but SIX??? (Includes Christine and Erik). 

Still, the scene where Christine kisses Erik while Holmes and Watson look on is quite well done and beautifully descriptive. 

Another problem is the introduction of Victor, Erik's supposed mute "assistant." Sorry, doesn't work. Erik is truly alone and isolated below the opera - that is how Leroux wrote him and that is why he ultimately goes beserk and tries to have Christine. He has no companionship FROM ANYONE, not even a mute servant. 

Lastly (and this is a minor issue), although I thought it was wonderful how Erik does get a happy ending in this book, I have to say I am bothered by the choice of a blind woman as a companion. This is not unlike a previous fan fiction book I read called Deception. Sorry, just have a real problem with this. Erik should NOT have to hide and blindness is just a poor physical substitute for another mask in my view.