Rating: 2/5

GOODREADS POLL QUESTIONS: What did you think of Edgar Allen Poe’s short story, THE BLACK CAT? 
...
READER RESPONSES:

  

OUCH....well I didn’t hate this anti black cat hit piece as much as the unbiased poll respondents did, but I didn’t really like it either. Of course, as a member of the GLASS Association (Get Lousy Drunk and Sing Showtunes), I will say that I found the negative portrayal of excess alcohol consumption to be both misleading and offensive and may have allowed that anger to color my opinion. 

  

Regardless, for me this story pretty much floated between “meh” and “so so” with occasional gusts up to okay. The writing was fine, though I think Poe Boy has certainly shown far more literary prowess than he displayed here. Still, I would easily have forgiven less than brilliant prose if the story had been good. 

Uh…it wasn’t….or, at the very least, it wasn’t good enough to engage me the way I would have liked. Much of this had to do with the story dynamic which just felt forced and far-fetched. 

The story begins with Mr. “kind, sweet, animal lover” who is happily married to Mrs. “kind, sweet animal lover” and has a lot of kind, sweet and well-loved animals, especially a large black cat named Pluto. So Dr. Doolittle begins sampling the local fermented beverages and quickly becomes a raging alcoholic madman who not only HATES animals, but enjoys committing surgical atrocities on them….WOAH!! BACK UP!!...HUH?

  

It just didn’t make sense to me and I lost interest fairly early which is tough to do with a story only 15 pages long (so hats off to Poe on that score). The journey from Mike Brady to Hannibal Lector was just too much of a stretch and the story's arms weren't long enough to reach. Anyway, from there the plot just strolled deeper into the land of “Yeah Right” until finally coming to a stop at the oh so predicable ending. Even the trademark dread that Poe is usually so good at imbuing in his stories was almost totally absent.

Thus, for me, a disappointment given how much I have loved many of his stories.