Rating: 3/5

Having bought this on an impulse, I wish I had read the Amazon sample beforehand. I may not have even spent my money. The story depicted 9th century Contantinople in its glory and, mostly, its hedonism. It was vivid in portraying that time and place. Through basically a good story, although with the caveats below, I did learn something about an era unfamiliar to me.

 This is Zeno's story told from his comfortable old age. When still a lad from the country, he is captured by Rus warriors [we would know them as Vikings], becomes the slave of Inger, and is castrated. The drunken Inger's comrades leave them behind at a squalid tavern and sail to the North without him and Zeno. Inger marries the hostess and has a daughter, Eudocia. Zeno is bought by a Byzantine scholar and is brought to the city. Years pass, then Zeno crosses paths with future Emperor, Michael III. A pawn of others' machinations, Zeno must lead Michael down the path of depravity. In the tavern Michael meets Eudocia, now a beautiful young lady; she becomes Michael's mistress. After Michael becomes emperor, she is married off to Basil, his favorite, a base-born peasant and stable hand. Many description of depravity and sex were gratuitous and I feel could have been left out. Some of them turned my stomach. The graphic descriptions of violent male rape were especially disturbing. The opening scene: an obscene travesty of the Liturgy, was disgusting. Zeno becomes involved in Byzantine politics, religious heresies, and intrigue. I felt far too much time was spent on the hairsplitting of the various heresies and was boring. Michael, the last of the Phrygian dynasty, is gruesomely assassinated in bed. Right before dawn, a peasant [Basil the Macedonian] and former tavern-girl [Eudocia] now rule the Roman [Byzantine] Empire. 

I would have rated this book higher had there not been so much 
debauch. I didn't like any belittlement of ecclesiastical institutions and ritual. When I saw something of either nature coming I skipped over or skimmed it. How much of this stuff was written in purely for shock value? Because so much of the novel consisted of this rubbish, the last few chapters after the murder of Michael were rushed through to the conclusion. The author did a good job of evoking Constantinople, although I don't think I would have wanted to live there at that time! There was a very interesting 'Historical Note' at the end.