Rating: 4/5

"Phillips, in a curious way, did not mind so much. He said the Lord's Prayer once, and left it at that. His mind divided in to two halves. One half was actually glad. For young Phillips for the first time, loved a girl with his whole soul; and she overlooked him. If he were drowned at sea she would be told; his death would sadden her a little, even if his life was indifferent to her. There was no true living for him, he felt, except in her thoughts: then his death alone could secure him life, even life for the few minutes she would give to thinking of him. Like many young lovers, he confused a girl with God: and he could almost imagine her now, watching him, out of the sky; watching him die, and pitying him" (39).

"There was a smell of stale sea, stale food, and stale air; but there was another smell too: bitter, ammoniac. It was quite faint, but the captain knew it. You do not forget it, if you have ever smelt it. It was the smell of fear. Disciplined men can control their muscles, even their facial expressions. But they cannot control the chemistry of their sweat glands" (49).

"Surely if she could see him like this, she would love him with her whole heart.

And yet, I don't know. Would she have loved him? She had like dwell enough to sit on the knees of his shore-going uniform, to rub her cheek against his pink smooth cheek. Would she really have preferred to sit on the knees of oily and sodden dungarees, her cheek against his sore and stubbly jaw?

His face did not wear, as he thought, the lean, drawn, and lion-like aspect one expects of an unflinching hero. For the immediate effect on a hero's face of unflinching effort is seldom to make him look romantic; more often it makes him look liverish. You know that noble look of open, wise patience, that you have seen on the face of some great explorer? That look did not come to him in the desert. The desert may have begotten it, but it only came to him afterwards, in safety and comfort. In the desert, he looked at times brutal, at times petulant, at times frightened. Never noble" (89).

"With so much technical knowledge to acquire anyhow, why waste the man's time in learning a useless and outmoded technique as well?

The answer is a matter of Virtue, really. For an inclination towards virtue (such as sent Mr. Buxton to sea) is not enough in itself; it must be trained, like any other aptitude. Now there is a fundamental difference in kind between the everyday work of a sailing-vessel and the everyday work of a steamer. The latter does not essentially differ from a shore job: it is only occasionally, rarely, that emergencies arise in Steam. But every common action in the working of a sailing-vessel, all the time, partakes of something of the nature of an emergency. Everything must be done with your whole heart, and a little more than your whole strength. Thus is a natural aptitude for virtue increased by everyday practice. For changing a jib in a stiff breeze is a microcosm, as it were, of saving the ship in a storm" (127-128).