Rating: 1/5

Okay. Wow, where to begin. Victor is a vampire hiding out in a monastery. He's having lots of gay sex with one of the monks, but when another gay man, Paul comes to the monastery, he begins the eye him. When Paul walks in on Victor killing his gay lover, Victor turns him into a "thrawl" a half human, half vampire slave. Okay, the first problem is, Victor is the main character, and I know with this kind of book you have to kind of root for the bad guy, but all he did was brutally slaughter innocent people (every night – you would wonder how he could manage to kill so many people and the police have absolutely no clue who is doing the murders. You could even wonder whether or not there would be any people left in the small town after he had stayed at the monastery for as long as he had), and have gay sex – lots and lots and lots and lots of gay sex. I don't have a problem with this, but it got kind of tedious after a while. Maybe I'm just not the target audience being a lesbian woman. We're treated to the most brutal depictions of him ripping apart Men, women and children- incidentally, how exactly does a vampire manage to find the jugular vein so quickly on a struggling victim in pitch blackness? It takes me several seconds to find the pulse in my own throat, so you would think it would be hard to do this – guess it's special "vampire powers" – but I digress. Despite all this, I was ready to give Vampire Thrall 3 stars because it really was kind of interesting, and it was somewhat suspenseful because you were curious, sort of despite yourself, about what would happen – but the ending was just really really ridiculous. It turns out that when Victor was alive, he was in love with Jesus. That's right, THE Jesus. He met Jesus dancing naked in the mountains (somehow I must've missed that scene in my Bible – I think I'd remember), and he and Jesus were in love, and in the end Jesus saves Victor and Paul from a vengeful ghost (the mother of one of his victims, who has a pretty damn good reason for being vengeful) so Victor (and now Paul) can go back on his merry way, slaughtering more and more people. Somehow I find it hard to believe that Jesus would facilitate the slaughter of so many unfortunate people by protecting 2 vampires. I mean, I know he's supposed to be all love and stuff, and for inexplicable reasons, likes Victor, but isn't he supposed to kind of be God, and isn't God supposed to kind of be good? I don't know, I'm not a Christian by any means, I'm an atheist – and I'm all for for edgy new interpretations of religious stories, but I just didn't buy it. Sorry. The ending just killed the whole thing for me, and the book was on pretty shaky ground to begin with