Rating: 4/5

The set-up is tantalizing: 14 year old Rosalind's lesbian moms die in a freak accident. The moms have left no will so trainwreck Ros is taken in by her birth father/sperm donor/total stranger Sean. Sean's life is in a rut and he admits (eventually) that he has bitten off more than he can chew. But he can't bring himself to give Ros over to her moms' overwrought best friend Karen, who is not happy AT ALL.

How to tackle the swirling, unpredictable mess that is the grief of a teenage orphan AND the anxiety of a single thirty-something lawyer thrust into parenting? How to wrassle the rage, remorse, mistakes, missteps, revelations of personal weakness and the scary side of opening one's self up to love and loss? 

Halpin deftly spins the narrative in Ros's grief journal (heartbreaking but also frequently funny) Sean's (often hilarious) email exchanges with his best friend, and various notes, IM's, and transcripts of conversations. The voices of all these disparate characters ring loud and clear, especially Ros, who is a punky, smart antihero for the ages. The multiple threads provide an unusual Roshomon-like revealing of details that allow the reader to learn about characters not only through what they say and do, but how they interpret events. The lack of descriptive detail that an all-knowing third-person narrator might give is not missed. In fact, the rhythm of the story as told through modern epistles is unique. It sometimes feels like found art.

And what a story. Nothing is shied away from: drugs, sex, guilt, selfishness and the awkward little victories that are the crucibles that shape us as kids and adults. Anyone of any age who has been through intense grief knows what a strange animal it is, how it can evoke the most destructive willfulness, the deepest despair. One of the many great things about Donorboy is the role friends play in shepherding the main characters through the darkness. It's truly touching.

Donorboy is marketed as a Young Adult novel, and it is, but it's also an ageless gem of storytelling for anyone with a pulse.