Rating: 1/5

The pilot book for the Shivers series happens to be one of the weakest in the series. M.D. Spenser’s writing quality was definitely better here than it was anywhere else in this series, and it’s apparent he just stopped giving much-a-fuck after a certain point in time. There’s some dark backstory/lore to the story I quite liked and a bizarrely somber tone to the whole book that I wasn’t expecting. The ending is decent and there’s a certain mechanic near the end I found interesting, but that’s where my positives end. For being the first book of the series, it is utterly boring. I’m not even kidding when I say a whole fourth of this book was complete padding, with the sisters looking around to find a key to the attic, then finding it, then needing another key, then venturing to the shed, then breaking into a desk, and—you see the issue? That’s a whole fourth of this book that is seldom used to pad out this story, and I’d argue about 70 pages of this shit was useless filler either scattered about randomly. The main character keeps going on and on about how much they dislike their father’s decision to uproot and move, and it’s like—SHUT UP! We get it. Not to mention the main is just a mean-spirited jerk half the time that was hard to like. There’s a lot of roughy grammatical errors, some typos, and instances of bad writing. There’s a two-sentence paragraph in the second-to-last chapter that literally felt like the sentences were in reverse order. Like bro, wtf. The book takes way too long to get to the point (The Enchanted Attic) and drags on far longer than necessary, there’s a dumbass fakeout death scare near the end that did absolutely nothing but drag out the story another five pages (kill me, please), and there’s a random go-go-gadget bullshit move in the final ten pages involving the dolls depicted on the cover (because yes, they’re in here) potentially being less doll sized. Straight fucking nonsense but whatever. I could keep going, but you get the gist. Overall, 3.5/10. Nice mood and some decent lore, but nothing else really. Really bad start for the series. The Weeping Angel Infested Attic.