Rating: 4/5

This book is a thorough history of the Korean War from start to finish. Although socially and culturally ignorant in many ways (published in the early 1960s), it is very well-written, and any time TRF strays from the history, his assertions are thought-provoking and valuable. There is so much I didn’t know about the conflict: about its dangerous and clunky inception, about the defeat of the Republic of Korea’s army prior to American involvement, about American military ineptitude and incompetence in the beginning of the war, about global concern for the expansion of the war within Asia and even into Europe. 

The book does an excellent job at dodging propagandist narratives and evaluating the US Army objectively: we are not and have never been tactically superior, we are good strategically, we have ample logistical assets, we enter wars soft and learn quickly; it is very conceivable in a deadlier conflict that the big first loss could be insurmountable. We have a chip on our shoulder (the level of spite and pettiness of Chinook crewmembers will never fail to astound me). I appreciated these critiques. 

A lot of Army officers read this book, specifically focusing solely on Chapter 6: Task Force Smith. It seems they often somehow only come away with the idea: ‘if these soldiers don’t salute me we’re going to lose the next war.’ In reality the message should be: ‘if I can’t foster a fighting culture - within a system that lets us exclusively train to fight - we’re going to lose the next war.’ 

Last, the Korean War labeled as the ‘forgotten war’ is misleading because it implies the American people experienced the war and then forgot it. This book illuminates more appropriate phrasing and sequencing for the conflict: the hidden war. The American people barely knew there was a war occurring due to government censorship of the media and an overall lack of governmental transparency. Regardless of the government’s success in obstructing the flow of information and constructing a false narrative, the men that fought and died were real. So it goes. 

Favorite quotes: 

“A soldier’s destiny, which few escape, is to suffer…” 

“Only those who have never learned self-restraint fear reasonable discipline.” 

“Crusades, even when failures, are emotionally satisfying. Wars of containment, wars of policy, are not.” 

“From the time of Athens and Republican Rome, no representative parliament has ever had much success with dealings beyond the water. There have been historians who claim that continued involvement of a people beyond its own frontiers inevitably produces Caesarism.” (Caesarism in this instance is alluding to the potential for MacArthur and his reckless provocations to eventually “cross the Rubicon.”)

“…wars fought for a higher purpose must always be the most hideous of all. It is desperately hard for men to accept that there is a direct path from the highest ideals to the torture chamber; for no man who accepts with his whole heart can fail equally to reject with his whole being… war was to be entered upon with sadness, with regret, but also, with ferocity.” 

“A competent, adequately trained basic rifleman could be made in eleven months. Competent, well-schooled commanders and staffs could not.” 

“Americans… inevitably tend to think in terms of holy war: against militarism, against fascism, against Bolshevism…” (against terrorism 👀) 

“…we’re saying goodbye to them all, we’re Harry’s police force on call…”