Rating: 5/5

Howard K. Smith was among the last American reporters in Berlin - hence the title - and through a number of serendipitous events, managed to leave on the last train out of Berlin to Switzerland in 1942, just days before Pearl Harbor was bombed. His book provides an overview of his years in Germany, his experiences with censorship and bureaucracy as a radio reporter broadcasting to America, and his thoughts about the various stages of the war, the German people, and Germany's political development.

My edition regrettably lacked the new photos and introduction - but nonetheless was exceptionally interesting for it's "man on the ground" view, augmented by his ability to blend into, if not be a part of, the native population. Unlike many books about the war, Smith provides his insights into the German population: their forced sacrifices to support the war (his first meal with real meat and coffee in two years was in Switzerland, as was his first new set of clothes). His view of their support, or rather lack thereof, of the Nazi party as the war dragged on is particularly interesting in light of the penalties for negativity. Interestingly, Smith also highlights a lack of support of the Nazi party's persecution of Jews, and mentions the Nazi relocation of Jews to conquered locations to function as slave labor, which he labels a death sentence. (There is no reference to death camps or concentration camps, only prisons.)
 
I was surprised to find suggestions on further separating the people from the Nazi party, in the hopes of encouraging them to overthrow the party while the war was going badly in Russia - something you might expect to see in a government document rather than a widely published book. Although his suggestions appear impractical, it's interesting that Smith maintained a sense of humanity in his time with the German people and recognized the cause of their ills in the political (if not military) leadership. He offers an interesting editorial view, an exciting narrative, and a book I wish I had known about much earlier. It's certainly not the best book ever, but there are flashes of insight and experiences about WWII Germany, and about being young during a pivotal time in the world, that you'll read nowhere else (not even in Shirer). I'd put it on the must read list for a WWII buff.