Rating: 4/5

Stephen Jay Gould's collections of essays on natural history found me at the right moment, in my twenties, when I had plenty of time to read and a mind that was primed for his wisdom. Now that I'm entering my sixth decade, it's a comfort to me to be able to still reach for him, and while I think the professor has a lot less to teach me now, I like to think it's because many of those lessons actually got through to me.

What makes the essays remarkable is not that they offer laypersons a deeper understanding and appreciation for natural history (although they do exactly that). It's that Gould has a tremendous knack for imparting lessons in scientific method, scientific progress, and morality from his vast knowledge of the history of science. And in the process you learn to share his love of Joyce's Ulysses, Gilbert &amp; Sullivan, Richard Wagner, Robert Frost, the Yankees, and of course, Darwin, Lamarck, Huxley. Any fan of Gould's will see great repetition in these essays, in both manner and substance. But that doesn't make the stories any less captivating, and it doesn't make the writing any less fabulous.

Some classic SJ:
We must always struggle to avoid the primary error of historiography – the anachronistic use of later conclusions to judge the cogency of an earlier claim.
Great works of science condemn themselves to oblivion as they open floodgates to reforming knowledge, while classics of literature can never lose relevance.
All historical studies – whether of human biography or of evolutionary lineages in biology – potentially suffer from this 'presentist' fallacy. Modern chroniclers know the outcomes that actually unfolded as unpredictable consequences of past events – and they often, and inappropriately, judge the motives and actions of their subjects in terms of futures unknowable at the time.
The vigorous branching of life's tree, and not the accumulating valor of mythical marches to progress, lies behind the persistence and expansion of organic diversity in our tough and constantly stressful world. 

And he never fails to have a few Carl Sagan moments:
I do not pretend to know why the documentation of unbroken heredity through generations of forebears brings us so swiftly to tears, and to such a secure sense of rightness, definition, membership, and meaning. I simply accept the primal emotional power we feel when we manage to embed ourselves into something much larger.

And embedded in these larger lessons, there are always a million historical bits. The great Linnaeus tried extending his very effective classification schemes for species into a clumsy binomial system for rocks, and his categorization of human races were pretty awful. Freud speculated on some batshit ideas rooted in Lamarckian theory. Nabokov was for six years a very effective research fellow studying butterflies. Darwin would not use the label 'evolution' given that in his time it meant 'predictable and directional unfolding'. 

This particular volume was the last of his collections to be published, so I read it with more than the usual amount of nostalgia. Gould, naturally, had a good sense of his own mortality, understood his place in the cosmos, and had an unparalleled grasp of chance and contingency:
 I will never run out of unkept promises, or miles to walk; and that I may even continue to sprinkle the journey remaining before sleep with a new idea or two.

I get a lump in my throat reading that even now.

The interesting bit is that Gould may very well one day become a footnote in the history of paleontology as the co-author of a lesser-appreciated theory of the punctuated nature of evolution. But in so many of these essays, he aims to lift the legacies of the forgotten and debunked scholars from centuries past. I have no idea how his contributions to his field will be seen by those on the cutting edge. Gould understood well that most scholars by the time they are in their old age are forced to witness their own decline. But I expect he felt very lucky too, and that comes through in his writing.

My point here is really that his essays are a wonderful legacy. And hell, I'm pretty sure he was on a Simpsons episode once. You could do a lot worse. Rest in peace, Stephen, and thanks for leaving behind your words.