Rating: 4/5

Mind is the Master power that moulds and makes,
And Man is Mind, and evermore he takes
The tool of Thought, and, shaping what he wills,
Brings forth a thousand joys, a thousand ills:—
He thinks in secret, and it comes to pass:
Environment is but his looking-glass.

This is a short and inspiring philosophical book with its title being influenced by a verse in the Bible. The author also makes references to Jesus, Krishna, and Buddha while explaining his ideas. The central theme of the book is that a man is shaped by the thoughts he harbors whether consciously or subconsciously. Good and positive thoughts will attract joy and peace while negative thoughts will attract misery and despair. If he finds himself in an unfortunate situation that is out of his control, he needs to accept the fact that nothing lasts forever. 

He can choose to find the good things from an unpleasant experience while from the bad things, he can learn important lessons. He can let the failure and pain guide and motivate him to improve himself and his life to earn the success he rightfully deserves. This will cause him to take ownership of his life and not blame other people for everything that is wrong in his life.
 
All a person needs to do is alter the way he perceives a situation. If you see the world as your ally, you’ll find that the world is a beautiful thing that wants you to succeed and it’ll present endless people and opportunities to achieve those goals and if you believe that the world is conspiring against you, you’ll find yourself at war with the enemy you can’t conquer and live with perpetual hell of your own making. Our thoughts will manifest into his habits and the habits will shape our circumstances because mind and body are intimately connected.

If you want to live a successful life, you need to have a passion or a vision of an ideal life. If you have a picture of what an ideal life looks like to you, you’re going to work really hard to achieve that and the unfavorable circumstance you’re in right now will seem like a temporary state that you’ll eventually get out of. Using the basic rule of cause and effect, instead of worrying about things you can’t control, you can focus on giving the best from your side. If that doesn’t work, you’ll need to learn to find better and efficient ways and try again. 

A calm person draws strength from within so the external circumstances don’t faze him. What you get is what you deserve in life and if you don’t have it then you need to work for it and earn it. It’s mostly how to use the law of attraction to your maximum benefit. The author also talks about the benefits of meditation in your daily life and interesting discussion about the cause of suffering and how to reach a state of enlightenment.

All in all, a nice short read.