Rating: 4/5

This depicts a man who has completely lost himself to his illness. He was once happy. He was once sane. He had a loving wife and a warm home full of pets. But, his illness took over; it sent him into fits of blind rage in which he abused that which he professed to love; he neglected his animals and beat his wife. However, for a time, he left his favourite amongst them in peace. He left his beloved black cat alone. Well, until one day where he was sent over the edge and decided to stab the poor creature’s eye out. What a bastard. 

“The fury of a demon instantly possessed me. I knew myself no longer. My original soul seemed, at once, to take its flight from my body; and a more than fiendish malevolence, gin-nurtured, thrilled every fibre of my frame.” 

Because of this I have absolutely no sympathy for the narrator of this tale; he is a terrible man. His illness is his alcoholism or so he says. So, he causes it himself; he knows the rage that drink brings him yet he persists in its consumption. It seems like a convenient excuse for a deranged man to me. He further defends himself by saying he is perverse and that he simply commits cruelty because he knows that he shouldn’t. This, to me, is just stupidity. I’m not sure when these scapegoat like ideas manifested itself within the narrator because he clearly wasn’t always this way. I suppose you could argue that the alcohol ruined him and destroyed his mind, but, again, that seems like an excuse. So, I can’t fully agree with that idea. He claims to have loved the cat, and his actions suggest that he did so beyond his wife. Yet, he immediately tries to replace the cat after he hangs it. Surely, such an animal would be irreplaceable to him regardless of whether or not he killed it? Surely, no other cat would be the same? Unless the alcohol destroyed his love and turned him to bitterness. It's all rather ironic:

“I was especially fond of animals, and was indulged by my parents with a great variety of pets. With these I spent most of my time, and never was so happy as when feeding and caressing them.This peculiarity of character grew with my growth, I derived from it one of my principal sources of pleasure.” 

The new cat doesn’t like him much, and I can’t say that I blame it. The narrator is incredibly repulsive and disgustingly grotesque. He begins to return the cat’s dislike with hatred, which turns to anger, which turns to an unbridled passion to destroy it. What a bastard. Humorously, he even tries to blame the cat when the problem clearly resides within his own head. His mind has been tainted whether by alcoholism, madness or some other dark force I cannot fully say. But, one thing’s for sure, he isn’t normal. He has somehow convinced himself that the cat harbours the soul of a witch. This has been emphasised, to his mind, by its lack of an eye. He thinks it sees straight through him and sees his dark soul; thus, it too must be killed. 

 

This story was incredibly uncomfortable to read even by Poe’s standards. Animal cruelty is a terrible thing, and I must admit that some of the description made me somewhat angry. Don’t get me wrong, I do like this story; it is incredibly twisted, dark and generally speaking quite fucked up. The narrator is an evilly insane man, which Poe captured perfectly. It’s just that I’m a cat lover, so it made me a little sad. But, overall, it is a marvel of writing. To evoke such a malevolent, vile, malicious piece of degenerate filth is a true accomplishment even if it’s horrible to read about. I'm glad the cat got the last laugh.