Rating: 4/5

Juan Carlos Onetti, "Let the Wind Speak." Helen Lane, translator. Serpent’s Tail, 1979/1996.

The Uruguayan Onetti (1909-1994) is part of the early 20th Century blossoming of literary talent in Latin America. As an undergraduate and graduate student, I read a few of his short stories, which left me with the lasting impression of just how dour life was from Onetti’s point of view. He is a writer of existential despair, whose fiction seems more anguished than Camus or Sartre’s. "Let the Wind Speak" is the first novel Onetti wrote after escaping the Uruguayan dictatorship (1973-85) and going into exile in Spain, which may have sharpened the pessimism that had long fueled his fiction but only sharpened it. Nonetheless, there are a few surprising moments of hope in "Let the Wind Speak." Sometimes, a novel will have a passage that functions as a thesis or interpretive clue. The thesis of "Let the Wind Speak" comes from the protagonist: “Everything pleases me, I like being happy despite everything. That happens when a person catches on in time, and really understand, that nothing matters and that possible understandings are infinite and uncertain”(193).

The protagonist is Medina, and the setting is Santa Maria, which is a fictional stand-in for Montevideo. Medina is something of a charlatan, getting by with what he can with others of the same ilk. He is character well known in town, as he exists around the margins, although not always. The novel is broken into two sections. In the first, he begins in the role of doctor/nurse(?) caring for a sick old man in what becomes, surprising to some, a death watch. He is also a painter and a beachcomber. He has a beat up old studio and a lady friend, Frieda, with a house on the beach. He sells his paintings to the locals who will buy them. Sometimes he is inspired to paint. Sometimes he takes commissions. Sometimes he hawks his paintings. He smokes and drinks, has sex as much as he wants or can get, and he more often than not is short of money. He walks the beach looking for inspiration for the apocalyptic painting he really wants to complete, The Last Wave, which will be white and dirty and full of the abject fluids (pus) and detritus of humanity. He is a nihilist but is also caring and pleasant. He and Frieda take in others under their wing, other grifter sorts down on their luck. The first is Olga, who wants a nude of herself to give as a wedding gift to an old boyfriend. Then there is Juanina, who is supposedly a pregnant runaway and has shown up on the beach. Medina is inspired by her profile and lean and angular body, and he talks Frieda into taking her in so that he can draw and paint her. Because they are short of money and food and alcohol and cigarettes, Medina sells his paintings of Juanina to an eccentric–he listens exclusively to recordings of Gregorian chants–bourgeois down the beach to whom he has sold before. Turns out that Juanina is neither pregnant nor a runaway. And then there is Seoane, who is an addict and drunk and doesn’t seem to do much else, whom they look after like their own son, except that Frieda may also have taken him as her lover. Onetti creates an alternative family of grifters who have little respect for social institutions and morés except for what of value, use, or desire can be extracted from or through them. This first section of the novel is the idyllic part, when life is pretty good and Medina’s thesis seems applicable. 

In the second section of "Let the Wind Speak," Medina is a police chief, and Frieda has become a successful lounge singer, so successful that she is thinking of buying the club where she performs. Medina and Frieda are no longer a couple. When I began reading this section, I assumed that it was chronologically prior to the first section. Somehow, it made conventional sense that Medina would have first been a police chief, and a corrupt one, before subsiding into a life as painter, beachcomber, and grifter; similar logic for Frieda. But instead Onetti has flipped that logic, and Medina’s life as painter, beachcomber, and grifter leads to a job as police chief, and everyone recognizes his authority, calling him chief. This is an obvious political commentary by Onetti on the Uruguay he fled. The job does not change Medina much. He is still the existential drifter who floats through life taking from it what he can. He is not necessarily bad at his job–he arrests a man who has murdered his wife–but he is also corrupt: for example, he interrogates and beats up his “son” Seoane, who has stolen a watch and a gun from him. The thesis of the book (see above) comes from this section. Medina says it concerning Seoane, wondering why he can’t follow Medina’s path to happiness rather than the self-destructive path Seoane has followed. Medina is trying to be fatherly! Unfortunately, the move from the margins to legitimacy doesn’t do Medina much good. He is still very much enamored of Frieda, who is murdered. Seoane is arrested, commits suicide in jail, admitting to the murder in a note. The extemporized family of the first section, and whatever sentimental bonds that kept it together, comes to a sad end. 

"Let the Wind Speak" is named after the annual Santa Rosa Storm that besets Uruguay and Argentina in August and can often be quite violent with high winds and rain. At the end, Medina retreats to his beach house with Olga, who became his lover after his break with Frieda. On the third day of the retreat, he sedates Olga and waits for the rising wind and waves to destroy everything. As a painter, he wanted to represent an apocalyptic wave, but in the end he wants to experience such a wave, suicidally, with the last person in the world to whom he feels an emotional attachment. Onetti undercuts Medina’s thesis: some things do matter and understanding can be quite finite and certain, or at least arranged to seem so. This feels again like Onetti’s commentary on the Uruguayan dictatorship. How many Uruguayans did the dictatorship destroy as it inevitably went down to destruction and, to be a little melodramatic, the winds of history blew it away?