Rating: 2/5

I'm done reading Long Stories. I guess maybe I don't like Long Stories very much or I don't like Richard Ford's taste in Long Stories very much, because these Long Stories were mostly very much a disappointment. Full standings, with detail:

June Recital (Eudora Whitely): 5/10. Her prose makes me feel like I have dyslexia. Also longer than it needed to be. 
The Long March (William Stryon): 7/10. Fine, but not anything great. Just solid, basic, typical american short/long story writing.
Goodbye, Columbus (Phillip Roth): 8.5/10. Really enjoyed this. It didn't sound that much like Roth to me. I guess his style evolved quite a bit over time. The ending just felt a little weak, so -.5
A Long Day In November (Ernest J. Gaines): 0/10. I didn't read this. Quit after 5 pages cause I just couldn't stand the style. Some gimmick with a mentally challenged narrator or something. I dunno. Seemed like that was all the story had to stand on. 
The Making of Ashenden (Stanley Elkin): 8.5/10. This would be a 9 if it didn't have such an absurd and weird ending. It was almost too much, honestly, I still can't really understand the point of it.
The Old Forest (Peter Taylor): 7/10. This was fine, but also pretty bland. Standard-ass story about a society of manners or whatever. It didn't help that I didn't like most of the characters or their actions.
Rosa (Cynthia Ozick): 9.5/10. Best story of the collection. Enjoyed it a lot, and liked it in almost every way. 
The Age of Grief (Jane Smiley): 8.5/10. I thought Jane Smiley wrote thrillers or something? I guess not. This was very good. Perhaps a tad long. 
I Lock My Door Upon Myself (Joyce Carol Oates): 0/10. Didn't finish this one. Read like 15 pages of it and quit. Couldn't tolerate the style. It felt like I was seeing the events through binoculars or something. I've read a few things by JCO, and I only liked one of them: the famous Where Are You Going, Where Have You Been. This was a lot different than that. I dunno the style just didn't work for me at all. 
Hey, Have You Got A Cig, The Time, The News, My Face? (Barry Hannah): 7/10. This was pretty good. I enjoyed it, but not a lot, and nothing really stood out as particularly interesting (the title is somewhat unique I guess, but I didn't really catch how it applied to the story).
Caroline's Wedding (Edwidge Danticat): 0/10. Didn't finish it. It was just so dull and plain it didn't feel worth my time. 

I guess I'm happy I can move on from this. Overall it really wasn't a collection I liked much at all.