Rating: 3/5

*3.5 stars
“...and went up the lane toward the road, glancing around at Charles as though his back got more vulnerable with each step” (54).
“...and piling up the rocks they dulled their scythes on…” (83).
“He slipped out of half sleep into skin cold and oily from sleeping in his clothes” (91).
“The footsteps came into the room, bringing along an aroma of the outdoor cold on foreign clothes…”(93).
“He kept frowning, with eyes that touched the cold in Martin’s bones…” (93).
“...but now I’m so fatigued and shaky I’m bumping into my own shadow” (111).
“...in that blizzard of silence that comes when one of us is being deceitful” (113).
“This observance of affection, without receiving any, seemed to me the burden of being an older brother, and still does” (145).
“He had a painful-looking crease in his neck from his clerical collar…” (148).
“...the prolonged, windswept, blizzard-flayed winters…” (150).
“They nodded, eager to get their hands behind the desk and onto the dovelike, cooing, feathery or whatever surface he was talking about” (152).
“...and sunlight coming through a window in the far wall fell over them with a warmth sunlight had nowhere else” (158).
“...while the dented and damaged dress form, made of varnished strips of paper lifting up in crisp translucent curves, stood above them, unmoving and silent, like a second, more permissive mother” (159).
“He stepped into the living room and strode around, displacing the air as none of them did…” (164).
“They’ll be necessary to each other the rest of their lives; the one with his passionate need to know and be told what everything means, the other already serene in his knowledge, and living among elements that are invisible and his own” (171).
“Her ‘Jiiiimmy’ has been more than once the swimming bees of serenity’s death” (186).
“Do the dead forget we sometimes didn’t love them, as we forget?” (200).
“...Orville Sanderson, a bachelor who drank too much, had a foul tongue, and hated children--perhaps from all those years of hearing recess--Catholic ones especially…”(210-211).
“...and his intestines sway to one side as if to make room for greater fear” (242).
“...then Jay might blame himself for it with his flaying conscience” (301).
“All his life he’s felt as tangled and stranded within himself as nails in a keg. The only way to freedom was to pull a tangle loose and hammer them into a new day” (322).
“But Charles could see creases of inconsistency appear around her mouth, and then she turned to the stove, blushing, and tried to conceal a smile” (336).
“...the unruffled blue of the lake reflecting the cloudless sky, as though blue were being distilled over the surface in front of them” (338).
“...Charles saw himself walking the boundaries of the farm, and felt the constriction and smallness of all he did and the meagerness of its effect within his known world” (338).
“...a pine-studded peninsula where long-legged birds ran on a ray of sand like a wisp of sun…” (344).
“...and he glanced up at Father from penitentially lowered lids” (345).
“...held in the jaws of clothespins” (382).
“Candles were so much more appropriate for a celebration than electric lights. With candles burning, there was room for darkness, for the emotions that arose only in subdued light…” (418-419).
“Their pasts were nearly identical and, as long as they didn’t limit them with language, remained intact, and many of the years of them were interwound with the influence of their grandfather” (450).
“Tim’s eyebrows raised so much he should have been wide-eyed, but his lids stayed at half-mast” (461).
“They all leaned back from the conversation, as if a corpus of their creation was burning on the table, or about to be burned” (462).
“Why did he associate coffee with funerals and death, and why drink so much of it if he did? Tasting the edge? Pouring through to his past?” (463).
*And here we have the title explanation. I can identify with this. (467).
“...and stared at him with deep-set eyes, which made him recognize again how brown eyes were better for expressing emotional concern than gray or green or blue…” (481).
“...her hands so restless the silver bracelets on her wrists clashed and sent riverlike reflections over the ceiling” (486).
“Although he was charitable, if someone came to the house and talked a great deal of nonsense, he’d be prompted to say when they left, ‘An empty wagon makes the most noise’” (490).
“The javelin was outlawed while Tom was in school, because a bystander has been pierced by one. He lived” (499).
“...but at night, yes, I crawl out of that facade, turn clinically bonkers, and strive to write” (543).
“He’d read at a slow rate, pursing his lips around the words as though forming sculptures of theri sounds…” (546).
“The wind’s going everywhere except where it’s been” (555).
“The poet sighed again--two lengthy blue plumes…”(560).
“His voice went up the scale and out of reach and cracked with a sound so shrill and unmusical it was as if the sky overarching this part of the city had been shattered and the snowflakes were broken fragments of it and floating down around them both” (561).
“...a blessing, in or out of disguise” (607).