Rating: 3/5

I don't know to what extent this book will aid me in formulating boundaries going forward, but I do know that I felt very rewarded by how much this book re-contextualizes and provides a very sturdy narrative to what had been going on with me. It's provided me with two of the most foolproof post-mortem relationship analyses I've yet to have stumbled upon. So, for that, I am grateful. It gave me a lot of thinking about, provided me an opportunity to put a name to - and admit - this issue I have had with boundaries and attaching myself to people with intense boundary issues. I had learned this lesson the hard way after 2018, but it was all part of an emotionally confusing and label-less morass that pivoted towards feeling like I was protecting myself, ensuring no one stepped across a "hard limit," etc. I had a triumphant moment of axing a friend for stepping on something that is a dealbreaker for me.

Despite those triumphs, this book puts a sound structure and taxonomy to those experiences that I needed in order to help me expedite how to process those sentiments. I do like that the book has a decidedly late-80s early-90s feminist kick to it a la Susan Brownmiller: many examples are given pertaining to the damage that men and men alone do. This book does somewhat subtly target women who struggle with body image, women who were sexually abused by fathers and stepfathers, women who were sexually manipulated or raped by men, etc. As a gay man who has borne more than his fair share of cruelty by other oppressed men who ought to know better, this gave me the book more ample opportunities to identify my own history through its examples. 

Obviously, the book is dated, and it is written as if it could be copy for a longer radio advertisement for Boundaries, Inc., but as always, these can be forgiven due to the brevity, necessity, and clarity of the content. There is one completely and utterly tone-deaf paragraph in the book pertaining to AIDS - worthy of changing my values on the book in its entirety - that was utterly confounding, but besides that, this is a good start of a book that leaves one with a lot to work with but also wanting a bit more.