Rating: 4/5

I got hold of this book from digging up from the shelves in one of the remaining thrift stores in Manhattan, and was generally surprised in discovering this. I immediately got interested in reading it, primarily because I got a strong sense it could provide me with a useful set of techniques in connecting with whatever it is that concerns myself almost daily. In the process of doing my book readings, I know that whatever findings I could have will help eventually in my efforts to relate more effectively with others whom I get to provide help one way or another, directly and indirectly. Of course, the process of helping starts with myself. I'm delighted to discover that the book is really a very easy read. But it took me awhile to finish it because I would go about testing its instructions whenever I would get the chance amidst doing and completing all my activities. 

Focusing as discussed in this book is different from the usual kind of focusing I mean especially when I deal with my numerous activities. Yes, I could use some more focusing, given the many activities I'm into daily - from business, relating, thinking, exercising, eating, traveling, etc.

But in this book, focusing refers to techniques being used in relating and connecting more solidly with my body, which I've not really paid much attention into in a such manner because of so many concerns I'm into at any point in time (that continues all day long, unless when I'm finally sleeping). It's different from meditation techniques. And it's fascinating to know that it's been based on researches done in the academic world (i.e., in the early 1960s by Professor Eugene Gendlin at the University of Chicago). 

The hallmark is defined by having to grapple in giving the most precise name on what your specific felt sense could be that a part of your body is trying to tell you (but you've been not paying attention to because of many reasons, including being so logical and/or linear in your general approaches in life). It really feels great getting connected with these felt senses, as my body generally knows what it needs and wants. The process helps clarifies life directions. I have to learn to be much better in relating and attuning myself with any of these felt senses. It's similar to being a very good friend who's very compassionate with whatever concerns you have, being not judgmental towards you, and would make you feel you won't be left alone or ignored anymore. 

I have to stop here now in telling more details about the book. Read more about the techniques by actually getting hold of this book, reading and practicing what it shares. It's really a wonderful and practically useful introductory book that Ann Weiser Cornell, Ph.D. has expertly written about from her focusing experiences.