Rating: 5/5

Carla Lemarchant asks Poirot to solve a mystery from the past. Sixteen years ago, her mother supposedly killed her father. Carla shows Poirot the letter her mother wrote before her death and tells Poirot she’s convinced of her mother’s innocence, and she wants him to prove it. Poirot knows this could be an impossible assignment, but he sees it as a personal challenge for his little grey cells.

The first scene of this story does a great job of grabbing you from the start. The way Carla studies Poirot, to see how good he really is. But also the way Poirot immediately sees through her and calls her out on it. She says she’s looking for the best of the best. And Poirot is so vain that he doesn’t even blink when he assures her that there’s no one better than him. The thing is, Poirot’s vanity is something that, when written differently, could make him an unlikeable character. But Agatha Christie wrote it in such a clever way that his vanity does the opposite, it makes Poirot a more charming and likeable character. Because his vanity doesn’t come from insecurity. He doesn’t feel the need to prove that he is better than everyone else, because in his mind that’s already an established fact. His vanity comes from an unwavering confidence in his own abilities. Poirot is also most definitely a flawed character, which humanizes him and this can also be used for comic relief. The latter was very much on display in a previous book of the series as Poirot was scared because he had to go to the dentist.

Considering the murder happened sixteen years in the past, you could think this story lacks something. All the evidence is gone. The accuracy of people’s memories can no longer be trusted. The supposed killer is no longer alive. There’s no intensity in the concept because there are no high stakes or consequences. And yet, Agatha Christie executes this story so brilliantly that the absence of these elements doesn’t matter at all.

This is Agatha Christie at the top of her game. And a very cool display of Poirot’s strengths as a character and as a sleuth.