Rating: 5/5

Faust does not part with its secrets easily - it is, by far, the most challenging book I've read in a very long time. To engage with Faust is to engage with Goethe throughout the entirety of his life - written over 60 years, it is a book that winds its way through life as few ever do, but as a result is a pastiche of greatest hits, fragmentary verses and half-finished thoughts. Some sections (I'm looking at you, Classical Walpurgis Night), remain completely inscrutable.

But I understand now why it is what it is - the most essential work of fiction in the German canon, Goethe's magnum opus, comprised of some of the most evocative scenes I've ever come across: both Part I and Part II reach a climax that is unparalleled...the translation scene...Gretchen in the Cathedral, in the Jail...Faust materializing a city from the sea...a monumental work.

In writing Faust, Goethe had two aims - first, as a young man, to create a powerful refutation of the Enlightenment academy and an ode to the raw feelings of Romanticism, and second, as an old man, to synthesize this microcosmic story with a macrocosmic synthesis to rival the great poets of antiquity: Homer, Virgil, Dante and Milton. In the first section, Faust is a man; in the second, he represents the personification of a rapidly industrializing society. Especially inspired by both Shakespeare and Milton, Faust emulates complex rhythms and rhymes that are nearly impossible to repeat in translated verse while his Gretchen, the Eternal Feminine, rhymes with Dante's Beatrice. 

But the book is not English, Italian, or Greek - it is German, and proudly so, weaving in elements of secret pagan ritual and witchcraft underneath the surface of an overtly Christian society. Rather than celebrating thinking, the quantitative approach of the Enlightenment, or feeling, the qualitative anti-thesis of the Romantics, Goethe identified doing - deeds, acts, ambitions - as his highest ideal. And in its dramatic final act, he sanctifies terrible means in the service of that ideal - Faust, in any classical sense a villain, is redeemed by the purity of his motives, by the very striving that produced so much destruction.

Sound familiar?

Faust set in motion, along with Hegel - Goethe's contemporary and correspondent - an intellectual tradition that produced both the pugilistic nationalism which catalyzes both world wars and the utopian socialism which created modern communism. Both Nazi and Soviet ideologies celebrated Goethe and incorporated Faustian symbols - the elevation of ends over means; the tendency to justify the cracking eggs needed to make an omelette. "

Reading Faust, you feel in possession of a dangerous book. A book which, taken seriously, could justify atrocity. And you know, as a student of history, that it did so. And yet like Mephistopheles himself, Goethe tempts us to abandon our study and embrace true love (Gretchen), true feeling (Walpurgis Night), true action (The Palace), and true creation (The City). Will we answer his call?

We sit in a post-War Western culture that celebrates the Enlightenment and rejects the Romantics; our machine gods will think, but never feel. In our world, as in Goethe's, the Academy and its abstract logical palaces of the mind has become the gateway for ambitious youth and the arbiter of our most important ethical debates. The experts and their various Homunculi live real lives, but are never alive. We face a crisis of meaning surrounded by extraordinary wealth. And a crisis of purpose amongst the most elite members of our world, who have sublimated the development of their own desires and instead picked arbitrary ladders, and have reached the top - no more fulfilled than when they started the climd: play stupid games, win stupid prizes.

The digital world, the world of virtual places and infinite space, is not real. Intellectual achievements, the manipulation of words and symbols, will never satisfy the most elemental human desires. Financial achievements, the paper money which abnegates us of our responsibility to do the deed, to unearth the true gold, cannot substitute for the truly creative acts. Can the creative act - the striving - satisfy us? Or are we lost at sea.

The world is stuck. We need a new synthesis. We need a new movement. We need a new intellectual North Star.

Faust, in this moment, is a worthy challenge. As a text, it advocates an ideal. And as a creative act by Goethe, much of it written at the end of a long, celebrated career, it advocates the curation and creation of that ideal. His medium may not be our medium. But his task is our task, as scary as that may be. 

For anyone interested in tackling this book, this is how I approached it - again, I will emphasize that without this extensive study, :

1. Paired an audiobook with a Kindle copy (Kline Translation) - let yourself listen and read at the same time: https://www.audible.com/pd/Faust-Part...
2. Listened through a different translations, without text, just audio (Williams Translation) - this one is slightly more dramatized, especially for Part II: https://www.audible.com/pd/Faust-Audi...
3. Then read the Norton criticism (physical copy) and cross-referenced it with key sections to re-highlight key highlights physically: https://www.amazon.com/Faust-Tragedy-...
4. I then tackled Conversations with Goethe as an overview of the writing process and Goethe's life itself: https://www.amazon.com/Conversations-...

I've then been re-reading my critical highlights to stay connected with the story.

As always, I also credit the conversation with my Book Club with unlocking a yet deeper understanding - Jesus the Carpenter as a builder and doer, Mephistopheles as a consummate nihilist, social media as Faust's study (just put down the phone), salvation through love not works, American culture as Goethe's synthesis of the sterile Enlightenment Brits and the feeling Romantic Germans.

Finally, as it relates to modern AI, the following quotes felt meaningful:
- Understanding, and true clarity, Express themselves without art’s rule! And if you mean what you say, Why hunt for words, anyway?
- With words fine arguments can be weighted, With words whole Systems can be created, With words, the mind does its conceiving, No word suffers a jot from thieving.
- Men always believe, when they hear words, There must be thought behind them, too.
- Who writes anything good these days, Or reads with moderate intelligence!
- The stuff of human life’s compounded, And distilled in a flask, well-founded,
- In the end we’re dependent on The creatures we’ve created.
- Great aims seem foolish at the outset: But we’ll laugh at Chance itself, yet, And brains, with thoughts to celebrate, In the future, a Thinker will create.
- From here I hope for general acclamation, Prompting is the devil’s true oration.