Rating: 3/5

Deciding to start my day by opening this almost immediately upon waking up, before my first cup of tea, was definitely an interesting decision.

The forward from PJF makes a lot of sense, having read Image of the Beast and A Feast Unknown. This book sort of makes those appear somewhat tame in comparison. This is truly unhinged and unfettered. There's a graphic sex scene with ass to mouth in the first dozen pages. That's it starting off light. Any thorough content warning would likely add double digits to the page count.

It's rare that something on the page makes me uncomfortable in the way some of the scenes enacted here did. At times Platt is downright off-putting and I started to question why I was reading this at all. That said, there is a delightful glee under the page of an author who knows exactly how repulsive they're being and knows just as well that you're still reading it right along with him. At no point in the tawdry cavalcade of sex, rape, incest, bestiality, paedophilia, scatology, torture, murder, and mutilation did it feel as though it was meant to be tantalising or arousing. It's presented with the air of a child who's learned some new words at school today and is relishing the chance to explete at the first chance - which is not meant as a slight. There's a sense of Platt as a modern de Sade, giggling mischievously as he clacks the most horrific things he can think of into his typewriter, eager to see a world of hypocrisy recoil from this satirical filth.

The Gas is a scathing throwback of the curtain we keep draped over polite society. As the maniacal Edmond tries to convince Vincent, we all have base urges, desires, impulses of our animal brains that we keep in check throughout the day, from the moment we're old enough to be taught that hitting is wrong and you shouldn't snatch. Some may act as though part of a more enlightened breed, those dedicated to the faith or to scholarly pursuits - Platt says fuck that here's what you really are beneath that veneer of self-aggrandisement and piety: we're animals a few chemical imbalances and hormonal irregularities from tearing each other apart and fucking in the mud like wild dogs.

However I can't bring myself to give it a higher star rating because it is also truly revolting at times. The 'big bang' scene could have been the inspiration for the infamous The Aristocrats joke. 

Also I want to acknowledge that this cover art goes hard as fuck. Absolutely insane. I want it on a poster.