Rating: 5/5

PUPPIES! 

  

JUST PUPPIES!

  

okay, this title is a lie, because sometimes it is also puppies and hammocks:

  

or puppies and baskets:

  

but i suppose i'll allow it, because the title PUPPIES AND ALSO BUNCHES OF OTHER THINGS is just not as catchy. 

this is the only book i have ever read in which there are SO MANY pictures of puppies peeing:

  

  

  

  

i like puppies. but i have a line in the sand. most puppies are cutest between, say, eight weeks and eight months. after that, you pretty much want to toss 'em out and start over again.

  

i KEEED! but i've said this publicly before, so i figured i would mention it again, so greg didn't come out and say it for me. i'm like the spokesperson for whatever the dog-version of nambla is. 

like, this one? needs more time to bake - it doesn't even have EYES!

  

while these are just about to peak:

  

this little guy never had a chance:

  

i wouldn't toss this one, because he's clearly got his priorities straight:

  

but this one - this one has clearly been brainwashed by the bird mafia:

  

into the chipper with you, doggie! 

there are some excellent naughty dogs in this book:

  

  

  

and one that's just getting started:

  

there are also many sad photos depicting the last moments in a number of feline lives:

  

  

  

  

RIP, kitties!

there's also a fish in peril, but fish are quite tasty and not even a little bit fuzzy, so i didn't feel much like weeping:

  

this one looks more like guilt over a stolen romantic moment than a meal-in-progress, so i think it's safe. plus, doggits?? would be an adorable new species:

  

this dog is clearly being hypnotized, so that froggie is safe as houses:

  

you do not want to eeeeeaaat meeee...

  

(but you see what i mean about how misleading this title is?? "just" puppies, my foot...)

and for greg, who claims that he recognizes this expression as something i do. ME??? roll my EYES??? never!!

  

  

and for greg's mom, because it's been a while:

  

AND THAT IS A REVIEW OF PUPPIES!

come to my blog!