It’s taken me well over a year to get through the saga of Young Werther’s love for his Lotte even though it’s quite a short little book. I plead mitigating circumstances. I had no thought of reading this novel until I came across a pair of characters called Goethe and Lotte in Christine Brooke-Rose’s Textermination, and checked out their real-life story. The trail led to a fictional version of the same story in Young Werther. I was tempted to try reading Young Werther in his own language so I bought a parallel text and set about deciphering Die Leiden while meanwhile continuing to decipher Brooke-Rose’s prose. I love challenges. 

Die Leiden is written mostly in the form of letters from Werther to his friend Wilhelm. The first lines of the first letter had a lovely rhythm and were full of short and recognisable words:
Wie froh bin ich, daß ich weg bin! Bester Freund, was ist das Herz des Menchen! (How glad I am to have come away! Best of friends, what the human heart is like!)

I read a bit further, pleased with my efforts, until I came to a line about two sisters, one of whom Werther seemed to be involved with. Or was he dallying with both at the same time, the young scamp? I was confused and switched to the English version but somehow lost interest in Werther when he then began to dally with Lotte, who was already engaged, excusing himself thus: I treat my heart like a sick child; I let it have anything it wants. 

Fast forward to last week and a decision to clear my currently-reading shelf with no further Zaudern und Zagen (shilly-shallying). I picked up Werther again and this time his sorrows somehow suited me better. Before I knew it, I was leafing through his letters, immer geschwinder (faster and faster) like water thundering through a gigantic gorge into a deep dark lake. Werther, like many young people of the 1770s, was awed by the spectacle of nature and continually pondering man’s punyness in relation to the landscape. 

 
Engraving of a cataract by Goethe

When Werther is not being awed by glowing sunsets or wild storms, he is tormented by thoughts of his beloved Lotte who meantime has married her fiancé. When the blue frock-coat and matching yellow waistcoat he was wearing the day he met her are finally worn out, he has another made exactly the same so that he can continue to be reminded of her. He treasures ribbons and trinkets that she has touched and dreams of her constantly. 
Such are the sorrows of young Werther. Goethe sees no alternative for Werther but to kill him off in the end, modelling his suicide on that of an aquaintance of his youth. 

Goethe had a real Lotte in his life, Charlotte Buff, whom he met in 1772 when he was twenty-three and she was nineteen and already engaged. Apparently her fiancé offered to stand down in favour of Goethe, but G remembered he had an urgent journey to make just about then and Lotte eventually married her fiancé. Goethe may have shared some of Werther’s sorrows over Lotte but he quickly found comfort in the arms of another (married) lady; there were a series of married ladies in his life, it seems. 
Lotte went in search of him in Weimar many years later when they were both in their sixties and she a widow. Her journey was not a success. Thomas Mann wrote about this period in their lives in his novel Lotte in Weimar: The Beloved Returns. It might well have been called The Sorrows of Lotte.