Rating: 4/5

“This is life. Let me tell you something: life is going to be hard. It’s going to be hard every day. That’s what life is. You get up, it’s another day, you don’t know what is going to land in your lap, but you can bet your last nickel that some of it is going to be difficult. Just get used to it”

The World of Normal Boys was such a great and hard ride. It started slow and it didn’t set a good pace until chapter 5 but once it got there it didn’t disappoint.

Soehnlein makes you feel as if you were Robin, as if you were 13 years old again, as if you were falling for the first time, as if you were upsetting your parents and friends for the first time. And he does it so well that you literally suffer with every new chapter, you literally get the butterflies and you desperately don’t want this incredible journey to end but when it does you are slapped with reality. It’s just there, in your face. And you just love it and think that’s the best way to end a book. It was actually not an ending, it was a beginning. A powerful one.

I bet being 13 back in 1978 wasn’t easy, especially if you fancied arts and you were attracted to boys. But owing it? I guess that’s the most difficult part of it all. Kudos to the author for creating an apparently weak and vulnerable boy who’s stronger than what you think. Robin’s evolution and growth is so well done that you go from hating him (at times) to loving him to then feeling damn proud of him.

Let’s not forget the amazing secondary characters. Robin’s mom (Kats favourite) was at times infuriating and I spent a good part of the book hating her but you know what they say about judging others before you walk on their shoes? 

This book has a lesson for everyone, it doesn’t matter if you are a teen yourself or a parent, there is a lesson in this book that you need to learn. It will make you think and it will make you reconsider a lot of things. 

BR with Kat, thanks for the ride! &lt;3

   Life is mostly bad because people are capable of terrible things