Rating: 5/5

What draws two people together? What makes them decide to be a couple? How do they overcome the barriers that divide them; the things they hate about each other in spite of their love?

"Comfort &amp; Joy" is a beautiful book in the tradition of Eudora Welty--a very southern story that nonetheless resonates across any such regional distinction. It is about two men, but the pieces of their stories could be assigned to any two people's lives. Grimsley fills the book with seemingly inconsequential minutia that offer the reader a crystalline vision of two people's lives as they slowly begin to merge. It demonstrates in a mature, adult way both the accidental quality of love, and its ability to endure and thrive in spite of the essential brokenness of human nature.

The set-pieces that make up the structure of the narrative, which spans the time around two consecutive Christmases, are all familiar from both film and literature. Clashing backgrounds, difficult families, traumatic childhoods--and yet in "Comfort &amp; Joy" they are specific to these men and their lives. Grimsley has tailored broad realities to the uniqueness of Ford and Dan. He manages to dance around the edges of stereotype (rich Savannah, poor backwoods North Carolina) without ever falling into caricature. These people feel real, like people I've met.

All of the ingredients of a typical "gay romance" are here--and yet not one of them is used in a romantic way. There is nothing easy here, and yet the discomfort is never so great as to ruin the pleasure of reading Grimsley's prose and following these two complex, sympathetic men on their journey.

As usual, I ignored the rave reviews and read the negative ones. Everyone's entitled to his opinion, but the negative reviews were idiotic. As someone who's shared a life with another man for 37 years, there is a goldmine of truth here, unmitigated by violins and unbridled declarations of love. If you know nothing about gay people, this would be a good place to start. If you are part of a couple of any sort, you'll find echoes of your own life in these pages, even if the basics are unfamiliar.