Rating: 5/5

Starting Parade's End is a little like reading an ethnologist's report from some alien world. All the characters, in this vision of pre-1914 England, seem to be moved by obscure impulses and constraints; and in many ways they appear more unfamiliar than, let's say, characters of a century earlier as described by someone like Austen. The feeling passes, but it is no accident: part of Ford's argument is that the First World War spelled the end not just for a generation of young men but for a whole mindset, a way of behaving and of being English, that is now utterly gone and cannot be recovered. 

Standing as the prime example is the central figure of Christopher Tietjens, who like everyone here is a strikingly original creation. A brilliant man working at an uninspiring government post, he is tired of the modern world and feels more at home in the eighteenth century, which he thinks of as ‘the only century that never went mad’ (‘Until the French Revolution; and that was either not mad or not eighteenth-century’). Christopher is no dashing hero – he is physically awkward and not very attractive, compared somewhere in book four to ‘a lumbering character from Molière’, ‘elaborate of phrase and character, but protuberant in odd places.’

He is, though, staunchly English in the most traditional sense – ‘the last Tory’, a man who considers it ‘the highest achievement and justification of English manners’ when he notices two people ‘talking with polite animation and listening with minute attention’. Reserve and privacy are his watchwords: ‘He would, literally, rather be dead than an open book.’

This odd, not especially likeable character forms the apex of an emotional triangle which, on one level, Parade's End explores across four books. The other two players are his wife Sylvia – she is unremittingly awful to him, but he considers it ungentlemanly for a man to divorce a woman – and the smart, spiky suffragette Valentine Wannop, who appears to be Christopher's opposite in every way and yet is clearly as perfect for him as he is for her.

Sylvia Tietjens is one of the most breathtakingly horrible fictional characters I can remember encountering. She is mesmerisingly unpleasant. At first I worried that she would be one of those sexily fatal femmes that male authors love to come up with; but she is a lot more than that to me. Ford gives us long exposure to her thought processes and background, so that her vindictiveness becomes gradually textured with psychological nuance. She is described once or twice as ‘Sadic’, but there is also something masochistic going on, as is made clear with a couple of hints to trauma in her past – take for instance this passage of extraordinary insight where she remembers an abusive encounter with one of her lovers:

The miserable memory would come, ghost-like, at any time, anywhere. She would see Drake's face, dark against the white things; she would feel the thin night-gown ripping off her shoulder; but most of all she would seem, in darkness that excluded the light of any room in which she might be, to be transfused by the mental agony that there she had felt: the longing for the brute who had mangled her, the dreadful pain of the mind. The odd thing was that the sight of Drake himself, whom she had seen several times since the outbreak of the war, left her completely without emotion. She had no aversion, but no longing for him…. She had, nevertheless, longing, but she knew it was longing merely to experience again that dreadful feeling. And not with Drake….

With great skill, Ford allows us to understand that Sylvia's many affairs – what are referred to wonderfully as her ‘high-handed divagations from fidelity’ – are just one facet of a tendency morbidly to sexualise everything. This comes back (as all things do in Parade's End) to the war, which for Sylvia is – an astonishing word to use – an ‘agapemone’, or zone of free-love. Indeed it's not just about sex, it's about sexual abuse: ‘You went to war when you desired to rape innumerable women. It was what war was for….’ And later:

These horrors, these infinities of pain, this atrocious condition of the world had been brought about in order that men should indulge themselves in orgies of promiscuity. That in the end was at the bottom of male honour, of male virtue, observance of treaties, upholding of the flag…. An immense warlock's carnival of appetites, lusts, ebrieties….

What a statement! And what a difference, here as everywhere, with Valentine Wannop, for whom the war is primarily a ‘mental torture’—

Immense miles and miles of anguish in darkened minds.

I fell in love with Valentine, and I found the shy, constrained romance between her and Christopher extremely moving. The section where they ride together through the moors, and become lost in fog, all while conducting a long, flirtatious game of one-upmanship about Latin poetry, is one of the best things I've read in years. Valentine is ‘the best Latinist in England’ (we learn much later), and Christopher feels that special pleasure which very intelligent people feel when they are in conversation with someone who is in a position to correct them.

‘It's alto, not caelo…“Uvidus ex alto desilientis….” How could Ovid have written ex caelo? The “c” after the “x” sets your teeth on edge.’

Christopher is deeply charmed – as is she by his general sense of bluff, rough gruffliness and his inability to do anything but what is right, no matter how much personal pain this may cause him. Or indeed her. The two of them know they cannot – should not, by all-important convention – be together, and so their courtship, such as it is, is confused, restrained, clipped, polite; and the more passionate for it.

It passed without any mention of the word ‘love’; it passed in impulses; warmths; rigors of the skin. Yet with every word they had said to each other they had confessed their love […].

When Christopher finally decides that the war has done away with the conventions he was used to, and that therefore he will damn well allow himself to have an affair if it will make him and Valentine happy, there is something both moving and hilarious in the blunt way he propositions her before returning to the Front, never previously having exchanged a single word of affection: ‘Will you be my mistress to-night? I am going out to-morrow at 8.30 from Waterloo.’ Overall, Ford's treatment of sexual desire and sexual jealousy is extraordinary – no wonder Julian Barnes, in the introduction to the Penguin edition, floats the idea that he's the English Flaubert (although this is a slightly weird comparison). Sylvia may hate Christopher but she also loves him, of course – some of her conflicted reflections on the relationship are exquisite:

When he had said: ‘I'd have liked you to have said it,’ using the past, he had said his valedictory […] her agony had been, half of it, because one day he would say farewell to her, like that, with the inflexion of a verb. As, just occasionally, using the word ‘we’ – and perhaps without intention – he had let her know that he loved her.

As should be clear from the quotations, the writing is superb throughout – but also dense, and often quite challenging. Deep psychological insight is funnelled into long, complex internal monologues, which in some cases (especially, I thought, in the last book) bear comparison with those of Molly Bloom or of Beckett's narrators. The result is deliberately confusing, with a throwaway comment in one book not explained until three hundred pages and two books later; or contradicted by another character's recollection of the same incident, so that you're never sure whose ‘version’ of the truth, if any, is the right one.

Language itself (and here again Ford seems part of the modernist project) is unstable and often breaks down. ‘What is language for? What the hell is language for?’ one character demands. ‘We go round and round.’ The ellipsis gradually becomes the primary punctuation mark, and the prose becomes increasingly aposiopetic – as can be seen even in the titles of two of the four books, Some Do Not… and A Man Could Stand Up—. At the same time, Ford can also write with eye-catching economy. When one character hears something nearby, Ford writes, magisterially:

Noises existed.

Structurally, too, the work shows great craftsmanship. All in all it covers a fairly wide timeframe, from 1911 to the mid 1920s; but only a few tiny moments are illuminated, like shafts of light in a vast tunnel. Book two covers less than forty-eight hours, and book three might be even shorter – the majority of it happens during a single evening. The overall effect, then, is stroboscopic, a series of sudden flashes separated by years, with much remaining dark to us as readers, disclosed only confusedly, through memories.

Book four, I should point out, is not universally liked. Graham Greene famously cut it out of his copy and referred to the work as a trilogy, and Virginia Woolf hated it. I have to admit I can't see why it provokes such strong feelings; it takes an oblique approach to the central characters, sure, but that's not unexpected – and it contains some of the best and funniest prose of the series. I also think the four-act structure makes sense – one of the recurring terms of Parade's End is ‘parallelogram’, for whatever reason, and I think the fourth book is needed to complete the parallelogram of novels. They make up a thick, wonderful, multitudinous work – a powerful character study, an analysis of sexuality, a contextualisation of the war, and a truly great romance…all of which leaves you feeling, at the end, that this alien world is your own world after all, that you are as alien as any of them, and that they are as richly human as you.