Rating: 4/5

This 2002 book was the last of Gould's ten books of science essays. He died from cancer at the age of sixty, just as this book was published. For twenty-five years he published a monthly column "Natural History" magazine. He would gather up and polish the columns for his essay collections. At the same time, he was a serious scientist who was one of the world's leading evolutionary biologists. 

He is the best popular science writer that I have ever read. His approach was to avoid jargon and technical language but, at the same time, deal clearly with complex and sophisticated matters. As he says in his preface, " at least I have never been lazy, and have never betrayed your trust by cutting corners or relying on superficial secondary sources."

Gould cherished the intellectual honesty that is at the middle of the scientific method. He loved to study great scientist, including his idol Charles Darwin, when they went wrong. He repeatedly pointed out that errors were part of science and that the correction of errors is what scientist did. That is the way science moved forward. 

He would focus on small matters to tease out large points. He explains that scientific books in the 1600s would list names in indexes alphabetically by the first name. The reason was that classical sources usually had only one name, Aristotle, Plato, Pliny, or were known by their first name, Alexander the Great, or Pliny the Younger. 

This became a tradition and resulted, by the 1700s with indexes listing a page of "John"s followed by the last name they were known by. He uses this as an example of how, even in science, many times things are done mindlessly merely because we have always done it that way, even when the conditions that lead to it, no longer exist. 

This is not the Gould collection to start with. Early in the series Gould was actively involved in ongoing developments in evolutionary studies. Many of his essays back then dealt with the implications and correctness of new arguments. He also enjoyed explaining particular examples of evolutionary development and using it as an example to discuss broader issues in the theory. 

There is very little of that type of issues in this collection. He spends more time of antiquarian issues. He enjoys trying to understand the thought processes of writers hundreds of years ago. He frequently shows why what seems to us to be odd and bizarre ideas, made sense at the time. His point is that we should have humility and skepticism about our current ideas. 

I enjoy the historical essays, but I miss the cutting-edge science essays. He also includes several editorial pieces about the efforts to take the teaching of evolution out of schools. 

My favorite of his collections is "The Flamingo's Smile", but they are all fascinating and thought provoking. He is fun to read. He gets excited about a clever idea, and he takes pride in being able to explain a nuanced idea clearly. Gould's passion about the importance of an open mind and intellectual honesty is exhilarating. There are very few voices with this message around at this point.