Rating: 5/5

Read this long ago in the late 60's and early 70's along with several "pop" anthro books by Ardrey, Morris, Lorenz and others. The reason I became an Anthro major at the University of Colorado(Boulder). This book's about the emerging understanding connections in human behavior between programmed behavior(instincts) and learning/experience. As Mr. Spock might say... "Fascinating!" I found this on the free rack at the Brunswick(Curtis) Public Library. Nostalgia made me pick it up and take it home.

I see that Goodreads has switched me to the new book page design. Don't need it... don't like it... don't want it... PHOOEY!

Anyway, I'm still enjoying the author's take on what makes the natural world tick. Even if it pissed of M. F. Ashley Montagu!

I'm finally back to reading this book after taking a break to read a crappy Tana French mystery for book group. The current scene is Madagascar and its lemurs, a sort of proto-monkey group of species that exist only that island. There are some other itty-bitty proto-primates leading very low-profile live in other tropics and trying not to go extinct. Think marmosets... The lemurs of Madagascar may not be doing so well since this book was written. Habitat destruction is a problem. Thanks mankind!

Getting near then end of this inter-library loan book, which is good because it's due back tomorrow. It's tonight or never. I can't decide whether I read it back in the 70's or not. I was certainly AWARE of it... Meanwhile, the author is focusing near the end of things on the nature-nurture debate and takes pains to settle the hash of folks like M. F. Ashley Montagu, who claimed that there is no instinctive basis for aggression/enmity. Ardrey says that recent(at the time) animal studies(ethology) seem to show that clearly is not the case. I'm with Ardrey...

Finished(just in time) last night with this excellent book. The only drawback for me were the at times fusty mid-2oth c. somewhat academic prose. My aging brain was challenged to follow along with understanding. Wiki says that this book and others of it's time(1960's and 70's) and topic(human/animal behavior) drew many students into an interest in Anthropology and Ethology. That was certainly the case with me. 

- Something near the end made me think of "Blood Meridian"'s little blurb at the beginning... the scalping thing.

- 4.75* rounds up to 5*.