Rating: 4/5

My eyes did not leave the Captain, who, with his hand stretched out to sea, was watching with a glowing eye the glorious wreck. Perhaps I was never to know who he was, from whence he came, or where he was going to, but I saw the man move, and apart from the savant. It was no common misanthropy which had shut Captain Nemo and his companions within the Nautilus, but a hatred, either monstrous or sublime, which time could never weaken. Did this hatred still seek for vengeance? The future would soon teach me that.Between 1866 and 1868, ships across the world keep encountering what appears to be a giant, dangerous narwhal. The U.S. government sends the USS Abraham Lincoln to hunt down the creature. Joining the expedition is the book’s narrator, Pierre Aronnax, a French professor of marine biology. But when the ship finally find the ‘monster,’ Aronnax, his manservant Conseil, and a hot-tempered harpooner named Ned Land, are thrown overboard during the attack. The three men are ultimately rescued by the ‘monster,’ which is revealed to actually be a giant steel submarine. Choosing life over death, the three reluctantly agree to remain on the Nautilus, and under the control of its Captain, the mysterious, magnetic Nemo.

Thus begins this classic adventure tale by Jules Verne, one of the foundational writers of science fiction. Unlike H.G. Wells, who wrote science fiction that was far more philosophical than technical, this book reads like an old-timey Michael Crichton novel. There’s a great deal of science—actual and predictive—within this story. It foretells modern submarines, scuba gear, and greater use of electric power. It also predicts future trends from trying to save the whales and ecological protectionism to opposing sport fishing and living as a pescatarian.

Captain Nemo is, of course, the most interesting character here even though, like Captain Ahab in  Moby Dick, we only see him sporadically and only through the eyes of the narrator. He’s on a self-imposed exile from the rest of humanity, and he occasionally carries out acts of vengeance against certain ships that cross his path. But he’s not a one-dimensional villain, as he also sends money to help oppressed people around the world, and acts to help individual people that he meets.

The journey of Nautilus spans the globe, exploring underwater forests, coral graveyards, the South Pole, and even Atlantis. The story paints a picture of a beautiful undersea world, with creatures real and imagined, including the famous giant squid. It’s not always scientifically or historically accurate, but it is consistently interesting.