Rating: 5/5

Everyone says this book is FUNNY????

Knowing the Australian sense of humour I can believe it.

(I recall the young Aussie nurse in new Guinea being herded off with her co-workers to be shot, saying in that laconic offhanded manner:
"Trust my Luck to be finished off by a bloody Jap!!")

But at the moment I am having a National Self-Crisis,
one of those "Oh-ye-of-little-faith" moments,
and wonder how Russell is going to DO it!!!
Why??? 
I know only too too well the horrific treatment the Japanese
dished out in Asia to the civilian populations 
and to captive soldiers and nurses - Australian, Indian, New Zealand, British and American.
It is NOT Politically Correct to talk about it now. 
HOWEVER the problem is that the Japanese have NEVER apologised, 
even admitted to their gruesome savagery the massacres, death marches, etc
unlike the Germans who have had a National and Public struggle to face up 
to the Holocaust. 
Unfortunately the civilian population has been kept in ignorance 
of the ferocity with which their soldiers behaved in Asia.
The so-called Rape of Nanking when an entire Chinese city 
was practically slaughtered has still not been acknowledged
by any Japanese government.
Only recently elderly Dutch ,English, Korean ,Chinese women were 
presenting their cases of being forcibly used as comfort women
in army brothels for Japanese soldiers in World War Two.
They were young women then.
A Dutch girl who complained to the Japanese doctor at her brothel was 
immediately raped by him. She was one of the speakers at the hearing
and I have read her autobiography.
Come on Russell, make me laugh!
Or at least grin.

PS. (added 1/1/2015) I fail to mention TV documentaries of recent years, interviews with elderly Japanese, those involved in rape, murder and massacre at infamous sites as young soldiers, telling how their superiors brutalised and threatened them into barbaric acts
...their guilt and relief at at last speaking out.
Their sadness.Tremendously moving.
Governments might deny. 
The man and woman in the street is another matter entirely.
Russell Braddon loathed the Japanese well after the war.
It was in writing his biographies of Nancy Wake and Cheshire V.C that he found himself able to forgive.

SEE my review of "Proud Australian Boy" by Nigel Starck, a very recent biography of Russell, and an excellent one!!