Rating: 3/5

“‘Haven’t you got a heart?’ […] ‘No, sir […] The doctor says it’s indigestion, sir.’”

Read one, and you’ve read them all. This maxim is true not only of Jane Austen’s books but also, to a lesser degree, admittedly, of those written by Edgar Wallace. Unlike Austen, however, Wallace’s one-trick pony carries me quite successfully and smoothly through those hours when I feel too tired to read something truly substantial but not tired enough to switch on the TV.

In The Dark Eyes of London (1924) we have another young, dapper and rather unconventional Scotland Yard detective, Larry Holt, who not only manages to solve a mysterious case of atrocious murder but also falls in love with his secretary Diana Ward. As usual, Wallace is more indebted to achieving sensational effects – with the help of a ruthless, rather dim-witted criminal factotum, secret rooms and tenuous, but entertaining plot twists – than to spinning a plausible yarn. In this novel, his villains are not only unscrupulous to the direst degree but also mentally unbalanced, which is a bit over the top even for Wallace’s standards. All in all, though, it makes extremely enjoyable reading. Wallace is always good at creating interesting and independent female characters, no helpless damsels in distress – but in The Dark Eyes of London he goes even farther in that it is basically Diana, and not so much Larry, who solves much of the mystery and brings the evil-doers (and boy, are they evil!) to justice. He also pokes fun at the hero’s notion of its not being cricket to marry a woman who is richer than he – when he has Diana say: ”’[…] You can’t marry a rich woman because you’re afraid she’ll want to keep you. You would much rather marry a poor woman – and keep her, if she would submit to that indignity.’” Maybe, after all, Wallace is much more honest in his satire of stereotypical gender roles than Jane Austen ever was.

Apart from suspense and a captivating love story, the book also has a very memorable side character – the rather wry valet Sunny, who says that in the case of his master’s demise he hopes he’ll manage to unsubscribe from the paper in time.