Rating: 2/5

In the wake of 9/11, espionage thrillers became the new detective noir, the former expressing our collective anxiety for the War on Terror just as the latter had for World War II. The archetypal gumshoe of hardboiled fiction -- the best man in his world, per Raymond Chandler in The Simple Art of Murder, and a good enough man for any world -- was supplanted by the skillful superspy, from 24's Jack Bauer to (Matt Damon's) Jason Bourne to (Daniel Craig's) James Bond (and even, to a degree, Christian Bale's Batman, reinterpreted by Christopher J. Nolan in The Dark Knight Trilogy: The Complete Screenplays with Storyboards as a surveillance-state soldier): the reluctant killing machine either trained by, working for, or in the crosshairs of the deep state, who would love nothing more than to be left alone peacefully if only there weren't always some new enemy combatant to whack-a-mole! Pierce Brosnan's 007 wasn't tortured enough -- nor suitably amenable to torture enhanced interrogation -- to cut it in a post-9/11 world of global terror; we needed gritty, not pretty.
​​
Holden Carver, (anti)hero of Sleeper (2003–2005) is cut strictly from the Daniel Craig cloth, a government operative coercively sent to work undercover in a criminal syndicate; however... alien technology has left Holden impervious to pain (much like Victor "Renard" Zokas in The World is Not Enough) -- a little somethin' special to differentiate him from Bourne and Bond and Bauer. And had Brubaker limited the "magic" to that one buy-in -- Holden's extraterrestrial analgesia -- I might've had an easier time getting behind his premise, but Sleeper is part of a larger superhero "universe," so naturally superpowers abound (meaning recurring instances of Double Mumbo Jumbo), and this narrative is beholden to a grander comic-book continuity that I simply don't much care about.​
​
For me, Sleeper was competently entertaining but ultimately standard-issue stuff, trafficking in tropes I've seen in a zillion other spy thrillers and superhero stories. The most intriguing plot development actually turned out to be the revelation of the antagonist's origin and motive in the final chapter of this volume ("The Road to Hell"): a "tactically augmented organism" (hence his name, TAO), he was made a member of the WildC.A.T.s before reaching the conclusion that being a costumed superhero "was a life of empty gestures. Always fighting the symptom and not the cause." (Per Wikipedia, TAO is evidently a villain created by Alan Moore for Wildcats, which makes oddly perfect sense given his deconstructionist proclivities.) After that, TAO went on to become the de rigueur supervillain bent on world domination -- blah, blah, blah -- and that's where this experiment in superhero noir lost me.

Sleeper is not a bad book, by any means, I'm just not the audience for it. Furthermore, my hope for 2020 is that we can (finally) move beyond the heretofore uninterrogated mythologies of the twentieth century -- the superheroes, the "tough guys," the deep-state conspiracies -- and start telling new kinds of stories, to help establish a new ethos of empathetic, cooperative coexistence for a correspondingly new millennium. Let the superspy at long last do what he claims to want so badly: go quietly into that good night.