Rating: 3/5

My review is very mixed. I am both happy I "listened" to it and regretting that I did. Mostly I am sad: to quote LeChiffre in the movie Casino Royale: "what a waste" 

The writing is good, although perhaps a little more exhaustive than I expected. I wish there had been more commentary on Ian like the final few paragraphs, and less detail about his childhood and adolescence. I admit I read it because I wanted to better understand the author that wrote the James Bond books which I thoroughly enjoy. I got that. But much of it was related to Ian's lifestyle and actions with less insight into why he wrote what he wrote. Part of this is related to the fact that James Bond was very much the end of his life. While his life certainly was part of the James Bond he created, Ian Fleming was much more than the Intelligence Officer turned novelist. Unfortunately, he is not a very sympathetic character, and I wish I knew less about him as a person.

This no holds barred unapologetic detailing of his life shows that compared to Ian Fleming, James Bond is almost a puritan. Ian Fleming leads a life that makes even the most tawdry or bawdy version of James Bond to look tame. In other words, Ian Fleming wasted his experience and life by drinking, smoking, sleeping with the wife of a friend who he later married then cheated on again. He was little of a father to his son who died his own sad end not that long after Ian died. His death at 56 was a sad result of his own lifestyle: he literally smoke and drank himself to death. Sad, and wish it had been otherwise.

While the biography does show where some of the Bond stories orginate from, I wish I had more of this and less detail about living ones life in a disappointing manner. As I alluded to above, I almost wish I hadn't read the book. One thing the book does well is illuminate the factors leading to the decline of England and the UK in the world in the 20th Century. These factors are intertwined with the lifestyle of Ian Fleming, his mother, and his associates. No illusions that my own nation is somehow heading in a different direction: just not at far down the path.

I still really like the James Bond Books, and found the story of their creationg, publication, conversion to movies, and the entire debacle with the Thunderball story interesting. At the end of the day however, the biography in Wikipedia would have been enough detail and insight into Ian fleming for me .