Rating: 4/5

Here are my highlights:

A cultivator’s degree of conformity to the nature of the universe is reflected in the amount of his or her virtue. If a person is to cultivate to high levels, he or she needs to break free from the pursuit of wants, something inherent in human beings. In other words, you should let go of all attachments and take lightly all matters of fame and gain. 

If you can let go of the things you consider important and part with the things you think you can’t part with, that is loss in the truest sense. Offering help and displays of charity are only a part of loss. 

An everyday person wants to enjoy prestige, prosperity, a better standard of living, more comfort, and more money. Those are everyday people’s goals. As practitioners, we are different, for what we gain is gong, not those things. We need to care less about personal gain and take it lightly, but we aren’t really asked to lose any material things; we cultivate in society and need to live as everyday people do. The key is for you to break your attachments—you aren’t really required to lose anything. 

You enter the world having nothing, and you take away nothing when you leave—even your bones will be burned to ashes. It doesn’t matter if you have tons of money or are a dignitary—nothing can be taken with you when you leave. Yet since gong grows on the body of your main consciousness, it can be taken forth. What I am saying is that gong is hard to get. It is so precious and so hard to acquire that it can’t be exchanged for any amount of money. Once your gong reaches an advanced level, if one day you decided not to cultivate anymore, then as long as you didn’t do anything bad, your gong could be converted into any material thing you wanted—you would be able to have them all. But you would no longer have the things that cultivators have. You would instead have only the things that a person can gain in this world. 
 

In our discipline we work on practicing Zhen, Shan, and Ren all together. “Zhen” is about telling the truth, doing things truly, returning to one’s original, true self, and ultimately becoming a true being. “Shan” is about developing great compassion, doing good things, and saving people. We emphasize Ren in particular. Only with Ren can a person cultivate into somebody with great virtue. Ren is a powerful thing, and it surpasses Zhen and Shan. Throughout the entire cultivation process you are asked to exercise self-restraint, to mind your character, and to not take rash actions. It’s not easy to exercise self-restraint (ren) when you run into problems. 

There is a saying in China: “Cede a little ground, and you will discover a boundless sea and sky.” Give some ground when you are in a challenging situation, and you will find it a whole different scenario. 

Attachments stem from human desires. The characteristics of attachments are that their targets or goals are obviously limited, fairly clear and particular, and often the person might be unaware of the attachments. An everyday person has many attachments. He might use any means necessary in order to pursue something and get it. A cultivator’s attachments manifest differently, such as in his pursuing a particular ability, his indulging a certain vision, his obsessing over a certain phenomenon, and so on. No matter what you, a practitioner, pursue, it is not right—pursuit has to be abandoned. The Daoist system teaches nothingness, while the Buddhist system teaches emptiness and how to enter the gate of emptiness. We ultimately want to achieve the state of nothingness and emptiness, and be rid of every attachment. Anything that you can’t let go must be let go. 

(1) The Origin of Karma Karma is a type of black matter that is the opposite of virtue. In Buddhism it is called sinful karma, while here we call it karma. So, we call doing bad things “producing karma.” Karma is produced by a person’s doing wrong in this life or in past lives. For instance, killing, taking advantage of others, infringing upon others’ interests, gossiping about someone behind his or her back, being unfriendly to someone, and so on can all create karma. In addition, some karma is passed on from ancestors, family and relatives, or close friends. When somebody throws punches at someone else, he also throws his white matter over to the other person, and the vacated area in his body is then filled with the black matter. Killing is the worst evildoing—it is wrong and will generate heavy karma. Karma is the primary factor that causes sickness in people. Of course, it doesn’t always manifest in the form of sickness—it can also manifest as running into problems and the like. All of these things are karma at work.

 

As you are a practitioner, you should be clear as to why that kind of incident takes place: It’s because that thing came—you are being asked to pay for your karma. To resolve such incidents, you have to keep yourself under control during those moments and mind your character. 

When your compassionate nature emerges, you will do things with much kindness (shan). From your inner heart to your outer appearance, everyone will be able to see that you are really kind. At that point no one will mistreat you anymore. If someone were to treat you unfairly then, your heart of great compassion would take effect and you wouldn’t do the same to him in return. That is a type of power, a power that makes you different from everyday people. 

In order to improve your realm of mind, you have to be tested by tribulations in this world. If your character has really improved and become solid, karma will be eliminated during the process, the tribulation will pass, and your gong will develop. Don’t be discouraged if during tests of character you fail to guard your character and you did something wrong. Take the initiative to find what you learned from that lesson, to discover where you fell short, and to put effort into cultivating Zhen, Shan, Ren. 

Small tests lead to small improvements; big tests lead to big improvements. I hope that every practitioner is ready to endure great hardship, and will have the determination and willpower to embrace the hardship. You won’t acquire real gong without expending effort. No principle exists that will let you gain gong comfortably without any hardship or effort. You will never 38 cultivate to become an enlightened being if your character doesn’t become fundamentally better and you still harbor personal attachments! 

Lust is another kind of demon. A beautiful woman or handsome man might appear in front of a practitioner during his or her meditation or dreams. That person will entice you and seduce you by making stimulating gestures that trigger your lust for an attractive mate. If you can’t overcome it the first time, it will gradually escalate and continue to seduce you until you abandon the idea of cultivating to a high level. It’s a hard test to pass, and a fair number of practitioners have failed because of it. I hope you are mentally prepared for it. If someone doesn’t guard his or her character well enough and fails the first time, he or she should truly learn a lesson from it. It will come again and interfere with you many times until you can truly guard your character and completely break that attachment. This is a big hurdle that you must overcome, or you won’t be able to attain the Dao and cultivate to success. 

Because you live amid this society, things such as emotions and desires, self-interest, personal things, and even the affairs of your friends and family come to occupy your mind too much and assume a high priority. How could you have a state of mental calm when meditating? Even if you intentionally suppress them they will still surface on their own. Buddhism’s cultivation teaches “precept, concentration, wisdom.”

Practitioners have to attain a clear and still mind, discard their preoccupation with self-interest, and let go of the greed in their hearts. 

The things that are encouraged on television, in the movies, and in literature teach you to become a stronger and more practical person among everyday people. But if you can’t transcend these things you will be far from a cultivator’s character and state of mind, and you will acquire less gong. 

Falun Gong cultivators can not only quickly develop their gong strength and supernatural abilities, but also acquire an incomparably powerful Law Wheel in a very short period of time. Once formed, the Law Wheel perpetually rotates automatically in a practitioner’s lower abdomen. It continuously collects energy from the universe and transforms it into gong in the cultivator’s innate body. The goal called “the Law refines the practitioner” is thus achieved. Falun Gong has five sets of movements. They are the following exercises: Buddha Stretching a Thousand Arms, Falun Standing Stance, Penetrating the Cosmic Extremes, Falun Cosmic Orbit, and Strengthening Supernatural Powers. 

You should take things that are related to self-interest lightly, and keep a clear and clean mind at all times. If you could prepare and know in advance when a tribulation was coming and what it would be, then it wouldn’t be a tribulation. Tribulations mostly come suddenly and out of nowhere. If you can be firm and resolute you will definitely make it through, and that is how your character is evaluated. Once your attachments are gone, your character is improved, you no longer fight and contend with others, your animosity and grudges are forgotten, and your thinking is cleaned up, then your ability to enter into deep stillness will be better.

Student: Will people get possessed if they practice out in the park? Teacher: I’ve said it many times: We cultivate an upright way, and one upright mind will subdue a hundred evil things! In upright cultivation the mind is pure, so nothing can get on you. The Law Wheel is something incredible. Not only do evil things have no way to attach to you, they have fear when near you. If you don’t believe it you can practice elsewhere. They all fear you. If I told you how many possessing spirits there are out there you’d all be scared—many people are possessed. Those people keep practicing after they’ve reached their goal of healing diseases and improving health, so what do they hope to gain? So they bring on these problems when their thoughts aren’t right. But that said, we shouldn’t blame them, as they don’t know the principles. One of the goals I had in going public was to help correct these wrong things. 

Student: What is a person with “great spiritual aptitude”? Teacher: The determining factors are as follows: the person has a good underlying base, outstanding awakening capacity, tremendous fortitude, few attachments, and takes worldly things lightly. That’s having great spiritual aptitude. A person with great spiritual aptitude is hard to find. 

If you want to reach a higher level, you must abandon your bad thoughts and clean out your filthy things in order to assimilate to the requirements of the standard at that level. Only by doing so can you ascend.

Upon xinxing improvement, the matter in your body is guaranteed to transform. What kind of changes will take place? You will give up those bad things that you are attached to. For example, if a bottle filled with dirty things is sealed tightly and 33 lecture one Why Doesn’t Your Gong Increase with Your Practice? thrown into water, it will sink all the way to the bottom. You pour out some of its dirty contents. The more you empty the bottle, the higher it will float in the water. If it is emptied entirely, it will float completely to the top. In the course of our cultivation, only when the various bad things that exist on the human body are removed can you move up. 

Aren’t you attached to a pursuit if you think too much about it? 

We talk about “loss.” When you gain, you must lose. You will encounter some tribulations when you genuinely want to cultivate. When they manifest in your life, you might experience a little bodily suffering or feel uncomfortable here or there—but it’s not sickness. The hardships can also manifest in society, in the family, or in the workplace— anything is possible. Discord will suddenly arise over personal gain or emotional tensions. The goal is to enable you to improve your xinxing. These things usually happen suddenly and seem extremely intense. If you encounter something that is very tricky, embarrassing for you, that makes you lose face, or puts you in an awkward position, how are you going to handle it at that point? If you stay calm and unruffled—if you’re able to do that—your xinxing will be improved through the tribulation and your gong will develop proportionately. If you can achieve a little, you will gain a little. However much you expend is however much you gain. Typically, when we are in the middle of a tribulation we might not be able to realize this, yet we have to try. We shouldn’t regard ourselves as everyday people. We should hold ourselves to higher standards when discord arises. Our xinxing will be tempered among everyday people since we cultivate amidst them. We are bound to make some mistakes and to learn something from these. It’s impossible for your gong to develop while you are comfortable and not encountering any problems. 

As a matter of fact, everything has degenerated precisely because the human heart has degenerated. As I said a moment ago, this Earth was created and set up for people. So if people degenerate, everything else will degenerate accordingly.
Because every one of you is cultivating, you must be compassionate and shouldn’t limit yourselves to, “If you treat me well, I will be compassionate toward you; if you don’t, I won’t be compassionate toward you.” Would that be any different from what’s found among everyday people, namely, “If you treat me well, I will treat you well.” There would be no difference. You are cultivators, so you have to go beyond the realm of everyday people and transcend that realm. With everyday people being that low and you being that high, should you regard those who are so much lower than you as enemies? When you regard that person as your enemy, haven’t you sunken that low yourself—to where ordinary people are?