Rating: 2/5

"Introduction (The Mad God)", Robert M. Price - Quite good, better than I expected.

"Azathoth", David E. Schultz (as by Edward Pickman Derby) - An ok poem.

"Azathoth in Arkham" and "The Revenge of Azathoth", Peter Cannon - A two-part story that is very interesting. Thumbs up.

"The Pit of the Shoggoths", Stephen M. Rainey - A good story, professionally written.

"The Madness out of Time", Lin Carter - Terrible. I should note that R. M. Price himself says this story is bad on the introduction: "...slapdash. The narrative was too evidently mere connective tissue to hold together the Mythos data." etc.

"Hydra", Henry Kuttner - Weak. Even R. M. Price says so in the introduction.

"The Insects from Shaggai", Ramsey Campbell - Weak. A story that can´t hold the reader.

"The Sect of the Idiot", Thomas Ligotti - Another weak story. It´s not a coincidence that the last three stories I wrote about here deals with dreams/hallucinations. Characters are badly developed, the stories are haphazardly written, and the dreams are not used as something great, but as an easy way to talk about anything without caring.

"The Throne of Achamoth", Richard L. Tierney and Robert M. Price - Another story with dreams... not bad, but also lacking something.

"The Last Night of Earth", Gary Myers - An ok short story, reminded me a bit of Clark Ashton Smith.

"The Daemon-Sultan", Donald R. Burleson - A "The quest of Iranon"-like story. Fine.

"The Space of Madness", Stephen Studach - A sci-fi story that is ok to weak.

"The Nameless Tower", John Glasby - There are so many cliches in this story that I almost believe it was written by a computer.

"The Plague Jar", Allen Mackey - A little better, but still... the ending is not that amazing. They´re too similar, those authors.

"The Old Ones’ Promise of Eternal Life", Robert M. Price - This one is just plain silly. Price "explaining" some verses from the Necronomicon.

Conclusion: Some very few good or ok stories - no more than 6. Most of them are uninspired by pedestrian authors. But, ok, it´s not that terrible.