Rating: 5/5

If you Google Image search and type in "stiff upper lip gif", the first two images you will find are:

This is Benedict Cumberbatch playing Parade's End's main character, Christopher Tietjens. 

Anyway, full confession, I did not read the last volume, called the Last Post, of this tetralogy. I had every intention of reading it, but: 

a) By the time I came to the ending of A Man Could Stand Up and it was a really beautiful ending I just couldn't bear to see the story go on. I just wanted Tietjens to live in fiction's happily ever after heaven in my imagination. Ford has made him suffer for me for some 700 pages by that point. I honestly couldn't bear to see Sylvia take one more stab at him.

and

b) There is some justification in omitting the Last Post in that, as Graham Greene wrote: it's "an afterthought which he (Ford) had not intended to write and later regretted having written." (I don't know if this is true or not, but certainly the ending of a Man Could Stand Up gave me every kind of closure I needed to feel that I have read a complete story.)

As to the three volumes I did read, this was an excellent novel. The modernist style in which it is written at times obfuscates clarity, but for the most part it rendered a heavy subject matter relatively easy to read. But YMMV of course. In this particular case I think it helped Ford express the clash and horror of the change that the First World War thrust onto a society which was already ending anyway (as his main character, Tietjens, is fully aware of). 

Tietjens is, mentally speaking, an 18th century gentleman, with stubborn ways which he sticks to, which further his absolute ruin at the hands of those who have already moved on. The brilliance of this lies in the nuanced observation of what being the "Last Tory" (as Tietjens is repeatedly described) actually means in this new world - you'd assume that this would mean a backward idea of shooting poaching peasants in the face and subjugating women around you, but that's not in fact what Ford means with that description, and Tietjens doesn't see the world in that way either. One of my favourite parts was when Tietjens and Miss Wannop discuss the suffragette cause, which shows his view of the world better than anything.

'[...]But just get it out, will you? Say once and for all that--you know the proper, pompous manner: you are not without sympathy with our aims: but you disapprove--oh, immensely, strongly--of our methods.'

It struck Tietjens that the young woman was a good deal more interested in the cause--of votes for women--than he had given her credit for. 

'I don't. I approve entirely of your methods: but your aims are idiotic.'

'You don't know, I suppose, that Gertie Wilson, who's in bed at our house, is wanted by the police: not only for yesterday, but for putting explosives in a whole series of letter-boxes?'

'I didn't...but it was a perfectly proper thing to do. She hasn't burned any of my letters or I might be annoyed; but it wouldn't interfere with my approval.'

'Look here. Don't be one of those ignoble triflers who say the vote won't do women any good. Women have a rotten time. They do, really. If you'd seen what I've seen, I'm not talking through my hat.' Her voice became quite deep: she had tears in her eyes: 'Poor women do!' she said, 'little insignificant creatures. We've got to change the divorce laws. We've got to get better conditions. You couldn't stand it if you knew what I know.'

'I daresay I shouldn't. But I don't know, so I can!' 

She said with deep disappointment:'Oh, you are a beast! And I shall never beg your pardon for saying that. I don't believe you mean what you say, but merely to say it is heartless. [...] You don't know the case of the Pimlico army clothing factory workers or you wouldn't say the vote would be no use to women.'

'I know the case perfectly well,' Tietjens said: 'It came under my official notice, and I remember thinking that there never was a more signal instance of the uselessness of the vote to anyone.'

'We can't be thinking of the same case,' she said.

'We are,' he answered. 'The Pimlico army clothing factory is in the constituency of Westminster; the Under-Secretary for War is member for Westminster; his majority at the last election was six hundred. The clothing factory employed seven hundred men at 1s. 6d. an hour, all these men having votes in Westminster. The seven hundred men wrote to the Under-Secretary to say that if their screw wasn't raised to two bob they'd vote solid against him at the next election...'

Miss Wannop said: 'Well then!'

'So,' Tietjens said: 'The Under-Secretary had the seven hundred men at eighteenpence fired and took on seven hundred women at tenpence. What good did the vote do the seven hundred men? What good did a vote ever do anyone?'

Miss Wannop checked at that and Tietjens prevented her exposure of his fallacy by saying quickly:

'Now, if the seven hundred women, backed by all the other ill-used, sweated women of the country, had threatened the Under-Secretary, burned the pillar-boxes, and cut up all the golf greens round his country house, they'd have had their wages raised to half a crown next week. That's the only straight method. It's the feudal system at work.'

And yet, although Tietjens has a genius way of seeing the world with perfect clarity, and seeing how he himself is absolutely unfitted to prosper in it, he cannot abandon his principles and continuously makes decisions that make life more difficult for him. 

The first book, Some Do Not... is perhaps my favourite. The other two volumes were harder to read, often because the style of writing didn't help to provide clarity as to what was happening and why, when you're in the middle of a war and everything is in an uncomfortable chaos.

I can't recommend this book to everybody. I can see that for some it will be quite impossible to read. But for me, who loves history, and who is passionately interested in English society, this certainly was a must read.