Rating: 4/5

I found a copy of this in a second hand bookshop in Wellington while on holiday. I've been looking for it for at least a couple of years. 

For an ex-library book my copy is in pretty good condition. But oddly, every 10 or so pages someone has crossed out a word in pencil and written an alternative one in the margin. In many cases they changed things like 'was' to 'were' but sometimes they were more bold like swapping in a different adjective. What's bizarre about the changes is that none of them improve the writing, and in some cases they are even grammatically incorrect. This anecdote is relevant because it got me thinking about what edits I would make to Helprin's stories. Short answer is none. Helprin's writing is flawless. In fact I can see some people find the lack of flaws in both Helprin's characters and stories frustrating. Some people need their fiction to be a little bit wabi-sabi. It's true that Helprin's stories are positive and uplifting even when the topic is grim. He seems to be able to find joy in routine, process and mundanity. But that's his style, if you want something darker look elsewhere. 

I've also grown incredibly tired of reading and listening to platitudes about the Master of the Short Story George Saunders. I've even heard Saunders described as the best writer alive. Well there's barely a single Saunders story I would put ahead of Helprin's offerings. Not that writing is about competition but there's no doubt in my mind that Helprin would hit Saunders for a hundred home runs just like his protagonist in Perfection.

The quality of the stories does vary and arguably the first one in the collection Il Colore Ritrovato is the best but in general Helprin's prose is flawless. From his stories you can quite easily compile Helprin's own character. American, Jewish, veteran, who lives on the East Coast of the US, holds respect for working with ones hands, has a deep love of the ocean, the list goes on. There's a certain repetition to the sort of characters he writes such that it becomes variations on a theme. Although Helprin has a real ability to write as if he has experience in all the things his characters do. Whether he's talking about erecting a fence, catching fish, or sailing through a storm, you get the sense you're hearing from an insider.

Probably my only gripe with the collection is the name. I was alerted to the stories by a friend on here and when I saw the name The Pacific I thought it would be stories related to the ocean I have lived next to all my life.

Wrong. 

This is a distinctly American collection of writing and it's largely set on the East Coast of the US more specifically in New York. In fact this collection should definitely have been called The Atlantic. I even think the picture of the waves on my copy is a shot of the Atlantic, it doesn't look like the Pacific at all, it looks a lot like the water you see off the East Coast of America. Any expert hydrologists out there please correct me. Does it matter? No, not really but the cover oddly echoes the bait and switch of the title. How important is the title of a book? I do get a special pleasure when I find the title of a book in the body of the work, often it's at an inflection point or moment of profundity. Certain books sit in my head by title and others are categorised more by characters or plot devices, this book definitely falls in the latter category.