Rating: 2/5

I'll start with the things I liked about this book. 
1. The story was very interesting and I found Sadako and her family very fascinating and I enjoyed learning about them along with the protagonists. 
2. I found it very refreshing and surprising that the main protagonist was a man, women/teenage girls are generally the most common and most popular for horror and both the movies featured a woman so I didn't expect it to be a man in the book. 
3. I enjoyed reading about how the protagonists figured things out and I liked the way the mystery was explored.
4. I thought the story was cleverly written and it had the right amount of tension and suspense to keep me reading on.

Now for the things I wasn't so keen on. 
1. This one is more to do with myself, really, and that is that I went into this book with pretty high expectations. I had heard that it was very scary and therefore I was expecting to be scared and for it to focus on horror. This isn't the case. At least not for me. I know I'm fairly desensitised due to the amount of horror and true crime that I read and watch yet even so I didn't think that any of the book was scary. There were parts that were very creepy and eerie and, don't get me wrong, they were very good but there wasn't one part of this book that scared me to the level that I was expecting. This book read, to me, more like a murder mystery than a horror which is a genre I usually love but I went into this book looking for some good scary fun and I just didn't get it. 
2. This, I imagine, is probably mostly due to the fact that I had seen both the Japanese and the American versions of the film of this book prior to reading it but there was only one part of the book that surprised me. I could see all the other plot twists and surprises coming from a mile away. The only one that did surprise me was one that I'm sure wasn't included in either movie and, honestly, I think it was better that they left it out. It was a ridiculous plot point which served absolutely no purpose to the overall story.  I can't remember the name that was used for it but it was some kind of medical thing where women have testicles and apparently every woman that has it is for some reason beautiful. Please. This was basically then used for some weird transphobia stuff about him not being able to decide if she was technically a she then as she had balls but then he basically decided he didn't care because of how beautiful she was. The story could've done without all that.  
3. I felt like the one week time limit wasn't a believable amount of time for them to figure everything out. A lot of the time when they would find out clues or work out what something meant, it seemed like it just magically happened. Like they just managed to luckily stumble upon just the right bit of information at just the right time. It felt a bit too forced due to the really short amount of time. Also, Ryuji felt like one massive Deus Ex Machina through most of it because he would just suddenly realise something or think of something which was so far outside of the box and yet he would somehow be absolutely correct.  plus, weird ghost Ryuji helping Asakawa at the end was just a terrible plot device. I really didn't like that, it was just silly. 
4. The main two characters were horrible. There was not one likeable thing about either of them. Asakawa could've been redeemed by his love for his wife and child but he spoke to his wife, and treated her, like shit so that ruined any kind of redemption for him. Ryuji was just vile. I still don't understand why the author decided to make one of the main characters such a despicable human being.  He was a rapist! Who actually told Asakawa that he'd raped girls and continued to tell him when he'd rape someone. Asakawa questions why he's friends with him, yet continues to be friends with him. Why?! He says he's sickened by what Ryuji says he does but then he never reports him for it.  and I do not buy into that thing at the end with the whole  'he's never been with a woman.' 'oh, so maybe he just lied about raping women.' that just came across like a cheap ploy to try and redeem an unredeemable character which didn't work for me. Even if he had lied about raping those women, that doesn't make it any better. He's still sick enough to lie about doing it which to me says he'd be perfectly willing to do it. I wasn't convinced by that. It was a lame attempt to get some empathy for him before he died.  and this actually brings me onto my next point. 
5. Why is rape basically treated like it's not a big deal in this book? Seriously.  Because with regards to Ryuji, it's basically treated like it's just some odd character quirk of his like 'oh, Ryuji! What are you like?' rather than it being treated as the horrible thing it is. Then when they find out the doctor raped Sadako (which was fairly obvious from the video) they decide there's no point trying to get justice because it was such a long time ago and just leave it while basically thanking him for his time. I didn't get it.
6. The ending was incredibly anticlimactic and disappointing. It set it up well for the next book and I could see how the story could grow but for this book it was all just one big anti-climax starting with  Ryuji's incredibly disappointing death, which I was excited about because I was expecting the greatest moment with Sadako crawling out of the TV and then that didn't even happen at all. Ryuji's death was one of the most boring deaths I've ever read about and after what a dickhead he'd been through the entire book I was looking forward to him having a horrible death (I don't even care how that makes me sound). Then it basically ends with Asakawa deciding that he can screw over his wife's parents to save her.  I was just expecting a lot more from it and it failed to deliver.