Rating: 2/5

I wanted something short to read from the Library and this looked a good bet, but it wan't for me.

I find reading Collins something of a cross between and wallow and a wade, and wonder if the chances of my enjoying him would be enhanced by time travel. Perhaps Victorian readers would have been in the 'sensationalist' groove and have found these early whodunnits exciting and relatively novel. But for me, these stories were rather more a case of a writer spinning out his yarn further than it can really be borne.

The second of the two -'John Jago's Ghost' - is more spun out than the former. An English barrister, suffering form workaholic stress goes on holiday with relatives in America and narrates the events that took place there. The farmer's sons are arrested for murdering John Jago, the farm overseer. Their cousin, Naomi, living on the farm with them (loved by both the overseer and one of the sons - and by the narrator) is convinced that Ambrose, the son she loves, is innocent. Is he? Isn't he? Collins is over-reliant on stories that reveal conversations and events in the past as the tale plods long-windedly to its conclusion. 

'Who Killed Zebedee?' is more convincing - a death bed confession in which a former detective reveals the solution to an unsolved case. In this instance, the denouement after a series of investigation has revealed nothing is snappier, even though it's one of those based on evidence that the reader was not privy to - not an unusual device, but I prefer a whodunnit that offers the clues and allows readers a chance to crack it for themselves.

Nevertheless, the introduction to this edition is by Martin Jarvis who (over?)enthusiastically imagines them as film scripts offering roles to Jude Law, Kate Winslett, Tom Cruise, Gwyneth Paltrow et al. Jarvis lays emphasis on Collins' development of character and in this respect I'm on his wavelength. From that point of view, I enjoyed the stories: the two brothers, Silas and Ambrose, in 'Jago' are distinctively drawn, each consumed by loathing of Jago but each differently constituted, one surly, one affectionate, but both cowardly. Their sister, however, is much more sinister - a spinster feeling her age and eaten up by religion and powerlessness. Cousin Naomi, the young love interest, I found more enigmatic - is she playing the field, is she a minx, is she believable at face value? And in 'Zebedee', the minor character of Mr Scorrier, the knife-engraver, is a neat miniature.

So things to enjoy here, but overall I found the stories rather drawn out.