Before Village was appropriated into an idyll, it was a real place, with real people, and real jobs. This book is about such a place. It is a kind of oral history of a mid-20th Century English village, mostly in the words of people not inclined to talk. And it is splendid.

LEONARD THOMPSON, 71, Farm-worker: Our cottage was nearly empty -- except for people.

THE BRIGADIER (rtd), on the church going to pot: What you need is the padre type, somebody who will have a drink with you in the bar and who has the right to say to you, "Now look here, old boy. You've been grizzling away about your Ethel and her short-comings, but do you ever think about how she feels being left alone all the evening while you are lining them up here? I mean, fair's fair. . . ."

THE REV. GETHYN OWEN, 63, Rural Dean: Religion has a lot to do with where their families and ancestors are buried.

ROBERT PALGRAVE, 55, Bellringer and Tower Captain: The bells tolled for death when I was a boy. It was three times three for a man and three times two for a woman. People would look up and say, "Hullo, a death?" Then the years of the dead person's age would be tolled and if the bell went on speaking, "seventy-one, seventy-two . . ." people would say, "Well, they had a good innings!" But when the bell stopped at eighteen or twenty a hush would come over the fields. (I remember this well in my own village.)

DAVID COLLYER, 29, Forester and Labour Party Organizer: Although I do not like towns, I think they are necessary when one is young. A town boy can drift into an art gallery--if it is only to get warm--and then see a picture, and then begin to feel and think about art. Or he might go to a concert, just to see what it was like, or hang around a big public library. From the minute he does these things he begins to be a different person, even if he doesn't realize it. For an ordinary village boy everything to do with these things is somehow unnatural. The village people live almost entirely without culture. I was over twenty before I realized that classical music was just "music," and therefore all one had to do was listen to it. I listened and at first believed I had no right to listen. I felt affected. But when I began to enjoy it I stopped worrying. Everything I do begins with doubt and insecurity. It is as though I am using a language which I haven't a right to use.

CHRISTOPHER FALCONER, 39, Gardener: The boy under-gardeners had to help arrange the flowers in the house. These were done every day. We had to creep in early in the morning before breakfast and replace the great banks of flowers in the main rooms. Lordship and Ladyship must never hear or see you doing it; fresh flowers had to just be there, that was all there was to it. There was never a dead flower. It was as if flowers, for them, lived for ever. It was part of the magic of their lives.

FRANCIS LAMBERT, 25, Forge-worker: Young men should always look for work which interests them, no matter how long it takes them to find it. No man should go in at morning to wait for the clock at night. And people who want the money without the work spoil everything.

ERNIE BOWERS, 55, Thatcher: I get up at half past five of a morning. I work many hours. I get tired, but I will be all right, I suppose. There are all these great boys in the house--they keep you lively. But you can't get into a conversation with a young person as you could years ago. They just haven't got the interest. They don't want our kind of talk. They're all strangers--all strangers.

You don't make much money if you work with your hands. You can't make the turnover. But I have no regrets working so slowly. I began in a world without time.

MRS. SULLIVAN, 55, Headmistress: You could, if you weren't careful, become attached to the children in a school like this. Sentimental. But you don't if you're wise. They must do what they are here to do. Learn enough by eleven so that they are able to go on learning when they leave.

MICHAEL POOLE, 37, Orchard Worker ("He is simple . . ." people will say.): 

I went to work on the fruit when I was fourteen. I never minded it. I got my money and that was the main thing. I grew, my money grew. It was nice to have it.
Summer was the best. You'd get the women come and give you a look. You'd torment them and they'd torment you. There used to be a regular procession of old girls who'd bike up from Framlingham for the picking. When I was sixteen, one of these old girls came up to me in the orchard and said, "Let me see your watch."
I didn't answer.
"Aren't you going to let me see your watch then?"
I said nothing. Anyway, she could see my watch; it was lying on my waistcoat under the apple tree.
"I shall take it . . ." she says.
"Take it then."
"I reckon you want me to take it?"
"I can see you're bent on it," I said, "so you may as well."
So she took it, for devilry. It was on a chain and she hung it round her fat neck the whole live-long afternoon. I wouldn't let her see it worried me. She'd walk by and shout, "Come and get it!"
I said nothing. She brought it to me about five, before she set off home. She put it over my head like a necklace and said, "There you are, you young bugger."
I wouldn't speak to her.
The next morning, along she comes, straight to where I'm about to start. Her arms were stuck out full length and she was all smiles. She got her mouth on my face and, my God, she must have thought it was her breakfast, or something.
I pushed at her. I said, "Don't! Look out, he's coming!" --He was, too. Old Fletcher the foreman. She broke away but back she arrived later when I was lying on the scythings, eating my bait. It was long grass all around.
"Don't fret," says she.
I said nothing.
"The coast is clear," she says, and comes down on me like a ton of bricks. I couldn't see nothing but grass. There was such a rocking. I couldn't tell whether I was babe or man.
At tea-time the women went rushing home with their aprons full of apples--shrieking, you can be sure. They shruck a bit more when they saw me and a couple of them rang their bike bells. My old woman shouted, "Don't torment him! He's like his old watch--not so bad when he's wound up!" Laugh! You should have heard them!
It was my first time.
Christ, that was a summer and no mistake.

MARIAN CATER-EDWARDS, 50, Samaritan: I'm fond of the old widowed men who sit quietly in their houses. Most of them aren't so much wanting food, or whatever, as for a talk. I feel so guilty. I chat my way through a quick cup of tea and they've got a look on their dear old faces like Bessie here, just longing for you to go on and on. I skip the groaners. It really does take it out of you to be groaned and moaned at. I like the ones who say, "Well, that's life!"

TERRY LLOYD, 21, Pig-farmer: I have dinner at twelve, do all kinds of jobs until half-past four, then it's feeding again. I have tea at six and at eleven, just before I tuck in myself, I have a walk round to see if everybody is cosy. Pigs are funny animals and like a sense of being cared for.

ANTHONY SUMMER, 23, Shepherd: I castrate the male lambs, the little tups, about an hour after they have been born. They say what you've never had, you never miss. I wonder.

ROGER ADLARD, 31, Factory Farmer: Pigs are very clean animals but, like us, they are all different; some will need cleaning out after half a day and some will be neat and tidy after three days. Some pigs are always in a mess and won't care. Pigs are very interesting people and some of them can leave quite a gap when they go off to the bacon factory.

There are an awful lot of petition going about concerned with cruelty to animals. They are usually got up by people who keep pets confined in flats and I am not sure that such folk are entitled to hold these opinions.

THE POET, Himself: They say that I have opted out. That is what they say. I am out of all the great events of the day--or so they tell me. The accusers come yearly and usually in the summer, for none of these kind of people have patience with a village in winter, and they point their finger at me for having turned my back on what they call current affairs. They tell me that a poet should not avoid what is going on in the world. A poet should be with the mass of mankind, they say; a poet should carry a banner. I do not march, I do not protest, I have not the people's cause at heart--so I am guilty! I do not argue about the colour question or the religious question. I am a guilty innocent, I suppose. Can one be that?

WILLIAM RUSS, 61, Gravedigger: Bodies used to be kept in the house for twelve days. Everyone kept the body at home for as long as they could then; they didn't care to part with it, you see. Now they can't get it out quick enough. They didn't like hurrying about anything when I was young, particularly about death. They were afraid that the corpse might still be alive--that was the real reason for hanging on to it. People have a post-mortem now and it's all settled in a minute, but there's no doubt that years ago there were a rare lot of folk who got buried alive. When a sick man passed on the doctor was told, but he never came to look at the corpse. He just wrote out the death certificate. People always made a point of leaving an instruction in their wills to have a vein cut. Just to be on the safe side.

I talk too much, that is my failing. I come into contact with many people at a serious time, so I have picked up serious conversation. What most folk have once or twice in a lifetime, I have every day. I want to be cremated and my ashes thrown in the air. Straight from the flames to the winds, and let that be that.