Rating: 5/5

My Ántonia took hold of me in ways I did not anticipate and could not fully understand. It made me weep, it made me laugh, and it made me care more deeply again about people and things I haven’t thought of in years. I love this story in a way that still nearly overwhelms me with gratitude. To read this book is to fill your whole life with it, if only briefly, if only for the space of a few hundred pages. When I finished it, I felt more alive. That is no small thing.

This is my first novel by Willa Cather, which I happened upon in a dusty pile in a second-hand bookshop in Paris and decided to read on a whim. I was immediately pulled away by the quiet sureness of Cather’s voice and vision, the stunning lightness of her touch, and the beautifully evocative undertow of her language, which rings true, clear, and unsentimental. This marriage, between richness of language and a determined view of facts, created indelible images that burned in my mind’s eye as bright as gold under a lamp. In Cather’s hands, the open and windswept Nebraska plains seemed to me to be a place of more beauty and more tragedy than I could ever have imagined it to be. Cather evokes this landscape so intensely you can taste the earth and drying grass and smell the melted butter and gingerbread. Yet, the fullness of Cather’s achievement emerges most vividly in the voices she gives her characters, and her fierce commitment to render even the most minor of them whole and palpable and glorious. 

My Ántonia constellates around encounters rather than plot, capturing the lasting beauty of the quiet, private scenes of intimacy that find people at home or at work, caught in the middle of all the tiny, daily tasks required to build a decent life in an otherwise hostile environment. There is a deep sense, in this novel, of mission and pride in ordinary folks traveling from faraway places and connecting from their various (dis)locations. After all, My Ántonia is, at its heart, an immigrant story about the fraught hyphenated realities of the American milieu, and the doubts and anxieties that emerge when one wrenches one’s self away from all that is familiar and comforting and sane and seeks to recall the lost stability of homeland in the turbulent landscape of the other. It’s a story about the magic trick that is to live through that kind of displacement and estrangement, or rather, to live more thoroughly within it: the joy and beauty enlivened by shared grief and exile.

My Ántonia most resonated with me in this language: the fierce and expanded sense of among-ness, the force of proximity and what it might make possible, the call of the crossings of the diaspora. It filled up the parts of me that longed for and still believed in a world that so earnestly offered love, support, and a place to hold our shared abject terror and sorrow. At the same time, it brought home to me the pain and difficulty of memory, of trying to reproduce stories of the past in the present, to remember the people we failed or who failed us, all the intimacies and contradictions that come with the territory. 

The story of Ántonia is delivered to us second-hand, told from the perspective of Jim Burden, whose youth Ántonia marked and left a stamp on this book. Through Jim’s gaze, and then beyond it, Cather illuminates the gulf between our assumptions of how women should be defined in society and the processes by which these women understand themselves and their experiences. The novel is so deliberate in clearing intellectual and affective space for the working women of the prairie, who fight (in ways often unrecognized) to escape the limitations of their social realities and shape their own sense of self. Cather, in fact, insists on it, claiming the female characters’ incessant daily negotiations of the people around them and the spaces they inhabit as definitional for communities. The sheer vitality and energy of this portrayal is what ultimately allows Ántonia to elide Jim’s possessive gaze and undermine the inevitable limits of his interpretation.

As I said—I love this book. Yet, while there is so much more I want to celebrate in this novel, there are moments when celebrations need to give way to critical engagement. That Cather can attend so clearly and thoroughly to the capaciousness of her white characters’ lives and experiences, and yet, in the same book, render the very few Black characters in a language so insultingly insufficient, so totally devoid of imagination, is a contradiction that slashes its way through the pages of My Ántonia. This is so complete a failure that the novel, in these moments, collapses into stilted metaphors of savagery and wildness and racial oversimplifications that add up to characters whose depths are limited to the color of their skin. I’m not interested in redeeming the novel from this failure of language, therefore exonerating myself from having to contend with loving this book. I am much more interested in the limits of a racial imagination that succumbs to anxiety, timidity, and insecurity at the very site with its encounter with the “other.” Reading “classics” often comes, at least in my experience, with this strange, twisted knot of love. I would wish it away, had it not often enlivened and enriched my reading of these texts.