Rating: 5/5

Just wonderful! I wish I could meet the heroine in real life. 

I see that many readers shelved this book under mysteries. I would say if you picked this book expecting a crime/mystery genre, you would be disappointed. Yes, the heroine solves mysteries as part of her business of being a private detective. But the mysteries are very small part of the story and they are not why I loved the book. 

What really is wonderful is how these detective stories turn into little pieces full of fascinating descriptions of Botswana, insights into culture in all its myriad forms stitched together by a deceptively simplistic language into a big and colorful quilt. A quilt that represent a heartfelt love of the country. It's one of those books that you read for the journey, not the destination.
And at the heart of it all is our wonderful heroine, Mma Ramotswe, the first lady detective in Botswana.

After her beloved father death, Mma Ramotswe used her small inheritance to open a business, “the No. 1 Ladies’ Detective Agency”. It wasn’t easy at the beginning as she battles chauvinism, sometimes works for free for a good friend, and gradually develops a solid name for herself. Her native good sense leads her to creative ways of solving cases involving insurance fraud, wayward teenagers, and cheating husbands. But, as I mentioned, there is so much more to the story than just retelling the cases.

I love Mma Ramotswe. In a culture where female dependence is embedded in history, Mma acts with extraordinary strength and courage. Her determination to overcome adversities in life both personal as well as societal earned her admiration and respect from many even from some men who wanted to dismiss her in the first place. 

There was a funny scene when the heroine went to a lawyer about opening her business:
  The lawyer winced as she spoke. “It’s easy to lose money in business,” he said. “Especially when you don’t know anything about what you’re doing.” He stared at her hard. “Especially then. And anyway, can women be detectives? Do you think they can?” 

“Why not?” said Mma Ramotswe. She had heard that people did not like lawyers, and now she thought she could see why. This man was so certain of himself, so utterly convinced. What had it to do with him what she did? It was her money, her future. And how dare he say that about women, when he didn’t even know that his zip was half undone! Should she tell him?

“Women are the ones who know what’s going on,” she said quietly. “They are the ones with eyes. Have you not heard of Agatha Christie?” 

The lawyer looked taken aback. “Agatha Christie? Of course, I know her. Yes, that is true. A woman sees more than a man sees. That is well-known.” 

“So,” said Mma Ramotswe, “when people see a sign saying NO. 1 LADIES’ DETECTIVE AGENCY, what will they think? They’ll think those ladies will know what’s going on. They’re the ones.” 

The lawyer stroked his chin. “Maybe.” 

“Yes,” said Mma Ramotswe. “Maybe.” Adding, “Your zip, Rra. I think you may not have noticed …”
Although in parts the book is quite funny, on the whole I found the story moving and lyrical and full of quiet wisdom.

This was a selection for my book club. I’m very glad to discover such a wonderful gem.