Rating: 4/5

This was quite an enjoyable story. It was first published in 1998 and so I think it would be unfair to judge it against the kind of gay literature that we have today. Today there is a plethora of stories with gay main characters. We now have popular gay romance (m/m), gay mysteries, gay contemporary fiction, as well as so many urban fantasy, and paranormal series which have gay characters. The writing environment for gay literature has become highly diverse and very competitive.

Having said all that I don't think this story falls short in any way but I just think readers of mm should be aware that this is a little different. First of all this is a mystery story. The main focus is about a missing heiress and the fact that certain parties want her to be declared dead so that they can inherit her money. Mark Manning is a journalist and a lone voice in the wilderness because he believes the heiress - Helena Carter is still lives.

What follows then is a race against time as Mark seeks to discover what has happened to Helena. Along the way he meets a host of characters all with their different agendas. He also meets a man that he falls in love with and he meets plenty of cats. It is a great story, with a good pace. It does have a strong anti - religious feel to it which some times felt a bit too over emphasised.

The romance between Mark and Neil was nice. It was gentle and loving but it wasn't the 'story'. It was a minor story line but an interesting one because it showed Mark coming to terms with his own sexuality and allowing himself to fall in love with another man.

The mystery itself wasn't too hard to figure out but seeing how all the characters were woven into the story enriched the story and gave it so many interesting perspectives.

The only thing I didn't like about the story was the present tense. It felt kind of uneven in places and was a little distracting but once I got into the rhythm of the story it was ok.

This is the first book in a series and I definitely want to read more. It is set up to be an interesting series with a very interesting protagonist.