Rating: 4/5

Man Meets Dog is a non-fiction book published in 1950 where the author, Konrad Lorenz, is a real-life Dr. Dolittle. He keeps many animals including cats, dogs, monkeys, an alligator, and birds. However, the book focuses primarily on dogs and cats. 

The information is a bit dated, and the paragraphs are extremely long. The author very much likes hunting with his dogs and fording the river with them. Some of the information didn’t seem very well researched, more conjecture, particularly about the early domestication of animals.

In the last 73 years, the pet industry has changed drastically. We now live in a world of cat cafes, Cat TV, and cloning. 

History

The author postulates that cats are all somewhat wild. He has clearly near met Bill. Bill comes from a long line of indoor-only cats. If he was in the “wild”, he would not make it. When Bill sees a bird through the window, he opens his mouth, hoping that a bird will fly in.

Training

Cats mainly train me. My attempts to train them inevitably result in a fit of giggles. When Bill gets on the counters or table, I give him a stern no. Bill, of course, stares at me in wonderment that I would even question his behavior and keeps on taunting me by continuing to sit on the table. When I start to get up from the couch, Bill will run away. From time to time, Bill will also launch himself under my bed. This aggravates me, because he likes to wedge himself in with the dust bunnies, essentially becoming a cat version of Swiffer. No amount of cajoling will suffice. He knows he has the upper hand. If I just leave him, as soon as I shut my bedroom door, he pops up onto my bed and very indiscreetly belts out a loud MEOW! Then, he decides to scale the mountain of my body. Apparently, I am supposed to be oblivious to Bill’s body teetering precariously on the summit of my shoulder. As I have absolutely no desire to remove all of the forgotten sports gear and forgotten hair accessories under the bed to remove Bill, I have no choice but to show him the spray bottle. Just to be clear, I never actually spray him. All he needs to do is see the bottle, and he will bolt out from under the bed as fast as he can.

The author was saying that a dog has never protected him from an intruder. Growing up, I had a cocker spaniel, and he did save me from an intruder. One day, I was home alone when I heard a knock at the door. There was a person dressed as a repairman claiming that there were reports that the television channels were not coming in. I left the person at the front door to check the television. The “repairperson” entered my house uninvited. My dog was at the back door, barking viciously, jumping up and down as high as his little body would go, foaming at the mouth. Keeping my hand on the handle of the back door, I evenly requested that the person leave. The person made a hasty exit, and I called the police.

The author shared some very heartwarming stories: one involved his dog following him to the train and it even jumped aboard! I also loved the story about a monkey who would steal one kitten or one puppy to love and cuddle. 

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Facebook Insta