Rating: 5/5

This is the tenth and final collection of essays from Stephen Jay Gould, with most of these essays coming from his regular monthly essay in Natural History magazine. And I am quite sorry that I have read all of the collections, for that means an era has ended in my reading life. But these essays in this current volume, most having to do with some aspect of natural history and / or evolution, are very good, and in some cases, very personal; and I recommend this book without reservation.

The title of the book comes from his maternal grandfather’s English grammar book, that his grandfather began studying as soon as he got off the boat at Ellis Island; after learning some English, his grandfather wrote in the book, “I have landed, September 11, 1901.” After the introductory essay (which discusses his grandfather, and continuity), most of the rest of the essays concern Gould’s usual subject of evolution and all aspects of natural history.

The author has a certain sense of humor, revealed by the titles of his essays, which include No Science Without Fancy, No Art Without Facts: The Lepidoptery of Vladimir Nabokov, Syphilis and the Shepherd of Atlantis (on how the disease was named), What Does the Dreaded “E” Word Mean Anyway? (on the choosing of the word ‘evolution’ for Darwin’s theory), and An Evolutionary Perspective on the Concept of Native Plants. Several essays deal with continued attempts to remove the teaching of evolution from American schools, and how Gould is mystified as to how people could feel personally or spiritually threatened by the theory of evolution. (When he died, in 2002, the Creationist trend was dying, but the Intelligent Design trend was gaining steam.)

He ends this collection with four short essays, having to do with his personal response to the events of September 11, 2001, and noting how acts of kindness are what save this world from despair. And I may, at some point, have to return to the first of his books of essays from Natural History magazine (Ever Since Darwin, 1977) and begin reading them all over again.