Rating: 4/5

The Only Astrology Book You’ll Ever Need by Joanna Martine Woolfolk sets a high bar for itself. This book was initially published in the 1980s, and I was able to acquire an edition from 2001 from my local library. From what I can tell, there was another version published in 2010, but I cannot comment on the content that may have changed between editions.

Before I begin this review, I would like to reiterate that I am not a professional astrologer. While I do generally feel positively about this book, somewhat with a greater knowledge may feel differently.

This book is broken into seven different sections. The first part focuses on sun signs, with the second and third going beyond that in discussing different placements in an individual’s chart and the meanings of that. Part four provides a historical view on astrology, as well as brief explanations of ‘what is the story behind this sign’. Part five delves into different astrological ages. If you’ve been hearing a lot about The Age Of Aquarius, this is that that is about. Six provides a lexicon of terms, and part seven provides tables, so one could hypothetically draw up a chart without using Astro.com or other sites. 

I personally enjoyed this book more than the last one I read on astrology (The Astrology of You and Me). My major complaint with that text as that it focused exclusively on sun signs. While that is important information, one should consider that there are other factors in play. Woolfolk does that. She spends a good deal of time discussing different placements and how they can impact an individual. I also appreciated the information she included about the decans of signs.

In section one, she includes a section called ‘sun signs in love’. I had somewhat mixed feelings about this. For example, I may have a water sun, but I have an air venus. Some of the advice dedicated toward my sun sign is impacted by that. Simultaneously, I don’t believe that if someone read the section for my venus and used that as a map to me, it would be helpful at all. These two things interact and should be looked at together. 

Another issue with this section I had is slightly more nitpicky. Woolfolk takes a sign and says ‘the women of this sign is like this, the man is like that’. While I have surveyed different astrology groups, and I can say that people will hold different opinions depending on if they are talking about a Pisces man or woman, I don’t really feel that Woolfolk addresses that specifically. I think that is also important to note that gender is not always binary, so limiting things to man and woman is just that … limiting. Additionally, I feel Woolfolk could have used more gender neutral language in her descriptions of how one may go about wooing a sign. Not everyone reading this book is heterosexual, and I think that I would be very disappointed if that was not changed in a later edition. 

Another issue I had with this book is that Woolfolk has a section on cusps – as in, if you are born at the beginning or end of your sign, you may have traits from that other sign. This very much upset my astrologer friend, who says that cusps only exist between houses. Considering Woolfolk’s history with astrology, I wonder if this is a newer understanding. I can understand why someone might feel that they relate to another sign more than their sun, or that not everything they read about their sun sign is applicable - there is certainly a bias in how people can present information sometimes – but that is because you have a full chart. You are not solely your sun.

This was not the lightest read, which was not a problem. I appreciated that Woolfolk addressed positive and negative aspects of different signs, while still keeping an even tone. In my experience looking up information elsewhere, some individuals may chose to focus a certain aspect of a sign to the exclusion of everything else. For example, when I try to find information about my rising, a lot of the information presented to me is about sexually appealing the authors find this placement; and that doesn’t help me in the slightest. Woolfolk doesn’t do that. While I would want to get an updated version, I think this is a book that I could and would revisit in the future.