Rating: 2/5

Okay, so I admit I was a little biased picking this book up. C’mon, we’ve all seen Jaws. Going into a shark novel and pretending you have no expectations is idiotic. I anticipated buckets of blood, unrestricted tension and absolute fear. Forget the writing and the character development; today was all about my lust for gore. Now, let’s all put our hands together and thank the almighty I hadn’t expected more. Another rage relapse and I might have developed an embolism. 
 
Today we’re going to do something different, today we’re going to dissect the plot. The basic sketch of the story is enticing, although not original it is a new take on an old idea. The very thought of a new species of shark, with an intellect that matches a human is frightening. How would the world respond? That is what drew me to the book, the fascination. While the idea is good, the execution of the complete story is choppy and undeveloped. Too much in a rush, Holsclaw never truly explains the origin of the shark or their purpose. Add to that the highly unlikely, completely absurd solution to the shark’s visit. 
 
The pace in the book is swift, too swift in fact. Through the entire book you feel like your playing catch-up, the action rarely slowing down. Mr. Holsclaw, even the most numbed reader needs a pause. The atmosphere in the book is chaotic and disorienting. I’m still not sure if that result was intended or just a side effect. Being that this is Holsclaw’s first book I’m not going to judge his style of writing too harshly. Having read Laid to Rest previously, let’s just say his style has improved. Just one tiny tidbit, if I may. Mr. Holsclaw, it’s okay to say someone knocked on the door, you heard a beep or the phone rang. We really don’t need to read, “Brrrrring” every time. We get it, no need to describe each and every noise. 
 
The characters are your basic shallow, stereotypical cutouts. Not one person is authentic. The two main players, Dr. Wyatt and Dr. Paige, are more involved with each other than the sharks. Which, by the way, was completely gratuitous. The secondary characters play out there roles predictably, lacking both brains and emotion. With more one-liners than your local lounge lizard, the characters proved amusing only when they were getting eaten. Which leads me to the only plus in this book – the gore. With every turn of the page, someone is dying and they don’t go easy into that peaceful sleep. I’m talking rip, shred, and devoured; it was beautiful. 
 
My rating? I give it a 2. The next time your looking for graphic carnage and you’re willing to throw logic out the door, get this book at your local library. 

-As reviewed for Horror-Web.com