Rating: 5/5

The tenth and final collection

I was a little bit disconcerted when I saw the title of this, Stephen Jay Gould's last collection of essays. I thought: has he anticipated his own sadly premature death with the metaphoric "I Have Landed" or is this a kind of melancholy coincidence, or perhaps I am reading into the title something different from what it warrants?

As it turns out, "I Have Landed" is not a reference to the Lethe shore of the poet, but a reference to his grandfather's arrival at Ellis Island on September 11, 1901, exactly, to the day, one century before the attack on the World Trade Center in New York. It is from this coincidence that Gould embarks upon some musings that form the touchstone for this, his tenth and last collection of essays.

He is a man who will be sorely missed, a complete original, at once the very embodiment of a meticulous scientist and an establishment New York liberal. He is one of our greatest essayists, a humanist and a quintessentially rational man who has often argued in favor of the value and importance of religious thought. Born in modest circumstance, descendent of Hungarian immigrants (as was another of our most prolific writers, Isaac Asimov) he fell in love (as he recounts in these pages) with the NYC Museum of National History as a child and never lost his love for "the odd little tidbits," nor his sense of himself as a natural historian. He is a "student of snails" (p. 324), a classical nerd "shorter than average" (p. 246) who spent more time at the Hayden Planetarium and the Tyrannosaurus exhibition than he did playing his beloved baseball, a paleontologist who became not only a gifted essayist but an international celebrity.

It's a neat trick what Stephen Jay Gould has done with his life, and it is a neat trick that he "chose" (if I may) to leave this vale of tears almost immediately after finishing not just this book, but more significantly, The Structure of Evolutionary Theory, the "life work" of his "mature years, twenty years in the making and 1,500 pages in the printing." It has been noted that people typically die after a long illness not the day before Christmas or the day before their birthday or the day before the christening of their youngest grandchild, but the day after. And the very great choose to leave us only after they have finished some compelling project to which they have devoted the last years of their life. Gould remarked in the Preface on the coincidence of his finishing these twin projects together in time for publication in the "palindromic" year of 2002--(how he loves the odd fact, the detail that others might miss, and how he rejoices in sharing such "tidbits")--while recalling the earlier "conjunction" of the near simultaneous publication of his first book of collected essays, Ever Since Darwin, and his "first technical book for professional colleagues," Ontogeny and Phylogeny in 1977. I wonder if he knew that these would be the bookends of his life.

This collection is touted on the blurb as "the most personal book he has ever published"; nonetheless it is very much like the nine other collections. There is the usual intricate and sometimes whimsical analysis of a bewildering range of subjects anchored to natural history with (of course) some asides on baseball. The style has gotten a trifle more ornate, the qualifications upon qualifications a bit more belabored, the subordinated clauses in the parallel construction of his architectured sentences a bit more in number, but otherwise he is still the same man, ponderously thorough and passionately alive in argument and analysis.

Some old subjects (the limitations of reduction in the biological sciences; the misleading popularizations of evolutionary ideas; the excessive ink the dinosaurs get, the delusion of racism, etc) are returned to and reworked. There is a convincing argument in favor of Vladimir Nabokov as a scientist in addition to his work as a literary artist. There is a return to Freud and his "evolutionary fantasy." (Freud could not shake himself from a Lamarckian view). There is a look into the origin and meaning and misuse of such words as "syphilis" and "evolution," noting respectively that science has done a poor job of treating syphilis and that the meaning of "evolution" has changed. (Darwin did not use the word in the first edition of Origin of Species, although, as Gould notes, he ended the book slyly with the word "evolved.")

Less anyone think that Gould is all learning and little insight (a laughable idea considering his contributions to evolutionary theory, his punctuated equilibria and his spandrels, to name the best known) consider this salient (and to some extent, self-addressed) question from page 4: "How do scientists and other researchers blast and bumble toward their complex mixture of conclusions (great factual discoveries of enduring worth mixed with unconscious social prejudices of astonishing transparency to later generations)?" How indeed do we escape the prejudices of our times, and to what extent does this apply to Gould himself?

There are drawings and black and white prints and in all 39 chapters in this handsome book. Gould ends where he began with his grandfather Papa Joe with thoughts about New York and its people adorned with the majestic cadences of Ecclesiastes, "To everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven. A time to be born and a time to die: a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted...."

And a time to be landed. Gould, no doubt, has landed not on the Lethe shore but near the Cambrian sea where he might take a closer look at those myriad creatures to which he devoted so much of his life, and from which he learned so much that he was able to share with us.

 --Dennis Littrell, author of “Understanding Evolution and Ourselves”