Rating: 4/5

The first novel I read by Eça de Queirós was his magnificent, meandering family saga The Maias, a masterpiece that deserves to be far better known than it is (at least in the English-speaking world.) The Crime of Father Amaro is also an excellent novel, though rather different in character; its satire is more savage and relentless, and it is prepared to use blunter techniques to make its points. The two novels are similar in their impatience with the provincialism and backwardness—as the author saw it—of nineteenth-century Portugal, but The Maias takes a scalpel to the follies and vices of this culture, Father Amaro something more like a hatchet.

The hypocrisy of the clergy and their conservative lay protectors is the main target of Eça de Queiroz’s satire in Father Amaro, which is set in the cathedral town of Leiria, north of Lisbon. Eça de Queirós’s sympathies were broadly liberal; and he is unrelenting in his lampooning of the venal, unctious priests of the novel and the fanatical, ritualistic, superstitious model of Catholicism that allows them to flourish. 

Although the satire is seriously intended and sometimes bitter, Eça de Queirós has a lot of fun with it along the way. His priests make up a wonderful, Hogarthian congeries of grotesques, from the vicious, vindictive Natário, to the lecherous, self-indulgent Canon Dias, to the gourmandizing “exploding boa constrictor” José Miguéis, whose death opens up the vacancy that brings the title character, the handsome, corruptible Father Amaro, to Leiria. Amaro's former seminary professor, Dias, kindly arranges for him to lodge with a pious widow and her nubile, naïve twenty-something daughter, Amélia, with predictably disastrous results. 

If the priests of Father Amaro are a pack of scoundrels—with the honorable exception of the kindly, humane Father Ferrão, introduced in the 1880 redaction of the novel as a counterpoise—then their parishioners, for the most part, deserves everything they get. A kind of summation or mise-en-abyme is offered by one of the most exuberant passages of satire in the book, describing the secret devotional kitsch collection of a wealthy, pious widow, Dona Maria de Assunção: a nightmare of a room crammed to the gills with figurines of saints, Virgins, and Baby Jesuses, scapulars, rosaries, pierced and bleeding hearts. “She herself,” the narrative voice tells us, “tidied, dusted, and polished that holy, heavenly population, that pious arsenal, which was barely enough for the salvation of her soul and the relief of any aches and pains. Her main concern was the positioning of the different saints; she was constantly changing them around because sometimes, for example, she sensed that St Eleutherius did not like being next to St Justin, and so she would hang his picture in a spot where he was in more sympathetic company.”

Eça de Queirós reserves this type of broad satire, for the most part, for relatively minor characters in his narrative, such as Dona Maria. His main characters are drawn with more nuance. Amaro himself, in particular, is a complex and intriguing and true-to-life figure. Although we see him developing into a monster in the course of the novel, we are given enough of a sense of the social and cultural forces that have shaped him for it to be difficult to condemn him outright. The tale of lust and longing of which he is protagonist has hideous consequences; yet we are left questioning whether he, as individual, or the Catholic Church’s disaster-waiting-to-happen requirement of clerical celibacy is more to blame. 

One of the things I most admired about this novel was precisely this: Eça de Queirós’s ability to combine an absorbing, often psychologically subtle, personal narrative, with a much broader, corruscating, caricatural social satire. It is pretty much the blend that Thackeray aims at in Vanity Fair, but I’m not sure he succeeds quite so well.