Rating: 2/5

I am about to re-read Diary of a Genius again.
Is the person aged twenty the same person forty-something years later? Yes and no, I think, maybe, sort of, probably. I'll find out after reading this again.
I've had this book for over forty years. I devoured it in my youth, straight after The Secret Life of Salvador Dali. Dali's writing, I found to my surprise was far more interesting and imaginative than his painting by comparison. 
Whether Dali learnt to look at the world with his tongue planted firmly in his cheek from Marcel Duchamp is anyone's guess. 

The Appendix is an extraordinary explanation on The Art of Farting. Giving a General Definition of the Fart, Distinguishing between Farts, Different Categories of Farts, Woes and Misfortunes caused by Double-barrelled Farts, The Story of a Fart that made the Devil take to his Heels, and drove him quite mad. Some of the Effects of Farts and Silent Creepers, Their Special Usefulness. Tailors' Farts, Geographers Farts, Whores' Farts, ….and much more, including Actors' and Actresses' Farts, which are not allowed openly onstage.

I bought Diary of a Genius new. The price is still pencilled inside - $5.

Re-read Review - Summary

Five stars first reading. Two stars second reading.

Not as impressed re-reading Diary of a Genius. It certainly must have some magic going for it, as I was surprised I remember it so well. 
If this is a private diary, why does Dali repeat ad nauseam that he is a genius, to convince and reassure himself?

In my naive youth, I was only impressed with the skill and craftsmanship of highly finished academic drawing and painting, which is valuable as a motivation in mastering drawing. This is one of the reasons why I was so impressed with Dali's work. It was only as I learnt and understood more of the art of the twentieth century did I embrace and appreciate all of modern art movements and genres. But in Diary of a Genius, Dali repeatedly demeans so much of modern art. Dali is particularly disparaging of Matisse. Where is Dali's credibility after being so dismissive of so much of Modern Art. He might be reinventing art criticism in another form as The Art of Farting.