Rating: 5/5

Oh, people can be so pathetic. Yes, they can be. 
And disconnected. And lonely. 
They struggle with their feelings. And with their relationships. 
It’s really hard to like them, sometimes. They seem so alienated and powerless. And they keep making bad choices and connect with even more unlikeable characters. 
Aren’t they just so hopeless? These people don’t seem to find meaning and joy in their lives. It’s just so depressing to observe these socially inept characters. 
At the same time, it’s also incredibly fascinating. 

Like this young writer who, after having written one successful book, starts to neglect his work and his perfectly fine romantic relationship. Is he already blinded by his precarious fame?

And like that creepy, lonely middle-aged man who falls for a much younger, cute blonde girl. Such a loser! Can’t he just accept that she has not the slightest interest in him, and that in reality, she isn’t as cute as he imagines she is? 

And there’s this young woman who loses her job and becomes depressed. She really is unpleasant, even her mother always said so. And her younger, accomplished sister as well. Can’t she just be like her successful sister? 

Finally, we are offered a glimpse into teenage angst in high-school life. Oh no, not again! Why do these American teenagers all seem to have miserable lives in high school? And lots of bullies? 
I’ve always had a hard time to understand this teenage angst. I loved to go to school. I was bored during school holidays, and I missed my friends from school. 
Okay, I didn’t like everybody equally. And not everybody liked me, I guess. But unfortunately, you just can’t nudge people into liking you. That doesn’t mean you have to feel unaccepted and socially irrelevant. 
Just be yourself, and it will all turn out fine. Just never accept anyone bullying you, or any other person. Just don’t. Defend yourself and more importantly, defend others against bullies. Don’t be a bystander; don’t be afraid. Just bite this bully’s nose off (figuratively speaking, of course). And go sit next to that invisible person, and start a conversation. Usually these seemingly isolated people turn out to be really great and fun and interesting persons. They just seem to be waiting for a nice person to come along and find them. 
Just don’t expect anyone to be loyal to you. People usually aren’t very loyal; loyalty is such a rare quality in people. People always seem to be on the lookout for new connections ; they seem to be driven by this irresistible need to connect with new people, and forget about others along the way. That can be really hurtful. 
But we just go on living our imperfect lives and hurt people and by doing so, create our own loneliness. 
Even if you present your loyalty on a silver platter, people rarely accept it. They don’t want the love and attention that’s attainable. It seems that people prefer the unpredictability of imperfect relationships, because it simply is more exciting. 

Oh, good grief, such a pathetic review!