Rating: 5/5

"There is a rowdy strain in American life, living close to the surface but running very deep. Like an ape behind a mask, it can display itself suddenly with terrifying effect. It is slack-jawed, with leering eyes and loose wet lips, with heavy feet and ponderous cunning hands; now and then, when something tickles it, it guffaws, and when it is made angry it snarls; and it can be aroused much more easily than it can be quieted."

A succinct but dense history of the Union perspective of the Civil War, "This Hallowed Ground" is beautifully written narrative history by Bruce Catton, who won a Pulitzer for his book "A Stillness at Appomattox", which details the final year of the Civil War. This book, however, covers the entirety of the war, beginning with the caning of a Massachusetts senator on the Senate floor after a philippic speech damning a Senator of South Carolina over the issue of slavery, and ending with a candlelight celebration by the Army of the Potomac in Washington after the surrender of Robert E. Lee and Joe Johnston of the Confederacy, and after the assassination of Abraham Lincoln and the imprisonment of Jefferson Davis. 

All of the well-known battles are represented (both Bull Runs, Antietam, Shiloh, Hampton Roads, Gettysburg, Vicksburg, The Wilderness, Chickamauga, Petersburg, and countless other battles and skirmishes), and not a single word is wasted; Gettysburg, famous for being the major turning point of the war, is only given about 5 pages. The main focus is not on the what and the when, but the why - why were these armies here, and what were they fighting for? The brevity of the book, however, is not due to a lack of detail. A lot of detail is focused on the politics of the armies, the successes and follies, and the lives of the soldiers themselves. Primary sources are used frequently, breathing a life into the narrative. 

One of my favorite anecdotes is about the Army of the Cumberland at Missionary Ridge, who are ordered to attack the center of the Confederate line but not to ascend the ridge where the opposing army is encamped. After braving artillery and musket fire, the army reaches their destination, only to be openly mocked by the Confederates, who instruct their men to take potshots at the Union general on his horse. They miss, but the offended general tells his men that although they were given orders to stay put, he would not discipline any soldier who decided to climb up the ridge and attack the enemy. The whole army cheers and marches up the ridge while a confused and angry Ulysses S. Grant observes from afar and wonders why the hell they are disobeying his orders and marching towards oblivion. However, the Confederates are so surprised by this attack that they fall back in confusion and retreat! Then there is a soldier from Indiana who, after the Union army is finished storming up Missionary Ridge against great odds, sees a Confederate general waving his saber at him and calling for his men to attack. Seeing this, the Union soldier throws down his bayonet and charges the general with his bare hands, causing the Confederate to blink, then quickly run away. A Union general sees this, and asks the soldier why he attacked with bare hands. The Union soldier confesses he saw the man was a general, and was trying to take him alive as a prisoner. 

There are many other colorful characters in the story of the Civil War, such as the Naval officer David Farragut ("Damn the torpedoes! Full speed ahead!") who does handsprings every birthday to prove he isn't old. He was in his sixties. 

In relation to current times, the book is most relevant regarding the attitudes of both sides towards slavery. Running low on soldiers, the Union army forms "colored regiments" made of freed men and led by white men and sends them into battle, and while originally paying them less than white soldiers, eventually concede to equal pay (!). One general in the Confederacy makes the same suggestion, offering that any slave who chooses to fight should be granted freedom and his master compensated for the loss, but this is immediately shot down. No one on either side was thinking of equality of the races when considering the abolition of slavery; in fact, one popular idea at the time was to ship all freed slaves back to Africa or to other colonies after the war, and one less popular idea was to exterminate all of them so there wouldn't even need to be a discussion. Lincoln knew this, and it was agreed by his staff that equality would be the problem of future generations. Indeed.

All in all, an extremely enlightening book on the Union perspective of the Civil War. Highly recommended.