Rating: 2/5

Re-Read.
This book should have and could have been epic...and yet...it was an opera house fire. The book starts off with the introduction of Henry, Sherlock's cousin and new assistant. Henry hates Watson and discredits his tales as false and completely untrue to Sherlock's character. So that's the authors excuse for butchering the world's most famous detective. Sherlock is violent and has these weird views about females. After almost beating a man in the prologue he later decides to just shoot the guy to take him out of his misery. The duo take a case in Paris to rid the infamous Opera House of its pesky ghost; of course Sherlock doesn't think anything paranormal is afoot. Phillip, the Count, and his brother Raoul also try to employ the detective both to spy on Christine but for different reasons. Phillip wants his brother to fall out of love with her and Raoul keeps thinking she's either being unfaithful or being brainwashed and wants to save her. Sherlock keeps wandering the Opera House and observing things but never actually puts anything together. When he does finally meet the Phantom he's more awed by him than anything The ending was a bit of a cop out and utterly ridiculous cause why would Sherlock really be so invested in the Phantom's love life? 
The thin that bothered me the most was the author's indecision. He followed the events of the novel exactly, which is fine. But he played with characterization...which would also be fine...until he tried to force his newly fleshed out characters to act as they did in the novel. When you change their motivation and characteristics you must then change their actions to match. Raoul gets violent and calls Christine a whore and a harlot on many occasion...but then he is sobbing and wondering why she is pushing him away the next page. Christine had more of a backbone in this one and logic would be that she'd choose neither man at the end or the Phantom the way she was portrayed instead of sticking with Raoul who stalked her the entire novel...and hired a man to also stalk her. So this was a disappointing mess and butchering of two classics.