Rating: 4/5

Having read the Horror and the Science Fiction books in this series of short stories with a gender/gay/lesbian/bisexual bend, when Mr. Dude said he had a copy of the out-of-print fantasy volume in the series, I begged, pleaded, and nuzzled neck. The result: I got to enjoy this selection of short stories.

Not surprising to those of you who know me well, the Science Fiction selection is still my favourite, but this one certainly was more enjoyable to me than the Horror issue. Granted, I have a low gorge factor, so the horror had too much 'ick' factor when I read it. This, the fantasy series, has some solid stuff in it, and nearly no 'ick.' Ergo, enjoyable.

Frost Painting was a pretty story about transition and the fear that holds us back in what - though less enjoyable - we are used to.

Gary, in the Shadows was a sad tale and a really touching one about a man whose ghosts literally come back to haunt - and protect - him.

Prince of the Dark Green Sea was a wonderful gay re-telling of the tale of the fisherman and his wife.

Water Snakes was really touching - and reminded me quite a bit of some of Jeanette Winterson's work.

Gestures Too Late on a Gravel Road was quite haunting, and left me feeling very sad, though a little vindicated. The notion of not quite saying goodbye soon enough haunts most of us, I think.

The Fall of the Kings was the longest tale, read like a novella, and was so wonderfully dark and sensual that I think it placed second in my favourites of the book. It is also the most classically fantasy story in the book.

Cloudmaker had a unique story idea, but left me a little confused and cold.

Magicked Tricks was a fun, also sword-and-sorcery setting fantasy story, and a cute romp to boot. It's basically a murder mystery with a it of a magical twist.

The Sound of Angels was wonderful - but to my mind belonged in a science fiction collection, given the technological story linchpin - and made me wonder how wonderful or awful it would be to be neurally linked to someone while they died.

The King's Folly also left me a little cold, but really, it had a solid idea and a nice twist.

Beside the Well was a beautiful (and dark) story set in a Japanese setting that I found qutie lyrical - and reminded me a bit of the novel 'The Fox Woman' I read quite a while back.

The Home Town Boy only suffered from being too darned short, but was otherwise a neat idea.

Expression of Desire was a nice vampiric tale with an interesting take on both desire and hunger, and with a neat counterpoint of frustration and letdown.

There are Things Which are Hidden from the Eyes of the Everyday was downright erotic and read a little like an X-rated version of 'The Alchemist.'

Full Moon and Empty Arms was a soft and fluffy piece, but to be honest, wasn't all that fantastical, just a little bit spiritual.

Mahu was wonderful - an aging soldier who gets a chance to relive his youth through the magic of Hawaii, and some powerful memories of those he lost during Pearl Harbor.

The Stars are Tears was a Thieves World story, a world I've never read, and suffered a bit for my unknowing, I think. Two very hunky gladiators who are in love suffer when one is tempted by a fellow who falls from the sky (literally). An interesting tale, and it whetted my appetite for Theives World.

Desire was a nice diary-entry piece about learning who onesself is, through the use of spirits and ghosts.

Young Lady Who Loved Cattepillars was a superb and asian fantasy about a young girl who absolutely refused to conform, and the girl who might love her, with a little help from a butterfly with but one day to live on the world.

In Memory Of was a Whitewolf tale with shapeshifters, and had a nice dash of the erotic within its story. I quite admit, I enjoyed the Whitewolf world when I was younger, so this one likely titillated me a bit more than it might someone else.

In Mysterious Ways was a super (and funny) little tale from a favourite author of mine, Tanya Huff, where thief is asked to steal a minor god's relic, and is stuck between that rock and a hard place.

In the House of the Man in the Moon was my favourite of the tale, about a man who even as a child could sense spirits, and who tries to reconcile his present day aiding of the police with his youthful vengeance against a man who preyed on children like he once was. This was just the best story in the book - and I'm glad it was the last.

A common thread throughout most of the tales was one of loss - nearly every character had lost a previous lover to violence, illness, or some other unnatural death. I find it telling that in this series - written in the eighties - there's very little prose that includes a collected and stable couple. It's not surprising (and, especially given a short story collection, conflict breeds more of an interesting reading experience), but it was interesting.