Rating: 5/5

When Henri Nouwen met Adam, he met himself.

He, himself!

His OWN faults. His OWN weaknesses. His OWN craziness. Admitting these, he found his submerged and forgotten Eden.

His own complete and wounded humanity.

In many ways, it was his Final threshold. For he crossed that last threshold to his Own Release from this sorry world soon after being with Adam.

In his End was his Beginning. And what is Eternity but ever-changing, multifarious New Beginnings?

All our beginnings are an eternal taking leave of All our sad endings... And this fresh start in Nouwen’s help and work with Adam was what we so naively call his end. 

Naively, because for Henri Nouwen - finally seeing it was NOT a case of what HE could do for this hopeless case called Adam, but what ADAM could do for his own Ailing self - life was no longer a Ruin, but a process of Eternal Change in the Newness of Heaven.

And Peace had found him at last.

We would rather be ruined than changed:
We would rather die in our dread
Than climb on the Cross of the Moment
And let our Illusions die.

Yes, at that final moment of Meeting Ourselves, we only Think we are Ruined...

But we are CHANGED. And at rest, finally.

For WE were previously our own Medusa, towards whom - like Perseus - we continually held up the Shining Shield of Our Indomitably Stubborn Will - and MISSED being Transformed!

We were RUNNING from ourselves.

But that moment when we kill our own leering, grinning Minotaur in the depths of our Labyrinth - our Ego - we find True Life.

We are defenceless humanity itself. 

Nothing to be ashamed of.

Our true life is ONLY the Present Moment. The present moment of life here and now, or the Eternal Present Moment of Paradise - it makes little difference!

And so Nouwen finally found Meaning - Pure Being - in this broken, incomprehensible kid named Adam.

And so, reaching the end of his life, Nouwen discovered Total Peace and Newness of Life..

And the summit of his self-recovery -

In his Real, Original Self:

For he had finally learned to Befriend his own Brokenness.

And in doing so, had finally yielded that brokenness over to the One who had Borne Brokenness’ Unbearably Totalized Full Brunt.