Rating: 4/5

This is an incredible book. For readers pretty familiar with the Civil War, it covers little new ground. It marches briskly through the familiar. The coming of the war, Bull Run, on to Richmond, the West, Gettysburg, etc, etc, etc. If it was a military engagement in Ken Burns, it's here. There is some, though - specifically, a focus on the characters of the army, and the sentiments of the army. The Westerns were taller than their Eastern "paper collar soldier" counterparts; undisciplined, accustomed to marching, averse to drills and parade ground routine. But in their last grand review, they did General Sherman proud. He looked back - and there they were, marching in perfect parade ground drill. The proudest moment of his life, he called it. And in the end, the soldiers, much as they had resented war and army life, were sad to leave their comradeship. It had been something noble and grand, shared between them.

In this book, Catton's verbosity serves him ill. He grasps at conclusions, I found, and at poetry; his embroider was too thickly spread. I found myself rolling my eyes a little, which is unusual for this particular CW aficionado.

His descriptions are excellent. You feel you know these men - for they are men, of course. No women merit a mention. William T Sherman, US Grant, General Smith, Robert E Lee, Admiral Farragut, who liked to turn handsprings into his sixties. He tells battlefield emotion, too, none better than the battle for Missionary Peak.

It pays important attention to the West, perhaps giving it its due as the pivotal middleground of the war. It may have been Appomattox that made for the end of the war, but it took the splintering of the Western Confederacy to really change matters.

History is changing, or rather, or interpretation of it is. In this way, Catton is a little behind the times. He does less justice than he ought to Black Americans, and is particularly harsh towards the Radical Republicans, who I believe committed the crime of truly believing in Black advancement. He does not mention the ultimate crime of the CW: that the comradeship between Johnny Reb and Billy Yank in some ways condemned Black Americans to the horrors that followed the Civil War, past the end of Reconstruction and into the dark night before the Civil Rights era, into now, where we sit witnessing the murder of George Floyd. Perhaps this was not the purview of this book, which only studied the Union Side.

In all, an excellent book, perhaps a little outdated in some of its interpretations, and tending too much towards dramatic, unsubstantiated conclusions and colorful metaphor. But a great book all the same, a compact, emotionally profound story of the Union army.