Rating: 4/5

The Religious Body is the 1st book in the Inspector Sloane mystery series by Catherine Aird and what a nice surprise it was. It was originally published in 1966 and Aird went on to write 25+ books in the series. I will continue to check it out.

The story is set in the fictional county of Calleshire, England. This particular story in a convent, located next to an agricultural college. On the night before Bonfire night, a nun, Sister Anne goes missing. Nothing is suspected until the next morning after breakfast (The convent has appropriate religious terms for the various activities and times of day, so please forgive me if I don't use them as I'd have to search into the story to find them. 😎) A search is organized by Mother Superior and her body is found at the bottom of a stairway leading to the cellar.

Calling the local doctor, he finds the death suspicious and, thus, the local police Criminal Investigations Department, led by Inspector Sloane is brought in. His normal DS is not available, so he takes DS Crosby with him. And this commences an entertaining, well-written mystery that drew me in and kept my interest. Inspector Sloane is a well-written character and the whole cast of suspects and witnesses and just the story itself was excellent.

There are many suspects. Could it be someone from within the convent itself? It turns out that Sister Anne came from a very wealthy family and planned to use her share of the family money to help the convent and its activities abroad. A cousin shows up, conveniently. He plans to turn the family business public and Sister Anne may have been an obstacle to that. What about the Agricultural college next door? On bonfire night, Inspector Sloane receives a telephone call, telling him to check out the colleges bonfire? Why is the body wearing a nun's wimple and Sister Anne's glasses? And what about the grumpy handyman who works out of the basement?

It's all very fascinating. Sloane conducts a competent, wide ranging investigation... 'ably?' assisted by Crosby. Sloane's daily interactions with his boss, Superintendent Leeyes, are always entertaining. Leeyes can only think of the golf game he is missing because of the murder investigation. And his recourse to quoting from his course on Logic always add something. It's just an entertaining story, not too dark, but still a murder investigation. It is wrapped up neatly and satisfyingly. I will be reading #2, Henrietta Who? Check out this series (4.5 stars)