Rating: 3/5

T.R. Fehrenbach's "This Kind of War" is more of a "U.S. Army" history of the Korean War. It is long on tactical/operational detail, placing less stress on politics, diplomacy and grand strategy surrounding the war. 

Ferhenbach has an ax to grind, but it is strictly professional. He despairs over the state of the army at the start of the war, unprepared, under-equipped and under-trained, then analyzes and chronicles how the force hardened after being bloodied. The author accepts reality, albeit with some complaint, that political necessity forced the US to defend its interests far from home in wars that required far less than total national commitment. Then he gripes at what a poor job the "national command authority" did selling this necessity to the American people. 

Fehrenbach really takes aim at the Doolittle Commission of 1946. This body rearranged the relationship between the line soldier and his NCO and CO, basically robbing commanders of their ability to enforce discipline. The author devotes pages to this, citing it as the principle cause for the army's softening in the inter-war years. (I checked for citations about this body in three different books on US military history, finding brief citation in only one.) 

From there, the nitty-gritty of endless company and battalion fights are recited in lengthy detail. But Fehrenbach does not succumb to the dry explanations that often accompany the arrows drawn on maps, more often found in the writings of armchair generals. Leadership plays a key role in winning the hard fight. The author will stress this when units do well, but does not lay blame as hard as Halberstam did in "The Coldest War." (There were times when Halberstam was vehement about MacArthur--Fehrenbach simply notes that he made mistakes, but does not list them all.) 

There is also some generational distance that the reader may have a hard time grasping. Fehrenbach decries how permissive American society had become--in 1950!!! The young men who fought in Korea had personal experience in the Great Depression and certainly experienced rationing during WWII. Like their parents, they enjoyed some measure of peace and prosperity during the post-WWII years. Maybe permissive isn't the right word here, as we associate "permissive" with Woodstock, 1969, not Peoria, 1949. The author again stresses the necessity for a professional army that trains realistically and accepts deployment, battle and suffering without question, while acknowledging the necessity for a citizen army in a democracy that may not be well-motivated to fight a war for reasons of state ( as opposed to a total war for national survival). 

I wish I read "This Kind of War" a decade ago. Better late than never--this one stays on my shelf.