Rating: 2/5

A mostly readable account of the Albigensian Crusade and its aftermath, but brought down a good ways by a few issues.

First, the writing is very dense. I'm not sure how much of this is Oldenbourg's own doing and how much is attributable to the translator (who really likes the term "dead letter"). The text feels like it ranges back and forth across the same topics many times successively, each time only layering on a thin new patina of meaning and interpretation. It can get very tiring to read, and I reckon maybe a third of the book could be cut without losing much.

Second, as odd as it seems to say, the author is pretty heavily biased in favor of the Cathars. On the one hand, it would definitely be strange NOT to feel sympathy for these people who were persecuted, often to the death, for their (essentially harmless, to a modern observer) beliefs; however, the author goes rather farther than a historian should, I think. She portrays the Cathar perfects as superhumanly noble and wonderful people, and repeatedly emphasizes their willingness to die for their faith, while glossing over the many who turned traitor and snitched to the Inquisition, and ignoring any evidence that they were fallible humans. (The best-known individual Cathar is probably Pierre Clergue, a major figure in the study Montaillou: The Promised Land of Error; he was sort of a tin-pot dictator, and preyed sexually on the village's women. The last known Cathar perfect in Languedoc fled home after killing a man, before becoming a perfect. Later he got his lover pregnant, convinced a friend to marry said lover, then dissolved the marriage, making it look like his friend was the father, as cover for himself. These stories may not be typical, but they show that the Cathar priesthood was just as capable of engaging in sordid antics as the Catholic one.) Oldenbourg's Cathars can come across as shallow, inhuman, and actually more difficult to empathize with for their lack of humanizing features.

Third, Oldenbourg makes the mistake of believing the present castle at Montsegur to be the one the Cathars used. There's a sketch of the castle in the front matter, and in the text she describes its construction, and makes deductions about the course of the siege from its position and shape, etc. She also engages in a little speculation based on supposed solar alignments in the construction. In reality, the Cathar castle was torn down after the siege, and the present castle on the site dates to several centuries later. The current castle is architecturally very different from its predecessor, making all of Oldenbourg's deductions and speculations groundless. This is a pretty fundamental error to make, especially for someone writing a history book. It's alarming that nobody caught it- this isn't obscure knowledge.

The book's narrative ends abruptly with the surrender of Montsegur, which makes for a dramatic and obvious ending, but it doesn't go into any detail at all about the following century of the Inquisition's efforts to weed out the remaining Cathars, and it says nothing about the heretics of Northern Italy.

This is a very "romantic" book, prone to sweeping statements and emotive vignettes, precision and analysis be damned, and short on theses and argument. Oldenbourg sometimes presents the Cathars in a pseudo-/proto-nationalist light, but never really develops this idea. She claims that the Church's violent suppression of heresy was a moral capitulation with lasting repercussions- but doesn't really explain why this is somehow different or worse than earlier suppressions of heresies, or indeed of the contemporary Crusades against non-Christian targets. Mostly she seems to identify with the underdogs in this story, but she isn't really a good enough storyteller to bring the reader to identify with them similarly, and she isn't interested enough in analysis to make solid arguments as to why they should. She's prone to citing isolated primary sources, and taking them at face value, rather than collating accounts. She has a lot of secondary sources in her bibliography, mostly academic works, but doesn't cite many of them in the text, and isn't really interested in an academic approach.

On a lesser note, it'd be nice if the book had better maps. There's one little map at the front of the book, but it doesn't show anything east of Beziers or north of Toulouse, and omits many places mentioned in the text (eg Avignonet, which is a pretty important place in the narrative).

In all, I don't really regret reading this book, but I also don't feel like I've read anything near a definitive book on the subject.