Rating: 3/5

Women both write and read most M/M Romance novels. In many cases, female writers present plots and storylines involving men in love with other men credibly and believably. When it comes to the anguish a man faces confronting and accepting his own sexuality, male writers usually have the benefit of personal experience to influence their writing. The same can be said about the anguish men feel when confronting their homophobic families with the man's sexual realities. Many male authors overcame that same anguish.
In spite of being a male writer, in Comfort and Joy, author Jim Grimsley fails to convey the intensity of emotional trauma experienced by men confronting their sexuality and their family. Grimsley observes the pain that the main character Ford McKinney experiences, but his observation is distant, lacking in empathy. It is as if he had observed a mouse who died in a mousetrap rather than another man who confronted extremely difficult circumstances.
Grimsley's research into various technical aspects of the diseases McKinney's lover, Dan Krell endures lends authenticity and credibility to the story. Reading the medical terms and descriptions seems authentic and factual. But the dispassionate rendition of the loving relationship between the men detracts from many otherwise emotionally powerful incidents within the storyline.
Main character Ford McKinney cannot accept his sexuality. Often, when with his lover, he is cold, yells at him without cause, and considers ending the relationship. He loves Dan, who loves him, yet he stands between that love and the happiness it ought to bring. His approach-avoidance psychological issues arise from his own insecurities rather than any element of Dan's character or behavior.
The ending of Comfort and Joy almost compensates for the weaknesses in Grimsley's telling of the story. The ending feels honest, authentic, and perfect for the circumstances created within the book's storyline.
Comfort and Joy is a pretty good book. Readers will find a good storyline and an authentic ending, but the book could have delivered more.