Rating: 4/5

Around 84 million people have been infected by the AIDS virus since the start of the epidemic. Over the summer I read We Are All The Same by Jim Wooten. This book was an amazing representation of a little boy's strength and a mothers love for a child who isn't even her own. This book starts in a little town in South Africa. With a little boy named Nkiosi who was slowly dying of AIDS and there was nothing anyone could do to help. The story takes you through this little boy's life and shows the reader what it was like to have AIDS. 

Sadly AIDS takes the lives of so many people. To this day there are a lot of people who have this disease. “We are all the same. We are not different from one another. We all belong to one family”(Pg.2). This quote comes from the little boy Nkiosi who just wants a normal life, but AIDS is stopping that from happening. This book talks about the fight that Nkiosi needed to fight to survive just one more day. Nkiosi was one of the very few kids to be adopted by a family that could afford him treatment and give him a loving home. 

I would probably give this book a ⅘ stars because I really loved the powerful message it gave. The only thing I didn't like was that at the beginning it was very slow. There was a lot of history and background information in the first two chapters, but other than that it had an amazing story line and it really opened my eyes to what AIDS is and how it affects the lives of the people who have it. This quote really showed me how terrible this virus is: “hundreds of dying men and women lay on blankets in every available space” (pg. 55). The reporter saw this happening right in front of his eyes. AIDS affects so many people from so many different backgrounds. It breaks my heart that so many people (including myself before I read this book) don't even know what AIDS is. 

This book gave me many thoughts and feelings. I learned so much about the AIDS epidemic. It's so sad that so many people are affected by this disease and don't have the right treatments that could save their life, or at least prolong their lives. So many people are suffering and can't get help. In conclusion this book was powerful but heartbreaking at the same time.