Rating: 3/5

It’s election year in America, and you know what that means: attack ads! Republicans are rolling out the same screeds I’ve heard since childhood about the socialists who are one election away from erecting the Soviet States of Amerika unless you pony up five bucks before midnight. This performative panic is fractionally more realistic this time with the Democratic Socialists of America fizzing around the edges of the Democratic Party, complete with a streamer haranguing college students in Mao cosplay. I take the socialists’ federal electoral prospects about as seriously as I take those of the Libertarian Party, but the micro-rise of the DSA does bring a nostalgic frisson of the 1980s to this year’s festivities.

My dismissive wordplay aside, it’s worth acknowledging that 2026 is just a snapshot in time. Socialism might be mostly a fundraising technique of the American Right for now; but with positive feelings about socialism having held steady around 60% within the Democratic Party since 2016, you’d be a fool to count it out. Indeed, the socialist dream has demonstrated a strange resilience despite a century of evidence that it doesn’t work. Joshua Muravchik, lapsed socialist and convert to global capitalism, sets out in “Heaven on Earth: The Rise, Fall, and Afterlife of Socialism” to document the ways in which the faith of his fathers keeps failing its way into the hearts of new generations.

The religious overtones of words like heaven and faith are deliberate. Moses Hess, who served as spiritual midwife to Marx’s thought, explicitly conceived of a social order that would displace the Christian “image of…heavenly joy…We, on the other hand, want this heaven on earth.” If you conceive of socialism less as an economic theory and more as an organizational, communitarian, explanatory, and eschatological replacement for church life and dogma, then its persistence in the teeth of all experience makes sense. Faith, after all, is the substance of things hoped for and the evidence of things not seen. The gradual breakdown of Christendom over half a millennium generates a vacuum that cries out to be filled with something; and socialism promises a rational morality, an immanent heaven, and the abolition of hell. That’s a deal many are willing to take.

The problem, as Muravchik writes, is that “after so much hope and struggle, and so many lives sacrificed around the world, socialism’s epitaph turned out to be: If you build it, they will leave.” This stark truth is perhaps the most important lesson of the book. Muravchik organizes his work not around socialist theory and academic dialogue, but around thirteen mini-biographies of prominent socialists who, with genuine fervor and often the best of intentions, tried and failed to bring the Heavenly Jerusalem down to this mortal plane. The fate of these experiments is always what A. J. MacDonald found in the 1850s when he investigated the aftermath of Owens’s experiment in New Harmony, Indiana: “I was cautioned not to speak of Socialism, as the subject was unpopular. The advice was good; Socialism was unpopular, and with good reason. The people had been wearied and disappointed by it; had been filled full with theories, until they were nauseated.”

Socialism sounds rational on paper as summarized in Babeuf’s defense of his revolutionary goals in 1797: to “organize a communal regime which will suppress private property, set each to work at the skill or job he understands, require each to deposit the fruits of his labor in kind at the common store, and establish an agency for the distribution of basic necessities. This agency will maintain a complete list of people and of supplies, will distribute the latter with scrupulous fairness, and will deliver them to the home of each worker.” Everyone works hard, everyone contributes, everyone draws what he needs, and no one is left behind. Sounds great, except that humans don’t work this way.

Self-interested parasites drag down productivity. The flaws of human nature warp collection and distribution, sometimes in cruel and murderous ways. Children and grandchildren grow restive under the artificial cap that low productivity and egalitarian welfare (to the extent this is achieved) imposes on material well-being. In short, every centrally planned economy we’ve ever tried has run up against the same problem: us. In the final chapter of the “Fall” section, Muravchik demonstrates that even the most successful example of socialism — the Israeli kibbutz — has gone the way of Blair’s socialism, Deng’s Communism, and Gorbachev’s Sovietism. To the extent that socialist states or communes survive at all, they do so as a pliable skin of humanitarian idealism enlivened by a hard skeleton of capitalism.

I found “Heaven on Earth” enlightening, though I have my quibbles with Muravchik’s apparent classification of fascism as a socialist heresy in his handling of Mussolini’s regime. Unlike socialism, fascism rejects both collective ownership and the abolition of private property. Fascism, rather, is an ideology of strength for the purpose of being strong, a paean to national greatness in which every private individual and every private institution is expected to organize thought and effort around the leader’s vision of muscular national supremacy. Socialism and fascism both tend toward authoritarian excess, and neither brooks competition from within; but one is the planned welfare of every individual, and the other is the planned welfare of a powerful state. Confusing the two is a category error that runs the risk of downplaying fascist threats. If you’re only watching for socialism because you think fascism is just its kissing cousin, you might not see the actual fascism creeping up behind you.

God willing, creeping fascism will not be the final fate of America, but we should note that a creeping approval of socialism has infiltrated even the Republican Party. Recent Gallup polling shows a small but steady uptick in the right’s positive feelings toward socialism since 2019. This approval is still in the GOP’s basement; but the party’s transformation into the image of Donald Trump has normalized the ethos of centralized control (“I alone can fix it”), direct manipulation of the economy through tariffs and attempts to control the Fed, and the heavy hand of government in corporate decision-making both through the purchase of stakes in key companies and through straight-up intimidation. Perhaps America will never be a socialist nation, but both parties are pushing us closer to the evergreen dream than ever before. I’m sure, though, that if we ever do take the plunge, we’ll be the first to do it right. After all, it isn’t that socialism has failed, right? It’s just that true socialism has never been tried…