Rating: 5/5

I’ve only read five PKD novels so far, but that’s enough for me to notice some recurring themes. Like The Cosmic Puppets, Time Out of Joint, and Ubik, the world in Eye in the Sky is not what it appears to be. In all four of these books, what the characters take to be reality isn’t reality at all. 

In The Cosmic Puppets and Time Out of Joint, the illusion is imposed from without. In Ubik and Eye in the Sky, it is imposed from within. This is the theme of the world as a creation of the mind. It is a much more philosophical theme than the more general theme of the world as illusion. 

An illusion imposed from an external source is mere deception. The illusion may come from other people who create a fake town. It may come from supernatural entities who can alter the appearance of reality. But in either case, the illusion is intended to make someone believe reality is other than it truly is. In the theme of the world as a creation of the mind, the very nature of reality comes into question. 

Eye in the Sky shares more with Ubik than just the theme of the world as a creation of the mind. Both novels leave the reader wondering whose mind is the mind creating the world and both have ambiguous endings. But this is all done with greater subtlety and finesse in Ubik. In Eye in the Sky, once the author of the first version of the world is discovered, it is not too difficult to figure out the authors of the later versions. And the ambiguity of the ending is little more than a tease. 

Almost half the book is devoted to the first version of the world. I was surprised and intrigued to find this religious world based on a nineteenth century Islamic cult. I would have been even more surprised if I hadn’t first read The Cosmic Puppets, with its Zoroastrianism. I know a little bit about Zoroastrianism, but next to nothing about the Bahá’í Faith. Apparently it grew out of an earlier cult called Bábíism, named after its leader, the Báb. The holy book of Bábíism is the Bayán. Dick simply imagined a second Báb. 

(If Tillingford had offered me the use of the intercom to heaven that he offered Hamilton, I wouldn’t have passed up the opportunity to talk with Dick. What a fascinating guy he must have been!)

The second, third, and fourth versions of the world reveal more of Dick’s interests: morality, mental illness, and politics. The prudish morality of the second world is hilarious. The paranoid fantasy of the third world is horrifying. And the McCarthyism of the fourth world is very apropos of the time in which Eye in the Sky was written.

Of these three worlds, the world of the paranoiac was the most fascinating. Whether this reveals something about Dick’s own mind or not, it certainly reveals something about how the world is experienced by people suffering from mental illness. It quickly reaches the point of absurdity, but before it does, it displays some of the mundane horrors that fill the world of the mentally ill. The knife which turns on its user. The can of peaches that intentionally falls on one’s foot. The ominous meaning behind a ringing telephone or a blown light bulb. Things that most people regard as harmless or accidental or meaningless are dangerous and malevolent to the paranoid.

There’s actually another world in this book that isn’t a world created by a character’s mind. It’s the world of Bill Laws. And there’s no sci-fi here. Bill is willing to live in Mrs. Pritchet’s world because, despite her prissy and silly ideas, he can make something of himself in her world. He and Hamilton argue about this and Bill sets Hamilton straight on what it’s like to be black in 1959.

“You try being colored a while.... Try putting yourself through six years of college washing white men’s dishes in a two-bit hash house. I’ve heard about you; your Dad was a big-shot physicist. You had plenty of money; you weren’t working in any hash house. Try getting a degree the way I did. Try carrying that degree around in your pocket a few months, looking for a job” (148-149).

“Want to know why I’m better off here? Because of you, Hamilton. It’s your fault, not mine. Think that over. You had your wife and house and cat and car and job. You had it fine . . . naturally, you want to go back. But not me; I didn’t have it so fine. And I’m not going back” (149).

I enjoyed Eye in the Sky, but not as much as Ubik. Although that’s probably an unfair comparison. Twelve years separate the two novels. Comparing it with the other 1950s novels I’ve read, I’d have to say I enjoyed it more than The Cosmic Puppets, but not as much as The World Jones Made or Time Out of Joint. But that might not be fair either. Each book has its own merits and flaws. But one thing that they all have is originality. And that will keep me coming back for more.