Rating: 1/5

Lahaye makes no-bones about the fact that his interpretation is based upon 2 key assumptions, which he explicitly says are key to proper biblical interpretation. These assumptions are the complete distinction between Israel and the church, and that scripture is to be taken as literally as possible, only allowing for it to be figurative when it has to be. Anyone who doesn't hold to both assumptions (i.e. any of the millions of other Christians who hold to the inerrancy of scripture but not this super-literal dispensationalist system of interpretation) is not going to be convinced by his arguments.

That said, the scriptural backing for his case is sparse. A few passages like Titus 2:13, which speak of things like the "blessed hope" are taken to be referring to the rapture. His reasoning is that if the rapture doesn't mean believers escape the great tribulation, it is not a blessed hope. Of course, orthodox believers of all eschatological schema believe that that rapture is a blessed hope. Those who are not pre-trib (e.g. post-trib, partial preterists) would say that the rapture occurs at Christ's physical return, when the saints are resurrected and the living believers go to the Lord with them. It is not the start of 7 years in God's house (which he considers to be Christ's great promise)(John 14:1-4), but rather, eternity in God's house! Other positions see it as a blessed hope just the same, expect that it is one that would be relevant to Paul's audience and Christians throughout time (since all go to eternal life), and not something that only affects those alive at the end of time.

Likewise, a lot of emphasis is made about how believers are said to escape the "wrath to come" (1 Thessalonians 1:10). This wrath to come is assumed to be the tribulation (which would only affect one group who are around thousands of years after Paul's original readers would have died), as opposed to, ya know, God's eternal condemnation (which all people throughout time would need to escape from, under the blood of Jesus Christ)

Lahaye does make some decent arguments against the mid-tribulation and post-tribulation rapture positions, which might be of use to a partial-preterist like myself (he doesn't even address my view, as it requires one to think that sometimes context warrants seeing certain language as figurative, an idea that apparently shouldn't even be entertained).

THE WORST THING
The worst thing about this book, however, is the attitude that it takes to suffering and tribulation in the life of a Christian. It makes no end of emotional appeals about why, if the pre-tribulation rapture is not true, how what Christians have is a "blasted hope" and not a "bessed hope." If Christians at the end of time go through this "great tribulation," why should they look forward to Christ's coming? No loving bridegroom (Christ) would allow His bride (the church) go through the tribulation! But this ignores the fact that some of God's children have been suffering horrifically throughout time. Maybe the body as a whole has never gone through something as horrible as this so-called great tribulation, but according to Lahaye's reasoning, no believer in 1st century Rome who spent years in exile should have endured years of increasingly severe persecution, culminating in being crucified or burned alive. For them, it couldn't have gotten any worse. Did Jesus not love them?! Does Jesus not love the members of his church, His bride, who are suffering and being tortured and murdered around the world even today? And what about the people who repent during the tribulation and then must suffer the wrath of the beast for turning to Jesus (according to Lahaye's theory). Why would God let them suffer as well, if a loving God wouldn't let His people go through the tribulation? Was there hope blasted, or, did they have their hope in Jesus Christ and the eternal life He gives those who overcome?

Frankly, the attitude taken in this book ignores eternity (and if I'm gonna say something that heated, you know I'm pretty put off by what was written). Our hope is mainly the 7 years where we can be in heaven with Jesus while the rest of the world suffers, not the eternal celebration with God in His kingdom. 

It is important to note that I'm not saying that all pre-trib believers do this. That fact that Lahaye is so short-sighted in his attitude towards the suffering of Christians doesn't mean it is indicative of the pre-trib position. If the view is biblical, then it is biblical (it's not, but that's because it's not, not because of a bad argument made in a book). That said, this view of suffering and tribulation is the worst quality of this book.