Rating: 5/5

I will also do a video review here at my channel: http://www.youtube.com/magicofbooks

“The White Russian” by Tom Bradby is set in the dying days of imperial Russia in 1917. Chief police investigator Sandro Ruzsky returns to St. Petersburg after spending three years in exile in Siberia. His first assignment involves the bodies of two people on the river Neva found just outside the Tsar’s Winter Palace. Ruzsky’s determination to uncover a ruthless killer leads him down a path of conspiracy and betrayal and a fight against the demons of his past.

As a note: "The White Russian" is part of my Year of Rereading for 2021. Find out more here: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QM-R0...

God, I still freaking love this book! This is a book that I have been wanting to reread for the longest time. This book was published way back in 2003 and I reread it a countless number of times, fulfilling my need for a book set in imperial Russia. As I’ve mentioned many times during my Year of Rereading, once I started my Booktube channel, I starting buying books at a crazy rate and, unfortunately, rereading my favorite books fell to the side. “The White Russian” is one of those books that I have been missing terribly.

This is one of those books that is hugely atmospheric. It’s Russia. It’s January. It’s cold. It’s icy. You spend this whole book freezing to death while reading. It’s an experience. Tom Bradby doesn’t just get the physical atmosphere of this book correct, but he also gets the political atmosphere of this book correct. The plot of this book is set in January of 1917 in St. Petersburg during the dying days of imperial Russia. Just a few months after the events of this book Tsar Nicholas II abdicates the throne and by summer of 1918 the Tsar, his wife, his son, his four daughters and a few of their loyal servants are brutally executed. You as the reader know the future of Russia. You know the turmoil that is to come and no matter what our main character Ruzsky tries to do, he will not prevent the fate of Russia. The atmosphere of this novel is so incredibly palpable. You can feel the unease and tension on ever page. You feel this world collapsing and suffocating and there’s dread around ever corner. 
The novel opens with the bodies of a man and young woman on the frozen river Neva right outside the Tsar’s Winter Palace. This opens the book immediately with a feeling of tension. You meet our main character Sandro Ruzsky who is a police chief investigator and we find out he’s spent the last three years in exile in Siberia. Ruzsky is a man who wants to do the right thing, even if there’s a terrible price to pay, which is what got him sent into exile to begin with. Ruzsky has a lot of emotional baggage. He has an estranged relationship with his father. His father wanted a different career for his oldest son. Plus there’s the issue of Ruzsky feeling involved in the death of his little brother when they were children that he feels his father still holds him responsible for. Ruzsky also has an estranged relationship with his wife who tries to keep him away from their son. Ruzsky is on good terms with his brother (who would be the middle brother had the youngest not died), but realizes his brother is hiding something dark inside. There’s also the popular ballerina Maria who Ruzsky had a relationship with prior to going to Siberia and now there’s some estrangement there between them. There’s also Pavel, Ruszsky’s deputy, who feels that he should have been sent into exile instead. There’s an incredibly rich cast of characters that populate this novel and I’ve not even mentioned the antagonists of this novel which are Okhrana, the Tsar’s secret police, who are trying any which way they can to prevent Ruzsky from uncovering the crime on the Neva. All of these characters live in this world that is rapidly decaying and are powerless to stop it. Every character is richly drawn and interesting. The novel, for the most part, is heavily about the main crime: why were this people murdered and by whom? Is there an involvement that is political? Is there a need to protect the Tsar and his family? Might they know something? Why is the Okhrana butting into everything Ruzsky and his team are doing? What is the agenda? The deeper you get into this novel, the more political it gets and you start to see how the main events are colliding into the eventual fall of the monarchy. It lends a certain sadness to many of the events, especially any of the scenes where you see Empress Alexandria and the children since you know they will suffer horrible deaths in the near future due to the dramatically shifting politics. 

If you can’t tell, one of my top favorite books. It’s not a mind-blowing amazing read that changes literature, but it is an absolutely gripping and exciting political thriller full of murder, betrayal, and shifting attitudes in Russia during this time period. Tom Bradby, in my opinion, really captures the mood of this era and does so by having a really well thought out plot and interesting characters who feel part of this world, not outside of it. I definitely recommend this book if you love all things imperial Russia or political thrillers with some murder and conspiracies.