Rating: 5/5

This is a manga which embodies all of my love of this particular mode of storytelling, using it to introduce some of most memorable characters who’ve ever haunted my imagination to the most striking and uniquely beautiful effect. 

We meet shy, sweet, androgynously adorable, yet powerful omnyouji, Sumeragi Subaru (an onmyouji is something similiar to a cross between a spiritualist and a sorcerer, but it’s a unique magical practice in its own right and culture), experiencing the various supernatual and interpersonal situations through his eyes. 

Often at Subaru’s side is his irrespressible and bold twin sister, Sumeragi Hokuto. She designs all of Subaru’s costumes, coordinating with his gloves that their grandmother has ordered Subaru to never take off, and matching them with her own. Hokuto’s costumes are particularly over the top, yet flattering, bringing out her sprightly pixie nature. They also bring out Subaru’s beauty in a way which make him able to pass for either a girl or a boy. Hokuto has some definite ideas about women and is their staunch champion, yet she’s also a staunch champion of her little brother’s budding romance with Sakurazuka Seishirou. 

The third member of the threesome is often quite low key in his suits, glasses, and white veternarian coats, until he takes off his glasses. Once he does, something wild, predatory, and seductive is revealed in the bend of his eyebrow and the gleam of Sakurazuka Seishirou’s eye. He’s only revealed a glimpse of this secret self to Subaru under the sakura tree. The rest of the time he’s mild mannered, joking and humouring Hokuto (his future sister-in-law) when he isn’t being quite the classical man in wooing a beautiful, reluctant boy (Subaru). 

These three characters explore the unique landscape which was Tokyo during the early 1990s while Subaru faces a variety of supernatural menaces. From a malice soaked chanel suit that possesses whoever wears it to the ghost of an unhappy actress haunting the Tokyo Tower, Subaru’s work as an onmyouji is never done. Constantly helping others, Subaru is often distracted of the shadow hanging over him, stalking him. A memory of a strange boy, standing under a cherry tree, revealing to him its bloody secret continues to haunt him. Who was that boy? Why does he remind Subaru so much of Seishirou? 

A unique genre cocktail of mystery, supernatual menace, rainbow love, driven by colorful character driven moments, enhanced by some of the most unique and memorable costumes I’ve ever seen, Tokyo Babylon has a special place in my heart. I’ll never forget Hokuto’s clover dress, flaring out, making her look like a pixie, or the sleeveless dress with the poofy hat and wings. Subaru’s outfits are iconic and androgynous in ths history of manga and anime from his hat with the ribbon, to his billowing coat, or his flared jackets. The duality between Subaru’s shy, awkward personality and his unearthly serenity when he’s using his magic is quite compelling. The most fascinatingly dualistic character, however, is Seishirou. Normally low key, hiding a kindly expression behind a pair of glasses, constantly teasing Subaru about wanting to marry him, he becomes quite different when he exposes his eyes. A dark, wild beauty emerges, hiding behind his civilized facade, hinting at a very different person lying behind it. 

For the beginning of a compelling mystery, capturing the feel of a 1990s urban fairytale which skips between the light and the dark, the playful and sinister, through the actions of some of the most compelling characters I’ve ever encountered in fiction, drawn in the unique, exquisite style which made me fall in love with CLAMP, this gets five stars.