Rating: 3/5

The character is optimistic but the story itself is very bleak. Almost every character had very big problems and none of them were resolved - though hints at possible starts to resolutions were available for some of them. Real life doesn't always get wrapped up nicely. Lots of real life endings aren't satisfying or aren't what we hoped. Even so, I kind of felt like the book posed lots of questions and loose ends and was building up toward events that we didn't ever get to see. I'm left with a lot of questions...

Blacky mentioned seeing a classmate sitting naked in a classroom once... What's that all about? I mean, I can make a pretty good guess, but that's a big question left unresolved. 

His little girlfriend slipped and hit her head and they took her away in an ambulance... and that's it. No followup.

Blacky legit tried to murder his bullies, but failed. What's going to happen with that? I imagine they won't bother him anymore, but will they turn him in to the police? You can't shoot at your classmates and try to kill them. Even if they're terrible people. 

Does Blacky get help from someone who isn't a fucking idiot? How about his siblings and their mom? Do any of them end up okay? It doesn't look promising. 

I feel like the ending is left up to me, in which case I choose to have Blacky wander out in the woods looking for deer during the freezing weather. He gets lost and freezes to death. Shay runs off and eventually gets a job doing something artistic and never talks to her family again. Cheedle manages to make it through his childhood without being abused by any of his idiot mother's boyfriends. He gets accepted into a prestigious university at an early age and never looks back. The end.

At any rate, I did enjoy the book. It was well written besides the lack of quotation marks for dialogue. The narrator was interesting. I just didn't like that it didn't really lead anywhere. I don't feel like any of the characters are any better off at the end than they are at the beginning. Most are worse off.