Rating: 5/5

This book is the basic teachings of Mr. Li Hongzhi. It's about self-cultivation and contains explainations to ancient mysteries as well as current science. Every time I open it (and the next book, Zhuan Falun) I find it hard to put down. For anyone longing for the truth of the universe, you cannot overlook this. From supernatural abilities to dimensions and humankind to divinity, it is quick and easy and the content is so fresh: "It is a different discourse at different levels on the nature of the universe—to be True, Kind, and Tolerant—at different levels, what Daoists call “the Dao,” or what Buddhists call “the Law”
Here is the prologue: 

ON BUDDHA LAW
Nothing is as profound as BUDDHA LAW. Of all teachings in the world it is the most wondrous and highest science. To open up this field, ordinary people have to
fundamentally change their way of thinking. Failing that, the reality of the universe will forever remain something of a myth to humankind, and ordinary people will forever grope around inside the box created by their own ignorance.
So just what exactly is BUDDHA LAW, then? Is it religion? Is it philosophy? That is just how the “cutting-edge” scholars of Buddhism see it. They merely study it on a theoretical level, subjecting it to criticism and so-called research, as if it were philosophy. The truth is, BUDDHA LAW is not limited to the little portion in scriptures, which is only
BUDDHA LAW’s initial-level Law. Instead, there is nothing that BUDDHA LAW cannot explain—it penetrates all mysteries, from those of particles and molecules to those of the universe, from small things to great things. It is a different discourse at different levels on the nature of the universe—to be True, Kind, and Tolerant—at different levels, what Daoists call “the Dao,” or what Buddhists call “the Law.”
No matter how advanced the science of today’s human race may be, it can only account for a portion of the universe’s mysteries. Once we mention specific phenomena of BUDDHA LAW, there is always someone who says, “We’re in the electronic age now, and science is so advanced. Spaceships have flown to other planets, and you still talk about those blind beliefs?” To tell it like it is, as advanced as computers may be, they
can’t compare to the human brain, which to this day is a mystery that baffles researchers.
Regardless of how far spaceships may travel, they still cannot fly beyond this material dimension in which the human race exists. The knowledge that humankind has gained today is extremely shallow and nothing more than a small part of the whole—it is
nowhere near a real understanding of the Truth of the universe. Some people don’t even dare to face up to, approach, or acknowledge the facts of phenomena that objectively exist, all because these people are too narrow-minded and are unwilling to change their
longstanding way of thinking. Only one thing can completely unlock the mysteries of the universe, space-time, and the human body: BUDDHA LAW. It can truly distinguish virtue from vice, and good from evil, and it can put an end to wrong views while providing the
right views...

Li Hongzhi
June 2, 1992

Find it all at www.falundafa.org in many languages