Rating: 4/5

This book was actually really good. I've wanted to read this book since I saw a review of it in People and thought it sounded really interesting, despite it appearing to be just another book in that slew of pop-fiction. I finally bought it at the beginning of January, but because of school I've had to put off reading it. Finally, thanks to summer, I got to read it. And it didn't fail to please.

I haven't ever really read a book like this before, both in plot and style. I know we've all read a book at some point that's in the form of a diary or something, but most of the "diary novels" I've read tend to not act like a diary. Like there's full on dialogue or what not, especially vivid descriptions of everything... as far as I know, people don't really write diaries/journals like that. Well, except for one person I know... but he's the one exception and I love him (hi, Richie!). So I was very please to read Rosalind's grief journal entries and find them written like a fourteen-year-old girl would write a grief journal.

A lot of times I was struck by how absolutely true Rosalind's emotions were. I remember feeling some of those exact same emotions only a few years ago. The anger, the confusion, the sadness... I definitely tell all teenagers to read this novel because there's going to be at least one thing they can relate to Rosalind with. Be it losing a parent (or two) or hating a parent.

And despite all that Rosalind says, you find yourself really drawn to Sean, he's really endearing and sweet, and I think parent's will probably be able to connect with him. He's a suddenly new parent... with a teenager... and you get to see (read?) him expressing his concerns and crying for help. Probably something most parents of teenagers (or simply most parents) can easily relate to. He struggles to be a disciplinarian, but also tries to create bonds with Rosalind, two things that are very hard to try and do at the same time.

The style of the book was also really awesome, in the way that a clear story is told through various emails, journal entries, IMs, recorded conversations, teacher reports, so many different forms of communications that really get this wonderful story across.

So, while I'm not sure how much parents will be able to relate to Sean (though I'm pretty sure they could) I know teens, and those who have been teens, will be able to relate to Rosalind in a lot of different ways. This book was really unique, and it will be a great summer read for you as it was for me.