Rating: 3/5

Had this on my bookshelves - must have belonged to one of my parents - so I decided to finally read it. Had a different experience with Parts 1 and 2. Part 1 is much more tight narratively. Faust is offered a deal by Mephistopheles: "I will bind myself to your service in this world, To be at your beck and never rest nor slack; When we meet again on the other side, In the same coin you shall pay me back." Faust takes the deal, and soon afterwards sees a beautiful girl on the street, offers to escort her and is rejected. He asks Mephistopheles for her. At first Mephistopheles demurs: "She? She was coming from her priest, Absolved from her sins one and all; I'd crept up near the confessional. An innocent thing. Innocent? Yes! At church with nothing to confess! Over that girl I have no power." But Faust insists. Man, do things turn out badly for poor Gretchen. Really really really badly. I was sort of impressed at Goethe's ruthlessness. This all makes a gripping story line. 

Part II is a different kettle of fish. Goethe decides to use the framing of the Faust story to perform a grand overview of history, mankind, mythology... MacNiece, the translator, says that he cut a fair bit of this section and I'm glad he did as what remains is a slog. Faust and Mephistopheles advise an emperor - ultimately, this leads him to solve his financial problems with the introduction of a lovely new tool, paper money. Goethe brings in Proteus and Philemon and Baucis - I had to have my Bullfinch's Mythology nearby to remember who everyone was. Helen comes into the story, is paired up with Faust and they have a child together. Must say, I felt almost as bad for Helen as I did for Gretchen. She gets matched with men without having much say in the matter. She is accompanied by a chorus of Trojan women, and they have a pretty pragmatic view of what is going on: "Women, to men's love accustomed, It is not for them to choose, All their lot is knowing. Whether to blond-headed shepherd, Or perhaps to black-bristled faun, As time may bring the occasion, Over their rounded bodies, Women assign to them equal right." Helen seems outwardly fine with everything, but after Meneleus and Paris, she knows the drill. 

The ending thoroughly annoyed me and made me annoyed with Gretchen and if I were Mephistopheles I'd feel very badly done by. 

I remember reading Louis MacNeice, one of the Auden group of poets from the 1930s, when I was studying English in college, so it was interesting to encounter Goethe with him as a guide. He does an okay job. In the Introduction, he says that various friends recommended he provide the translation in blank verse but he chose to have it rhyme, as he felt that "the rhymes in Goethe are part of the sense." I side with the friends on this one. The English in this translation feels a bit dated, and the rhymes contribute to that.