Rating: 4/5

An important primary source not only because it is the earliest known autobiography of an Englishperson, but is also a revelatory window into the life of a Medieval Christian woman. 

Margery Kempe didn't always behave in the way that was expected of her. She never acted against the teachings of the Church (England was Roman Catholic at the time which is 1373-1438), but was often accused by other people of being a heretic because she did odd things like wear only white clothes, did not eat meat, and took a vow of chastity at the age of 40, while still married, and after bearing 14 children (who can blame her?). The oddest thing about her, and which caused her much suffering and persecution her whole life, was her constant sobbing, weeping and wailing in church, groaning and roaring while the congregation was trying to listen to a sermon or take holy communion. She was vilified and even imprisoned for this behavior and escaped being burned at the stake, many times being accused of being a Lollard. The Lollards were pre-Reformation Christians who believed that the laity should read the holy scriptures themselves and did not need the instruction of a priest to understand the Bible. Chief among the Lollards was John Wycliffe who translated the Bible into vernacular English which became popular among Lollards, despite efforts to suppress it by Henry IV. Wycliffe was declared a heretic by Pope Martin V and the Lollards were persecuted and martyred for their beliefs. Margery Kempe was not a Lollard but since she made it a habit to go on pilgrimages and would engage people in conversation about her faith (she was effectively teaching the gospel in her travels) and having long discussions with priests and friars, people were jealous of her knowledge of God and accused her of either being possessed by evil spirits, or of holding Lollard beliefs.

Anyone who is interested in Medieval history and/or Church history will probably find this book rewarding. A passage that impressed me very much and which describes Margery Kempe's unique position as a Christian woman of the Medieval Era, is one which she claims came from Christ himself, in one of the many instances in the book where he speaks to her directly:

"Daughter, if you knew how many wives there are in this world, who would love me and serve me well and duly, if they might be as free from their husbands as you are from yours, you would say that you were very much beholden to me. And yet they are thwarted from their will and suffer very great pain, and therefore they shall have great reward in heaven, for I receive every good will as a deed."

Good for Margery. She was able to serve God the way she felt she was called to do, despite being a woman in a time in history where people did not always accept the way she chose to live her life. She is a good example of how we should desire to please God and worship Him no matter our circumstances or position, and no matter if we are ridiculed or laughed at.