Rating: 5/5

"Consider me alone my precious child, make me your object, I am enough for you, rejoice in your Saviour and your salvation"

Julian's revelation encouraged me to remember how closely and intimately God loves us. When one feels overcome by the weight of our sin, she asks us to remember the deep love of Christ who, hanging on the cross, tells us, "Look how much I love you. If I could suffer more for you, I would suffer more." 

This picture of Christ, wounded, bleeding, and dying, but somehow rejoicing in his death and suffering because it benefits us, could only remind me of my own mother. There is truly something so motherly about Christ's crucifixion. I love how Julian emphasizes the feminine love of God. She wrote that Christ, "who does good for evil is our true mother; we have our being from him where the ground of motherhood begins, with all the sweet protection of love which follows eternally. God is our mother as truly as He is our father, and he showed this in everything" 

Julian also acknowledges the reality of sin without leading the soul to despair. We should understand and know our sins but ultimately remember that God's love suffices for all of our flaws and our sin is not who we are, nor who we were meant to be. She reminds us of God's pity and compassion. She describes the state of man through a parable God gave her: the sinful man is like a man who fell into a ditch, became injured, and could not get out without the help of his master. Is this man really so completely evil and rotten and dirty and gross? Because he fell into a ditch and mud covered his eyes so he could not see? Julian would say otherwise. While it is good and right to name our sin, this cannot be the only thing we hear in church, school, etc. It gets exhausting after a while. 

Julian's picture of Christ as a mother is extremely helpful. "The kind, loving mother who knows and recognizes the need of her child, she watches over it most tenderly, as the nature and condition of motherhood demands. And as it grows in age her actions change, although her love does not. And as it grows older still, she allows it to be beaten to break down vices so that the child may gain in virtue and grace." Christ, like a mother, will not lie to us and tell us we do not sin. Julian even says it is a grace to be reminded of our sins so we can repent and receive forgiveness. Christ is like the mother who lifts a child out of a mud ditch, lovingly rebuking the child while taking her by the hand into the house to change. 

"But when our falling and our wretched sin is shown to us, we are so terrified and so very ashamed that we hardly know where to put ourselves. But then our kind Mother does not want us to run from him, there is nothing he wants less. But he wants us to behave like a child; for when it is hurt or frightened it runs to its mother for help as fast as it can, and he wants us to do the same like a humble child"