Rating: 5/5

The dreamy bearded shrink called the author of The Brothers Karamazov a neurotic, repressed bisexual epileptic in a preface of which I understood one sentence out of three. The friend of Sartre and the plane trees (sorry) has, for his part (passenger), drawn from this 850-page monument the genesis of "The Rebel," the one who always says no. With its murder in mysterious circumstances, investigation, and dramatized trial, The Brothers Karamazov follows the plot of a detective novel. Fyodor Karamazov, the victim, did not steal his fate as a murder victim. A detestable being, he has fleeced and driven his two wives mad. He has not an ounce of affection for his three sons: Alyosha (or Alexis, depending on the page), the youngest, the saint of the novel who devotes his life to religion and spreading good around him; the youngest, Dimitri (Mitia for his friends), a romantic party animal, with a debt of affection and Ivan, a cultured elder who cultivates his nihilism. This legitimate offspring, completed by an envious and epileptic bastard with the name of a cousin, Smerdiakov, has every reason to hasten the succession. Dimitri does not hide his hatred for this older man who refuses him his share of the inheritance and who covets the chosen one of his ardent heart.
Suppose this novel is a monument of literature. In that case, it is because it brilliantly explores the existential questions of all its characters, particularly around Faith, Freedom, Evil, and Free Will (not the one that calls on VAR, my football friends).
Some passages, particularly the one devoted to Ivan's poem, "the Grand Inquisitor," are incandescent and flammable. I'll summarize it for you. That's the Faith resting on the freedom to believe without proof; the long-awaited resurrection of Christ occurs in Seville amid the Inquisition, barbecues of infidels, and planchas of fornicators. After a few miracles recycled from the gospels, the Grand Inquisitor decides to burn the former crucified (no wonder he keeps us waiting when you see how he is received!) with full knowledge of the facts so that he does not deprive man of doubt, hope, and the possibility of choosing between good and evil. Without God, there are no more boundaries between good and evil. With Him, how can we forgive him our suffering and accept the justice of men? The absence is not always wrong.
The rest of the novel offers a unique reading experience, thanks to the richness of its characters and dialogue, which makes the narration nearly perfect.
That's the last novel by Dostoyevsky, an author with whom one should not count one's hours; I only have to go back in his bibliography.
Unmissable.