Rating: 3/5

Kids, remember: always be yourself. 

Unless you can be Batman. 

Always be Batman.

Incredibly, I did not LOVE this.

I liked it, no doubt. The IDEA of an aging Batman donning the cape and cowl, kicking creeps ass and then needing a rubdown later, picking a fight he could not win only to get up, dust off his old and tired self and BE the Dark Knight again was great. Miller is a genius and there were parts of this that reminded me of Alan Moore’s CLASSIC Watchmen, with it’s subtle and not so subtle political and social commentary.

But the art was … eh.

And it was sometimes hard to follow.

Here’s the thing: what Miller did exceptionally well, over the top good, top shelf SCOTCH (I’m talking 12 year old McCallans) was to further humanize DC’s most human, and therefore most compelling hero. How better to explore our hero’s humanity than to delve into his MORTALITY, he’s getting OLD. But he’s still a hero, and still dark, still pissed off and still wants to not only get the bad guy, but punish him, beat the shite out of him and make it really hurt.

This is like if Batman were Rocky Balboa. Not the 1976 version, a young warrior; this Batman is the Rocky Balboa of the same film name in 2006, old and coming out of retirement, and like the Toby Keith song: not as good as he once was, but he's as good once as he ever was.

A more observant and inspired reviewer than me once noted that Marvel had humans who were striving to be gods; DC had gods struggling to be human. My problem with DC has always been the Superman paradigm: he’s too powerful, he NEEDS weakness to be more accessible and thus more interesting as a hero.

Miller gets into this some as Superman (noticeably NOT getting older) is shown still doing the incredible and hardly believable (though with some fresh ECO sensibilities) and has an almost satirical approach to Batman and Superman’s complicated relationship and that makes this all the more absorbing.

Probably a MUST read for genre fans, and still a damn fine story on many levels.