Rating: 5/5

Warning: some spoilers.

I've tried on various occasions to get into this series, but I've clearly done it the wrong way by starting on the first book, Queen Lucia, with which I always struggle. I volunteer at Lamb House in Rye, the "Mallards" of the Lucia books, and this paperback happened to be in the volunteer room, and it was the beginning of the post-lockdown season when we were only opening the garden and there were few visitors, so I borrowed the book to read while sitting in the beautiful walled garden—and, at long last, I fell in love.

I did have the advantage of having watched the 2014 BBC TV mini-series, although some people prefer the 1985 version, which I haven't yet seen; it's notable that both dramatizations start at the point where these two social climbers meet because they are truly worthy rivals, and that is why this fourth volume in the series sparkles so brightly.

Now I have to go back and read the earlier books to answer some questions—how come Miss Mapp, whose wealth is revealed to be about one-eighth of Lucia's, has the grandest house in Tilling? The impression I get from Mapp and Lucia is that Mapp represents old money and Lucia new, but I may be wrong. It's the house, Mallards, that gives Mapp her position in the town, quite literally; it sits at the top of the low rock on which Tilling/Rye is built, one of the spacious Georgian houses that sit serenely among the older cottages. In this volume Lucia temporarily gains possession of Mallards and thus of Tilling, and Mapp has to fight to regain her social supremacy.

It's an unequal battle because Lucia, despite all her silly pretensions, is born to be a social queen; she is revealed to be a formidable organizer, is possessed of limitless energy, and is a natural leader as recognized by her main follower, Georgie, and others like Quaint Irene, the artist who by the end of the book has a full-on lesbian crush on Lucia. Lucia is the sort of woman guaranteed to infuriate other aspiring social stars and she soon has Mapp in a futile rage because Mapp is nobody's fool and sees through Lucia's pretensions easily enough.

I was happy to see that Benson gives Mapp a victory of a sort at the end; she will soon be married, thus putting her firmly in the lead over widowed Lucia in an era where marriage endowed a woman with status. And she is in possession of the recipe that has made Lucia's dinner-parties better than anyone else's . . .  I have a certain amount of sympathy for Mapp, although both women richly deserve every setback that befalls them. I'm now really looking forward to reading the other books.