Rating: 2/5

Sometime around 1993 or 1994 I came across a copy of Steven Zeeland's book Barracks Buddies and Soldier Lover. I was in the Army at the time, an airborne infantryman in the 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg. I had join in 1987 long before Don't Ask, Don't Tell, so the book intrigued me. It was even more exciting to learn that Zeeland and I had been in Frankfurt, Germany at the same time where the interviews for that book took place. It gave a familiarity to a book unlike I had ever read before. The interviews were personal and gave evidence to how the military's ban on gays was affecting real people. It was even more to my shock when one of the guys Zeeland interviewed was someone that I had even went out with for a short time. Later I made contact with Zeeland and he was kind enough to send me a picture of Eric. 

So, when Masculine Marine showed up in my mail from Paperback Swap recenlty I started reading it within a couple of days. I was looking forward to reading about another branch and in a way looking for an explaination as to why my one dating experience with a Marine from Camp Lejuene. We spent a weekend together after meeting in Raleigh, NC, and was one of the worst dates I had every been on. 

Well, unfortunately I was disappointed, the book almost reads like a clinical study. Much of the time is spent talking about Marine image of masculine and feminine, a Marine's "obsession" with how he looks and is USMC just one big homoerotic organization. The interviews were at times almost impersonal in their reading. At times I found myself speeding reading to get through a particually boring section. 

Of the four military branchs the Marine Corps is the most interesting in that can can be so homophobic and homoerotic at the same time. There is a mysticism to them that demands respect from those of us in the other branchs. (I also served in the Air Force Reserve for a few years). A family member was a Marine in WWII and even into the last years of his life you could easily see it. 

While the book does give insight, especially to those without military service, to the world of being a gay Marine I was disappointed in how distant some of the interviews felt at times. However, in a twist of fate that book will become a more critical record down the road now that DADT has been repealed. Years from now when all the controversy has subsided and people wondered what everyone got their feathers all ruffled over this will be for their reminding.