Rating: 5/5

Warning: I am using this book as a proxy for the book I actually read on this topic, Arctic, published by the Folio Society of London in 2025. And I have forgotten how to add books. Anyway, onward.

After conclusively beating Napolean in 1815, the British Navy found itself with a lot of surplus ships and no clear mandate for usage, so the British Naval Board cooked up the idea of going after the elusive Northwest Passage, which, this time, would need to lie somewhere along all that Arctic ice just west of Greenland. 
 
This beautiful compilation by the Folio Society (which frustratingly does not always assign ISN numbers) is a collection of contemporary artists’ conceptions of the frozen Arctic landscape and excerpts from the log books of the various expeditions that were sent to find the path through the ice to the open ocean that people were willing to believe actually existed at the top of the world. The expeditions are not limited to the British. As European colonialism breaks out in the second half of the 1800s, Germans and Italians also throw their hats in the ring of becoming the first to the North Pole. The collection looks at each of these expeditions in chronological order, which makes for intriguing reading when one expedition, The Franklin Expedition, goes mysteriously missing in 1845. Subsequent missions, in addition to looking for the hidden passage, are also tasked with finding out what happen to Franklin and his men. This turns grisly a few expeditions later. 
 
In fact, in addition to the breathtaking beauty of the artistic renderings of the plains and mountains of ice illuminated by spectacularly dramatic skies, there is a constant undercurrent of dread that the elements will end up killing every one of the men of the expeditions. Men are regularly dragged off by polar bears, disappear into thin ice, run low on rations and starve, develop scurvy and waste away or go mad, and lose limbs to frostbite and gangrene. Ships are trapped in ice for months at a time. Night lasts for months. Sled dogs are there to pull the supply sleds but can also be served as dinner in a pinch. The Inuit (aka Eskimos) assist on occasion, but there are also incidents of violence that occur. The last explorer in this volume, the married American Scott, ends up liking Inuit women in a way that could be torn from recent headlines.
 
The prose of some of the logbooks is poetic, and the editors do a good job of focusing on what I assume are the most interesting bits of each expedition. 
 
A very enjoyable read!