Rating: 5/5

October 10, 2014 update upon completing reading the book (third time but first review):

Here is a book that would have been immensely profitable for me if I had read it as a young man beginning to raise my family. Now having been married over 50 years, with three children and seven grandchildren I can say that I can still apply the principles learned. And more, I can disciple younger men in this book to give them the start that I had wished I could have had. This is recommended reading for every man for building the best possible relationships in life, especially with his own family. I also recommend this book as a discipleship (mentoring) tool. Besides going thru the book together, men can use the questions for each chapter at the back of the book as a guide for discussion. 

A friend and I are about to finish the book as we meet weekly for breakfast and time of discussion in it. This has been rich and rewarding to both of us. I would look forward to helping other men using this material.

Here are just a few observations about each pillar:

The Servant King in balance never leans to either side; the abdicator or tyrant. 

“Whether serving kingdoms or companies or churches or families, the king in a man’s chest beats to secure justice, establish order, ensure stability, and provide structure. The king in a man develops what one rather kingly document called the United States Constitution, calls ‘domestic tranquility.’”

The Tender Warrior in balance never leans to either side; the coward or brute.

“Yes, the warrior is a destroyer. The Christian warrior is out to destroy evil in all of its many forms—dishonesty, corruption, tyranny, injustice, pornography, child abuse, oppression, racism…Yes, the warrior is a protector. Men stand tallest when they are protecting and defending. And it is in the areas of the soul and spirit that most of today’s families need careful protection. Some anonymous warrior said it wisely and well: ‘Keep out of your child’s life anything that will keep Christ out of his heart.’” I say also keep those things out of your own life.

The Wise Mentor in balance never leans to either side; the dunce or know-it-all.

“The mentor function is modeled everywhere in Scripture. Mentoring is part and parcel of discipling. The heart of the mentor is a teaching heart. It is a coaching heart. The mentor knows, and he wants others to know. He is always discipling—first his wife and kids, then others. The mentor has a spiritual heart that tugs at the hearts of others. His heart makes you want to learn.”

The Faithful Friend in balance never leans to either side; the loner or smotherer.

“If there is no soulish connection, then there is no reason for living. If the King provides but never connects, it’s no good. If the Warrior protects but never connects, it’s no good. If the Mentor teaches but never connects, it’s no good. It is not good for man to be alone! It is the Friend in his chest that gives the King, the Warrior, and the Mentor a reason to exist. If one of the four pillars is to stand a little taller, a little straighter than the others, if one pillar must bear a little more of the weight of manhood than the others, it must be the Friend pillar.”

Men, read the bible regularly, study it—apply it, read the Four Pillars of a Man’s Heart – Bringing Strength into Balance! And women, there is even a chapter for you at the end of the book that you might encourage the men in your life.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

July 10, 2014 update - I'm reading this book for the third time since I am going thru it with a friend in a discipleship relationship. The Four Pillars of a Man's Heart are: The Servant King, the Tender Warrior, the Wise Mentor, and the Faithful Friend. We are just finishing the Servant King section in chapter 5. Here is an interesting statement by the author, Stu Weber that I think applies to today's professed leaders. This seems true to me even though the book was written almost 20 years ago: "Unfortunately the king in a man is a dying breed in our culture. The men who wrote our constitution were kings. They looked way ahead. And for two hundred years now this nation has enjoyed the fruit of their provision. But by contrast, some of the men who today interpret our founders' constitution cannot see beyond the end of their own legal noses. As a result, justice is fading, security is eroding. Kingly leadership is in short supply. And the nation is adrift."