Rating: 3/5

Well, alas, it was as I feared. The hype about the book was more than the book could deliver.

The foreword by Jonathan Ames was delightful, and I especially appreciated that the publishers decided to include the original Sports Illustrated article at the end.

The book itself, however, fails in several ways. The most glaring of all is the lack of veracity regarding the game of baseball -- particularly, the "perfect" game of baseball. A perfect game, as any good fan knows, involves the pitcher facing the minimum of batters. But it also involves none of those batters reaching base, whether through error or a hit-by-pitch, etc. (For example, if you've faced the minimum 24 batters through 8 innings, then hit the leadoff hitter in the ninth inning, only to get the next batter to ground into a double-play, you no longer are in the running for a perfect game. You're simply one out away from pitching a no-hitter and a _nearly_ perfect game.)

The main character, Sidd Finch, is enjoyable in the same way Alyosha is enjoyable to read about in The Brothers Karamazov. He is, in some ways, a minor god walking among men. And his reactions to certain "humanly" things is hilarious. 

But ... the narrator and the female lead character are lacking. The bulk of the baseball players get glommed together as one unit. And the amount of baseball actually discussed in the book is seriously lacking. True, in the movie "Run Lola Run" the main character is actually only running for a few minutes total. Happily, the slower parts of that movie still move events forward. The slower parts of this book seem to idle, and as a reader, idling is OK if you're reading (and skipping ahead in) Tolkien. But for a more modern book, a reader like me hopes for more of interest to occur.

Ultimately, I would recommend this book for true baseball aficionados (with the caveat about the "perfect" game misnomer). Otherwise, I think the SI article sufficed, and a longer book didn't need to be fleshed out from this gem. To go the wrong direction with a metaphor: Some gems just look better uncut.