Rating: 4/5

A great collection. Not all the stories/novellas were great, but most were pretty good, and several were amazing. Ford's intro is interesting if you're interested in novellas and what makes a novella, though in the end he doesn't really answer this question -- not that there's an answer anyway. He brings up some great points along the way, provides some nice history, I'll read it again and again. The only shocking exclusion from the anthology was Jim Harrison. Harrison has to be the country's most prolific novella writer, and yet nothing. I think he even mentions Harrison in the intro, and yet nothing. The two writers' styles are similar enough that I'm sure Ford has read and enjoys Harrison. Some old descriptions of the anthology describe its including Harrison (as well as Tobias Wolff), so perhaps Ford couldn't get permission. Still, he mentions wanting to include "A River Runs Through It" and not being able to obtain permission for that. Anyway, there were several novellas I wish I could replace with any of a number of Harrison novellas, though such is the nature of an anthology. This is a wonderful intro to the form as well as a great collection for anyone already familiar with it.

Eudora Welty's "June Recital" was great, though not my style (not at this time, anyway) -- it was pretty Faulknerian, which I don't think I was ready or looking for. William Styron's "The Long March" had some great moments, though I don't know that I'd be interested in seeking him out. "Goodbye, Columbus" started out amazing, with probably the best of Roth's writing I've ever read, though about halfway through it turned a bit sentimental and story-driven, and I lost some interest and became disappointed, which is how I always feel when I read Roth. Like, That's it? Gaines' "A Long Day in November" I found appallingly simplistic and quite boring; I wasn't sure what Ford saw in it. Elkin's "The Making of Ashendon" was great. Typical of Elkin, amazing writing, etc. I don't know that I've ever seen a writer switch from first to third person halfway through a piece. Elkin does it absolutely smoothly here. Peter Taylor's "The Old Forest" was pretty good, though again I don't know that I'm champing at the bit to read more of his work. "Rosa" was typical of the only other thing I've read by Ozick, "The Shawl," which is to say very dramatic. Good, but.

Jane Smiley's "The Age of Grief" was the definite standout here. I actually cried at the end. Never have I read a more efficient, distilled, accurate (or so it seemed) depiction of marriage, and of having a young family and of getting older. And I read a lot of that sort of thing. This was simply incredible, and I'll definitely seek out more of Smiley's work, asap.

Oates' piece did nothing for me, it never sunk it's teeth in, but Barry Hannah's "Hey, Have You Got a Cig, the News, the Time, My Face?" was the collection's second standout. It reminded me of Elkin, in a way, in the narrator's tendency to rant, or to border on misanthropy. This was complex, funny, touching, sad, and a great overall story. I need to read more Hannah, for sure. This, along with Smiley's piece, makes the collection worth it, if nothing else does.

The final story, "Caroline's Wedding," seemed unspectacular to me. It was a story I'd read many, many times. It would have been great if the collection had ended with Hannah, but what can you do. The collection is almost fifteen years old, and it would be great if Granta published a "New Book of the American Long Story," as they did with the short story. We'll see. We'll see. Meantime I need to go gorge myself on Smiley and Hannah.