Rating: 4/5

Really enjoyed this the last of the Highland Brides trilogy. Here we Finlay get Alexander’s story, he has been a character in the previous two books, Highland Wedding and His Bonnie Bride. In those books he was a friend of the hero and also a rival for the heroines affections. An extremely handsome man Alexander MacDubb is a widower with a young daughter in the first two books but all has changed in this book. He has been remarried and widowed again, but also has suffered the loss of his daughter and father. This has changed Alexander from a handsome, sociable, affable ladies man, to a remote, emotionless recluse, consumed with the need for revenge against the clan who murdered his father. Alais is the niece of the Laird responsible for that murder ( and also the theft of property) the king has denied Alexander any Avenue of revenge so he has just has to accept the situation. That Is until he finds out his brother Barra has fathered three children with Alais’s deceased sister, he rides out immediately to get the children but when he stumbles across them their aunt is with them. Seeing his chance for revenge he kidnaps Alais intending to seduce her in revenge for his losses. Alais is not unwilling, she is betrothed to an evil man so if she can find some pleasure for herself before she has to marry Donald then she will take it. Alais and Alexander soon find themselves emotionally involved but it is hopeless, Donald will not rest till he gets her back and Alexander cannot forget who Alais’s family are or what they have cost him. This is a really good story and if not for the other two books in the series could be read and enjoyed quite well, but, for me it had one major flaw. The timeline is all wrong, Alexander’s age, when we see him in book one he is maybe mid to late twenties with a toddler daughter, in book two ten years have past he is still single his daughter alive, maybe twelve by now, Alexander mid to late thirties, now in his book he’s widowed, daughter dead ( while still a child) two years, father dead several years, so Alexander has to be at least forty, if not older, in a time when this was considered old age, and Alais is around twenty. But he’s still spoken of as a man in the prime of life and no mention is made of the age difference. It totally spoiled the book for me, but as I say if I hadn’t read the other two it would not have been a problem.