Rating: 3/5

Fleming. Ian Fleming.

This biography of Ian Fleming by Andrew Lycett was the most comprehensive one out there I could find. As someone who loved both the Bond books and movies (can't forget Chitty Chitty Bang Bang), I was interested in learning more about the man. There certainly is a lot of myths woven around the man who created James Bond to nobody's surprise. Lycett is able to look beyond the myths however and give us Ian Fleming, the complex individual that he was.

Unfortunately, Fleming's case is largely one of the commonly used phrase "never meet your heroes". While Fleming had a wide variety of friends and acquaintances (Churchill, Truman Capote, John F. Kennedy), his views on women leave much to be desired. Fleming isn't going to be confused as a feminist anytime soon. Fleming told one friend: "Women were like pets, like dogs, men were the only real human beings, the only ones he could be friends with."

Fleming's story is interesting however to consider since he did not even begin writing Bond until after the age of 40 and died by the age of 56. Of course, with a diet such as "he was smoking seventy cigarettes, and contrary to his dictates for foreign correspondents, drinking a bottle of gin each day" it's no wonder he even made it to 40. Of course, he eventually did cut down his cigarette habit to 60 a day.

While Lycett does give some attention to the Bond books, it ultimately leaves much to be desired. They are mentioned in the context of what was going on in Fleming's life but we never got much more in most cases other than a plot summary. Although it is fascinating to see that Fleming (much like Doyle with Sherlock Holmes) eventually came to regret his creation and even considered killing him off multiple times. It's even more interesting to consider all of this since James Bond was largely the man of action Fleming wish he could have been during the war.

Although I do give Lycett credit for giving us more information about Fleming's novel, The Spy Who Loved Me, my personal least favorite book of the Bond series. At this point, Fleming claimed he did not see Bond as a heroic figure "but only as an efficient professional in his job". The train had already left the station at this point however so to speak.

Overall, I find it extremely interesting that the current Bond series today rejects the campiness of the 70s and 80s Bond movies and even the campiness within the Bond books. Instead, they embrace the darker side of James Bond as a character and ultimately leave you wondering whether Bond is really a hero or not. I would have been interested in seeing Fleming's take on this.

Lycett's biography is overall an enjoyable read, although I do think it sometimes gets lost in detail. As previously stated, I would have enjoyed a bit more literary criticism of the Bond novels. However, the biography serves its purpose well of giving readers a more intimate and stark look at the man who in modern popular culture is becoming more myth than fact.