Rating: 4/5

“THE ENGLISH-ASPERANT- BUDDIST-MONK- SUPER PITCHER”

The novel revolves around three characters. The mysterious Sidd Finch who can accurately throw a baseball over 150 miles an hour, Robert Temple who is an ex-reporter suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, Debbie Sue who is hyperactive, scatterbrained free spirit. It takes place during the 1985 baseball season. A scout discovers Sidd Finch after watching a triple-A farm league game at Old Orchard Beach between the Tidewater Tides and the Maine Guides. I smiled because Old Orchard Beach abuts the community where I live in Maine. The Maine Guides were a short-lived team that lasted in OOB from 1984-1988. They uprooted and moved to Pennsylvania. The Tidewater Tides renamed themselves the Norfolk Tides. The fictional book was published in 1987. 

The New York Mets farm team’s managers are drooling over possibly recruiting the mysterious Sidd Finch. The problem is Finch. His ultra-shy demeanor and indifference to money as well as fame are roadblocks. Robert Temple stumbles upon the Mets’ secret weapon but has an inability or desire to write about it because of his PTSD. Keep in mind that events occur before cell phones or even email. Keeping a lid on the team’s secret was easier than today where you could accidentally fart and it’s shared around the world on the internet. 

The story does not center completely around baseball. Large chunks of it are about the three primary characters. I discovered around a third of the way through the story that Sports Illustrated ran a 1985 April Fools article in their magazine about Sidd Finch. It was also titled ‘The Curious Case of Sidd Finch.’ The Mets and Sports Illustrated let the public in on the gag a week after it was published. George Plimpton (1927-2003) wrote both the magazine article and the book. He even mentions the Sports Illustration article in the book’s storyline, and the author makes a brief cameo. 

‘The Curious Case of Sidd Finch’ is a charming novel. Mr. Plimpton inserts a few interesting pieces of trivia, some about baseball. It is not a laugh-out-loud book, but I found it amusing and quirky. If you are hoping for a story with a lot of baseball action, The Curious Case of Sidd Finch’ will disappoint you. The plot does culminate with Finch finally pitching a few games. I loved the ending.