Rating: 1/5

I honestly want to know if romance authors write this kind of tripe fully believing in it or if they just don't care that they are helping to perpetuate some horrific ways of thinking as long as they're getting paid for it.

A young MacFarlane woman and her niece and nephews are kidnapped by the MacDubh clan because it turns out the children were fathered by the younger (married) brother of that clan's Laird. The Macdubh hate the MacFarlane because the uncle of the young woman somehow arranged to steal a crap-ton of land and wealth from them and murdered the old Laird (the current Laird's father) with the help of his lover, the late step-mother of the current MacDubh Laird. Somehow this all got set up so everything bypassed the old laird's heirs and if they tried to do anything about it they'd be branded outlaws by the king of Scotland for non-explained Handwavium Reasons. 

The Macdubh Laird is a huge misogynist that thinks just because a handful of women (his step-mother, two previous wives, and his brother's late wife) have been terrible people in the past then all women must be like that and he goes out of his way not to mix with anyone who would prove otherwise to him. He proceeds to vengeance rape the young woman for the crime of being born a MacFarlane and to piss off her kin and betrothed (who is also a horrible person she didn't want to marry either). The author tries really hard to make out it's not rape and it's all okay because the woman decides that because she can't avoid the forced sex she would at least try and avoid more harm and pain by attempting to enjoy the whole thing. Since the Laird is a Studly McHotty she can't help but be attracted to (despite his awful behaviour) that makes everything better. So begins the insta-Stockholm-Syndrome-love thing.

After much off-page shagging she winds up pregnant. After she tells him she's pregnant he demands to know who the father is because, as mentioned, he's a bit of a dick. She gives him a good smack in the face for this insult among many and after a non-apology and an extra insult about her "tainted" bloodline the Laird decides they must now get married for the sake of the child, even though he hates women and especially MacFarlanes. The young woman doesn't put up much of a fight, partly because she has nowhere else to go or a way to support herself and a child, but mostly because she's suffering from that insta-Stockholm-Syndrome-love thing and she truly believes that she can change this cold, abusive dick of a man if she just stays nearby and constantly shines the power of her compassion and love upon him. 

... And at this point I decided I'd had quite enough of hating myself and claimed a DNF at 49%. I think that was at least 48% longer than I should have taken and I haven't even bitched about the weirdly shoehorned in bits with the niece having the Sight. Just do yourselves a favour and stay clear of this unless you're a true masochist.