Rating: 2/5

2.5/5
	
I’m going to soapbox a bit, and some of you may not like it. But this is a review about a comic that soapboxes a bit, which puts me in pretty good company.

The curse of a 24hr news cycle is the way it perverts your sensibilities. If you’re not careful, you stop relating to the world on a personal level. Once that shift happens, once your feet leave the ground, the world becomes a place of war and strife on a scale you can’t really fathom.

Hard Traveling Heroes seems strangely topical, especially in light of what’s still happening in minority communities all over the US. With Hal the uncomplicated space cop set against a left-wing radical like the archer, it asks a question we are still trying to answer forty-plus years later: Why is it so easy for the powerful to ignore social issues when all around them is inequality?

As troubling a proposition as this seems to be, it makes perfect sense that Hal Jordan, Green Lantern of Space Sector 2814 wouldn’t be immune to it. For Hal, it’s not just about humanity’s well-being anymore. Imagine you rose to godhood tomorrow, what’s it to you that a man goes homeless among the untold billions you police?

Enter heavy-handed left-wing billionaire, sometimes hero, and Denny O’Neil mouthpiece: Oliver Queen, the Green Arrow. The arrow is the man on the pulse of the problem. He sees the ugliness of the world, and he’s delighted to call Hal a fascist when he puts his belief in the infallibility of the law. The result is equal parts buddy cop movie and heavy-handed sermon. Walking America’s streets, Ollie pushes Hal to reconnect with humanity during a time of great discord and unrest in this country. Denny shows us how capes and cowls would contend with the faceless villainy of racism, political corruption, and exploitation; leading them quickly into situations where willpower and arrows don’t always fly true.

Denny was part of a new crop of socially conscious writers in comics, and I couldn’t help but hear his voice behind every page. Not having grown up in or around the time of the book; in the thick of what that sweeping social change meant to the moment, I find myself taken out of the story every now and again which impacted the score. The power of comics comes from how an invisible creator carries the creation through time, renewing it for each successive generation. With the writing in this volume, it just came off the other way around, where the characters seemed locked in time, overshadowed by the views of the creator – especially the section with the little girl who bears a striking resemblance to Nixon.

Illustrated lavishly by one of the all-time greats of the industry, Neal Adams, the art is brilliant. With its liberal use of close-ups and wild expressions set against urban sprawl, Adams anchors the characters to a very recognizable world. Hal is sleek and ever in the air, giving the readers the sense that he is always looking down on things. In contrast, Ollie remains in constant contact with the pavement and the foreground, standing close to the reader in a way that subtly accentuates the plot of the book. It’s easy to see why Neil’s art influenced so many generations of artists with its deep rich shadows and form sculpting hatch marks. The result is a cross between cinema and caricature that did as much for the artists of the Image generation as Kirby did for Marvel’s bullpen 60’s.

It’s hard for me to judge Hard Traveling Heroes as harshly or as kindly as I would like because it comes from a time before my own. For me; the Civil Rights Movement was a blip in a history book, and I am more likely to be glib about how little we’ve changed when I view it through the prism of retrospect. The news cycle I’m exposed to doesn’t show me how much we’ve evolved from the world Denny and Neal were trying to change. Instead, the people I see are still unable to overcome the complications of race and power which divide us, regardless of the heroes who come to our defense. So, maybe the issue isn’t how much we’ve changed since this story was written, but rather, how little.