Rating: 2/5

The book The Pact by Lisa Frazier Page is an interesting book that takes the reader for a trip through the lives of a few boys. Three boys live in a community that very many people don’t make it out of without going to jail or dying at a young age. The boys tell their story of how they made it out of this troubling place and got to where they are. Sampson, George and Rameck encounter things average teenagers wouldn’t. The author does an amazing job at making the different points of view combine as a whole 

 The way the book is set up is difficult for me to understand. In the book each paragraph alternates between characters so it’s hard for me to keep track of what is happening to whom. The book overall has a slow pace but I still consider it to be a good read if you enjoy slower paced books. It is based on a true story about three guys who made something out of their lives even though they grew up in bad communities.

 The reason I choose to read this book was for class. I thought the book would be my type of story but it turns out it wasn't. Throughout the story situations that can jeopardize the boys paths to success happens. They each have things they have to overcome, their families were different in their own way but they all connected somehow. Some get involved in the wrong crowds and others can't control their anger and it gets the best of them but in the end they make it out as good people and return back to their communities as doctors.

The book is not one I would put on my list of favorites. Don’t get me wrong The Pact was a good book. It had a great theme and was very well written. I just wouldn’t prefer reading it. I recommend this book to teenagers that love a good slow paced story. I’d give this book 2 stars out of 5.

The author did a great job putting the book together. I would not recommend reading it if you enjoy books that get right to the point. I personally enjoy reading books that have a mystery or books that give me something to look forward to. In The Pact I didn't really have much to look forward to because the story looked back on their lives instead of leaving you wondering if they were going to make it or not. It starts off by telling the reader that they had became doctors already. If you like books that give away the ending this would be a great book for you to read.