Rating: 3/5

The Killer Inside Me *** – SPOILER ALERT – This is a masterwork of mood, psychology and brutality. It is in many ways a horrifying read, but the character of Lou Ford is a fascinatingly evil character. It’s hard to put the book down despite its gory details and outrageous amorality. 

It is full of holes, however. I count three murders that authorities allowed after they suspected Ford. That’s some pretty incompetent police work. One could quibble about a psychopath who kills every 15 years. Then there’s that first-person perspective of someone who dies at the end. (And appears to be telling the story to someone.) And finally, these are some pretty strange women who love Ford no matter what he does – and I mean no matter what he does. (Perhaps he learned to create female characters from Dickens.)

Overall, a great book for atmosphere, mood and psychology. (11/18)

The Real Cool Killers *** This is the story of a violent subculture (1950’s Harlem) cordoned off by a society unconcerned about the suffering and degradation of those living within it. All the characters – black or white – show an almost complete disregard for the suffering of strangers. The violence is excessive and savage. A sense of being trapped permeates the novel.

For a detective story, it is interesting that the authorial voice goes back and forth across all the characters – not just the principle detectives. We see the lives of the people (mostly petty criminals) in Harlem and the workaday violence they endure. The only thing not shown is a life of normalcy and safety. In this way, I think, Himes presents a devastating indictment of American culture and its treatment of African Americans.

The plot has the usual twists of a noir story and a somewhat surprise ending followed by the typical explanation (which includes a Q&amp;A from the police statements of the accomplices). But I found the very last scene the most interesting. It features Sissie going to prison to visit one of the surviving characters of the story and, trying to go straight (?), they decide to marry. She then admits she’s pregnant with Sheik’s child, and the other character says they better get married as soon as possible. End of novel

This is an odd ending. Of all the characters, why end with these two? And does it represent the end of a cycle of violence, or the continuing of the cycle? Is it supposed to be presented as a misguided attempt to escape? Or is the reader supposed to be hopeful that everything will work out? My take is that it simply portrays the ongoing struggles of individuals in a segregated, violent society. A chapter ends, but the struggles and exhaustion continue. 

Himes’ style is graphic and highly wrought. Everything is very descriptive – sometimes to the point of absurdity. But it is noir. If you like a violent crime story, this is a gripping story that is well told. Although it lacks explicit social commentary, it does shine a harsh light on American society. (5/14)