Rating: 3/5

My interest in wanting to explore some Japanese literature has come from recently watching the latest Shogun series and a Netflix series called Tokyo Vice which is based on a memoir of an American journalist in Tokyo in the 1990’s. I highly recommend both of these tv programs and look forward to diving into reading them as well. However, my first experience of a Japanese crime, mystery, thriller fell way short. I chose this one because it was a ‘locked room mystery’ in which a crime occurred which would fulfill a reading challenge prompt and would allow me to read a book in translation as well as a “classic” – written in 1948. I will briefly explain a few things that I noted about this particular book - The Tattoo Murder Case.

Set just after WW2 in a defeated Japan, the victim has survived the war only to be murdered because of her full body tattoo – an illegal act for all parties. Not only was this illegal but for a woman to have such an art form on her body was considered shocking. The author writes in a way that tells a LOT and shows very little. We hear a LOT about tattooing and that there are people who are collectors of skins – yes, that’s right, the skins of the bodies of those individuals who after death have allowed their tattoos to be preserved. UGH! Well, ok. Moving on. 

There was much repetition of the story throughout and not a lot of plot to move this forward. The police were made out to be unable – not smart enough – to solve a case where a dismembered body was found inside a locked bathroom and the torso which contained the tattoo was missing. The brother of the chief inspector played a rather large role in investigating and he was a medical student who had had a brief intimate encounter with the victim prior to her death. But what I couldn’t fathom was the introduction of a character presented to be a genius and friend of the chief’s brother who proceeded to do what the police were unable to do – solve the murder with quite a few twists and turns. 

Trying to be brief here, so wrapping this up – the translation fell way short for me and was rather clunky and very American sounding if that makes sense. It was not at all what I expected from my first experience of Japanese literature. I’m sure there are way better books and even better crime/mysteries to choose to read. This was ok if you’re intrigued at all by tattoos.