Rating: 4/5

You, Hercule Poirot—the world-famous detective—are asked to carry out an almost impossible feat: to solve a 16-year-old murder. 

Check out the crime board with higher res here. 

You receive a letter requesting an appointment with a young woman. A tall, slender woman arrives, and while smoking a cigarette, she introduces herself as Carla Lemarchant. She's looking for the best detective—la crème de la crème—to reopen the Crale case: she claims to have new evidence suggesting the culprit may have escaped justice. 

Hercule Poirot said slowly, "Granted that what you say is true, mademoiselle, sixteen years have gone by!" 

Carla Lemarchant said, "Oh, of course it's going to be difficult! Nobody but you could do it! (...) I've heard about you," Carla said. "The things you've done. The way you have done them. It's psychology that interests you, isn't it? Well, that doesn't change with time. The tangible things are gone—the cigarette end and the footprints and the bent blades of grass. You can't look for those any more. But you can go over all the facts of the case, and perhaps talk to the people who were there at the time (...). And you'll know what really happened..."

You remember that case. It made a lot of noise back then. Amyas, a well-known painter and womanizer, was found dead, and his wife Caroline was convicted for his murder. The young woman tells you Caroline left a letter to be read by her daughter once she was 21. In that letter, she tells her daughter to be at peace, because she was innocent—she didn’t murder her husband. 

The young lady confesses she's in fact Amyas and Caroline's daughter, and that she had no idea about their parents' tragic deaths, she had only recently been told the truth about her family. She was only a child when the tragedy took place. She begs you to investigate the murder in hopes that it’ll allow her to move on, start a family of her own, and find closure. 

You concede and tell her you'll find the truth—but that it may not necessarily give her the peace she's looking for.

“One must have the courage to face reality. Without that courage, life is meaningless. The people who do us most harm are the people who shield us from reality.”

Now you must interrogate the 5 people who were with the Crales at the time of the murder: Angela Warren, Caroline’s sister; Philip and Meredith Blake, the Crale’s childhood friends; Elsa Greer, Amyas’ mistress; and Cecilia Williams, the governess. 

This is one of Poirot’s most difficult cases: not only did it happen 16 years earlier and the case has already been closed, but also he has no physical evidence and memories have blurred. 

“So young. Something innocent, something appealing, something helpless. But youth is not that! Youth is crude, youth is strong, youth is powerful—yes, and cruel! And one thing more—youth is vulnerable.”

This is also one of Poirot's most poignant cases: a family destroyed, lifelong friendships torn apart, innocence lost, one person doing their best to hold everyone and everything together until they no longer could. The novel was good, but the TV adaptation starring David Suchet—that was a masterpiece. What stellar acting, idyllic setting, moving soundtrack! It really strikes a chord. It resonates and lingers. Whichever version you choose, you won't forget it. 

“I should hope, M. Poirot, that whatever our feelings, we can keep them in decent control. And we can certainly control our actions.”

---------------------
More murder boards:
- 
  Murder on the Orient Express
 
- 
  The Mysterious Affair at Styles
 
- 
  Hallowe'en Party

- 
  Cards on the Table

More Poirot cases: Three Act Tragedy, The Hollow, Third Girl, Black Coffee