Rating: 5/5

My daughter introduced me to these series. On one of our trips to a bookstore, she asked me if I could get her a pocket version of Chicken Soup for the Soul. As my wife and her read it together, they both absolutely loved it and told me of how wonderful these books are.

I have never read any Chicken Soup for the Soul books, but my 9 year old daughter, at that time, has been already exposed to them. On our recent trip to the bookstore, she was looking for something that she needed for school. I was in pocket books section looking for some of those Zen and Tao books. I have noticed that they carried a whole series of pocket Chicken Soup for the Soul books. I decided to grab one and surprise her with it.

After my daughter read it, I wanted to check it out myself and both of us wrote a few words about it.

My take on the book

  A little spoonful of Chicken Soup for Kids Soul
 is a wonderful book of a numerous stories. It is people of various ages, race groups and backgrounds sharing their experiences and stories of when they were small children. Some of the stories are sad, touching and tragic. Some of the stories are cute and funny. There are also some quotes as well, that relay the message of the information presented in the book and makes the child think about what the meaning is.

There are even some celebrities who share their stories and experiences from where they were little kids. Shaq, the basketball player is one of a few of those people.

I like the idea that they make the child see different views on the everyday situations in our lives. The books make the child analyze those situations and put some thought on how that relates to his or her personal experiences. My daughter enjoyed it and even gave me some explanation to why she liked it, why she thought this book was important for another child to read and even on how it effected her emotionally. 

My daughter’s take on the book
A little spoonful of Chicken Soup for the Kids Soul
I’ve read a lot of ‘Chicken Soup for the Soul’ books. I just finished reading Chicken Soup for the Kids soul and I really liked it. All the wonderful stories, each teaching you something knew. “I have learned to find self-esteem in things that make me special and not what others say or don’t say about me”. I also learned that “Everyone has something to give and that you should do the best and god will do the rest.” Another thing I learned “What is important in life is how we treat each other.”

Two of my favorite quotes from this book are “The man who knows right from wrong and has good judgement and common sense is happier than the man who is immensely rich! For such wisdom is far more valuable then jewels” and ”A friend likes you for who you are and not what you look like, because that is what really matters.” 

Conclusion
Even though my daughter’s take on this book was mostly in quotes, she used the quotes and stories that have touched her in some way. She actually used them because they have taught her some kind of a valuable lesson and that is why she decided to mention them.

This book is fantastic. It is not to big and the child enjoys holding it with his or her little hands. The information in it is extremely valuable and easy for a kid to understand. I highly recommend it to anyone to read this book to their kids or better yet, have the child read it him or her self.