Rating: 2/5

It's one of the definitive Batman stories! It's brilliant! It helped comics become more serious! I hate it!

Hello everyone, welcome to another edition of Tim has an unpopular opinion.

Okay, so that last one is an exaggeration, I do not hate the Dark Knight Returns, but I do not like it, and I certainly do not love it like so many do.

Let's get this started with the direction most people seem to go with, I do not like Frank Miller. There has been plenty said about how Miller has become a self-parody of his work and how Sin City ruined his writing and that it's hard to enjoy his older work because of this. I'm not going that direction, though I honestly see where that group comes from.

I disliked this book before I disliked Miller. I'll also say something that most people who dislike Miller won't say; I genuinely enjoy some of his Sin City work (not all of them, but I've read them all and actually do think there are some gems). I dislike this book for four main reasons:

1. The art. I hate, genuinely hate, the art style. The story could be amazing, but it would be hard to get over a three star review simply for the art. It's ugly to look at. It's blocky, it's cramped because of the small panels and it's unimpressive all around. I know this is very much on opinionated thing, but this style worked better in Miller's later black and white style because the panels were frequently larger and less detail actually made the issues less obvious. It's unpleasant on the eyes and it legitimately gave me a headache.

2. TV talking heads. Oh yes, I know he gets worse with this later, but it was annoying attempt at political comedy here and adds very little to the actual story. 

3. I dislike Superman as a character, always have and most likely always will, but even I will say that Miller is just ridiculous with his portrayal of him. Superman is guided by a moral compass, he should not be portrayed as an ineffectual tool for the government. He may be "all American," but his loyalty to the government (as shown many times) would not stretch to the lengths Miller goes to. He's a joke here, just to show how "awesome" Batman is in comparison. 

4. Swastika pastie woman. Jesus Christ Frank, I don't even have words, but maybe the Joker does...

 
(Made even funnier by the fact that she is supposed to work with the Joker... obviously other comic creators disagree with Miller’s take.)

Now, I won't disregard the merit of this book in terms of the history of comics. It did help get comics to be taken more seriously, it did help people think of Batman as the Dark Knight rather than Adam West and it did help usher in more interesting stories involving Superheroes. I also admit that I genuinely liked Carrie Kelley's story line about becoming Robin. 

I like nothing else... okay, that's a lie. I love that one of the Mutant members says "It's just a Goddamned bat." 

Because well, 

 

Thanks Miller, you added to your meme retroactively. 

2/5 stars.