Where Truth and Wisdom are verily, there is Love verily, coming of them both.

(I AM NOT MAKING FUN OF RELIGION, I AM ONLY MAKING FUN OF JULIAN OF NORWICH, AND EVEN THEN ONLY WITH THE DEEPEST ADMIRATION AND AFFECTION FOR MY SISTER IN CHRIST.)

this book is a trip. I read it because it's the earliest surviving example of a book written in english that we know for sure was written by a woman, historical importance yadda yadda, but mainly, it's a trip. 

julian of norwich is sooooo horny for god! and in particular so horny for, like, jesus's physical bodily damage! she's a real gorehound, to be honest! (I may also finally have to cave and create a #sidewoundrepresentation shelf, because obviously.)

but then just when you think that this book is going to be exclusively about julian's ecstatic agonies over jesus's blood-dripping forehead or whatever, she hits you with some extremely interesting stuff about jesus being our mother. like, really hits you over the head with it—it's relentless. even though I was tickled by the god-is-all-forms-of-love-and-I-do-mean-all section, the mother jesus gender section is the part I liked the best, the part where I had to sit up straight and tuck my shirt in and start taking notes instead of simply goofing around on my computer in the giant lecture hall (metaphorically speaking) because I realized that actually this was an interesting speaker with an interesting point. and give it to her!! because yes, she's right!!!!! if one believes that god is the father along with everything else then one must also surely believe that god is the mother, and like, yes, obviously, but I am just so unused to hearing that perspective from faithful catholi-christians (christians of any stripe, really, but when julian was having her revelations norwich was busy suppressing the lollards and martin luther hadn't been invented yet).

quotes about our mother jesus under the cut simply for length, but I do recommend reading them if you're interested, because again, it's all kind of wild:

And thus I saw that God rejoiceth* that He is our Father, and God rejoiceth that He is our Mother, and God rejoiceth that He is our Very Spouse and our soul is His loved Wife. And Christ rejoiceth that He is our Brother, and Jesus rejoiceth that He is our Saviour. These are five high joys, as I understand, in which He willeth that we enjoy; Him praising, Him thanking, Him loving, Him endlessly blessing.
✝✝✝
I beheld the working of all the blessed Trinity: in which beholding I saw and understood these three properties: the property of the Fatherhood, the property of the Motherhood, and the property of the Lordhood, in one God. In our Father Almighty we have our keeping and our bliss as anent our natural Substance, which is to us by our making, without beginning. And in the Second Person in skill and wisdom we have our keeping as anent our Sense-soul: our restoring and our saving; for He is our Mother, Brother, and Saviour. And in our good Lord, the Holy Ghost, we have our rewarding and our meed-giving for our living and our travail, and endless overpassing of all that we desire, in His marvellous courtesy, of His high plenteous grace.

For all our life is in three: in the first we have our Being, in the second we have our Increasing, and in the third we have our Fulfilling: the first is Nature, the second is Mercy, and the third is Grace.

For the first, I understood that the high Might of the Trinity is our Father, and the deep Wisdom of the Trinity is our Mother, and the great Love of the Trinity is our Lord: and all this have we in Nature and in the making of our Substance.

And furthermore I saw that the Second Person, which is our Mother as anent the Substance, that same dearworthy Person is become our Mother as anent the Sense-soul. For we are double by God's making: that is to say, Substantial and Sensual. Our Substance is the higher part, which we have in our Father, God Almighty; and the Second Person of the Trinity is our Mother in Nature, in making of our Substance: in whom we are grounded and rooted. And He is our Mother in Mercy, in taking of our Sense-part. And thus our Mother is to us in diverse manners working: in whom our parts are kept undisparted. For in our Mother Christ we profit and increase, and in Mercy He reformeth us and restoreth, and, by the virtue of His Passion and His Death and Uprising, oneth us to our Substance. Thus worketh our Mother in Mercy to all His children which are to Him yielding and obedient.
✝✝✝
Thus Jesus Christ that doeth good against evil is our Very Mother: we have our Being of Him,—where the Ground of Motherhood beginneth,—with all the sweet Keeping of Love that endlessly followeth. As verily as God is our Father, so verily God is our Mother; and that shewed He in all, and especially in these sweet words where He saith: I it am. That is to say, I it am, the Might and the Goodness of the Fatherhood; I it am, the Wisdom of the Motherhood; I it am, the Light and the Grace that is all blessed Love: I it am, the Trinity, I it am, the Unity: I am the sovereign Goodness of all manner of things. I am that maketh thee to love: I am that maketh thee to long: I it am, the endless fulfilling of all true desires.
✝✝✝
He might no more die, but He would not stint of working: wherefore then it behoveth Him to feed us; for the dearworthy love of Motherhood hath made Him debtor to us. The mother may give her child suck of her milk, but our precious Mother, Jesus, He may feed us with Himself, and doeth it, full courteously and full tenderly, with the Blessed Sacrament that is precious food of my life; and with all the sweet Sacraments He sustaineth us full mercifully and graciously. And so meant He in this blessed word where that He said: It is I that Holy Church preacheth thee and teacheth thee. That is to say: All the health and life of Sacraments, all the virtue and grace of my Word, all the Goodness that is ordained in Holy Church for thee, it is I. The Mother may lay the child tenderly to her breast, but our tender Mother, Jesus, He may homely lead us into His blessed breast, by His sweet open side, and shew therein part of the Godhead and the joys of Heaven, with spiritual sureness of endless bliss. And that shewed He in the Tenth [Shewing], giving the same understanding in this sweet word where He saith: Lo! how I loved thee; looking unto [the Wound in] His side, rejoicing.

This fair lovely word Mother, it is so sweet and so close in Nature of itself that it may not verily be said of none but of Him; and to her that is very Mother of Him and of all.

(which last bit I think makes mary this sort of urmother????)

other little bits of miscellany:
- rightfulness hath two fair properties: it is right and it is full—WELL, WHEN YOU PUT IT THAT WAY
- the word 'liefer'!!!! lief my old friend I didn't know u could be comparative :')
- so many modest (or not modest?) little as to my sights, forty-three in all!!
- sin is more painful than hell
- 'soothness'
- I know now that 'homely' and 'homeliness' mean something different in british english than in USian lol

  whether we be stirred to know God or our Soul, both [these stirrings] are good and true.

________________
*the translation is interesting. julian of norwich wrote in the vernacular; grace warrack's 1901 translation, which is the one that has wound up in the public domain—look at this beautiful cover!—makes use of all those olde-timey eths and so on. I wonder to what extent that is a preservation, and to what extent a manufacturing, in taking something from middle english and going to the trouble of translating it to a modernized english for readability. I suppose that, in any case, it's likely for the effect of that elevated and grandiose tenor in the Churchy Language–y way. and we presumably also have warrack to thank for the transition into modern english of wonderful phrasing like a marvellous mingling both of weal and woe (while I have to imagine that the original text, which I haven't perused, was alliterative as well, translating it successfully is a feat in itself!).