Rating: 3/5

The Masque of Mandragora is an overlooked Philip Hinchcliffe serial. One of the few times the Hinchcliffe era really attempted a historical setting (the other two being Pyramids of Mars and The Talons of Weng-Chiang) and it’s quite resplendent in its Italian Renaissance setting. It’s also one of four serials to be written by Louis Marks who novelized none of his stories, three novelizations falling to Terrance Dicks and Doctor Who and the Masque of Mandragora falling instead to Philip Hinchcliffe. This isn’t the only serial Hinchcliffe would adapt for the Target Books range of novelizations but in terms of adapting the story it’s one of the ones that is perhaps difficult to talk to. While Terrance Dicks famously adapts stories to be close to the story but with his easy to read style, Philip Hinchcliffe shows that there was a clear reason as to why he didn’t really write for the show. Doctor Who and the Masque of Mandragora reads almost too straightforward in terms of what happened, making the prose have a tendency to just be glossed over in reading the short novelization. In its shortness there is almost a paradox to the novel, it took me several days to get through because of how bland Hinchcliffe’s prose is, not helped by The Masque of Mandragora being a story which while having its fair share of action scenes, is more a contemplative piece in many ways.

On television the story was propped up by director Rodney Bennett’s use of location shooting in Portmeirion to serve as Renaissance Italy, and sadly Hinchcliffe doesn’t really add much to the descriptions. There’s a sequence early on in the serial involving orange trees and the way Hinchcliffe translates it makes it feel normal when in the serial we have a beautiful forest and some sparkling dialogue leading into action. The only thing that really does sparkle is the main dynamic between the Doctor and Sarah Jane, Hinchcliffe clearly being close to Tom Baker and Elisabeth Sladen through their three years on production. Hinchcliffe actually does some small additions to the dialogue for the Doctor in particular which makes for a pretty fun addition, especially when putting the bombast of Tom Baker against the villain Hieronymus and the Cult of Demnos. The events of the story are there and it’s perfectly fine as a novel.

Overall, Doctor Who and the Masque of Mandragora is essentially an example of why some people are better suited to suggesting ideas to produce instead of writing, something exemplified by Big Finish Productions as they adapted some of his unused ideas with scripts by other people. It makes a solid story come across as incredibly bland on the whole, making the shortness of a Target novelization feel much longer and honestly leave me with little to actually say about it. 5/10.