Rating: 4/5

Overall an entertaining read. I do agree with some that the writing at times got a little flowery. For those interested in the beginnings of the US space program and the origins of NASA this book provides a good start. The early astronauts are real American heroes and even a little insight into their personal struggles and challenges made for very interesting reading.

The book touched a little on the prevailing politics at the time which provided some context but didn't go so far as to take focus off the astronauts or the missions they were assigned to. I was surprised to read the scathing summary of the policies of the Obama administration and the impact they have had on NASA. While I had issues with several Obama era policies, I believe that NASA advocates are looking for a place to lay blame. The conditions that existed for the nation to rally around the space program have subsided. The space program was magical in at this time for two reasons; man conquered the wonder of space travel and we prevailed over our strongest adversary. Without these kinds of conditions to focus the attention of the nation, it is hard to repeat the glory days of space program.

Frankly speaking, the relentless torrent of technological progress will also serve to dilute the amazement of continued progress of the space program. Even the technological advancements in film making insulate us from future space success. Case in point, much of the country has already been to Mars with Matt Damon. There was no way to credibly simulate the moon landing in the late 60's. CBS ran simulated landing and there was no way it could be confused with reality. Today, a real landing has to compete with a very exciting and realistic landing created by Hollywood. In terms of 'amazing' the American public, NASA has a lot of competition.

The special time that existed during the space program is one of the reasons I enjoyed this book so much. The late 60's were an incredible time of chaos and transformation for the country. Some of it represented the worst of our nature, but the space program at that time embodied the very best of what America could be.