Rating: 5/5

This has been my favorite so far! The saints were exiting Nauvoo in mass. They were being terrorized by Mormon haters who had no conscience about beating and killing innocent Church members. Leaving left their precious Nauvoo Temple behind, the saints outfitted wagons to begin the trek across to an unknown place in the far away Rocky Mountains.

The main reason I liked this volume is that it made me think and learn beyond what I already knew. When I think of the pioneers, my vision is of them walking across the plains, wagons (or handcarts) and animals in tow. It didn’t occur to my modern mind that relentless rainstorms meant slogging through mud that sucked in wheels, legs, feet, etc. No AAA could be summoned for rescue. It was their problem to solve with little assistance but man and animal power. The wind, the heat, the cold, relentless conditions were challenges we can't even imagine! 
I shall not whine about having to go to the airport a couple hours early ever again!

The challenges did not stop there. I didn’t think much beyond crossing rivers by just slogging through those either. Brigham Young sent groups beyond the main company to find the best spots to cross: lower riverbanks so wagons could pass; build sturdy bridges where they could; or even get rafts ready for passage if necessary. All had to be good enough for their wagon train, and future ones to use.

Along with the trail navigation, there were also temporary settlements and shelters to build, land cleared, fields prepared, crops planted, and fences to put up so future pioneers could be cared for along the trail. They were all monumental tasks! …And I just remembered the rattlesnakes. (Fortunately, it seems the Indians were friendly!)

Even though I do know the different transportation methods of pioneers to the west, this volume tied them all together. Most of the Steed family traveled together across the plains. However, one couple sailed with Sam Brannan on the Brooklyn, which left from New York and went around the tip of South America, (making an unscheduled stop in the Juan Fernandez Islands). They stopped in many places including Hawaii for provisions, and eventually arriving in San Francisco. Another couple traveled with the Donner-Reed party, eventually hoping to meet up with the main wagon train. The details and journal entries of each travel method were fascinating, and of course, all were fraught with challenges and danger.

Besides the documented travel of the pioneers, the other reason I loved this volume was the intense struggle Joshua Steed had with his personal questions about the Church, and his relationship with Jesus Christ. His questions were honest, challenging, sometimes bitter, and far from easy. The answers and explanations he received from Nathan, Caroline and Pres. Young made him think seriously about everything that really bothered him. He was no easy pushover, and that was good! Beautifully written answers to ponder for us all.

Loved this volume! On to the final #9…