Rating: 4/5

REAL AND STRAIGHT-FORWARDLY TOLD
The story of Robin, a fourteen year old boy and his dysfunctional family, takes place in the late 1970s. I was only a bit older, spending my high school years in the early part of that decade. More masculine in my demeanor than Robin, I had an easier time in high school passing for "normal," but I could still very much relate to this character, his experiences and feelings. I think any gay person, regardless of their age or at what stage they are coming to terms with themselves, or like me, now in my sixties, having figured it out long ago, will see something of themselves in this novel and strongly relate to it.

Soehnlein writes in a very straight-forward uncomplicated style, but the story he tells is incredibly complex and rich with experiences and events that are so relatable. There's a sense of realness to his writing that is hard for me to articulate. Reading this book I often felt a sense of nostalgia and found myself distracted with my own memories, the isolation I felt and attractions I couldn't share. Certain secret experiences I had with other boys which telegraphed I was not going to be "normal." Thankfully, I was not raised in a family as tragic and dysfunctional as Robin's, but it's common for all of us to experience some sort of family drama growing up. Coping with it made all the more difficult by having to pretend to everyone, family, friends, peers, to be someone you are not. Worse, to be someone they were likely to condemn and judge as broken or defective. 

If I had one criticism, it would be the "adventures" in delinquency Robin undertakes with Scott, a boy he believes is like him. While I found their interactions very real and the character of Scott as well written as our protagonist, I thought the truancy they engage in tested the limits of plausibility. It's a minor criticism.

Finally, while I would highly recommend this book for anyone questioning their sexual orientation, I would even more highly recommend it to straight people who know and care about someone engaged with this struggle. It will give them real insight into what the person they care about is going through.