Rating: 5/5

I really enjoyed this comic; I keep wondering why it took me so long to read it. I finally got around to reading it after being blown away by Batman: The Dark Knight Returns, Part 1 (Region 2), and Batman: The Dark Knight Returns - Part 2 [DVD]. I thought it was finally time to get round to the source material. I am glad I did.

I quick recap of the story. Bruce is no longer Batman. There has been no Batman for 10 years. To curb his urges, Bruce has become something of an adrenalin junkie study. Gotham has become a darker and more lawless place. On the 10th anniversary of the last Batman sighting, Bruce's subconscious "Batman" fights back, telling him Bruce he is just the shell, and he is not done with him yet.

Most of what I thought was great about the movies holds true to the comic, with a couple of exception. I have to say I prefer the animation of the movies, but I think at the time of the comic and for what is trying to be portrayed, it does work. This means Batman strikes from the shadow, leaving his opponent incapacitated and confused as to what just happened. A couple of the panels, like when Batman takes out the pimp in the back of the taxi I it took me a while to see what happened from the artwork. Like I said, these were surgical strikes, and it does put me in the mind of the pimp with a broken hand, thinking my hand is broken what just happened. When Batman decides to show himself the artwork, it reflects that by drawing bigger, more detailed pictures of him. The main thing I did not like about the comic was that I thought there was too much of the talking heads. The media discussions of Batman, I can understand why this was done, e.g., the Arkem psychologist taking an anti-batman stance to sell more of his book and make a name for himself, but I think it was a bit overdone. I mean all together. This probably makes up half the contents of the book. The best thing about the comic and it major advantage over the movies is the internal dialogue Batman has with himself. In the movies, they make Batman talk more to explain his methods. Whereas if you look at the comics, there are very few speech bubbles while he is Batman, and most of these are orders or threats. The rest of them it is Batman analysing everything in his head. I think that is what makes his scarier (like when a magic trick is explained it is not as impressive). Having the unknown factor is what Batman has his edge. An example of this is in the second fight with the Mutant Leader, the Leader cannot understand Batman is targeting nerve clusters and showing him shallow cuts in the "just the right" places can be effective. I also like the way he keeps thinking, lucky with every near miss, and the explanation of why he paints a big bright target on his chest. I also like the way Batman has evolved, he is not above using guns, will kill to protect given no other option, and lacing his smoke bombs with a watered down version of the scarecrows fear gas is genius, not only does he appear in front of his victims, he appears in front of them as their "worst nightmares"!

The others, Commissioner Gordon is still Batman's biggest supporters but are facing retirement it is not really until he is gone that Batman man realises how much Garden protected him. Garden is the same tough but fair cop he always was. The Joker is just as evil as ever he comes out of his coma with the return of Batman and makes one last mass murdering run at Gotham. Unlike in the movie the Joker is not a physical match for Batman but is a master of psychologically pushing his buttons. He knows this is his last chance if you will, and he wants to die at the hands of Batman. Superman has become a tool of the establishment. Batman says it is because of Clarks respect for people in authority, but he also says to Clark nobody could force Clark to do something he did not want to do. Strangely, Oliver and Clark share the same opinion on Batman he is too loud, and he plays things mysterious but a loud kind of mysterious. Clark, in his thought, also says Batman needs to work more in secret like he is forced to do. This could be why he does not let anyone see him when he comes to Gotham. Maybe he should do something about his costume if he is trying to keep a low profile. The only thing I do not like it the relationship between Bruce and Alfred. Alfred is still the dutiful servant, but that is what Bruce seems to treat him like in this story a servant, someone to tell what to do and expect it to be done nothing more, nothing less. Having said that Alfred does manage to get in some verbal barbs of his own, and though Bruce values his opinion probably more than anyone else's but there is a clear line saying Bruce/Batman is in charge live with it.

I have a great comic , very detailed, excellent as a standalone or as a companion to the movies to fill in extra details. It's a true classic for Batman fans. Enjoy reading it repeatedly over multiple sittings it is a lot to take in. All good!!!