Rating: 4/5

T.R. Fehrenbach served during the Korean War as an officer in the U.S. Army. His experience shaped this book. This Kind Of War is an account of the military aspects of the Korean War (1950-1953) with a fair amount of social commentary to go along with it. Fehrenbach addresses the conflict in American society between the social liberalism that the civilian world values and the more Spartan, totalitarian world that the military prefers. Fehrenbach comes down on the side of the military, but he makes a good case as to why armies can't engage in the more easy-going existence of the civilian world. War isn't a game and it sure isn't easy-going. 

The book was first published in 1963. It's about a war that had ended (well at least the shooting stopped) ten years earlier. It's still relevant in 2012. I first read it in 1991 when I was going through the Armor Officer Basic Course at Fort Knox, Kentucky. At that time, we were focused on Iraq. This book could be found (possibly still is) on recommended reading lists for both officers and NCOs. Though the Communist threat had faded by then (Fehrenbach is concerned about how the Communists are more serious than the West) I still felt like it had many lessons to teach. I would argue it still does. For while one's enemies might change war doesn't. However, the tone of the book isn't militaristic or warlike. The book takes a professional military viewpoint and that's significant. Those who are unfamiliar with how the U.S. military works might not understand how important that difference is, but it matters. 

The book itself very readable. Dramatic and suspenseful it moves along at a brisk pace. While long ,with over six hundred pages, it never drags. If I can find any fault it would be the lack of a bibliography, footnotes and/or end-notes. There is an acknowledgement at the beginning of the book in which Fehrenbach states that the book was compiled from many sources. That's all well and good, but it would have been better to have listed those various sources. Nevertheless it's a well written book. I've held onto my copy for the past twenty-one years and ,while I long ago stopped serving in the U.S. Army, I have no intention of getting rid of it.