Rating: 4/5

My copy of this book was in tatters. Red cloth with black bindings all gone astray. The pages are yellowed and the middle sections deeply stained with red dye leak? Oh, so many of these old and wonderful tales are not going to stay in print? 

This is House book #1 for the Norah Lofts series for the "in" town residence that begins with Martin Reed's obtaining land from the Abbey for services rendered in 1381. Plague, collapse of Noble houses, failure in different types of husbandry and the Knight class falling away have strengthened the Guilds. And most of the religious houses of every ilk. All of which are most self-serving and intrinsically unfair and manipulative to the peasant, self-learned, or gifted of skills or talent, but without any path possible to an advocacy which would enable their use.

Martin has done his years of apprenticeship and journeyman and still is rejected. He's ruined the curve of the quality too in his output.

There follows the building/shack structure in which he begins. Following are the stories of the 4 people who presently over the decades of his life, live with him there. In familial relationship or in association toward his growing businesses, and over 4 to 5 decades. The tales are detailed to exact degree and from those eyes alone as the narrator changes in each section.

But Martin's thoughts from 10 to 70 years of age; they are never obscured.

Real as dirt. And dark. And amidst some moments of joy or glory, the majority is sad. Loss and grief. Fire and consumption (lung-rot). Norman and Saxon and Romany- the house he begins with that Abbey toss away of pox filled ground, it grows.

This is a story of an impossible entrepreneur. Forging shoes, blacksmith's shakes, wool cleaning (as bad as cotton picking but worse because it is mainly indoors), sailing for trade, bringing weavers to England instead of the wool to the Flemish.

Wonderful read. I will start book #2 (House at Old Vine) to see who comes next to the Master's spot at the table of the town house. Will it be Martin's granddaughter (in name but not by blood) Maude? 

This book has one of the most intrinsic looks into the early unions, Guilds, and the hierarchies enabled and encompassed by them. This is entirely in the cognition of those who lived in the late 14th and well into the 15th century. Beauty, song/art, healing/sickness, faith and hatred- all defined in the English eyes of that period.