Rating: 4/5

Where the Heart Leads

Sarah Montgomery's beau, Rand comes home from the Civil War to find she is engaged to another man after thinking him dead. Rand will not listen to reason and heads out west. Sarah decides to follow Rand to see if they can work things out. Unbeknownst to her former husband-to-be follows to stir up trouble.

Plains of Promise

Emily Coftner heads west to help a friend after learning some devastating news about her now dead husband. After her previous experience in her marriage Emily does not think she will ever love again. Isaac Liddle has other ideas about Emily. He tries wooing her, but Emily is reluctant and tries to resist his entreaties. Finally Emily agrees to marry Isaac, but she has made promise to someone that may interfere with her ability to keep her promise to Isaac.

The Heart Answers

Jessica Dubois was the adopted daughter of Major DuBois and she was always given whatever her heart desired. At times, Jessica is mean-spirited and unkind to those around her. Her only friend at the fort is Ellen. Ellen is the laundress and she has a young daughter Franny. Ellen suddenly dies. Jessica loves the little girl and helps her to learn her letters. Jessica is smitten with Clay, the preacher, who goes from fort to fort. Clay is a cousin to Franny and feels he is responsible for her. Jessica convinces Clay that she should be Franny's caretaker while he is traveling. Clay agrees, as long as she agrees to provide for Franny. He suggests that Jessica take Ellen's place and become the laundress. The position of laundress is a lowly one, and not looked on by the other women as desirable. Jessica reluctantly agrees, although she has never done such a thing in her life. Clay likes Jessica, but he cannot think of courting Jessica because she is not a Christian. Everything works out happily in the end for the couple and they raise franny together.

To Love a Stranger

Bessie Randall, a rather plain woman with a big heart learns by accident that her beautiful sister, Lenore has been corresponding with a soldier, Jasper Mendenhall stationed in a Wyoming fort. To make matters worse, Lenore explains she was married by proxy to this man, under her sister, Bessie's name. Bessie thinking this might be her chance to marry and feels bound to this commitment takes the stage to Wyoming. Jasper, expecting the beautiful, Lenore is at first disappointed, but there are very few women at the fort so he decides to give it a chance. They travel to a new fort in Arizona. Along the way Bessie finds and Indian baby by the side of the trail beside her deceased mother. Bessie takes the baby, whom she names Ruth, with them. Bessie worries all the time that she is not a good enough wife and that Jasper does not care for her. The family of Ruth after several months is found and Bessie must return the baby to her original family. Bessie is heartbroken. Jasper thinks the only thing to do is send her back east to her family. Bessie returns to Boston and realizes her heart belongs to her husband, whom she loves. She quickly returns to Arizona and Jasper greets her and tells her never leave him as he missed her and loved her.