Rating: 1/5

DNF-ed at 42%

when looking for a book about ancient Irish history, I selected the book written by an actual historian working at a university before realising this was a companion book to a TV series. the fact that this book has obviously been written after the show had been made and, at times, reads more like a script than a history book did not bother me much. although with time I have come to prefer history books written like Mary Beard's SPQR and Cat Jarman's River Kings, using specific historical artefacts as the central points of their structure, I was willing to forgive the visualised presentation of information in this book where the hosts (I mean, writers) meet different specialists in different locations to discuss very specific information in ways, I'm certain, looked good on camera. I was interested in the subject material and ready to disregard this.

what I could not disregard was the obvious lack of critical work and engagement with sources and information. let me explain.

the first instance in which I began to realise this was a book written by a historian but not meant to be treated as a history book was when discussing the epic poem Táin Bó Cúailnge. long story short, this poem talks about a conflict between two factions seeking to acquire a black bull and represents, among many things, a great example of the social dynamics during the period--particularly in terms of women and materiality (more on this second point below). the authors do explicitly state this text is merely a transcription written down centuries later in monasteries and, therefore, passed through a Christian lens which the original definitely did not intend. this is an important annotation which I was glad to see. the issue comes, however, when they briefly use this text to discuss the possibility of there being women warriors during the period and whether the presence of actual women warriors in history was true or an addition meant to be derided by Christian monks. although they do not take this text at face value, they do use it as a starting point for this subject which does lead them to discuss Julius Ceasar's writings on the Celtic people. this is troubling as the authors focus on a single quote from this text which discusses how ten of his men are next to nothing in comparison to a female Celtic warrior. they soak this in as a fundamental proof of their existence and recognition without even referring to the context within which Ceasar might have written this or any other possible interpretations: what if he made this comparison, not because he admired those warriors, but to criticise and ridicule his own men? the mere possibility of this quote meaning anything but its surface-level meaning in a history book was very troubling.

the second and most troubling instance came later when discussing the ancient Irish law codes and became most representative of the tone this book bears. without properly stating it, it is clear from the beginning the authors not only admire ancient Irish customs but also, romanticise them. this is most glaring with their discussion of slavery during the period. what made ancient Irish laws stand out in comparison to other codexes within the region, apparently, was their detailed and diligent specifications regarding different instances slave owners might encounter (among other subjects). these laws, once more, are taken at face value, seen as examples of Irish people's concerns for the wellbeing and dignity of their slaves (a phrase simply impossible to be true), particularly when owners have 'sexual intercourse' with their female slaves and how they can be protected. ignoring the fact that the authors do not engage in any form with the possibility that intercourse between an owner and an owned person is nothing but rape, they never consider the possibility that these laws have not been written down with the slaves' benefit in mind. as their discussion of the Táin Bó Cúailng's preoccupation with materiality proved (there are large sections of this poem detailing the main characters' material wealth and its main focus is the acquisition of an object), Irish people during the period took their possessions very seriously. 

the fact that this very simple connection between slavery and materialism is never addressed by the authors made me put this book down at once. this is not a history book but a nice, shiny painting of a single, one-dimensional perspective of a very complicated history and people. hard pass.