Rating: 3/5

“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible," 
spoke the Beast, in a voice that was one great roar. 
Who are you, and why do you seek me?”

 

This book was one of my favourite childhood reads. I still own the book I used to read when I was a child, so I decided to read it again as an adult. My original plan was to read the whole series, and I may go through with it in the future. Anyway, I was so surprised when I opened the book and I realized that I still remembered the first chapter almost by heart! I must have read it more times than I thought 😆... Unfortunately, I didn't enjoy it quite as much as an adult. I just couldn't help but notice that this book has some issues, at least to the eye of a modern reader.

I think the main problem with this book is its lack of cohesiveness: it felt more like reading a series of isolated events than a whole story. Also, the whole plot is basically a big deus ex machina, with solutions popping up every time the characters are faced with a certain problem. Its fairy tale writing style, full of repetitions, classical symbolism and oddities, also emphasized the episodic character of it all, and made the main plot difficult to follow. This kind of style can result in a masterpiece (in my opinion, Gulliver's travels is an excellent example), but in this case it just felt a little difficult to follow, and some of those episodes felt a little undeveloped and gratuitous (like the trip in the china dolls' town).

 

On the other hand, as an adult, I was able to appreciate some nuances I didn't get when I was a child, and that made me realize how positive the message behind this book is. When the Scarecrow asks Oz to give him his much desired brains, they have this conversation:

“Can't you give me brains?" asked the Scarecrow.
"You don't need them. You are learning something every day. A baby has brains, but it doesn't know much. Experience is the only thing that brings knowledge, and the longer you are on earth the more experience you are sure to get.”

Of course, the Wizard is just trying to trick our heroes, because he knows he can't actually give them what they want; but the message behind the whole story is very simple: the Scarecrow was already intelligent, what he really needed was to convince himself that he was; the Lion was already brave etc. 

"All you need is confidence in yourself."

Another curious passage is the moment in which the Tin Man and the scarecrow have an argument to decide which is more important, a brain or a heart. 

“All the same,' said the Scarecrow,'I shall ask for brains instead of a heart; for a fool would not know what to do with a heart if he had one.'
'I shall take the heart,' returned the Tin Woodman,'for brains do not make one happy, and happiness is the best thing in the world.”

This really gave me the feels. Also, the whole "home sweet home" narrative, in which Dorothy says over and over again that it doesn't matter how bright and beautiful the Land of Oz is, she just wants to go back to Kansas because: 

“There is no place like home.”

So, overall, I think this book is still enjoyable today as an adult, but only as a reminder of childhood memories. It has a great historical value, and it's arguably one of the most well-known and well-loved children classic, but I don't think modern readers (both children and adults) would enjoy it as much as Baum's contemporaries certainly did.

I admit I don't know much about the history of this book and of its composition, and it's much likely that my ignorance is responsible for some lack of understating of the author's style. Nonetheless, I'll keep this story in my heart forever and I treasure the evenings I spent with this book, the original movie adaptation, and the gorgeous musical The Wiz!