Rating: 4/5

“Why?” Gustavo asked. And, when Fitch was not forthcoming, Gustavo commanded, “You’ve got to tell me why.”
 “If you could see her…,” said Fitch.
 “I saw her when we did the kitchen. She’s pretty. She’s beautiful. But she’s not that beautiful.”
 “Yes, she is,” said Fitch. “She bears up, but I’ve never seen a more wounded, deeply aggrieved woman. It’s not because she’s physically beautiful. What the hell do I care? It’s because she needs something like this, from me, from us, from everyone. Not that it would or could be a substitute, but as a gesture.”
 “A substitute for what?” Gustavo asked.
 “Her husband.”
 “Her husband left her?”
 “Her husband was in the south tower when it came down,” Fitch said. “For Christ’s sake, they’ll never even find the bodies. Vaporized, made into paste. What can she think? What can she feel?” – “Monday”

 He had no idea, of course, who she was. Nor did she know that was above, and she probably never would. He managed with great difficulty to move off his blood-soaked square of the roof and travel, before too long, to a point close enough to the lantern to hear every drop of water, to see the steam on the opaque plate of glass, to inhale the sweet moist air, and to touch his fingertips against the vents as if in doing this he were embracing a woman that he would love for the rest of his life. – “A Brilliant Idea and His Own”

 “You were on the port side.”
 “So I was.”
 “And I was on the starboard.”
 “You still are,” she said.
 “I am, but I no longer have to come up with a pretext to talk to you.”
 “Why would you need a pretext to talk to me?” she asked.
 I hesitated. I could see she was watching with interest as I tried to be exact.
 “Without a pretext, it would have been too forward.”
 “It would have. That’s always the problem, isn’t it.” – “Prelude”

 Now no one breathed except Roger. The pitch was thrown. The same astronomical conjunctions occurred. The bat connected explosively with the ball but, this time, just under the limit beyond which the ball would have been destroyed. Leather was stretched as far as it would stretch, thread too. It travelled in a straight line, leaving behind it a brief trail of orange flame and then a hardly perceptible line of white smoke. 
 Mouths dropped open and bodies froze as the ball slammed into the minute hand of the clock that said World’s Most Honored Watch and blew it from its axle so that it windmilled through the air, corkscrewing, eventually, into the ground in front of the wall that had written on it the challenging notation, 407 Ft. The field of Yankee Stadium, with the Yankees standing upon it, was still. – “Perfection”

 “All right,” said Jacob Bayer. “I will show you the soul.” Everyone peered at him, moving in their seats. “Bring me a telephone,” he commanded. A telephone arrived immediately and was placed, disconnected, in Jacob Bayer’s hands. It was a beautifully crafted rosewood box with fittings of polished brass. When Jacob Bayer received it, the mallet brushed against one of the bells and made a sound both delicate and refined. “This,” Jacob Bayer announced, “is a telephone. It is a mechanism. It is of great value, and, when attached to a telephone wire, can carry your voice across continents.”
 After the audience had sighed with pleasure at what he had said, he stood on his tiptoes, raised his arms to their full extent, hands still holding the telephone, and brought it from a height of three meters crashing down to the piazza’s stone floor, having propelled it with all the force he could draw from within him, which was quite a lot. The largest pieces to remain intact were the bells, and of the rest nothing was left bigger than a pea pod. It was if the machine had had a bomb in it. First came screams, then shock, then remonstrances, then a murmur, which Jacob Bayer silenced by standing to his full height and bellowing over the heads of all who looked at him, “Bring me a baby!” – “Jacob Bayer and the Telephone”

 Down by St. Elizabeth’s, up from the river and toward the museum, and just beyond where the Utrechtseweg parts from the Onderlangs, he died with the vision of his daughter Charlotte In his eyes. – “Charlotte of the Utrechtseweg”

 “What about the currents?” she asked, mindful of their distance from shore.
 “Oh, the currents,” he answered. “If they wanted, they could take us all the way to Al-Arish.”
 In, strangely enough, the most sexually provocative words she had ever uttered, and yet modestly, she said, “That would be very uncomfortable, wouldn’t it?”
 He didn’t answer. Her smooth and solid limbs were still half in the water – as the raft bobbed on the swells, the sea would run up her thighs, and down, and when it sank deep into the crest of an oncoming wave the water went all the way up to the base of her neck, and then washed away, perfectly outlining her breasts in the wet tank top. Taking his eyes from her body, he surveyed her face. She was not the kind of woman for whom men would turn as they walked on the street, but in her expression were great beauty and grace. In her expression, in her imperfect, somewhat too heavy features, he could see experience, and suffering, and strength, and love.
 A face like hers, if held differently, if set off by different eyes, if shaped by bitterness or greed, would not be beautiful. But the way she smiled was all beauty, suddenly, as if he were the first to see. Never had she been so buoyant or so lovely. Perhaps it was the sea. God knows what she took from the sea. – “Last Tea with the Armorers”