Rating: 5/5

This is a beautiful book! I continue to thank my reliable Friend for her astute endorsement. Those who have become familiar with me know that I rarely give a five star rating to a book, but there was no hesitation that this is exactly what Mazur's book merits.

As a rule, I do not seek short stories, but this is certainly atypical of that genre. At first I compared the style to Olive Kitteridge, because many of the characters reappear in succeeding stories and continue to tell their tales. Many have a thread tying them together. Although  Olive  deserves much credit on its own, the flavor of the two books differ greatly in style.

Mazur's writing displays an amazing facility in her descriptions. The best way to describe her book is as a sensual experience. She has conveyed each sense in a manner that one might feel as a participant. Much of what she has written is erotic, but in a sensitive manner that carries one along in her narrative. This is a feast for the senses: the smells of cooking, growing vegetation, wool and smoke; touch of skin against skin, the elegant feeling of silk apparel; the sights of the moon and gardens, the beauty of the tropics and the orderly, yet beautiful plantings in Japan and much more. But everywhere there is  food  , from the ordinary to the exotic, one can smell it, taste it, envision it!

The inhabitants of these stories are mostly international, from Europe to Asia, to the US- in my own areas of Boston and Cambridge. In keeping with her descriptive elegance, Mazur has one of my favorite recurrent characters, Cass partaking of the tropical fruits mangosteens and durian. The latter is well known for its offensive,malodorous scent but its exquisite taste- a "custardy richness". Not to be outdone, the mangosteen is described.
 "The leaves are large ovals- they glisten in the sun. And the skin of the fruit is a deep purplish brown. But the flesh is a creamy translucence- oh God, and it tastes like everything you could ever want." (p.134)

Mazur has also skillfully portrayed the subtle dance of youth and old age, sometimes the disharmony, but at other times the blending and union with increased congruity. This is beautifully expressed in her tale about Marion, an 84 year old anthropologist, who had studied caves,but moved from America to Paris many years previously. She befriends a group of young people who spend their nights exploring the subterranean world of Paris. The experience of this unlikely group reveals unexpected pleasures and is truly evocative.

There is much more that can be said in praise for this fine author, but this meager offering will have to suffice.