Barthelme advises young writers in a snarky list of 39 items I gather circulated in MFAs like Daniel Clowes' art school confidential comics, "Step one in the great enterprise of a new and preferable you in the house of fiction is: Mean less. That is, don’t mean so much." 

He isn't so successful at this in his short stories as he is in his novels, because the more reserved and brief an utterance is the more compelled we are to interpret it. The effect of his narrator, a passive male or somebody making the occasional casual but striking comment at very clear video footage of a passive male, is somebody being coy with us. That is, until we understand that here, oddly, is somebody who is saying nearly all of what he wants us to know. We are so used to evasions, euphemisms, elegant constructions, theories, games, that we are disarmed by an inhumanly human voice. Compare another New Yorker writer who takes ordinary people as his subject matter with Barthelme. 

Stamm: "The corkscrew was shaped like a girl in a pleated frock, of the sort that Lara knew from childhood photographs of her mother, a short, light-green summer dress. Only the red collar didn’t really fit; it should have been embroidered tulle, and white. Lara could see the pictures—big family get-togethers in a garden in the north of Italy, full of people she didn’t know. Even her mother didn’t know all their names. 'That man was a neighbor—what was his name again? And aren’t those my mother’s cousin Alberto’s children? Graziella, Alfina, and what was the little one called? Antonio? Tonino?' The colors were faded, which made them somehow more garish. It was as though the photographs had captured the sun, the sun of childhood, pale and ever-present. Thereafter the family had fallen apart, and people had gone their separate ways. When Lara had visited Italy with her parents, there hadn’t been any more big reunions, only afternoons spent in darkened homes with old people who smelled funny and served dry cookies and big plastic bottles of lukewarm Fanta. " 

Barthelme: "Rita says the living-room lights keep her awake when she goes to bed before I do, which is most of the time. The light comes down the hall and under the bedroom door, she says, and in the dark it's like a laser. So on Sunday, after she'd gone to bed, I started to read Money in semidarkness, tilting the pages to get the light from a book lamp clipped onto the magazine. That didn't work, so I gave it up and watched a TV program about low riders in San Diego. They put special suspensions in their cars so they can bounce them up and down. That's not all they do, but it's sort of the center of things for them. I'd seen the cars before, seen pictures of them jumping - a wonderful thing, just on its own merits. I watched the whole show. It lasted half an hour, and ended with a parade of these wobbling, hopping, jerking cars creeping down a tree-lined California street with a tinkly Mexican love song in the background, and when it was done I had tears in my eyes because I wasn't driving one of the cars. I muted the sound, sat in the dark, and imagined flirting with a pretty Latin girl in a short, tight, shiny dress with a red belt slung waist to hip, her cleavage perfect and brown, on a hot summer night with a breeze, on a glittering street, with the smell of gasoline and Armor All in the air, oak leaves rattling over the thump of the car engine, and me slouched at the wheel of a violet Mercury, ready to pop the front end for a smile." 

In both there is the immediate presentation of the object of desire, but in one we can immediately feel a symbol being formed, the roots of desire being traced deeply. The corkscrew collects all possible significance. (This is done deftly, naturally, relying on Laura, which is why I also like Stamm.) In Barthelme the car does not. The motive is even eventually supplied, but it is not a motive that collects the entire characters being, from the cradle to that moment. 

This straightforwardness is why I like Barthelme. There is an underlying kindness to it. He thinks the contemporary world, even in all its tackiness, and the people in his stories just as they are, not even as histories, are interesting enough on their own. It is a great humanistic gesture. And if you are willing to go along for the ride, it can be fun in the way literature (and this is literature[1]) is rarely fun. Barthelme's stories are full of overlooked intimacies, pleasures, appeal - and their overlooked opposites, which give the pleasure to the sensitively interested. 

If you'll indulge me in some literary chatter, I think he has a very strong relation to Beckett, his older brother's literary father, who, significantly, the younger Barthelme regards as a mentor. In Beckett's work there is an almost active frustration of the interpretive faculty of the reader. (Out of this the older brother develops his collage technique.) Beckett's characters are dissolving characters in dissolving or even absurd lives. Our relation to them terrifies us. They refuse to be understood as anything other than nakedly what they are, shambling need. 

In Barthelme there's room left for the reader to approach it for more, for politics[2], and all other headiness, but Barthelme's characters are just intact people, in mostly normal lives, doing what they do. They are sometimes thrust into some implausible encounter or situation, usually vaguely sexual, but they do not work themselves up into Lear, into some defining choice. We are just kept interested, and reminded that things do indeed get very strange. Interpretation isn't really courted by omission like it is in Hemingway. Barthelme's characters too are naked, but their nakedness is no horror.

[1] It is easy for pornography or genre work to lack pretension in the same way because it can be shorn of everything but the stimulating materials. 'Literature,' or properly speaking literature of the representative kind becomes genre material as it approaches the tropes, etc, of the genre of drama. There are works of literature that are genre work without genres, and these are precious, as they are unsullied springs with an unusual but pure taste.
[2] Think of how much can be done with that opening passage. Barthelme himself isn't unaware of his work's political implications, but his stories are still aggressively about the personal sphere. If we get politics at all it is through what is selected, not through a conspicuous presentation.