Rating: 4/5

Richard Branson is not one to mince words. Or his deeds. He sets his sights on a goal, girl, vision, mission and he goes for it full force. No holding back. No focusing on what others might think (aside from his close friends and family). No dilly dallying. Going full throttle. 
 
From page one, this was a whirlwind and existing adventure through his growth from a child to adult, his romantic quests, his entrepreneurship journey, breaking his mental barriers and overall his growth all around through his triumphs and challenges. The narrative was flawless and took you back and forth in time portraying a world in ways I never thought a non fiction book could. Went from the hippie time, through the war time. This book had a mix of everything and then some.  
 
“In my life, I've come to expect the unexpected. It sounds easy enough to say, but all the things that have happened to me, to the family and to Virgin have taught me that you have to be prepared at all times to deal with surprises.”  
 
Branson is not only about making profits, giving consumers quality products at a fair price, making a conducive environment for his staff aside from providing them jobs but he is also about giving back to the society and taking care of the environment. 'If I can make a difference in one of their lives then it's worth it. '  
 
“A business has to be involving; it has to be fun and it has to exercise your creative instincts.” If you're looking to start on the entrepreneurship road or are already on the journey, this book will be like fuel because through Branson's journey you'll see the power of an idea, the rewards of being persistence, perseverant and having a sound, empowering vision. If you're an adrenaline junkie like me, you'll enjoy those wild balloon rides that had me at the edge of my sit.  
 
Should you read the book? Why not. It has challenged me to try things beyond my comfort zone even when they scare me. It's only by pushing yourself beyond that real growth happens and that's where all the fun is. So to more adventures.  
 
Let me sign off this review with this quote “At the outset, each of those individual ventures was a step into the unknown for the company - a bit like the loss of one's virginity. But, unlike really losing your virginity, in whatever world you make for yourself, you can keep embracing the new and the different over and over again.”