Rating: 5/5

20,000 Leagues Under the Sea by Jules Verne is a great read for someone looking to go on an adventure. The story starts off with M. Annorax, a scientist from France who discovers reports of a mysterious creature tormenting ships in the Atlantic. The United States Navy invites M. Annorax to join the USS Abraham Lincoln in search for this mysterious beast along with his faithful servant named Conseil. They board the ship and meet a Canadian harpooner named Ned Land. For the next few weeks, they don’t see the mysterious creature as they sail along the vast Atlantic Ocean until one day they spot it. They attempt to neutralize it, and Ned Land throws a harpoon at it, but the harpoon bounces off of the skin of the creature harmlessly. The crew then discovers the skin is made of a very hard substance, perhaps metal, and the beast rams into the boat, which throws Annora and the Canadian Ned Land overboard. Conseil, being the faithful servant he is, jumps overboard to accompany his master, where they float for a few hours before being picked up by a submarine called the Nautilus. They sit in a dark room until morning, which is when the captain introduces himself. He doesn’t seem to understand they are saying so they speak in French, German, and Latin until Captain Nemo speaks in English having originally understood the story. He avoids the world because of how terrible civilization has become and lives on his submarine instead. Captain Nemo brings them on his grand adventure of the world and exploring the great ocean. He brings them along to loot sunken Spanish Galleons filled with gold, explore new areas, and find new tribes not touched by human civilization. However, while sailing near England, Captain Nemo becomes the target of an unknown ship, where to Annorax’s horror, he sinks to get revenge on all of the people that took away his family and life. Recently, the 3 newcomer have wanted to escape the ship to get away from the slightly insane Nemo and go back to the world. The Nautilus then encounters a deadly vortex of water known as the Maelstrom, and the 3 manage to jump ship, and eventually wake up in a cabin in Norway. 

This book follows the themes of exploration and trying new things, such as using deep sea suits to explore outside the ship for hours on end. However, the story also follows the wrongs of humanity which is expressed by Captain Nemo in the form of misanthropy and his hate for humans, and because of this, seeks revenge. 

This book was a very creative read for myself because it was super imaginative and flowed the themes of exploration, but also did a good job of exploring the wrongs of humanity and Captain Nemo avoiding humans. This book was a great read and I would highly recommend it to anyone up for the challenge.