Rating: 4/5

Rating: 4.2 / 5 **Note: This rating is only for Faust I, as I did not read Faust II.

I was pleasantly surprised by this, a book that I went into thinking that I would conclude it to be so-so. When I first bought it, I did not know it was a poem, and so was somewhat disappointment when I opened the pages expecting to see them full of text from left to right and instead coming up short halfway across the page. Poems are fine for some, but I myself am an advocate for prose, and was prepared to read paragraphs of paragraphs of descriptions of Faust's inner madness, his dialogues arguing morality with his demons, the gory details of his deal with the Devil.

I did get all of this, but in poetic form, which I did like, but...

...let's just say that I found the poem to compromise meaning at times in order to rhyme and make sense of its own meter. Now, originally, this was written in German, so maybe the meanings of what is happening is clearer there, but in English, I felt that this was compromised at times. For instance, the consequences of Faust's coupling with Margarete (Grette), such as what happens to her family and how she ends up in a dungeon, were very unclear in the translation of the text that I read. Actually, looking back, I couldn't even find the moment when she and Faust physically copulated, so I was entirely confused why she was going crazy and then in prison all of a sudden--a true WTF moment for me.

However, if there is one thing that I must give to the credit of the translation, it is Mephistopheles and...pretty much every single thing this character does and says. It is savage, but his criticisms of humanity are indeed true, perhaps more now than ever before with so much evil predominant in this world with a population much higher than in Goethe's time was thought possible. Grant you, I know that he's a villain and whatnot, but next to Faust, who is stupid enough to fall for his tricks, I found myself supporting Mephistopheles a bit more, since he at least knew what he was doing, whereas Faust was in a state of perpetual confusion. It was kind of an Othello moment for me, in which I'm supporting the villain more than the hero of the story because the villain is purely and simply smarter. Again, this is based on personal preference, but I can only genuinely support a character that I respect, and that respect is more often than not earned for me via intelligence of some sort, which to me lends narrative worth to a character. Iago was easy to support because he had ways of being charming and so gosh-darn smart that I couldn't hate him for it; Mephistopheles kind of functions the same way for me, although his snark is more because of what he is rather than who he is--the dynamics of a "role" rather than the psychology of "character".

All in all though, for Part I of this play, I was thoroughly entertained and read through it quite quickly. Part II however, after the first two scenes...I couldn't convince myself to pick it up again, so I left it alone.

Regardless, 4 stars for Part I!