Rating: 4/5

This was one of the most bizarre books I have ever read. 

That said, the historical, political, and religious commentaries put forth in this book are what made it valuable to read and what made it pop, shimmer, and burn in its rightful moments. The plot is so incredibly unlikely, yet its movements allowed me to feel the stain of Rolfe's anguish at the missed opportunities of his life throughout. That made the unlikely jumps from hither to thither feel all the more authentic. 

In my most positive review, I could walk out on a limb and speak so highly of it that I could say that I could sense ways in which this book could spawn a sort of second reformation, in that similar to Luther's thesis it provides a deep introspective view of the issues within the catholic churches own political order, and the efforts which Arthur Rose (or Hadrian VII if you will) puts into place, and his overall approach to moral reasoning really rip open some of the seems of redundancy and hypocrisy which have plagued organized Catholicism for centuries. 

I found it very awkward to read in many points, but here and there certain considerations and reflections that Rofle worked into this novel that really shine and hold enough weight to make it through the tough parts. I almost wanted to rate this a three instead of a four, but I thought that as a historically inclined masterpiece which admittedly was littered with words that rest outside of my own relatively extensive vocabulary I had to give it four for how much was delivered in it, even if as I said, a great deal of it was awkwardly conveyed. 

After reading it, I looked up some more about the author, and found him to be a very interesting fellow in all the most eccentric ways possible. After learning more about him and his life I am going to torture myself with another one or two of his works in the near future. 

This book is very far from being for everyone, but if you are looking for early 20th century politics/ historical context leading up to WWI and you happen to find religious history fascinating, then you might want to give it a try.