Rating: 5/5

In this memoir a college kid becomes a mountain man, surviving a winter of living alone in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness, working as a salmon caretaker for what sounded to me like the Department of Fish and Game. Since the author graduated from college with a degree in Wildlife Biology in 1981, I'm guessing the events he wrote about in this memoir took place back in the 1970's.

Let's get this clear right away. PETA wouldn't like this memoir, and if you think animals should not be killed for food, you probably won't like it either. Even though I was a vegetarian for almost 50 years (until my hair started falling out) I know there are a lot of people who believe hunting is a better way to get meat rather than to rely on factory farming, which is often said to be cruel to animals when they are still alive. At least the animals killed in this memoir had happy wild lives until the moment the lost the "kill or be killed" challenge all these animals live with. I'm sure if you've ever lost multiple cats to mountain lion attacks, as I have, you're likely to be less sympathetic toward cougars.

Aside from the hunting/trapping issues this book brings up, the memoir impressed me positively. I love reading memoirs about unusual and amazing things people do. I loved this story about a very young and inexperienced college freshman taking on a job that required living all winter, for seven months, in a tent in the mountains just to make sure the nearby creek didn't freeze over, to keep tiny microscopic salmon alive until springtime. This young man had no idea what he was getting himself into but relished the idea of becoming a mountain man. I loved reading about the changes he went through during the seven months. I thought it was a fantastic story about an experience most of us will never have.

The best part of the book, for me, was that his friends bought him a puppy before he left for the hills. It was a female dog he named Boone. Great dog. It was so important for him to have a companion.

Cleanliness factor: very good, but one f-word uttered by a friend, and of course, the violence toward animals, for food and pelts.