Rating: 2/5

I've said it before and I'll say it again—I have no problem with a story where I hate one of the protagonists for part of the book. Those kinds of books can be powerful and dramatic, and so long as the hateful person pulls his or her head out of that nether orifice before the HEA, it's all good. But if they do something really dastardly, then I damn well need to see some groveling before the HEA. This is one of those books that left me with issues. 

So here's the storyline: 

Ailis MacFarlane is the only heir to her family's holdings unless her beastly and abusive Uncle Colin manages to father a child before someone cuts his throat. Said beastly uncle has decided Ailis should marry Donald MacCordy, eldest son of his clan's laird. Donald is also beastly—and rapey, and TSTL. And he kisses like a leech. 

Ailis has the care of her sister Mairi's bastard children, and a hulking reject named Jaime who adores her because she's the only person he knows who doesn't treat him like crap. Surprisingly, Donald has agreed to let her keep them. Not like him to be so thoughtful. Hmmm…

Turns out that, apart from looking forward to punishing Ailis for her repeated rejection of his attempted rape seduction, Donald also wants Ailis because it would seal an alliance between his popular-as-a-skunk-at-a-garden-party clan and hers. And he'll take the kiddies, too, because he happens to know something Ailis doesn't—that their father is Barra MacDubh. Barra is the younger brother (and sole heir) of the MacDubh laird, Alexander, so his twin sons, though they're bastards, are valuable property, especially to a guy who wants to stick it to the MacDubhs..

Mairi's untimely death has sent Barra into an alcoholic funk. Not only did he lose the love of his life, but because the MacFarlanes and MacDubhs are feuding, he can't exactly go to her family's keep and claim his kids. They're half MacFarlane, so his clan won't welcome them, and they're half MacDubh, so if their paternity was known the MacFarlanes won't treat them well, either. Fortunately, Barra gets schnockered and blurts the whole story, and Alex decides to go collect his heirs. He can stand a little MacFarlane stink if it means he doesn't ever have to marry again. He's concluded from his vast experience with the gentler sex that all women are evil.

He and his best men ride onto MacFarlane lands, just exactly where Ailis and Jaime have conveniently taken the kids on an outing away from the stronghold. Alex grabs the kids, and takes Jaime and Ailis as well. Ailis realizes that she, being heir to the MacFarlane laird, won't be well-treated if the MacDubhs know who she is, so she claims to be the children's nurse. Unfortunately for Ailis her subterfuge doesn't hold up long.

Alex already has a Jones for the wench. Once he knows she's the only current heir of his father's murderer, and that she's betrothed to wed a MacCordy, he justifies his intentions for her as just vengeance for the wrongs those clans have perpetrated on his own. 

It doesn't really help me like this guy that he considers all the obvious moral issues. Ailis was a baby when the MacFarlanes killed his da and cheated his clan of some lands. She had nothing to do with the wrongs her clan did to his. He's aware that Colin MacFarlane and Donald MacCordy are both vindictive SOB's who will probably punish her because he used her for his revenge against them. He's aware, too, that Donald MacCordy, on a good day when he's not pissed, would be a cruel husband. And he's aware that Ailis doesn't want to be violated. Which makes him a rapist if he proceeds. None of this gives him pause. He wants her, he'll have her, and then he'll kick her to the curb and let her face the consequences. 

Barra and the rest of the clan aren't any more thrilled than I am with this plan—Barra tries to talk him out of it, but Alex isn't budging. Barra does get him to promise not to hurt the girl (apparently raping her and sending her home to abusive men who will beat and/or kill her because of what he did isn't hurting her). Even so, we're later told that if Ailis had put up much resistance, he'd have "had to" get rough with her.

All this is supposed to be acceptable because Ailis is sort of OK with it. She doesn't want to be raped or shamed, but if she's gonna lose her virginity unwillingly (cuz she wasn't gonna be willing with Donald either) she'd rather lose it to Alex. And besides, she's not kidding herself. If she resists she's only going to be raped anyway, but less gently. If anybody buys that her choice to submit in order to avoid being hurt means it wasn't rape, they seriously need intervention. 

After the deed is done, Ailis cries, both for her stolen virginity and for the fact that her body responded against her will. 

And that's the bit I hate most of all in these bodice rippers. Seriously, it's gross to have forced sex result in a mind-blowing orgasm for the victim. 

The next day, Alex decides that after the pleasure he took from raping her, he'll "support" her by escorting her to breakfast. I'm supposed to like this guy, because after raping her he pulls a shred of decency out of his ass and accompanies her down to breakfast so he can help her deal with the pity and shame he's inflicted on her. 

There's just (barely) enough redemption at the end to make me OK with the HEA, but this hero never is never a man any sensible heroine should trust. Recognizing that you've been an asshole is not the same as feeling remorse for pain you've caused. And without awareness of that pain and honest regret for it, I don't see much hope for change. 

I'll give this three stars, cuz this wasn't a regency and the story had some action (and kept me reading even when I wanted to 

 )

With just a touch of remorse/growth on the hero's part, this could've gotten four stars, but the gag-worthy moments lost at least a point—and if I were the PC type it would be more.