Rating: 3/5

Julian has a really good theology and portrays the image of God as good and love well, but the writing style makes it a 3.5 star read for me. I just am not a fan of the revelatory structure and the "three things which correspond to this" style that I see in medieval writings.

But! Julian is amazing at letting us know that God in Christ loves us deeply and is a good Father.
'Do you want to know what our Lord meant in all this? Learn it well: love was what he meant. Who showed it to you? Love. What did he show you? Love. Why did he show it? Out of love. Stay with this and you will learn and know more about love, but you will never know or learn anything else from it - not ever.'

She also has a fascinating theology that Christ is our Mother and uses the symbolic language of femininity to speak of God's love for us. For a 14th century nun to be saying this is really enlivening to me as it shows that it is totally appropriate to refer to God as Mother and Father - since both are symbolic representations of a greater truth.

So our life is grounded in Jesus, our true Mother, through his eternal wisdom and foreknowledge, with the almighty power of the Father and the supreme goodness of the Holy Spirit. By taking our nature he gave us life; by dying on the cross he carried us to eternal life. Ever since then, through to this moment and on until Judgment Day, he feeds us and helps us - he does everything that his wonderful mother's nature and the natural needs of a child require.

Sweet and lovely is our heavenly Mother in the eyes of our soul; precious and beautiful are the children of grace in the eyes of the heavenly Mother. They are gentle and humble, with all the lovely natural qualities of a child. It is not natural for the child to despair of his mother's love, or rely on himselt; it is natural for him to love his mother and each of the other children. With these lovely qualities and the others like them we can serve our heavenly Mother and give him pleasure.

Finally, despite my presuppositions, I actually don't think Julian herself was strongly a universalist . She constantly speaks of "all those who are going to be saved" and "those who which our Lord saves". Now obviously this language doesn't preclude universalism, but it certainly does not teach it either. However, I do think that if you take her theology seriously you should believe whole-heartedly that God will restore all. The Church may teach that some may be eternally condemened, which may make it seem impossible - but with God all things are possible as she says. Only if all are saved can we say with her:

All shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be well.