Rating: 1/5

This book was okay until about halfway through, and then I abandoned it, for two reasons. 

First, I got irked on the section regarding epidurals. I'm not anti-epidural. I'm pro educating yourself about the risks and the appropriate timing for having one if you want. But - the author points to anesthesiologists insisting epidurals are desirable because research has shown that there are lower levels of the stress hormone cortisol in cord blood post epidural-birth than non-epidural birth. I'm a licensed massage therapist. I make it my business to know all about stress and cortisol and their effects on the body. I think about them everyday because I see them everyday. And while consistent, elevated cortisol levels wreck havoc on the human body in a myriad of ways, it is still necessary to have a certain level of cortisol, because it's what gets us out of bed in the morning. It is possible to not have enough cortisol and need treatment. 

Human birth has been around far, far longer than anesthesiologists and epidurals, by tens of thousands of years. And the human race was able to successfully procreate that entire time. There is still so much about labor and delivery that is a mystery to modern science (no one can say for sure what begins labor, for example). And the exact interplay of hormones that goes on is nuanced and not completely understood. If there is a certain amount of cortisol in a newborn baby it is probably supposed to be there. It most likely serves an important purpose. Being born is stressful for the baby, too, not just mom. I mean, your skull folds over itself just so you can be squeezed through a tube like toothpaste. 

Second, and this was what really did it for me, the author flat-out says that home-births are dangerous, and uses the position of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists as support. Well, of course a bunch of OBs will tell you it's dangerous to have a baby in the comfort of your own home because it threatens their livelihood. Having babies in hospitals is the reason modern obstetrics exists. Research supports planned home births (this is just one study - http://www.bmj.com/content/330/7505/1...). OBs (who are surgeons and trained to view pregnant women as set of potential problems) in other developed countries might only see women who have an actual complication arise in her pregnancy or who might be high-risk for one. In the US, almost all women, even those who go throughout their pregnancies needing nothing more than prenatal vitamins, see these doctors whose specialty they don't need. So of course they discourage women from seeing anyone but themselves. 

(I'm not anti-OB, either. I have an OB. She's great. She's not eager to cut anyone open at the first hint of everything ever. She supports my desired birth plan and wants to help me achieve it.)