Rating: 5/5

Let me start this review with a word of recognition to translators Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky, whose translation I chose for this reread of Dostoyevsky's novel, following my tradition of collecting different translations of foreign masterpieces. Theirs is a really excellent one, and I'm convinced it contributed to my enjoyment of this reread because, although I always liked this novel, I can distinctly recall that on my first read I struggled more and got less enjoyment out of it, and not exactly because of the long philosophical chapters strewn all over the narrative. No, good translations can make or do a book sometimes, and in my reading history I've found a lot of awful translations that drove me to try to always read the original if it's in a language I know. However, that's not the case for many others, and that's how translation is so influential in shaping up or determining their degree of enjoyment for a given work. 

Let's look at one of my favourite lines, in the translation by Constance Garnett, the first I ever read:

  "Above all, don't lie to yourself. The man who lies to himself and listens to his own lie comes to such a pass that he cannot distinguish the truth within him, or around him, and so loses all respect for himself and for others. And having no respect he ceases to love, and in order to occupy and distract himself without love he gives way to passions and coarse pleasures, and sinks to bestiality in his vices, all from continual lying to other men and to himself. The man who lies to himself can be more easily offended than anyone."

Now, see the same passage translated by Andrew R. McAndrew, my second read:

  "The important thing is to stop lying to yourself. A man who lies to himself, and believes his own lies, becomes unable to recognize truth, either in himself or in anyone else, and he ends up losing respect for himself as well as for others. When he has no respect for anyone, he can no longer love and, in order to divert himself, having no love in him, he yields to his impulses, indulges in the lowest forms of pleasure, and behaves in the end like an animal, in satisfying his vices. And it all comes from lying—lying to others and to yourself. A man who lies to himself, for instance, can take offense whenever he wishes, for there are times when it is rather pleasant to feel wronged—don’t you agree?"

And then, the same for this my third reread, by Pevear and Volokhonsky:

  "Above all, do not lie to yourself. A man who lies to himself and listens to his own lie comes to a point where he does not discern any truth either in himself or anywhere around him, and thus falls into disrespect towards himself and others. Not respecting anyone, he ceases to love, and having no love, he gives himself up to passions and coarse pleasures, in order to occupy and amuse himself, and in his vices reaches complete bestiality, and it all comes from lying continually to others and to himself. A man who lies to himself is often the first to take offense. It sometimes feels very good to take offense, doesn’t it?"

Notice the differences? All three translators have kept intact the essence of Dostoyevsky's point in this quote. But they phrase it in subtly distinct ways, ways that the reader will take note of. Some readers are lulled in and kept entertained by the prose, others are kicked out of immersion by the prose. Some understand better a point if phrased with a few words in or out, others understand it no matter how it's worded. Some authors can make lengthy descriptive portions work stupendously, and others bore the living daylight out of readers doing the same, etc. Many authors that are dropped for being "boring" or "flat" or "wordy" can blame it to varying extents on the translation, especially with a language like Russian that has linguistic complexities and multiple-meaning layers that English doesn't possess. Never forget, translation can make a world of difference! I reiterate, therefore, the praise for Pevear and Volokhonsky's work.

Now, on the novel itself . . . Ah, those Karamazovs! Let me count the ways in which I love them, want to slap them silly, hug them, drop them in a lake, and et cetera.

I've never been able to pick up just one brother as my favourite. All three of them, Dmitri, Ivan and Alyosha, have something that elicits sympathy and makes them easy to identify with; even that snake in the garden, Smerdyakov, the probable fourth brother, has something that makes him if not sympathetic at least easy to understand when all is taken jointly in analysing his motivations. The only one that's irredeemably messed up is their father, Fyodor Pavlovich, who must be up there competing with the likes of Michael Henchard, King Lear and Tywin Lannister for the title of Worst Father in Literature. 

The man is so neglectful with all his children, so emotionally (and physically in one case) abusive, so selfish, so dilapidated, and an all-out awful parent that you can understand the way the eldest two turned out, and marvel at the youngest being so saintly for such an upbringing, and marvel at how the brothers love each other despite their father attempting to play each against the others for his own benefit. Dmitri is the one most affected by this upbringing, or perhaps he's the one that externalises it more starkly, as he embodies the wild passions his fathers indulges in, and becomes the target of parental wrath over inheritance and a woman. There's a great speech in his favour near the end delivered by lawyer Fedyukovich that starts with the fundamental question this book aims to answer, what is a father?, and my own belief is that Dostoyevsky is answering by showing us what exactly a father isn't.

The women each of the Karamazovs are involved with are, in my opinion, harder to relate. I couldn't like Katerina nor Grushenka nor Lise for different reasons (although I cannot say I was predisposed against them in particular either), but one characteristic they all share that I noted was that they're hysterical to a degree that can be off-putting. True, the brothers are also prone to hysterics. Or rather, Dostoyevsky wrote them like that: all characters in this novel exhibit extremes in emotionality and theatrics. I suspect this is intentional and for a narrative purpose, although I can see how it could be a cause for disliking the book as others have pointed, because I at times caught myself feeling pangs of irritation during certain scenes when characters showed histrionics that were too much for my taste. Perhaps it's because I'm attuned to the Russians' style of writing, for this type of characterisation never affected my enjoyment of the novel. In fact, these extremes might have contributed somewhat to why these characters are hard to forget. In the end, the story is what I was in for, and the story didn't disappoint.

The novel is very long, and there are plenty of overly long dialogue and chapters that are nothing but an exposition on philosophical matters that the author was interested in. Like many, I wasn't enthralled by those, but I did find some of them really thought-provoking and excellent, such as the exchanges between Father Zosima and Alyosha and Alyosha and Ivan. The lying speech by Elder Zosima, the Grand Inquisitor chapter, and the speech by Fedyukovich at the trial are my personal favourites. Dostoyevsky packed an incredible amount of his beliefs and philosophy in them.

As for the narrative, one complaint I've seen frequently is how disjointed a potpourri of plots and ideas this reads like. I honestly never got that impression, and still don't; but then, I'm aware and always have been since my first read that The Brothers Karamazov is just the first volume in a series, so many plot threads and ideas were left inconclusive and unfinished, and readers not aware that they're reading Book 1 of a series that was never finished are likelier to nurse this impression. Unfortunately, Dostoyevsky died before going further than one chapter for the next book in the Karamazov saga, so we'll never know how some plot ideas would've paid off, and we have to take them in that context. Each "Part" in the novel is somewhat self-contained, and that helps the book pass off as an standalone novel, but taken as a whole, the unfinished stuff and in-progress stuff can leap out at the reader. This is one very important detail to keep in mind, as it saves the reader some frustration.

I very much recommend this novel! If you can, set aside a time for reading it in bits and pieces, it's easier that way.