Rating: 5/5

2025 Review
Wholly invested in the Windeatt translation now. I desperately needed these words this summer, and noticed more interactions with Julian's theology in my reading this summer. Some obvious (The Bell by Iris Murdoch) and some natural (Little Boy Lost) and some kindred (China Court).

"Great was the holy conversation that the anchoress and this creature had through talking of the love of our Lord Jesus Christ for the many days that they were together." (extract from Windeatt's translation The Book of Margery Kempe ch. 18, 169)

2024 Review

On this read (Windeatt translation), my sixth time through, I am beginning to see the fruit of spending each summer immersed in these words. I'm realizing how much my thinking and spirituality have been shaped by Julian, how it is becoming "common sense" to me, and how my theology has grown through a foundation in the lovingkindness of God.

"Here end the sublime and wonderful Revelations of the unutterable love of God in Jesus Christ, vouchsafed to a dear lover of his and in her to all his dear friends and lovers, whose hearts, like hers, do flame in the love of our dearest Jesu." (165)

2023 Review

This year I read Barry Windeatt's translation for the Oxford World's Classics edition. Definitely my favorite! I sat down with Mirabai Starr's translation at first, but her translator's note turned me all the way off to her methodology so I decided to pivot. Windeatt's translation is readable without losing Julian's spark, and the explanatory notes are very helpful. There's also an index of Scripture references, a general index, a list of revelations in both the short and long texts, an excerpt from The Book of Margery Kempe, and some helpful front matter too. I have struggled to find the right edition to recommend to those interested in Julian, and I think I've finally found it!

This is the fifth time I've spent the summer with Julian, and it is always needed, always a balm to my soul. Resting in God's love, delighting in him and receiving his delight--there's nothing like it. As the first theological text written in English, it is a fount of English spirituality and theological expression. Drinking the sweet waters of the source simply fills my soul.

"...our Lord showed me spiritually in a vision how intimately he loves us. I saw that he is to us everything that is good and comforting for our help. He is our clothing that out of love enwraps us and enfolds us, embraces and wholly encloses us, surrounding us for tender love, so that he can never leave us." (45)

"Truth sees God, and wisdom contemplates God, and from these two comes the third, which is a holy, marvellous delight in God, which is love. Where truth and wisdom truly are, there is love, truly coming from both, and all of God's making." (97)

"And just as we shall be without end, so we were treasured and hidden in God, known and loved from without beginning." (119)

2022 Review

I never regret spending several months with Julian. Her central question regards what it means to live in the reality of God's love, and I love meditating with her on that every year.

This was the first time I sought a different translation: that of Father John-Julian, OJN. I valued his lexical choices, but the format of Paraclete Press's edition was not ideal for my personal reading. He sets the readings into brief daily sections, a total of 195, though I wanted to make it through in ~3 months as usual. The sections don't always follow the text's chapter designations, which I found unhelpful. The translation is also arranged somewhat like poetry. I liked it sometimes, but disliked it most of the time. Shewings/Revelations is not poetry. It is the first theological text in vernacular Middle English. I respect the translator's choices, because one of his major goals is to make the text accessible for devotional use. It just wasn't quite suited for the devotional pattern I've settled into over the past few years. It also makes it really hard to go back through the text to find quotations and passages for additional meditation, and the line breaks and indentation make quoting in a review like this a chore.

I plan to read Mirabai Starr's translation next. I wonder how I would have encountered this translation if I had read it before reading Elizabeth Spearing's thrice. The poetry-like line breaks and 195 sections for daily readings made me feel something of a distance between myself and Julian, which I had not encountered before. Yet, Father John-Julian's translation choices (opposed to organizational choices) communicated Julian's words to me in a fresh way that I thoroughly enjoyed.

Overall, I'd gift this edition to someone who is interested in Julian but intimidated by her, or someone seeking different translations. Yet, for someone who is acquainted with mysticism, medieval texts, et c., I'd recommend another edition.

2021 Review

My third year in a row spending the summer with Julian. Always worth it! Her focus on comfort was particularly needed this year--as it was last year, too--and her invitation to rest in God's goodness and love remains enticing. It struck me this time that Julian herself never says "all shall be well." The many times it's repeated in the text always come as quotations from her visions.

"...the goodness of God is the highest object of prayer and it reaches down to our lowest need." (49)

"And what comforted me most in the vision was that our God and Lord, who is so holy and awe-inspiring, is also so familiar and courteous." (51)

"'Look how I loved you. Look and see that I loved you so much before I died for you that I was willing to die for you....For my pleasure is your holiness and your endless joy and bliss with me.'" (76)

"...in this marvelling he sees his God, his Lord, his Maker, so high, so great and so good in comparison with him that he made, that the creature hardly seems of any value to himself, but the brightness and purity of truth and wisdom make him see and recognize that he is made for love, in which God holds him forever." (105)

"Mercy works with tenderness and grace blended with abundant pity; for by the work of mercy we are held safe and by the work of mercy everything is turned to good for us." (111)

"Thus I saw that God is our true peace, and he is our sure support when we are ourselves unpeaceful, and he is continually working to bring us into eternal peace." (113)

"And just as we shall be eternally, so we were treasured and hidden in God, known and loved since before time began." (129)

"He did not say, 'You shall not be tormented, you shall not be troubled, you shall not be grieved', but he said, 'You shall not be overcome.'" (135)

2020 Review

Chose this again for a summer devotional read, taking it even slower this time through to savor it. Julian's focus on love and intimacy with God is always a breath of fresh air, yet her reverence for the Holy Trinity never wavers. My second reading confirmed that Revelations is a great introduction to mysticism for the novice. Love mysticism can be a bit woo-woo for us Western folk, and Teresa of Avila is not exactly in the contemporary comfort zone, either, until one is introduced to mystic thought and expression, and can read it phenomenologically. Julian is more earthy, and the Penguin Classics translation by Elizabeth Spearing is very readable, especially after reading A. C. Spearing's introduction, which explains her earthy terms like "homely."

"...our Lord showed me a spiritual vision of his familiar love. I saw that for us he is everything that is good and comforting and helpful. He is our clothing, wrapping and enveloping us for love, embracing us and guiding us in all things, hanging about us in tender love, so that he can never leave us. And so in this vision, as I understand it, I saw truly that he is everything that is good for us." (7)

"[Jesus] supports us willingly and sweetly, by his words, and says, 'But all shall be well, and all manner of things shall be well.' These words were shown very tenderly...Thus I saw how Christ feels compassion for us because of sin. And just as I was earlier filled with suffering and compassion at the Passion of Christ, so was I now also partly filled with compassion for all my fellow Christians; and then I saw that whenever a man feels kind compassion with love for his fellow Christian, it is Christ within him." (21-22)

"Truth sees God, and wisdom contemplates God, and from these two comes the third, a holy and wonderful delight in God, who is love. Where truth and wisdom truly are, there is truly love coming from both of them, and all of God's making; for he is supreme unending truth, supreme unending wisdom, supreme unending love, uncreated." (105)

"And you to whom this book may come, thank our Saviour Jesu Christ earnestly and heartily for making these showings and revelations of his endless love, mercy and goodness for you and to you, to be your and our safe guide and conduct to everlasting bliss; which may Jesus grant us. Amen." (180)

2019 Review

For my first time going completely through the short text and long text, I read a few chapters each day as part of my devotional practice. Julian is such a mother of the faith, and her voice is rich. Insights leapt to me from every page, and some of them changed my life. Considering returning to this one on a yearly basis.