Rating: 5/5

Frederick Barthelme is the good stuff. Reading his fiction is like smoking a fat joint with good friends, or having a few beers on a hot early evening, or a sleep-in after five days of early mornings. His prose is simple and his characters are usually of average intelligence or lack insight, but he manages somehow to see the infinite complexity in all this, in the modern-suburban life, in the beauty of an empty car-park late at night, in the law of averages, I guess.

The stories in this collection are stylistically-influenced but wholly original. They read like a modernised Raymond Carver and maybe feel a little pre-Tao Lin, but the Barthelmeian thing is this beautiful optimism about the mundane nature of living. He's able to capture those moments that feel like a pause in time, when you might be walking through your neighbourhood you've seen a hundred times, just trying to get home, when, as if out of nowhere, you become aware of the fact that you're alive, on this earth, with all these other people who are living their own individual lives in their own houses, and it's like this overwhelming sense of gratitude for being here, able to acknowledge and appreciate that. Like, for instance, this little gem from "Driver":

"She looked terrific in the car. She had on a checked shirt open over a white Danskin, her feet were up on the dash, and her short hair was wet and rippled with the wind. Her skin was olive and rough, and it was glowing as if she were in front of a fire. When I missed a light next to Pfeiffer Chemicals, a couple of acres of pipes and ladders and vats and winking green lamps, I leaned over to kiss her cheek, but she turned at the last minute and caught me with her lips." p.131.

Also, he writes women like nobody's business.

Of course, the collection isn't perfect. In fact it pretty clearly illustrates where Barthelme is strong and where he's weak. He's strong when he writes from a first-person male perspective, usually an older male who's somewhat educated, a little disinterested with life, but with an inarticulate yearning for something more. He's weak when he doesn't do this. Some of the stories are written from a second-person perspective and these work okay, but they feel a little pointless. "Shopgirls" is a nice idea, but it's hard to tell if Barthelme has a point or he's just trying to be a little experimentally fancy and show-off-y. And he certainly proves with "The Autobiography of Rita Jay" that he should stay very far away from the perspective of a female character. He's brilliant when he observes a woman, but he can't get inside her head.

Anyway, readers interested in Barthelme might need a checklist of reading pre-requisites, so I'll make it easy by spelling it out right here:
You best not be concerned with plot, because in Barthelme's world, going for a drive is about as plot-heavy as it gets.
Helps if you're sympathetic to the plight of the common person, because there are no extraordinary heroes here. 
Don't expect to take sides. You might not like, or even find interesting, the main character (Barthelme doesn't shy from writing from the perspective of a pedophile), so just go with it, because everybody has some story to tell.
Don't come to Barthelme looking for outlandish settings in far-away lands. This is Southern American suburbia, and it could (if that isn't where you are) just as easily be your neighbourhood, starring your next door neighbour.

Point is, when Barthelme is good, he's very, very good. He expresses something plenty of authors wouldn't even consider worth looking at, because it might seem "boring" or "pointless". But he manages to look at what most of us glaze over, with a curious and careful eye. What he sees and records feels all the more beautiful because you realise, up until now, you've missed it every time it's been right in front of you.

"Ray opened his mouth to repeat himself, then laughed. 'It's a great life, isn't it? It's much better than anything I imagined, or anything I did before. ' He was making hand gestures, slicing at the air as if cutting away underbrush. 'With my first marriage and my second - I didn't have a clue. You get married, have a baby, you have a car, have a job, and everything just gets away from you, lickety-split.' Then he put an arm around Judy's shoulders, tugged her toward him. 'Now everything's a lot better. You want something, you take it. That's how we go - bip, bip, bip.'" p. 205