Rating: 2/5

Four separate volumes but all free for Audible-Plus-UK members--read by John Telfer.

(ETA: After further thought, it is not the characters’ Britishness that bothers me. It I their uppity attitude and poshness, their class.)

This did not work for me. Every time I listened, something nagged at me, something bothered me, I was not enjoying the reading experience. I often went back and listened several times. The writing style doesn’t fit me. Too wordy and very British—the expressions, the idioms, the choice of words. I would think and think again—what a strange way of saying that! I don’t feel comfortable with the language. I want things said in a simpler fashion, more directly. Or maybe it is just that the British expressions don’t feel natural to me. There were long sections where I kept thinking—please, please, get to the point! Gosh this drags on forever! 

Often we are in the characters’ heads. Thoughts are left unfinished. Sometimes I knew what was implied, sometimes I didn’t. Too often we are told what has happened rather than experiencing events firsthand.

The characters—I felt a kinship with ONE of them, just one. This one guy I did like--he is not running after money, fame or position. He has morals. The other characters left me totally cold. The one I like is not enough to hold up the entire novel. I was too often bored or wondered what I was missing.

The audiobook is read by John Telfer. He easily switches between different accents—British, American, Scottish and French. Nevertheless, I just cannot say I loved it. The narration fits the book, but the book left me unsatisfied. Three stars for the narration.

Think about the title. We have here a reflection on the consequences of war--our expectations at the start and where we ae left at the end. The setting is before, during and after the First World War in Britain and France.

There are lots of references that indicate the author is knowledgeable and well read, but somehow none of this meant a thing to me. Is it its Britishness that bothers me?! Or is it the wordy prose and that I have had trouble relating to most of the characters? This book did little for me so I cannot recommend it!

It is not fun writing reviews for books you don’t care for. Youth by J.M. Coetzee has made me interested in reading this by Ford! Clearly, not everybody enjoys the same thing!

*The Good Soldier TBR
*Parade's End 2 stars