Becoming Native to This Place 05312014 by Wes Jackson
Interesting: Community!!!

Alternative perspective on human interaction with the earth
By Gregory J Guenther on June 19, 2000
Format: Paperback
Very easy reading, short book.
Wes Jackson describes a growing perspective that we need to interact symbiotically with the earth rather than considering the earth a "resource" at our disposal. He mixes philosophy with actual personal experiences to further illustrate the story.
The fact that he began the Land Use Institute in Kansas and is still and active participant lends credibility to his dialog.
Comment Was this review helpful to you? Yes No
10 of 14 people found the following review helpful
Doesn't live up to the title.
By Settler on August 10, 2009
Format: Paperback Verified Purchase
Wes Jackson is writing with the huge disadvantage of a great title, and I have to say I value all the thought and meditation the title provokes more than the content of the book, which starts with some promise but then wanders off into the woods. He tells you early on that he's going to get lost in the woods when he says that we need to have our "evolutionary/ecological worldview inform our decisions."

Part of the problem is that the title is hopeful, but the book reads like more of a wandering lament or critique of our situation for which the author ultimately has no compelling answers.

That said, the first chapters do provide some useful information on the history of agriculture in the US and the Soviet Union. Particularly interesting is his view that the failure of Soviet agriculture (because much of it was based upon Communist ideology, including ideas about plant heredity) produced in the West the contrary view that philosophy should have no bearing whatsoever on agriculture. Jackson does want philosophy and moral reflection to influence our thinking about agriculture, but he still leaves us ungrounded in any worldview that can provide moral compulsion for care of the earth.

Skip this book in favor of any of the following:

Living at Nature's Pace, Farming and the American Dream, by Gene Logsdon
The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture, by Wendell Berry
The Omnivore's Dilemma, A Natural History of Four Meals, by Michael Pollan
1 Comment Was this review helpful to you? Yes No
Good book!
By Victoria Kantargis on August 21, 2013
Format: Paperback Verified Purchase
it's very interesting. thought provoking...most books are but this one is really good. theres history, genetics, culture, etc. very good.