Rating: 3/5

5/10

Ghosts, or Phantasms as they called them then, were, certainly, one of the most known subject through the centuries in fiction stories; but it was in the 19th century, and through Sheridan Le Fanu’s stories - the “leader” as they called him - that inspired many writers later and made it even more popular. 
Today, of course, with the fantastical genre having seen many changes these stories seem a bit old-fashioned, but we cannot say that they don’t have a particular atmosphere of that era.
This collection, collected and edited by M.R. James almost a century ago, contains some of his lesser-known and rarer ghost stories.

Madam Crowl's Ghost
The first story opens the collection with an old woman as she narrates us the events that brought her, when she was just a little girl then, in the home of the near-dying Madam Crowl, and faced-to-face with her spirit.

With his usual Irish style Le Fanu brings in this story an interesting idea, but nevertheless fails to impress so much in the end as a whole.

Squire Toby's Will
The second story focuses on the Marston family, and particularly on the younger son - Charles who, through some treacherous plans, became the heir of the house of Gylingden Hall and left his older brother out of their father’s will. However, when one day a stray dog starts wandering in his father’s tomb something very strange will happen that will bring him to the discovery of the true will, as also faced-to-face with his spirit.

It is a much bigger story but, even though its central idea is good, it drags too much and becomes more tiring than it should for what Le Fanu wants to point about. 

Dickon the Devil
The third story focuses on an unnamed protagonist as he narrates us the events that led him to a remote place of Lancashire after being employed by two rich maids for the partition of a small estate and which brought him against with a mysterious man, and also with the long dead Squire Bowes.

It’s a more satisfying story, though certainly not an exceptional one, with Le Fanu’s writing flowing much better here, and also managing to keep the interest much longer than the previous two stories. 

The Child that went with the Fairies
The next story focuses on a family in an old city of Limerick who, as they encouter a beautifully coloured carriage and its strange black woman following it, their lives will change forever when little Billy gets enchanted by her charm, only to find themselves later against with his mysterious disappearance.

It is a mediocre, but small story as the supernatural element here is much weaker and without managing it the end to show something very remarkable. 

The White Cat of Drumgunniol
‘The White Cat of Drumgunniol’ follows the Dan Donovan’s narratives as he recounts us, through our unnamed protagonist, the events that took place in his home in Drumgunniol when he was just a little boy and that brought him against with a mysterious woman, and a cat that brings death to anyone who happens to see her.

It's a much more interesting story than the previous one but with its biggest disadvantage being, however, Le Fanu’s writing which, certainly, shows his strengths as also his weaker points. 

An Account of Some Strange Disturbances in Aungier Street
The most optimistic idea comes in this story following Dick, a medical student, who along with his cousin Tom decide to stay in one of his uncle empty houses that he bought some time ago. But in this house they will discover along the way that something very strange is happening and will bring them against with a strange spirit.

This story is a perfect example of how a good idea can never surpass mediocrity, and this is because of Le Fanu’s writing as it fails to pass through the necessary emotional elements to this story even more enchanting - which is caused from always concentrating his ideas to the areas/landscapes of the events that take place, rather than the characters themselves. 

Ghost Stories of Chapelizod
The ‘Ghost Stories of Chapelizod’ is a different story as it is split into three, loosely connected, parts. The first part follows Larkin, a bully of the small village of Chapelizod, who comes against with the spirits of his victims; the second part follows the adventures of Sexton Martin as he comes, too, against with a strange man and a with very peculiar incident; and lastly, the third part ends with the adventures of young Peter as he encounters an unusual group of soldiers and a strange woman that is seeking for her lost treasure - only to discover later that he they had die long ago.

It is certain that from these three little stories, the second part is the one that stands out most as Le Fanu manages to build a very powerful suspense. Of course, I cannot say, that the other two have also their, own, moments with the first one, despite its small size, having an interesting - if somewhat very common - idea; while the last having a powerful mystery with Le Fanu unfolding very nicely till the end. 

Wicked Captain Walshawe, of Wauling
The next one, of the two, of this collection is a story that is in a chapterized format. It follows, through an unnamed narrator, the life of Captain Walshawe and his, unloved, wife; as well his uncle adventures who became the sole heir of their house and who encounters a strangely evil spirit.

One of the better stories as Le Fanu manages here, despite the low expectations that the previous stories brought, to build a good suspense as also to also hold the interest of the plot at a high level. 

Sir Dominic's Bargain
This story follows an unnamed businessman and explorer who, as he travels to the south of Ireland, comes against with a man in an abandoned house who narrates to him the adventures of his grandfather, who was in Sir Dominic’s service, and his master’s meeting with an unusual man who offered him a deal - as to solve his economical problems - only to discover later that this was probably also and his biggest mistake.

It is pretty a powerful story with Le Fanu managing to build its mystery very nicely and also bring the suspense to a strong conclusion. 

Ultor de Lacy
Another story in a chapterized format that focuses on Ultor, the sole heir of the De Lacy’s castle, and to his two daughters who, after the rebellion in Ireland, he was forced to leave them behind. But, when one day he returns suddenly back to the castle he will discover that something very strange is happening; something that will bring him and his daughters against with the most strange things.

It's a likealbe story, but slightly disappointing after what the two previous stories brought as Le Fanu in this one brings, essentially, a somewhat neutral conclusion. If only he had made a little spookier it would have been a lot better. 

The Vision of Tom Chuff
The most strangely phantasmagorical story comes in ‘The Vision of Tom Chuff’ as it follows a cruel husband who brings terrors to his wife and children through violent behaviours. But, when one day he returns home drunk he will find himself in a dream that will take him to a world so similar same with our own, yet so strangely different that will bring against with the most horrendous things - only to discover later that this, perhaps, was much more real than he had believed and may even bring and to his death.

The strongest, and certainly the best, story of this collection shows Le Fanu’s, much greater, imagination as he takes us, through Tom’s dreams, in a world that is very likely the actual horrendously representation of Hell itself. 

Stories of Lough Guir
As similarly with the ‘Ghost Stories of Chapelizod’ the last story of this collection is divided into five parts as they follow, through an unnamed writer, the narratives of the protagonists of these events as find themselves against with the strange spirit of the Earl of Desmond.

All these five stories have a, relatively, good idea but they’re too small - with just two pages each - to have any significant impact, in the end, and become somewhat indifferent. 

Closing, I would only add that this is definitely a collection that does not impress very much as it has some tough stories, which is mostly from Le Fanu’s particular style, but it is worth a look if you're interested to see more of his other works.