Rating: 3/5

[3.5] A very good example of the kind of thing it is - genteel, slightly humourous story of 1950s ladies - but it's not quite my kind of thing. I'd suspected this is what Barbara Pym - and also the entire output of blog-favourite boutique publisher Persephone Books - would be like, whilst faintly hoping she might turn out as satirical as Stella Gibbons. So although Pym has been widely recommended, I'd never sought out her books... but holiday cottages always seem to have at least one Virago Modern Classic in them. 

The first page was promisingly, amusingly camp, but the rest of the book rather more mundane. I liked the main characters a lot - mildly eccentric university friends who live miles away from one another, each spending a lot of time among dull, very conventional, very 1950s people who don't really get her. Jane is a vicar's wife who mentions her leftfield opinions too often - she'd sound absolutely fine these days, but in a society where people even mind the use of chairs from the bedroom at a gathering in the sitting room, it's a different story. Her faux-pas are many but still almost elegant: a quarter-Miranda - though her nervy manner I imagined as that of Bill from 2.4 Children. Prudence would likewise be perfectly normal these days, a fashion-forward serial monogamist in a London PA job she's too bright for. (Back then it was because too few good careers were open to women, sixty years later it would be the effects of the recession on graduate jobs. Disappointingly, the novel has nothing whatsoever to say about the content of Prudence's work, for a freelance academic economist - this is too much like the empty intellectual allusions of chicklit, although there are at least many quotes from the metaphysical poets, whom the characters studied. ) 
Both women have certain introvert tendencies that people then and now often consider rude: stopping using a cafe at lunchtime because one's colleagues have started to go there, or running out of rooms at home when the window cleaners appear. (Can entirely sympathise with these, though when I last had window cleaners I trained myself to acknowledge them briefly and then ignore in that situation.)
The elder Jane can't resist trying to matchmake for Prudence, and a little village drama ensues around this when Prudence comes to visit her friend. 

I could identify with J&amp;P in being stuck in the company of all these mainstream busybodies - I admire their patience with them and also find Jane rather [inadvertantly] brave because she can't help being herself and being weird, rather than bottling her true self up to try and have a quiet life. 
But their environments are suffocating. And it's a whole life of settling for scraps. And if I want escapism from boredom, I want to read about something different. 

There's also a lot of frustration about gender roles in Jane and Prudence. I've never romanticised the 50s - my retro interests are a little later - but this book debunks those who do. It's interesting to see how much some things have changed - the women spend a lot of time making food for men, and will automatically tend to a man if he, for example, spills something on his clothes; overwhelmingly, IME, contemporary British men hate that sort of fuss and would rather look after themselves, and most women, apart from those now elderly, rarely do this. Yet the discussion about whether a woman should make a move on a man could have come from any number of magazine articles within the last twenty years. These days, a lazy suitor might copy and paste his email to more than one person (I'm sad to say I was once taken in by a very good example, and only found out when we were friends for a while afterwards, and he sent it to someone else quite openly, presumably having forgotten, whilst we sat together at the computer.) Pym has a more old-fashioned example, also disclosed in Jilly Cooper's spoilertastic introduction: he gives a book to Prudence, reusing the same inscription and quote that his deceased wife had written in one she gave to him.
Although Prudence is an attractive, clever twenty-nine year old living in London, the men she dates are clearly not good enough for her (no-one ever says so, and she is set up with a cheater, who'd be disapproved of much more now than he was then, if forums are any barometer) - presumably most of the better men are already married or died in the war. (Jane's student daughter of Prudence: "the supply of men isn't inexhaustible at her age, not like it is at Oxford". The thoughts of one of Prudence's other friends: "One couldn't go on having romantic love affairs indefinitely. One had to settle down sooner or later into the comfortable spinster or the contented or bored wife.") But is it really not possible for her to find more like-minded friends in London, of all places?
Housekeeping is fussy and old-fashioned: the influence of Elizabeth David hasn't yet filtered through to the countryside and cooking with garlic is disapproved of; those bedroom chairs; and there's an expectation of having summer and winter curtains. The importance of the differences between High and Low Church CofE - Jane and her mild-mannered husband are somewhere in between - are frequently discussed and are quite arcanely fascinating. Asperges. (Nothing to do with social awkwardness.) North End Position. Evening Communion. 

A few quotes I like:

- married people did not understand the importance of the full hot-water bottle.
- "...you always said you wanted to be in a country parish..."
"...I didn't think it would be like this. I thought people in the country were somehow noble, through contact with the earth and Nature... and all the time they're just worrying about petty details like water tanks and magazine covers! like people in the suburbs do."
- "Just the sort of place you ought to live in," he said at last. "Very Vogue and all that. Not quite my cup of tea, I'm afraid."
I'm not asking you to live with me, thought Prudence, merely to have a drink. 
- It appeared that Prudence had forgotten _____ to the same extent as she had forgotten Philip, Henry, Laurence and the others. That is to say, he had been given a place in her shrine of past loves; the urn containing his ashes had been ceremonially deposited in the niche where it would always remain. Philip, Henry, Laurence, _______, and who could tell how many others there might be.  

One reason I'm not so fond of Jane Austen as many others are is that her world is inevitably constrained, and that's not what I want from a book - it's no kind of escape. I've learned to appreciate certain sorts of peace as I got older: as a teenager I found a house that was silent except for the ticking of clocks to be depressing, with vague intimations of mortality - in the last few years I grew to like its peace. I can do small talk now, but I prefer the company of those with whom it's rarely necessary, or at least not the main thing. Pym has been called a mid-twentieth century Austen, and whilst I can see what people would go for in her writing, this is not a world I would generally go to for fun. If I did love Austen and Pym I'd probably fit better into the contemporary versions of the worlds they satirise...