I can't devote the time now (June 2021) to read all these essays, but I picked it up to read the second essay "No Science Without Fancy, No Art Without Facts: The Lepidoptery of Vladimir Nabokov" and picked up quite a few gems.

Nabokov named a blind man in Laughter in the Dark after a German amateur butterfly collector named Kretschmar because he'd scooped Nabokov on his new moth species description decades previous. (pg. 45) What delightful pettiness. I have considered exactly that sort of pettiness in a novel idea I'm developing.

He quite incorrectly considered incredible insect mimicry as unexplainable entirely by natural selection, believing such mimicry was "carried to a point of mimetic subtlety, exuberance, and luxury far in excess of a predator's power of appreciation. I discovered in nature the nonutilitarian delights that I sought in art. Both were a form of magic, both were a game of intricate enchantment and deception." (pg. 37) Insect mimicry is a source of endless consternation to Nathan despite my many, many patient explanations of how it occurs, and he was delighted to hear Nabokov's (empirically indefensible) thoughts on the matter.

Gould's overarching thesis on Nabokov's "intellectual promiscuity" deeply resonated with me:

"No more harmful nonsense exists than this common supposition that deepest insight into great questions about the meaning of life or the structure of reality emerges most readily when a free, undisciplined, and uncluttered (read, rather, ignorant and uneducated) mind soars above mere earthly knowledge and concern. The primary reason for emphasizing the supreme aesthetic and moral value of detailed factual accuracy, as Nabokov understood so well, lies in our need to combat this alluring brand of philistinism if we wish to maintain artistic excellence as both a craft and an inspiration. [...]

"This Nabokovian argument for a strictly positive correlation [...] between extensive training and potential for creative innovation may be more familiar to scientists than to creative artists. But this crucial key to professional achievement must be actively promoted within science as well." (pg. 48 &amp; 49)

I began my jaunt through the Nabokov canon after listening to Jamie Loftus' Lolita Podcast. I had read Lolita twice before and will give it a re-read at some point this year, but since reading Ada and Pale Fire and myriad Nabokov short stories I have found meaningful kinship with Nabokov, as I am a scientist with a passion for writing and literature, especially at this unique moment of my life when I am completing a doctoral dissertation while simultaneously reading more fiction than ever before (made possible in part by forsaking most social media and television and having my social life drastically reduced by the pandemic). My natural attention to detail made me well-suited for laboratory research but it also drives my pleasure in my many non-academic pursuits. I have had a hard time thinking of myself as a creative person because my obsessive tendencies to read and research before I create anything myself make me feel as if I'm merely re-capitulating other's ideas instead of crafting my own. I am gradually bridging that artificial divide in myself.

"But many of us who labor in both domains (if only as an amateur in one) strongly feel that an overarching mental unity builds a deeper similarity than disparate subject matter can divide. Human creativity seems to work much as a coordinated and complex piece, whatever the different emphases demanded by disparate subjects—and we will miss the underlying commonality if we only stress the distinctions of external subjects and ignore the unities of internal procedure. If we do not recognize the common concerns and characteristics of all creative human activity, we will fail to grasp several important aspects of intellectual excellence—including the necessary interplay of imagination and observation (theory and empirics) as an intellectual theme, and the confluence of beauty and factuality as a psychological theme—because one field or the other traditionally downplays one side of a requisite duality." (pg. 51)

To end with Nabokov: "I cannot separate the aesthetic pleasure of seeing a butterfly and the scientific pleasure of knowing what it is." (pg. 51) I am not an entomologist and I'm a pretty poor plant scientist, but I am a decent agricultural plant scientist and I delight most in the natural beauty of the crop plants I can identify and describe or explain in some level of scientific detail. Butterflies are versatile carriers of imagery in literature, but I like to imagine all the ways plants can do that work too.