Rating: 3/5

I read this novel for two simple reasons: one, the writer is an acquaintance I met through my freelancing for roleplaying games; two, I have been playing Vampire: The Masquerade since 1992 and I wanted to know how it all ended.

The novel relates the story of the days leading to the Final Night for all vampires, the so-called Gehenna, where it is prophesized the original vampire, Caine (of Abel fame), and the Antediluvians (Caine's grandchildren, so to speak) will awaken and pass judgment upon all the vampires in the world. Peachy.

I don't know how much of the story was the author's idea, and how much was handed down from the game developers, but to the credit of both, I actually liked the novel. The writing was good enough for what it was telling (though there were too many parentheses throughout the novel), and the storytelling itself was engaging enough to keep going back to it and finish it in 3 days.

It was annoying, though, to realize that even at the end, they kept some things secret, and that the novel ends on the morning of the day of Gehenna; officially, you really don't know what will happen when the end comes, only what transpired up to it. I can deal with that as a gamer, but as a reader I expected more. But I guess that's the general problem with game-related fiction in general. All these things aside, like I said, I liked the book. I liked that no punches were pulled; that vampires died left and right; that the big names went down without gimmicks and once and for all; that when the shit hit the fan, it hit it good and spread everywhere. Most of all, I liked that, even when vampires are borderline on being blood-powered superheroes, the main character held on to the ethos of the Vampire line: it's all about personal horror and redemption; even a centuries-old, blood-sucking, bestial-featured, manipulating vampire could have a shred of humanity left in him to make him feel remorse for his actions, and hope to rise above his monstrous nature.

A very cool ending to Vampire: The Masquerade, and good enough to make me wonder, what's next?