Rating: 4/5

Richard Hughes is known today (if he is known at all) for his first novel A High Wind in Jamaica. If his second novel is anything to go by, it should be a work of rare class. Hughes wrote In Hazard in the doldrums between the two world wars, those years of curious suspension between epochal cataclysms. The story is simple: the steamship Archimedes sails south from Norfolk, VA and unwittingly falls into the path of an unseasonal storm of nightmarish violence. After many days of non-stop danger and toil, the ship emerges from the hurricane, grievously damaged but still proud and unsunk. A rescue ship arrives and tows it to the safety of Belize. 

That's the story. That's all of it. A slim book, maybe even a slight book at first glance. But boy, can looks be deceptive! In Hazard is a book that lulls you at first with its smooth prose before pitching you headlong into 120-odd pages of the most elemental fury. You may well wonder how the writer is able to sustain the narration of one single natural event over such a span, how he can maintain such a high pitch without sacrificing quality? But sustain it he does, by some miracle, without even once letting you go. 

Hughes deploys exceptional powers of description in the service of a nautical tale that is gripping and harrowing in turn. Simon Schama called the book a "masterpiece of lyric terror" - as pithy a tag as any - and favourable comparisons have been made with Conrad himself. Several times during the hurricane, I was marvelling not just at the writer's skill but also his ambition. It is almost as if Hughes took it upon himself as a challenge: how to take a singular natural phenomenon and describe it as lucidly, faithfully and forcefully as you possibly can. Needless to say, he succeeded in his self-appointed challenge; as a spirited exercise in style, the book passes with flying colours. 

*

As much a descriptive tour de force, In Hazard is also a sort of paean to man's willpower, his courage and strength in the teeth of the most colossal adversity. I suppose you only get to test your mettle to the max in a few extremes of experience - war, exploration, adventure. A Category 5 hurricane in the Caribbean certainly counts as one of those extremes. 

Hughes pays particular attention to two characters of similar age: the English lad Dick Watchett and the absconding Chinese revolutionary Ao Ling. The spiritual/intellectual evolution of both is traced carefully, but for some reason, Ao Ling's transition from impoverished childhood in provincial China to restless radical in her great cities really stuck with me. Alongside the descriptions of frenzied nature, this was my favorite passage of the book. (Caveat: some of the attitudes may strike the 21st-century reader as racial stereotyping; all I'll say is don't belabour the point.)

Hughes does not stint on the technical details either - there is enough seafaring jargon here to last you all the way to Hispaniola. Turbines, condensors, pumps, fire-room, furnace, steering gear, aftercastle, hull, fuel tanks... even with the utmost effort, you can barely keep your head wrapped around it all, although in fairness Hughes does strive to keep everything as clear and shipshape as he can. The depth and thoroughness of his research into the workings of a steamship will be apparent even to the most casual reader. Still, one might struggle. After all, the sum total of what I learnt from reading Forester's Brown on Resolution many years ago is simply this - port means left (four letters both) and starboard means right! And there it ends, at least with me. 

A final word then on the quality of the prose. Maybe it's a lost art among modern generations of writers, but Hughes' prose has an assurance and fluidity - an aplomb - that you don't see much of any more among today's stuttering amateurs. And yet it used to be fairly common in the first half of the last century. Not the complex constructions of the 19th century, but prose that had improved in clarity without losing any of its sinuous muscularity. 

Ah well, one can harken back to olden times, but what good does it do? In the meantime, you have Richard Hughes to keep you company. I read an old Penguin paperback, but kudos where they are due: NYRB Books have reissued all four of Hughes' novels, adding to their ever-wondrous catalogue of forgotten classics. 

P.S. Apparently, In Hazard is based on the true story of the Phemius, a ship which was caught up in a ferocious hurricane in 1932. The captain’s report so impressed the owners that they gave a copy to the writer who ended up working it into a novel.