Rating: 1/5

I think I've outgrown Laymon's novels- I almost sprained my eyes from all the rolling they did over some of the scenes. Every character in this story is messed up and unlikable (well, maybe not Ian, but like all the characters, he's not fully fleshed out). Certain characters and storylines just get dropped without explanation 

Spoilers ahead:

I kept waiting for Janet's crazy ex to pop up and get killed by Albert, but he's never mentioned again after Janet decides to ditch him to go to the Halloween party... so I'm not sure what Laymon was trying to do with that character.

Honestly, the characters all do such insane things that serial killer Albert appears to have more sense. First Janet's live in boyfriend demands Janet abort their baby but then threatens her and her friends if Janet doesn't come back with him.

Janet, newly pregnant and literally just broken up with her boyfriend, goes on a date with sad sack Mosby (who pretty much sexually assaults her, but that's okay because he has low self esteem, which make Janet think he'd be perfect for Meg) because I guess being single is the worstb thing ever.

Meg.. Janet's friend, beast to her beauty, is so hard up for the attention of an attractive male that she sleeps with Janet's ex. And claims to be so desperate that she'd do it again. Wtf? 

Lester is married to the ice queen, Helen, but enters into a weird affair with the older Emily Jean (which involves bizarre role playing, with her pretending to be her daughter May Beth). But then, suddenly Lester seems to really be into Emily jean (although he's still hoping to bang May Beth), and then, boom! he's suicidal and homicidal. Helen is without any redeeming qualites. She sleeps with a student, lies to her husband that it's Ian she had the affair with and then tries to goad Lester into killing Ian (I assume because if Ian dies then she wouldn't have to quit her job).

May Beth goes off with Albert because she's a whore? Because all the women in the book are just desperate for sex and or money. However, May Beth does have some moxy, so points for that.

Janet, who agrees to meet up with suddenly insane Dave, ditches him to go to a Halloween party, which is populated by promiscuous faculty members. She and Ian fall in instalove, but she's attacked by crazy (and if course slutty) Mary, simply bc Mary thinks she might be flirting with her paramour, Ronald (who's wife Dale is also a teacher and at the party). 

It was all just too messed up, and that's without Albert's pension for humping knife wounds. It's a shame, because when I first read Laymon (the Traveling Vampire Show), I thought I'd found another horror author who's books I could devour, but all the rapeyness piled on top of more rapeyness just pisses me off. His books are like blood soaked letters to Penthouse. 

The story moved along swiftly, even if it made little sense, so I guess that's a point in it's favor? I honestly can't recommend his books anymore though, Laymon might have been a real sweet guy when he was alive, but his books read like the fanatasies of some deranged, horny teenager.