Rating: 4/5

Borrowed from my sister Tracy in Worcester over the weekend. I'll read this alongside "Lust For Life". This edition is blue and hardcover. Edited/curated by Richard Ford. 7/9... I finished another mediocre Joyce Carol Oates novel. I've read some of her s.stories and I think I like those better. There's one in here. Starting tonight...
I finally did get started Saturday night and read the first two stories. Are the two Bowles related? The story by Paul is a shocker and very strange. Seems like I might have read it a long time ago. More tonight... I can't be writing something about every story and author. There are too many. I'll try to stick with the highest lights. Last night that was "Blackberry Winter" by Robert Penn Warren. Very similar to Eudora Welty I thought. Tennessee instead of Mississippi. The natural world/human world interface well described.
Now much further in with many stories read but many more to go. I've encountered various kinds of experimental prose from three different female authors: Eudora Welty, Grace Paley and Flannery O'Connor. All interesting... The realtive duds: Kurt Vonnegut(a story I read years ago in Playboy), and "The Lottery" by Shirley Jackson which I also may have read already. The highlights: Bernard Malamud and James Baldwin. JB might not be that great a writer but the emotional content was very affecting. 
Last night... only one story read but it was a great one: "In the Zoo" by Jean Stafford. Takes place in a fictionalized Ft. Collins in the 30's and 40's(I think) and reminded me of "Housekeeping" and "Tree of Smoke"(an odd combo). I always wonder if the "reminded of" writers, if later in time, had read what I'd just read and subconsciously used it. Like Grace Paley's story, this was an epic in miniature. A story of misery, suffering and death revolving around two connected moments of brutality and revenge. There's an amazing connection between these two stories and "Tree of Smoke" as well but I won't be a spoiler.
Tuesday night and two more read including another in experimental/ poetic/modern mode by Stanley Elkin. Then an insane bit of chaos from Joyce Carol Oates. Kind of like the one from Paul Bowles. Weird...
Thursday night/Wed. AM... I finished William Gass' story this morning after starting yesterday. I recently came across his name with some reference to him being some kind of American literary holy man. If I'd ever heard of him I'd forgotten but that doesn't mean much. That's true of a lot of great writers. So... I was really looking forward to reading "In the Heart of the Heart of the Country". And then dismayed to find that it's pretty much poetry masquerading as prose. Each of the various parts is like mini essay. Not really fiction. But then my mind adjusted and I was enthralled. Notes and quotes:
- "Mud presently."... a great sentence. Could be the title of a poem.
- "it's better to live in the country... than in any city, in any stinking fog of human beings, in any blooming orchard of machines."
- Reminds me of Plath and Eliot at times.
- Beddoes? Holsclaw? Rilke?(actually I have HEARD of Rilke...)
- "It isn't necessary to suppose our cows have feelings; our neighbor hasn't as many as he used to have either;"(cows or feelings?)
- Thomas Lovell Beddoes was an English 19th century poet. Committed suicide. Don't they all? Still no luck with Holsclaw.

This story was preceded by more crazy-experimental stuff by Donald Barthelme. Not poetry but sort of stream of conscience. We probably have Faulkner and Joyce to thank for it. I'm hoping for more conventional choices from here on out - halfway through now. But...
Slow going this weekend due to my two-job busy-ness. I did read J. A. MacPherson's railroad story. My mother, younger sister and I rode on the Broadway Limited from NYC to Chicago and then the California Zephyr to Oakland in the summer of 1962. Right around the time of the end of the story. I rode the current Zephyr out to Cali a few years ago. All those jobs for black men are pretty scarce now but there were/are still waiters and stewards and such(all black men) on those trains from Chicago west.

Slow going... I'm working two jobs and today's the first day off for me in almost two weeks. It sucks but I need the $$$. I've managed to read only one more story in days, that being "The Babysitter" by Robert Coover, the author of that fantasy baseball book I read years ago. This is yet another exercise in experimental writing. Another approach. Can't say that I like it particularly but it was sort of interesting. 
Next day... even more progress as I read a few more stories: The Ray Carver I'd read before of course - wonderful as always(the blind TV detective is "Longstreet"/James Franciscus(?)). Also more post-modernist craziness in "City Boy" and Gayl Jones' vivid slice of ghetto life.
I got back to it last(Friday) evening with two more stories. A bit more conventional slice of life from a kid's perspective from Joy Williams and "Fugue in A-Minor", a jazzy tale reminiscent of a Lord Buckley "soliloquy"... all good. 

I've found a bit more reading time lately and have read a few more. The "end" is sort of in sight. "Here Come the Maples", "Pretty Ice" and "Greenwich Time" are New Yorker ballads of Waspy unhappiness. All skillfully wrought by Updike, Mary Robison, and Ann Beattie. "Testimony of Pilot" is another mini-epic and very moving. One of my favorites so far... 

Only one last night but it was devastating. A prose-poetic stream of consciouness visit to the darkest side of our culture. People do live there... kids too. "Lechery" by Jayne Anne Phillips.
 
I'm still plugging away as I find the time. Three more finished": "Liars in Love" by R. Yates is another devastating portrait of an gutless, equivocating American middle class Momma's boy a la' Frank in "R. Road". As with that book the outcome for the reader is compromised by Yates' awkward prose style, which harkens back to the earlier 20th century of Wilder, Steinbeck, Lewis etc. Sounds "square," man. Jamaica Kincaid's story is reasonably effective but too mild in it's evocation of coming of age separation, rejection and bitterness. "Territory"(David Leavitt) stands out for it's theme of a young gay man finding his emotional and social place in the world. Different... 

I wonder if I'll have room to finish this review? Seven more to go. Last night I read "Bridging" by Max Apple. Kind of the same vein as "The Circling Hand" but from the parent's perspective. Touching... Then "Greasy Lake" by T.C. Boyle where teenage wanna-be hoodlums meet some adult badness and slink away: a la "Superbad"'s brilliant party scene. I just read another Boyle story in the latest N. Yorker. Another dissection of young male cluelessness. Boyle's a master of those stories. 

Nearing the end now. Read "American Express" last night. A lyrical, disturbing, complex and fascinating story of how two men find a way to be imtimate that works for them. Might not work for you and me though... This was preceded by a forlorn Tobias Wolff updating of the Cain and Abel story.

Just read "The Joy Luck Club" which of course have since been upgraded to a novel and a movie. Very moving story. Almost done now but I just discovered that there's a further, more contemporary collection too. I'll put it on my "to read" list.

Read another one last night. Three more to go... "The Fireman's Wife": A pungent depiction of a mismatched young wife's desparation. Pressured by "outsiders" to ignore her unhappiness. I also read last weeks's story in "The New Yorker". A typically abrupt, funny and rueful tale of Modern Montana from Thomas McGuane.

Hoo Rah... finally finished with the last three stories:
"Hot Ice" by Stuart Dybek - a lyrical mini-epic visit with some Chicano Chicago losers. The ending is beautiful but heavy with symbol. I have no idea what it means.
"You're Ugly Too" by Lorrie Moore(a New Yorker fave) - another look inside a routinely troubled life. Very funny...
"The Things They Carried' - included for it's cultural relevance I assume. Seems like I might have read it before. Kind of flat/trite to me but maybe it was my mood. Maybe I've just had enough of the Vietnam thing(I was there) after "Tree of Smoke" and all the rest.