Rating: 5/5

A Book So Good It's Out of This World!!! 🌟🌟🌟🌟🌟🚀🌛

Many nonfiction books about historical events I am already familiar with can be written in such a textbook way that I become bored with the simple regurgitation of the facts and lack of new information or insight and I sometimes find it difficult to finish reading the book. This was certainly NOT the case with "Moon Shot"! From the moment I began reading it I was hooked. I suddenly found myself immersed in the late 1950's flying high in the sky with America's greatest test pilots and sitting in the cockpits with them while they flew dangerous missions in WWII or landed a scrap metal plane on a stormy night on a aircraft carrier tossed at sea. Then I found myself sitting next to the Mercury 7 as they were originally introduced to the world and became the very first astronauts. I got to know each one of them and watch them form bonds that would last a lifetime. I cheered each of NASA's accomplishments and felt disheartened by their setbacks. I also felt jealous every time the Soviet Union took a step forward and we fell another step behind. I cried when Gemini 8 went to the Moon and Borman, Lovell and Anders showed the world the first pictures of our nightly visitor and the first pictures of ourselves. I cried again when Apollo 1 burned up on the launch pad and 3 brave men died, Grissom, White and Chaffee. And again when Apollo 11 landed on the Moon and Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin took the first steps ever taken there. I'm not trying to ruin the book. I assume anyone thinking about reading this book probably knows about those few events. If not, I apologize. I shared all of this to show how well-written, immersive and personal this book is. It doesn't read like a textbook or even a history book, it's more like a memoir of several people mixed with a spectacular novel, except that the story is completely true. Every day I would tell my husband more exciting information about the astronauts, or the Apollo program or the Gemini program, even the Moon itself. It was such an interesting, exciting and awe-inspiring book filled with historical events, fun facts and unforgettable stories of friendship, commitment, ambition, courage, sacrifice and success that is out of this world. I am so glad I read this wonderful book and I highly recommend it to anyone interested in learning about the Space Race or the early history of NASA. I hope you enjoy reading it as much as I did. 🌟🌟🌟🌟🌟