Rating: 5/5

… more than anything else I felt motion in the landscape; in the fresh, easy-blowing morning wind, and in the earth itself, as if the shaggy grass were a sort of loose hide, and underneath it herds of wild buffalo were galloping, galloping …

High Plains mixed-grass prairie during springtime. Near Harrison, Nebraska.
From Flickr, by https://www.flickr.com/photos/terrano...

Willa Cather

Willa Cather – born 1873 near Winchester Virginia. Her family moved to Nebraska in 1883 when she was nine, joining her father’s parents out there. After trying farming for eighteen months, they moved into the town of Red Cloud where her dad developed real estate and insurance businesses, and Willa went to school for the first time. “Cather's time in the western state, still on the frontier, was a deeply formative experience for her. She was intensely moved by the dramatic environment and weather, the vastness of the Nebraska prairie, and the various cultures of the families in the area.” (See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Willa_Ca... for more details on Cather’s early life.)

 

Will Cather, ca. 1912

Prior to 1918, when My Antonia appeared, Cather, then in her mid-40s, had published six books: 
- April Twilights (1903, poetry collection)
- The Troll Garden (1905, short stories)
- the study (co-authored with Georgine Milmine) The Life of Mary Baker G. Eddy and the History of Christian Science (1909) 
and the novels
- Alexander's Bridge (1912)
- O Pioneers! (1913)
- The Song of the Lark (1915)
 
My Antonia and the previous two novels are known as Cather’s “prairie trilogy”. These novels, which became both popular and critical successes, are set in a time and locale which Cather knew from her own experience and memories, and established her reputation as a significant American writer.

Cather won the Pulitzer Prize in 1923 for her next novel, One of Ours, published in 1922. Throughout the 1920s she was praised by other writers such as H. L. Mencken and Sinclair Lewis.

She continued to publish novels and other fiction into the 1940s. Willa Cather died in 1947.

My Antonia

My Antonia is narrated in the first person, by a character named Jim Burden. Cather employs a rather modernist, to me, conceit by introducing the book, in her own voice, as a manuscript produced by an “old friend” of hers, who had grown up with her in the same small town in Nebraska. Having met “last summer” on a train crossing Iowa, they talked for many hours, and their conversation “kept returning to a central figure, a Bohemian girl whom we had both known long ago.” More than any other person we remembered, this girl seemed to mean to us the country, the conditions, the whole adventure of our childhood. I had lost sight of her altogether, but Jim had found her again after long years, and had renewed a friendship that meant a great deal to him. His mind was full of her that day. He made me see her again, feel her presence, revived all my old affection for her.Jim had been writing down memories of her, and several months afterwards shows up at Cather’s Manhattan apartment with the manuscript. Which is ostensibly the novel we are about to read.

The manuscript, on which he scrawls “My Antonia” as he hands it to Cather, is “Jim Burden’s” memoir of the years he spent in this small Nebraska town prior to leaving it for the east around the age of twenty, including his memories of an immigrant girl just older than he, who arrived with her Bohemian family on the same train as he did – Antonia Shimerda. It is, as well, memories of the pioneer farmers who first came to Nebraska (some “American Europeans”, others recent immigrants like the Shimerdas); of the immense treeless prairie and climate they found, of the small town around which these farms ranged, of the ways of life on the farms and in the town.

Willa Cather and her narrator Jim Burden, the character introduced as the writer by the real writer, have a lot in common. Both were born in Virginia, Cather in 1873. Both moved to Nebraska around the age of ten (Cather in 1883), and in both cases the move was directed towards (or to, in Jim’s case) a grandparent. Both lived on a farm for the early part of their Nebraska years, then both moved into a small nearby town (Black Hawk in the novel, Red Cloud in Cather’s case) around the time they were ready to start high school. 

These similarities cause me to conclude that, if one wants Jim Burden’s year of birth, one may as well assume it’s the same as Willa Cather’s, 1873. I further believe that Jim Burden may as well be Will Cather herself. Not, of course, that the details of Jim’s life correspond to details of Cather’s life. Rather that the things that deeply affect Jim Burden are the same things that deeply affected Cather, as she grew up in a small town just like Black Hawk, knowing and knowing of the immigrant families that had come to America and thence to Nebraska to farm the prairie.

Cather’s book is filled with achingly beautiful passages about all of these things. I could quote them until I ran out of review room here, but after trying to write this review for hours and thousands of words I realize I can’t say everything I want about the novel, and in trying to say everything I say little or nothing.

And in searching for a single passage to quote, I realize that what I think beautiful will only be so because of my own personal memories of related things, and will strike others as “nice” or “banal” or whatever. So I give up on that.

So I’ll simply assure you, reader, that your own memories and experiences will find their counterparts in Cather’s / Burden’s memories – if you have memories of a prairie, or of seasons, or of such things as your wonder at discovering the love of learning at university, or of seeing or discovering a work of art (a painting, a symphony, an opera) at that exact moment in your life when you were simply overwhelmed by it; or memories of feelings you had when you were young, of another young person; or memories of the admiration you felt for perhaps a grandparent - or perhaps a pioneer girl, a bit older than you, who showed a fire for life totally different from all the others you knew.

To summarize: Jim Burden’s fictional memories are, I believe, Willa Cather’s real memories – and again, not the details, but the general colors and outline of the painting which is suggested by the novel, a painting which might as well be this.

 
If you think this beautiful, you will probably think My Antonia beautiful too.