Rating: 1/5

The book's title is ironic in view of its apologistic stance defending a basic concept of rapture that the author concedes is shared in common by Pre/mid/post-rapture tribulationists, identifying the principal difference between these approaches in the timing of the rapture, not its occurrence. Therefore, the "imminency of rapture" held by the early church is applicable to all three strands of belief, despite the author professing otherwise. 
Inconvenient contradicting sections of passages in scripture that point to the post-trib approach are cited without analysis e.g (page 90), preceding signs in heavens described in Matthew 24:27-31, "...after the tribulation of those days.... they will gather together His elect from the four winds". That gathering is the rapture, yet the author argues there no no signs preceding it (pp72-73).
Another inconvenient passage for the author's pre-trib position is Matthew 24:15- 25 describing end times, a period of great distress that is unequalled. Significantly, verse 22 states "If those days had not been cut short, no on would survive, but for the sake of the elect those days will be shortened". Thus, the elect are saved by virtue of the shortening of those days "of great distress" ie tribulation- implying they go through it. 
The author's view that post-tribs are masochists for not wanting to be raptured before the tribulation is untenable and unrealistic. No one wants to to be subjected to persecution but that has been the historical reality for many Christians, which Jesus warned about. He also promised to never leave of forsake believers. The sense of imminency of Christ's return is no less acute for post-tribs in such circumstances. 
About half the book is devoted to critiquing the opposing views of the pre-tribb position - and in places, reproaching the behaviour of opponents in a rather peevish manner. Hardly relevant to the discussion at hand. 
Finally, there is an idiosyncratic inclusion of the alleged "revelation" of Margaret McDonald included in Appendix 3 the book, which supposedly supports the pre-trib position. The author is at pains to dispel any accusation of her having occultist connections. He publishes the transcript of McDonald's "vision" as recorded in Norton's Book 'The Restoration of Apostle and Prophets: in the Catholic Apostolic Church" (1861). He need not have bothered as MacDonald's writings are nothing more than opaque, rambling and incoherent. An embarrassment, really. 

If this book was an undergraduate assignment I'd acknowledge its effort. But its is awkwardly written and in need of editing, not only of text but of chapter order. There is some dubious analysis of biblical text with inaccurate interpolations. The incorporated Time Charts make no reference at all to the final White Throne Judgement - a glaring omission of the most prophesied significant event in history- in spite of the author's reference to some concepts of the Book of Revelation in which that event is given pre-eminence"- but ignored by him in his discussions.