Rating: 4/5

'Taken from writings, orations, and recorded observations of life, this book selects the best of Native American wisdom and distills it to its essence in short, digestible quotes — perhaps even more timely now than when they were first written. In addition to the short passages, this edition includes the complete Soul of an Indian, as well as other writings by Ohiyesa (Charles Alexander Eastman), one of the great interpreters of American Indian thought, and three great speeches by Chiefs Joseph, Seattle, and Red Jacket.' (Book Cover)

As a non American, I very much wished to get a good basic understanding of the original Northern American psyche, culture and world viewpoint. I was aware that many of the sources I have encountered in my life depicting the 'American Indian' were most likely dictated by the larger population and most politically powerful culture of white America, whose motivations for reporting on Native Americans and what I have heard called 'The Indian Problem' were more that a little questionable in authenticity and likely personally or politically biased. I know enough of the plight of the indigenous peoples of my own country to be suspicious of hearing any person's voice describing or explaining from an outside cultural viewpoint, even with the best of intentions, as likely to have incorrect interpretations. This is a brief and curated compilation of the words of many Native American people, from many diverse nations. The collection has been sensitively presented to find and explain shared viewpoints on themes of the land, communication, beliefs, education, personal values, respect, love, communication, purpose, betrayal, loss, grief, honour, integrity and common humanity. It also contains some of the most powerful, beautiful and most poetic language it has ever been my privilege to read. Accessible and enjoyable to read, this is not a history book, but a collection of voices speaking passionately and eloquently about the people, their lands, culture and their purpose and exactly how and why contact with white man has destroyed all of these within a very short period of time. 

These are all life lessons passed down by very wise men, men who learned to think before they spoke, to listen courteously, waiting patiently for their turn to make their point, with direct simplicity that shatters comfortable beliefs others may hold about the truth of the matters addressed, in these preserved letters and speeches. I particularly enjoyed the explanations of the relationship of a mother and her child and how that child grows and becomes known as a valued individual in their community, written about in the essay 'Soul of an Indian' by Ohiyesa, as well as his writings on 'The Moral Strength of Women'. I also really appreciated hearing the first person perspectives in the written down speeches of Chiefs Joseph (Nez Perce), Chief Seattle (Suquamish and Duwamish), and Chief Red Jacket (Seneca). Here are some of my favourite thoughts from the entire compilation. Let the voices speak for themselves as they are far more eloquent than I could ever be:

  "But for me, I cannot forget our old ways. Often in summer I rise at daybreak and steal out to the corn fields, and as I hoe the corn I sing to it, as we did when I was young. No one cares for our corn songs now. Sometimes in the evening I sit, looking out on the big Missouri. The sun sets, and dusk steals over the water. In the shadows I seem again to see our Indian village, with smoke curling upward from the earth lodges, and in the river's roar I hear the yells of the warriors, and the laughter of little children as of old. It is but an old woman's dream. Then I see but shadows and hear only the roar of the river, and tears come into my eyes. Our Indian life, I know, is gone forever."

 — Waheenee Hidatsa (North Dakota)

  "Oh, the comfort, the inexpressible comfort of feeling safe with a person, having neither to weigh thought nor measure words, but pouring them all right out, just as they are, chaff and grain together, certain that a faithful hand will take and sift them, keep what is worth keeping, and with a breath of kindness, blow the rest away."

— Anonymous Shoshone

  "They are a heartless nation, that is certain. They have made some of their people servants — yes, slaves! We have never believed in keeping slaves, but it seems that the white people do! It is our belief that they painted their servants black a long time ago, to tell them from the rest — and now the slaves have children born to them of the same color! The greatest object of their lives seems to be to acquire possessions — to be rich. They desire to possess the whole world. For thirty years they tried to entice us to sell our land to them. Finally, their soldiers took it by force, and we have been driven away from our beautiful country."

 -Ohiyesa's uncle, Santee Sioux

  "Many of the white man's ways are past our understanding. . . . They put a great store upon writing; there is always paper. The white people must think that paper has some mysterious power to help them in the world. The Indian needs no writings; words that are true sink deep into his heart, where they remain. He never forgets them. On the other hand, if the white man loses his papers, he is helpless. I once heard one of their preachers say that no white man was admitted to heaven unless there were writings about him in a great book!"

— Four Guns, Oglala Sioux

  "The white man who is our agent is so stingy that he carries a linen rag in his pocket into which to blow his nose, for fear he might blow away something of value."
 
— Piapot, Cree Chief

  "I have carried a heavy load on my back ever since I was a boy. I realized then that we could not hold our own with the white men. We were like deer. They were like grizzly bears. We had a small country. Their country was large. We were contented to let things remain as the Great Spirit Chief made them. They were not, and would change the rivers and mountains if they did not suit them."
 
— Chief Joseph, Nez Perce

  "When the buffalo went away the hearts of my people fell to the ground, and they could not lift them up again. After this nothing happened. There was little singing anywhere."
 
— Chief Plenty Coups, Crow

  "Here, for the first time, I touched the goose quill to the treaty — not knowing, however, that by that act I consented to give away my village! Had that been explained to me, I should have opposed it, and never would have signed their treaty, as my recent conduct has clearly proven. What do we know of the manner of the laws and customs of the white people? They might buy our bodies for dissection, and we would touch the goose quill to confirm it, without knowing what we were doing. This was the case with myself and my people in touching the goose quill the first time."

-Black Hawk, Sauk 

  "There are but two ways for us. One leads to hunger and death, the other leads to where the poor white man lives. Beyond is the happy hunting ground where the white man cannot go."
 — Many Horses Oglala Sioux 12

  "As children of nature, we have always looked upon the concentration of population as the prolific mother of all evils, moral no less than physical. It was not, then, wholly from ignorance or improvidence that we failed to establish permanent towns and to develop a material civilization. We have always believed that food is good, while surfeit kills; that love is good, but lust destroys; and not less dreaded than the pestilence following upon crowded and unsanitary dwellings is the loss of spiritual power inseparable from too close contact with one's fellow men. All who have lived much out of doors, whether Indian or otherwise, know that there is a magnetic and powerful force that accumulates in solitude but is quickly dissipated by life in a crowd."

-Ohiyesa (Charles Alexander Eastman) 'The Soul of an Indian'

  "Suppose a white man should come to me and say, “Joseph, I like your horses. I want to buy them.” I say to him, “No, my horses suit me; I will not sell them.” Then he goes to my neighbor and says to him, “Joseph has some good horses. I want to buy them, but he refuses to sell.” My neighbor answers, “Pay me the money and I will sell you Joseph's horses.” The white man returns to me and says, “Joseph, I have bought your horses and you must let me have them.” If we sold our lands to the government, this is the way they bought them.

 — Chief Joseph, Nez Perce

  "I once showed a party of Sioux chiefs the sights of Washington, and endeavored to impress them with the wonderful achievements of civilization. After visiting the Capitol and other famous buildings, we passed through the Corcoran Art Gallery, where I tried to explain how the white man valued this or that painting as a work of genius and a masterpiece of art. “Ah!” exclaimed an old man, “such is the strange philosophy of the white man! He hews down the forest that has stood for centuries in its pride and grandeur, tears up the bosom of Mother Earth, and causes the silvery watercourses to waste and vanish away. He ruthlessly disfigures God's own pictures and monuments, and then daubs a flat surface with many colors, and praises his work as a masterpiece!”

-Ohiyesa (Charles Alexander Eastman) 'The Soul of an Indian'

  "I was born upon the prairie where the wind blew free and there was nothing to break the light of the sun. I was born where there were no enclosures and where everything drew a free breath. I want to die there, and not within walls."
 
— Ten Bears Yamparika Comanche