Rating: 5/5

So...my husband is leaving me for the 3rd time this year, but this time, he won’t change his mind. You see, he cheated on me twice this year: emotionally in January while sending certain pictures to a female coworker, and again in March, where he hoped that if he was friends with the female coworker, she would eventually return his feelings. EVEN THOUGH SHE TURNED HIM DOWN 3 TIMES ALREADY!! And he kissed her, which should have been the final straw for me. I even miscarried at 4 weeks.

But after he “realized” he wanted to be with me again, I took him back even though my gut told me “don’t you dare fucking do it! You’re only prolonging the inevitable. He has a pattern.” I followed my heart instead and we were good for 7 months. We did couple’s therapy and individual therapy. We even got a new place together in August and things seemed great. Except they weren’t. I was just too blind to see them.

I’ve never been able to be my true self with my husband, and I accepted that. We’ve been together since I was 17 and he 19. 10 years is a looooong time to be with someone. We went through a lot, me getting stable with my bipolar, trying to figure our futures out, ect. People change, I get it, but I’ve never been with anyone else; I’ve never lived on my own. He was a trucker last year and I learned to be independent. I grew stronger, got my shit together, and became a better person.

But when he decided to quit the job because he got major depression (which I helped him with!), I supported his choice. I wanted him to be happy, even if it meant my own happiness had to take a back seat.

For the last week and a half, I’ve been a horrible mess, sobbing, wanting to beg him to stay and don’t give up on us. He blames my bipolar for being too much, even though I haven’t had any episodes in the last 2.5 years, I’m strong as fuck, I can do shit on my own, and I don’t hurt myself. He’s ignored aaalll my progress and just thinks I’ll fall back onto old habits. And I started to blame myself for the failure of my marriage.

Fuck. That.

He’s the one who ruined us. He got “bored” with our relationship and wants to be on his own. I know he fucked up, but I forgave him and accepted all his flaws, while he doesn’t even think I’m worth sticking around with. And this book helped me understand that. I will make it through this, even though I’m terrified as hell. I’ll learn to make myself happy and put myself first for once. He’s held me back long enough. He's a couch potato while I want to explore the world and try outdoorsy things. We only have a sense of humor in common.

If you’re going through the same pain of being left by a partner or spouse, pick this book up. I plan on rereading it again as I go through the stages of grief in my divorce. Whoever you are, you’re not alone. Be sad. Cry or scream to get things out. Its okay to ride the roller-coaster of emotions, but don’t wallow in it for too long. You ARE WORTH MORE! You will live beyond this, you will find love again when you are ready. Take your time and grieve like I am.

You got this.