Rating: 5/5

Listened to the audio version read by Kevin Foley. 

For some reason he decided to do "accents" which seemed pulled at random and reside in the range of Looney Tunes racial stereotypes. While a little distracting at first (and unintentionally hilarious) it actually was a helpful audio cue to know who was speaking. 

I very much appreciated the shifting frames of reference Fehrenbach would drift in and out of (i.e. one moment describing frontline action, the next- consternation at the executive level, and then American public opinion). He did a good job of generalizing American attitudes, prejudices, shortcomings, and strengths over and against similar generalizations of our opponents and co-belligerents. While academic historians probably hiss and boo at his generalizations, I personally think it's the duty of any author to tell you their opinion of a thing. Fehrenbach was an officer in the war and writes in a style frankly not that different from Thucydides in chronicling the Peloponnesian War (which he, likewise participated in-- while not making the narrative all about himself). 

If he has a "moral" to the story, it's that America needs to make up its mind if it wants to have a "Legion" (a professional warrior caste that will implement American foreign policy with an iron will, anywher ein the world) or not. He posits that America at the moment (he wrote in 1963) was trying to have its cake and eat it too-- privileging peacetime occupations/business for its citizens, while also trying to play world-police-- all while relying on a (mostly) volunteer military. 

Personally, I disagree with him. I think the answer is that there needs to be a social expectation that every man be war-ready up to a certain age. I think unpaid military drill for men from 15-35 would be ideal. No contracts. No compensation. Just basic weapon competency, order following, and physical fitness. Additionally an assigned "competency" (plumber, electrician, medical, white collar) that would be seen as an additional duty to "combatant." Not only would this be a massive force for good in shaping the young men of America (if done well)- to include massive health benefits, it could greatly reduce the money spent on national defense. I'm sure you're thinking right now, "Oh no-- if we don't have 'professionals,' we'll be unprepared!" 

Well, let me tell you right now, I spent over a decade in the military and I can tell you that the best coders aren't in uniform, the best drone operators aren't in uniform, in short, if we got into a real, existential war, we'd need to "brain-drain" the civilian sector anyway, so why not already keep tabs on where all the skillsets are we'd need to use and make every American male conscious of his duty to his country? It would have the added benefit of making the average citizen MUCH more conscientious about who he voted for!

Anyway, great book. Highly recommend. More than just a chronicling of the tik-tok of the war's progression, but insights into the American character.