Rating: 4/5

You don't even need the linear notes; the title of this novel alone suggests what will happen. The amoral Amaro, ill-suited for the priesthood, will besmirch his collar, break a few vows. The path is predictable: passion, lust, sex; domination, jealousy. Pregnancy? Uh-oh. Of course, that Amaro is a priest only adds to the intrigue.

The author takes his time getting to the good stuff (the first neck nibble isn't until page 110 and almost another 200 pages of 19th Century playacting takes place before a ripe, inchoate scene). But once our crazed couple figure out a venue, things progress rapidly.

How will Amaro justify his crime? By thinking in the third-person: He was, it is true, a priest . . . but he had an argument for that too: as long as a priest's behaviour was not a cause for scandal amongst the faithful, then it in no way damaged the efficacy, usefulness and grandeur of religion. All the theologians teach that the order of priests was instituted to administer; what mattered was that the people should receive the inner, supernatural sanctity contained in the sacraments, and provided that they were dispensed according to the consecrated formulae, what did it matter whether the priest was a saint or a sinner? 

Yes, priests get skewered and roasted in this telling, but this is not some caricaturish bodice-ripper. There are subtle pokes at something larger. The Canon, another amoral clerical character had much to say:

'Everyone has a right to the grace of God,' said the Canon gravely and impartially, acknowledging the equality of the classes as long as it was only in respect of Heaven's comforts and not material goods. . . . 'For Heaven is also for the rich. You have misunderstood the precept. Beati pauperes, blessed are the poor, means that the poor should be content with their poverty and not covet the property of the rich, nor want more than the mouthful of bread that they have, nor aspire to share the wealth of others, for if they do, they will no longer be blessed.'

The author introduces a lot of characters, some merely minor, as if to serve a purpose before they are dispatched. And dispatched they are. I found it amusing that in all but two instances the cause of death was apoplexy. We don't get a lot of apoplexy any more, there having been an evolution in medicine and language. It was aneurisms that got the other two, though one of them was likely misdiagnosed.

Nicely, not all the characters were from the sorry side of humanity. There was one priest and a doctor who got on despite their theological differences. I enjoyed eavesdropping on their conversations. And when you craft a character like the doctor, you can let him say things like this, to an unmarried pregnant woman: 'Nature demands conception not marriage. Marriage is just an administrative formula.'

I grew to really like this novel. It somehow transported out of the 19th Century. Maybe that was the author's ideas, maybe the universality within, maybe the translation.

Oh, and the title and storyline demand comparison with Zola's The Sin of Father Mouret. Sorry, Emile, this one is much better.