Rating: 5/5

Audiobook...read by Maya Angelou 

I wasn’t a passionate reader in High School- -the handful of books I did read (“Valley of The Dolls”, “The Catcher in the Rye”, “Franny and Zooey”, “The Handmaid’s Tale”, and “I Know Why Bird Caged Sings”,), were each books I ‘do’ remember reading that stayed with me all these years. 

Always on the lookout for good Audiobooks these days...(fitting nicely with my daily-to-do’s - especially with my duties as house keeper &amp; gardener maintenance of our busy AirBnB in the back of our house)...
I was inspired when I read a review by *Suzy*... here on Goodreads. She ‘listened’ to the Audiobook. ( great idea I thought - and it sure was)...
“An American Classic”...that once was a book people wanted banned from schools. 

Of course we always picked up new things when we read or listen to a book again....
And something that really stood out for me this time around was that Deuteronomy was Maya’s favorite book in the Bible. 

I knew that Shakespeare was her favorite author - but I hadn’t remembered about Deuteronomy and why. As a young child Maya believed if people wanted to avoid hell, all they had to do was memorized Deuteronomy and follow its teachings word for word. 

When I went through B’nai Mitzvah and studied the Torah - Deuteronomy was my least favorite section. I didn’t like ‘the laws’ and I remember being happy that our daughters both had Genesis, ( dealings with creation), as their portion of focus for their Bat Mitzvah. 

But... recently I dived into Deuteronomy.... which was inspired from reading “Bitter Orange”, by Claire Fuller. ( a Priest wanted to leave the church in the story - and I wanted to understand why). I concluded he interpreted Deuteronomy more like a Jew than a Christian. 

Back to Maya.... 
She wasn’t able to avoid hell. A child who saw abandonment, racism,
Social injustice, Discrimination every day as a child in the south, slavery, rape...( at 8 years of age)....she somehow became a legendary survivor ...

 “Without willing it, I had gone from being ignorant of being ignorant to being aware of being aware. 
And The worst part of my awareness was that I wasn’t aware of what I was aware of”. 

This book is timeless...
Insightful - culturally historical... and Maya’s autobiography. 

The little happy parts that had me smiling was when Marguerite and Baily were children - reading books - playing as little kids do...
The ‘meals’ that came out of grandmas kitchen were abundant.
I laughed at a breakfast visual of ham - eggs- potatoes -tomatoes - with so much ham fat poured on top of the tomatoes that they turned white. 

Our diets have change through history ....
But so much importance in this gem of a book hasn’t. 

Thanks, Suzy.., for the Audiobook ‘inspiration’!
Maya’s voice was like having grandma read a bedtime story ... 
She could tell a story.
Beautiful prose.