Rating: 5/5

I can hardly believe that this book was published in 1902! 

If you know about the "Law of Attraction" it's very likely you found out about it from a movie called The Secret that came out in 2006 - a 100 years later! A part of the human population was blown away by it (me included), other parts were either amused, disturbed, hated it or found it hard to care.

Now, this review contemplation rant WHATEVER will be weird, especially if you don't believe in the Law of Attraction. It's very likely you'll end up thinking I need some serious help. XD  Which is fine, you don't know where I live anyways.

Before I say anything else, I have to admit that although I practice the Law (I freak out every time it works) and I agree with the majority of the teachings (e.g. if you have problems in life they are your own doing, stop complaining, see the bright side/opportunity, etc.) I am rather concerned with the general obsession for owning stuff and believing that having something that you currently lack will bring you happiness.  So in this new "happiness movement" people often get encouraged to desire stuff. (Or at least imagine we already have them). Why? Cause you HAVE TO! We all know that owning the newest piece of technology will make us happier. Just look at all those happy faces in the smartphone TV ads. Or how happy physically fit and attractive people look on the Posters. They definitely get to pick the best husbands/wives. Look at the rich people on the news! I bet they've never had health/family/mental problems - owning a Rolls Royce guarantees perfect life!

We are almost being conditioned to desire, to think happy thoughts all the time, to wish for better jobs, more money, a truer love, bigger home, etc. And we often end up neglecting what we currently posses. In fact, the more we believe that thoughts can attract something better, the more we might end up hating the situation we are currently in. The main problem is.... why do we desire it in the first place? Who taught us to want it? Will it really make us happier? And when do we put a stop to it? What do we do if we become addicted to "desiring"? What if we are never satisfied?

For example - you can desire for the perfect mate (boyfriend/girlfriend), but if the mate does something "wrong" or disagrees with you, would you wish for a new/better one right away? If it's easy and quick? Why waste your time and energy dealing with a problem, learning tolerance or practicing forgiveness, when all you have to do is just move on the next option?

I guess, what I'm trying to say is- don't take this book (and The Secret) way too seriously. Life is not meant to be spent solely on chasing after dreams or wishing for a better future. Sometimes, problems happen for a reason and sometimes misfortune is what makes us better, more human. 

In my experience, the Law worked in two cases:
1. When my mind is cleared (after experiencing some dramatic phase of my life) and I am super focused on what I want for a couple of days, then I stop thinking about it completely. It usually takes 4-5 days for things/people to "manifest" (and that still scares the shit out of me).
2. When I end up being happy with what I have, practice mindfulness and just feel super relaxed. This takes longer, because I don't really desire anything at this stage, but if I remember to wish for something I just do it for a few minutes and then go back to being "present".

UnFortunately, I'm too busy with life to really spend too much time contemplating the "wrongness" of my current situation.

Don't wish for something when you are feeling depressed for not having it. Not having lots of money/perfect partner/great carrier according to the society's standards is not "wrong", unless you believe it.

If you are stuck and you find it hard to "manifest", try reading the teachings of Buddha, Tao or Toltec Philosophy to balance the "ego".

The Secret is better written, better explained, more practical and more relevant, but I would still recommend As a Man Thinketh for everyone who is curious. It's a revolutionary (but not very well-known) piece of work that has also inspired Napoleon Hill to write Think and Grow Rich. Anyways, if you want to start from somewhere, start with The Secret and try to keep reading/watching the DVD. The first half hour is damn right freaky and feels like you are watching some weird religious propaganda if you're new to it.