Rating: 4/5

Padre Amaro is a young Catholic priest who falls in love with young girl Amelia. When this was first published this created an uproar in Portugal in 1875 because of its openly depiction of sex and forbidden love. When its movie adaptation was shown in 2002, the several religious organizations in Mexico attempted to prevent its showing. The movie became an international blockbuster and made Gael Garcia Bernal (born 1978) a Mexican actor and director as a household name. 

I saw that movie and I liked it. But of course, as we all know, the book is oftentimes better than the movie. I think it was not because the 118-minute movie could not contain everything that happened in all of the book's finely printed 471 pages but because the movie made the plot simpler that it missed the whole point that Eca de Queiros (1845-1900) wanted to convey: hypocrisy. It is not an anti-Catholic novel as he only showed what we all know sometimes happens, even now or most especially now. That priests are human beings and they also get their share of temptations. But that well-known fact is not what De Queiros wanted to expose: it is the hypocrisy of the society particularly some self-righteous people who try to condemn erring priests not realizing that they are part of the system that pushes young men who have no religious calling to become priests. That they are the ones who put them to test and instead of helping them lead temptation-free lives by praying for them and guiding them away from temptations, these people celebrate and get amused when they see priest falling to temptations and live their sinful lives. They even put the priests in situations where they can be near women as if they are Satan's flock tempting Jesus in the desert to turn stones into bread. They should burn in hell.

There are several priests in this novel and it reminded me of Dr. Jose Rizal's Noli Me Tangere 2 (3 stars). While both books have exposes that can be viewed as anti-Catholic, this by De Queiros has a good likable priest in the character of Abbot Ferrao. If "Noli" is mostly Rizal's propaganda for the Filipinos to raise arms against Spain, "Padre Amaro" is a deathless literary Portuguese classic that generations have read and will be reading. The writing is fluid, easy to read, crisp and honest. The characters are all well-developed and transformed in the end. The plot is engaging and the climax is built in such a way that you will just read on and on waiting for the scenes when Padre Amaro and Amelia will first kiss, will first make love and how they will be making love since they cannot do all those amorous escapades in the open, etc. You would also need to find out to make your own conclusion if they book is really anti-Catholic so you have to read carefully and if there is a balance in De Queiros' treatment of the good and bad sides of Padre Amaro's character.

Overall, a memorable read. Very good translation for a 19th century book. Well done, Ms. Margaret Jull Costa.

Thank you to Veronica for giving my copy of this book during my 47th birthday.