Rating: 5/5

Still a five star read for me - I listened to the audiobook this time, and enjoyed myself tremendously! 

I thought I had reviewed this book on a previous read, but I don’t see a review. I recently reread “Queen Lucia”, the first book of this series, for a challenge, and it is the perfect start. You get to know the scheming, snobbish Mrs. Emmeline Lucas, ‘Lucia’ to her friends, as she rules the social life of her picturesque village with an iron hand (wrapped in velvet). Book 2 tells the story of “Miss Mapp” of Tilling, a seaside village where she reigns supreme. 

This book brings the two scheming titans head to head. Lucia, now a widow, comes out of mourning longing for new surroundings, new fields to conquer; she sees an ad in a London newspaper for a pretty house to rent in the seaside village of Tilling. She goes for a viewing, and it is the lovely home of Miss Mapp, who previously visited Riseholme. Lucia is entranced, agrees to lease, and talks her dear friend Georgie Pillson into renting a nearby house. Nothing much happens at first, but as the visitors settle in and begin to make friends and entertain, the battle for social supremacy is on! Then, there is a lot of scheming, plotting and gossiping, which sounds awful, but in Benson’s hands, it’s hilarious - at least I think so! 

On the back of my book, it says of the six-book saga:  “Set in the precise middle of this luxurious sextet is the crowning work “Mapp and Lucia”, a saga of propriety wherein the greatest rivals in the history of England meet for the very first time. Never before has that exquisite creature Lucia faced a foe of such dastardly cunning. Never before has the United Kingdom seen such an extraordinary battle for power. And never again will the provincial rich of England between the wars be depicted so perfectly, so forcefully, and with such devastating humor.”  

Another reviewer said succinctly on a previous edition I owned,  "Nothing that Lucia and her enemy, Miss Mapp, did was ever of the slightest importance, but they did it with Napoleonic strategy, Attilan ferocity, and Satanic motive."  

Whenever I want perking up, I turn to Lucia!