Rating: 4/5

This is not a review of the book; this is an examination of the differences between The New Enchanted Broccoli Forest (2000) and the original Enchanted Broccoli Forest (1982). Which may make this useful only to me, but keeping notes that are useful only to me is half of why I use Goodreads anyway.

I’ve had the original Enchanted Broccoli Forest for longer than I’ve been keeping track of when I purchased books. I bought it as a reminder of where I went to college (Moosewood Restaurant is in Ithaca, New York) but it’s also a really nice cookbook; I’ve used its Moroccan Orange-Walnut Salad for a long time as one of the few greens-based salads I make. I also converted its Sesame-Lemon Bread for use in a bread machine. I decided to take a more serious look at it after picking up The New Moosewood Cookbook about a year ago. I ended up adding its Amaretto Cheesecake, Peach &amp; Rum Puddingcake, and Sweet &amp; Pungent Fried Rice to my repertoire as well.

When I saw a nearly pristine copy of The New Enchanted Broccoli Forest for only $1.50 while traveling a few weeks ago, my latent OCD kicked in: not only was my current copy very beaten up (it’s an ex-library edition that clearly had been used a lot before I bought it, and my own use has not helped), but getting the new version would mean both of my Moosewood books would be in matching editions.

Both the original and this revised edition are great cookbooks. The New edition adds some really nice glossy color photographs (8-½ by 11, not 8 by 10). The important part of any cookbook is the recipes, however, so I went through my favorites, as well as some I plan to make, and some random choices, to see how it’s changed over twenty years.

The Amaretto Cheesecake (p. 276 original, 260 new) is nearly exactly the same. The only difference is that the crust now takes 2 tablespoons of butter instead of 2-3 tablespoons, and the filling takes ⅔ cups of sugar or honey instead of 1 cup of sugar. I don’t remember this being overly sweet, so on balance I’d prefer the original. There’s also an interesting difference with the cooking time. The original says to turn off the oven, open the door, and leave the cake in for another 15 minutes. The new says to turn off the oven and leave the cake in for 30 minutes: no opening the door and twice as long. My memory of this cheesecake is that it was near perfect; I find it hard to imagine that baking for an extra 15-30 minutes, depending on the effect of opening the door, would be an improvement.

The Orange Walnut Moroccan Salad (p. 61 original, 45 new) removes the bit about preparing the oranges ahead of time to let them stand for at least an hour. Honestly, I’m not sure how much of a difference that made. It also uses twice the olive oil (6 tablespoons instead of 3). The organization of the ingredients is also removed; instead of two sets of ingredients, one for each step, there is one set of ingredients (this is a general change throughout the book as far as I can tell). And instead of mixing the salad just before serving, the recipe specifies to “Let each person assemble his or her own salad”. None of these are substantial changes, although I somewhat prefer the way the original is written.

The Peach &amp; Rum Puddingcake (p. 258 original, 240 new) is perhaps the most disappointing change. The new version may fix a typo, which is a plus for the new book, but it also removes the rum, which is a huge negative. The recipe is renamed to Peach Puddingcake, and the rum is removed from the cake; it becomes optional for the sauce. The other changes are that the vanilla is increased from ½ teaspoon to a whole teaspoon plus a quarter teaspoon of almond extract (probably replacing the rum), and an entire cup of milk is added. The latter might be fixing a typo, so I’ll probably try it with some milk next time I make it. But I don’t remember it being so dry it needed an entire cup of liquid, and going back over my photos it sure looks like a cup of liquid would be wrong. The cooking time drops from 35 minutes to 30 minutes (at 350° in both cases). In my notes, I note that 25 minutes was what I needed, so this may also be a fix, but I would think that milk would increase the time. I don’t really know, however. The topping changes from 3 tablespoons confectioners’ sugar to “maple syrup to taste”. So this recipe is a toss-up. If it fixes a typo, that’s great, but I want my rum!

Sadly, the Sesame-Lemon Bread (p. 98 in the original) has been completely removed. Admittedly, it was a huge mess in the original—I don’t see how it could have worked as written. If it hadn’t been for my overall feel that it ought to be great, I would never have done the work to fix it. But I would have liked to see how close my reimagining of this bread is to what it was supposed to be.

The Sweet &amp; Pungent Fried Rice (p. 220 in both) might not even be the same recipe. The ingredients are similar, but the name changes from “sweet &amp; pungent fried rice” to just “fried rice”, and the tofu is no longer marinated in soy, scallions, ginger, and garlic but rather in either plain water or dry sherry—and that’s optional. The eggs are stir-fried separately and then added again later; and the bean sprouts are replaced with more normal vegetables. Whether the old recipe has been replaced or updated, however, it is definitely a win for the original in my estimation.

The recipes I plan to make show similar alterations. The Honey-Bran Muffins (p. 116 original) have been completely removed. Honey-bran muffins are not exactly uncommon, but recipes that use actual bran instead of breakfast cereal are. I definitely want to make this recipe, so I definitely want to keep the old book.

The Indian Pulao (p. 222 original, 224 new) is obviously the same recipe, but also very different. That’s somewhat understandable: this is a recipe that is designed for variation every time you make it, and I expect the author varied it so much that by the time she started working on the new edition her version had heavily evolved. The newer recipe contains fennel, mustard seed, and garlic, which is a win for the new version.

The Wholewheat Poppy Seed Cookies (p. 278 original, 263 new) hasn’t changed substantially; the whole wheat flour has been replaced with whole wheat pastry flour, and the ¼ teaspoon salt has been doubled.

To reduce the chances of my missing other important changes, I also randomly chose four pages from the new edition. Each page contained only one recipe, which may be another difference between the old version and the new; the old tended to accentuate the handwritten nature of the book by cramming recipes into every open space.

The Puréed Vegetable Dip (p. 251 original, 115 new) has slightly different spices—more basil, no thyme—and the yellow summer squash has been given a zucchini option, but the recipe is basically the same.

The Carob Pumpernickel (p. 101 original, 78 new) has been given a full page where it originally had only a quarter page. However, it also uses 1 extra cup of water and an extra 1-½ cups whole wheat flour—a half cup less in the sponge and two cups more when adding the rest of the flour at the end. I don’t know if that means the original recipe was wrong, or that the recipe was so good that she kept making it bigger and bigger.

The Broccoli &amp; Tofu in spicy peanut sauce (p. 190 original, 184 new) is basically the same except for replacing the tamari sauce with salt; but it increases the sauce by 50% so that there is more sauce for the same amount of stir-fry.

The Spicy Baked Beans with Rum &amp; Molasses (p. 216 original, 219 new) is a recipe I must have missed, because it looks great. However, like the Peach Puddingcake, this recipe removes the rum from the title; it does leave it as optional in the recipe itself. It also replaces the three tablespoons of butter with a single tablespoon canola oil, vastly increases the garlic from three cloves to ten, switches from tomato juice to fresh tomatoes while at the same time switching from dried beans to canned. It also adds some chili powder, cumin, and more salt; it’s harder to compare the spiciness of this recipe both because of the switch in kind of ingredient but also because it increases the number of servings by 50% so that some, but not all, of the ingredients are also increased by about that. Other than making the rum optional, however, the two versions seem very close to each other.

I’m probably going to keep the old edition. Except for de-emphasizing the rum, however, it’s pretty much a toss-up.