Rating: 4/5

Originally titled Murder in Retrospect (ugh!), Five Little Pigs is one of several books where Christie used nursery rhymes for titles/concepts, such as Ten Little Indians/Then There Were None. In this one, Carla Lemarchant comes to Poirot with a letter her mother had written to her when she died, but had only recently come into her possession. Her mother, Caroline Crale, was 16 years ago convicted of the murder of her husband, accomplished artist Amyas Crale, and she died in prison a couple years later. In the letter Caroline claims she was innocent, a claim not shared by anyone who was actually closely connected to the crime, but one that Carla wants Poirot to help refute. 

Poirot agrees to investigate, not promising anything, of course, and finds five “little piggies” that might be suspects and/or might shed light on the case: Philip Blake, the “little” [and yes, he’s fat] piggy who went to market, in this case the stock market; his brother Meredith Blake, the piggy who “stayed home” to play with herbs and poisons, one of which may have killed Crale; Elsa Greer is the piggy who “ate roast beef” (she’s gluttonously sexy, voracious); Miss Williams is the piggy who “had none,” the straight-laced governess, and finally Caroline’s sister, Angela, the little pig who cried wee-wee-wee, all the way home, presumably because she’s a teenager with a disfigured face [i.e., disabled] who might feel sorry for herself?

Amyas causes his wife some distress by inviting a young woman, Elsa Greer, into the house so he can paint her portrait (and apparently, have an affair with). Amyas and Caroline basically have an open relationship, but this one might just be different. The painting goes on throughout the book and figures in the mystery in a pretty interesting way. Caroline tells her hubby she will kill him for this affair, and there is plenty of evidence to prove she did. But, oh, did she?

One interesting angle in the book (in addition to the important painting) is that the case is 16 years old. Poirot (improbably) gets all five of these folks to write their memories of the case, so of course they are all different, and all flawed, because of their various investments in the situation and limitations on their perspectives. What do they recall after all that time? Do we trust their memories? Why should they all agree to write?! But once we accept this premise, the stories are pretty interesting. Of course most mysteries have witnesses or interested parties recount what they know of the case. This is different in that it is in writing and 16 years after the fact. So that does create some emotional distance in the telling, as the crime occurred so long ago.

Okay, so it’s not that different as an angle for a book, but the resolution of this one still manages to be terrific, innovative and, yep (to me) surprising. I bump up my 3.5 rating to 4 just for the ending. The books--after reading 25 of them now--tend to be a bit long for me, sluggish in the middle, as I know much of the information is just leading me to dead ends, but the Dame knows how to wind up a mystery!