Rating: 4/5

Basis for the BritBox Series (2021-?)
Review of the Ipso Books paperback edition (2017) of the Collins hardcover original (1938)
For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity. - Ecclesiastes 3:19 (King James Version)I saw the first 2 episodes of the new Cush Jumbo/Billy Howie/Jared Harris TV series The Beast Must Die which had the screen credit saying that it was based on a novel by Nicholas Blake, a penname of Cecil Day-Lewis (1904-1972). I saw that the book was listed on the Guardian/Observer's 1000 Novels Everyone Must Read and that Day-Lewis had based his detective Nigel Strangeways on the poet W.H. Auden (1907-1973). Day-Lewis himself was a poet and was also the father of the actor Daniel Day-Lewis. All of this background made me curious to read it.

The TV-series gender-swaps the character of Frank Cairns into the Frances Cairns role for Cush Jumbo but does start with the same vengeance premise of the book. Otherwise most of it is totally different and it is yet to be seen how many of the novel's twists are incorporated into the screen adaptation. Nigel Strangeways is a private detective in the books, but it is on the police force in the TV version. The book takes place in Gloucestershire whereas the TV series is on the Isle of Wight. 

The Beast Must Die is actually the 4th in the Nigel Strangeways novels. It is probably listed in the 1,000 Novels List due to its various clever twists so there is not much one can say about it without spoilers. I enjoyed the book quite a lot and it will be interesting to follow how the screen adaptation differs from it.

Trivia
The 2017 Ipso Books paperback includes a bonus teaser of the 1st chapter of There's Trouble Brewing (1937), which is the 3rd Nigel Strangeways mystery.

The book was adapted as a French language film Que la bête meure (1969) dir. Claude Chabrol. Based on the trailer it looks very faithful to the book although with character names and locale changes.