Rating: 2/5

This is a type of Historical Nonfiction that people tell you to read because it is a "Classic" but boy is that style of writing very dated. If you've ever read a historical nonfiction book written in the last 40 years, you probably can picture the style of writing in your head. It is factual, it is written in the third person, it is told from as unbias a perspective as possible. In the long line of historiography (History of History) this is a more recent development. It came about in the 60s and 70s when historians decided that it was best to be as scientific as possible in their telling of our shared experience. Books were, and continue to be, written with as little human bias as possible. This is, of course, impossible. However, that is the intention. Audiences read history books for the history itself, not necessarily the writers opinion on it. Historians and casual History buffs can read multiple works by an author to try and parse his opinion on events and compare it to others. But the Historians opinion in his work is always meant to be obtuse and hidden behind the events he is retelling and analyzing, at least to a certain reasonable degree. 

All that said, this book was written in the 1950s, before that style came into vogue. Bruce Catton doesn't really care about being objective or obtuse in his personal opinions. Instead his book reads like propaganda and the grandiose talk that a war veteran gives to his grandchildren asking what the war was about. For some, this might not be difficult to adapt to when reading, but I've read enough of the more modern histories that his style felt incredibly jarring and annoying at times to read. 

As I kept reading his book though, I found myself getting more and more into the story he was telling, I thought "Hey, maybe I am really starting to warm to him!" But then I realized that it wasn't his style I was finding myself gravitating towards, it was the actual history of the Civil War itself. Catton really did nothing for me. Some might find this a little too mean, but honestly I thought it was as outdated a history as could be written. It really only shone a light on how far the field has come since the pontificating days of Catton and his contemporaries. I can really only see this as an interesting book to read if you are either A) Interested in the Historiography of the Civil War, or B) Want to read books that inspired more modern writers in their historical research. 

I may read more of his work later to get a better picture of his style, but for now all I can say is that Bruce Catton feels like a relic whose work only stands to be studied as a period piece. I feel like it has no relevance in the modern discourse on the subject other than as a footnote for more modern works. If you are looking for an excellent work on the Northern side of the Civil War, then please pick up "Lincoln's Lieutenants" by Stephen Sears. It is much more thorough, much more factual, and much more in depth than Catton, who reads like an old man telling a grandiose bed-time story to interested kids.