Rating: 5/5

Shantaram by Gregory David Roberts is a huge yet hard-to-put-down novel. The blurb says it is based on the life of the author, but is also part fiction. Several seemingly unnatural events corroborate the fact. Fiction or not, the book kept me hooked for the entire duration.

The simplistic writing style results in a near-perfect narration of the epic story that is Shantaram. Various intricacies, including the subtle ones, that make up the Indian culture are beautifully captured. The detailed description of Mumbai, both literally and figuratively, is sure to make the reader fall in love with the city, given they aren't already in love with it.

The characters seem as real as they can get (special mention to Prabaker, the protagonist's friend). The theory related to the Big Bang, the matter, and how everything in the universe is approaching towards a common goal, is mesmerizing.

Most (if not all) of the emotions known to man are covered in the story. It is an epic tale of love and friendship, of crime and poverty, and of revenge and exile.

The prose is full of wise quotes throughout. It makes one reflect on the way we look at life. Few instances:

  "wisdom, in one sense, is the opposite of love. Love survives in us precisely because it isn’t wise."

  "The truth is a bully we all pretend to like."

  "What we call cowardice is often just another name for being taken by surprise, and courage is seldom any better than simply being well prepared."

  "And I'd learned, the hard way, that sometimes, even with the purest intentions, we make things worse when we do our best to make things better."

  "the cost of knowing love, is sometimes greater than any heart would willingly pay."

  "I think wisdom is very overrated. Wisdom is just cleverness, with all the guts kicked out of it."

  "I was too young, then, to know that dead lovers are the toughest rivals."

  "Guilt is the hilt of the knife that we use on ourselves, and love is often the blade; but it's worry that keeps the knife sharp, and worry that gets most of us, in the end."

  "It's isn't a secret, unless keeping it hurts."

  "Hate is a very resilient thing, you know. Hate is a survivor."

  "it's impossible to despise someone you honestly pity, and to shun someone you truly love."

  "People haven't stopped believing in love. They haven't stopped wanting to be in love. They just don't believe in a happy ending anymore. They still believe in love, and falling in love, but they know now that... they know that romances almost never end as well as they begin."

  "It's a fact of being in love that we often pay no attention whatsoever to the substance of what a lover says, while being intoxicated to ecstasy by the way it's said."

  "love cannot be tested. Honesty can be tested and loyalty. But there is not test for love. Love goes on forever, once it begins, even if we come to hate the one we love."

  "'Sometimes it is necessary to do the wrong thing for the right reasons. The important thing is to be sure that our reasons are right, and that we admit the wrong-that we do not lie to ourselves, and convince ourselves that what we do is right."

  "You can't kill love. You can't even kill it with hate. You can kill in-love, and loving, and even loveliness. You can kill them all, or numb them into dense, leaden regret, but you can't kill love itself. Love is the passionate search for a truth other than your own; and once you feel it, honestly and completely, love is forever. Every act of love, every moment of the heart reaching out, is a part of the universal good: it's a part of God, or what we call God, and it can never die."

  "Love is a one-way street. Love, like respect isn't something you get; it's something you give."

  "It's bad, loving someone you can't forgive."

Looking forward to watch the movie based on this book, and then on to its sequel.

Verdict: A must read.