Rating: 4/5

”It’s about poor Sister Anne. She, poor soul, has gone to her reward and we’ve got the police here.” 

The Religious Body is a 1966 crime novel by a British author that features Inspector D.C. Sloan and Constable Crosby. Their investigation about a murder in covenant has a police procedural feel to it while retaining classic mystery vibes. 

Inspector Sloan was called to the Convent of St. Anselm when poor Sister Anne was found dead at the bottom of the cellar stairs. Clad in a black habit, little of Sister Anne was visible, but through keen observation the inspector finds clues that defy logic. The police surgeon confirms was Sloan already suspected, Sister Anne was murdered. 

Why would someone want to murder Sister Anne, and how did they get behind the cloistered walls? 

Suspects emerge quickly when the inspector learns, who besides the nuns, had access to a key. And a distant cousin of Sister Anne’s happens to be in town. Would he benefit from her death? Most bizarre is the tip Sloan got about the Agricultural Institute (all boys school) next door to the covenant. He arrives on campus during their Guy Fawkes Night in time to save the stuffed nun effigy the boys intend to burn at the bonfire. How did the boys get the nun’s habit for the costume? 

And then a second murder occurs. 

All the typical aspects of a classic murder mystery apply here. A large, isolated estate. Multiple suspects with opportunity. Red herrings (that were just enough without being excessive). The murder weapon, a blunt instrument, which could be anything. The nuns prove to be tricky witnesses too. But what I enjoyed the most was the methodical sifting of the evidence and the sub plots that kept the conclusion obscured until near the end. The British humor and assured competence made Inspector Sloan a compelling character. 

This was a delightful and interesting murder mystery, the first I’ve read by this author, but it won’t be the last. The only time my attention drifted was in chapter one. This was due to the flurry of Sister names that were introduced in quick succession. You need not worry about making a character list, the cast is smaller than I anticipated, and each key character was given sufficient background. Once again, I must credit the group Reading the Detectives with another wonderful book find.