Rating: 5/5

Hedline, London, 1918: "The Cult of the Clitoris" -- Hmm, whaaat? Most readers had never heard of the clit; an old duffer burped, "Who's this Greek chap Clitoris, they're all talking about?" Radical right-wing MP, Noel Billing, ran the hedline (&amp; story) in his newspaper, claiming that 47,000 Brit perverts were listed in a German Black Book, and were conspiring to keep Brit from winning W1, along w German-born Jews who also lived in the UK. Billing had burst a vessel because the beautiful American dancer, Maude Allan (1873-1956), who'd been performing her Salome "dance" for a dozen years around the world -- she was as famous as Loie Fuller &amp; Isadora Duncan -- was planning to expand her career and appear in Wilde's play, "Salome," w the help of drama critic J.T. Grein, who also produced new plays. Noel Billing suggested that Maude Allan was a lewd woman and lesbian. Only muff divers, he implied, knew how to give other women pleasure. And why was she always with the PMs wife Margot Asquith, surely among the 47,000 in the secret Black Book. (It never existed: it was fake news, which gives this vastly entertaining - and erudite - slice of unknown history a topicality).

Maude certainly had some posh lovers. Sticking to facts at hand, author Hoare can only refer to some of her social outings. She was, however, haunted by the execution of her brother who murdered 2 women in a Baptist Church in San Francisco, which he attended -- personal bio later introduced in the most frivolous trial ever held.....

Sex, drugs, history (W1), sociology, sex, political manipulation, and a court-room trial will keep you glued to this rare, mostly unknown story, which seems like a Monty Python/ Carry On comedy until lives are ruined. Maude Allan unwisely sued MP Noel Billing for libel.  We've been here before!  Invoking the name of Wilde, who'd died 20 years earlier, Billing said the play (which Allan performed once) was about "the physical orgasm" and animal lust. The production was part of a German conspiracy to corrupt Brits and lose the war, he added. War hysteria reigned ! Billing fueled homophobia &amp; anti-semitism. 

In the 19-teens there was plenty of worldliness in London; it just didnt "pop" w the 20s, postwar. London had seen Nancy Cunard in men's clothes, Bakst's designs for the Russian Ballet, Nijinsky's narcissistic sexuality, Beardsley's illustrations, Cubism, Vorticism, the author reports, and, further there was an "illicitness of desire" in clubs and private rooms - that added to the excitement. Billing concocted the 47,000 (fake names) and sought to save British morality w Maude Allan /Oscar Wilde as figures who could not be endured. He smeared Maude with leaks about her long dead brother, and called her a genetically sick performer for her interest in the beheaded John the Baptist. The middle-classes, per usual, cheered him.

Early summer, 1918, last months of a preposterous war, Maude's libel suit went to trial. Allan (1873-1956) is actually a minor player in a big all-star cast. Lord Alfred Douglas was a star witness for Billing. The little prick, who'd married briefly, said OW was a moral and sexual pervert. "He had a diabolical influence on everyone he met. He was the greatest force of evil...he was the agent of the devil in every possible way..." Most healthy people would be "disgusted" by OWs "Salome." Later in the trial he began shouting, waving his arms and had to be ejected while the gallery applauded him.

The trial, writes Hoare, became a medieval inquisition w Maude Allan as a modern witch. Maude lost the libel suit. Billing went on to other mishmash ventures. Critic Grein had a breakdown and lost his job. Maude's career vaporized, but she was helped by Friends in High Places, it seems. The author wonders, discreetly, if Maude had been set up by the government to take down or embarrass Billing. Was she part of a political conspiracy -- had she been encouraged to sue for libel?

This saga is, yes, "outrageous," as the title says. By the 40s, Allan was in LA working briefly for the Douglas Aircraft Company. UCLA didnt need her on the performing arts staff. C 1912 Maude Allan statuettes had been sold in Bond Street, her Salome sandals and costume jewelry were copied for society ladies. Her performance was said to be so hypnotic that many viewers insisted she danced naked. In sum, she was an Edwardian sex symbol. She died in obscurity in Los Angeles.

I keep thinking: this trial could only have happened in Britain.