Rating: 5/5

Star Wars Legends Project #306

Background: Battleground: Tatooine was published in 4 issues from June-Sept 1996. It is the third Rogue Squadron story arc. It was written by Michael A. Stackpole and Jan Strnad, with art by John Nadeau. Stackpole wrote for every issue in the series, plus a number of additional things. Strnad has written a few additional stories, including Republic: Prelude to Rebellion and Droids: Season of Revolt. Nadeau continues his run on Rogue Squadron comics here.

Battleground: Tatooine takes place 6 months after the Battle of Endor, 4.5 years after the Battle of Yavin. The main characters are Wedge, Tycho, Wes, and the rest of Rogue Squadron, along with Winter. Bib Fortuna and Huff Darklighter both play major roles. The story takes place on and around Tatooine and on Ryloth.

Summary: In the wake of Jabba the Hutt's death, someone on Tatooine is making a lot of money selling Imperial ordinance. Dispatched to the planet under the guise of attending a belated memorial for Biggs Darklighter, Rogue Squadron is tasked with protecting a New Republic Intelligence agent in her search for the source of the goods. What first seems like a simple case of scamming and corruption soon turns more complicated, and deadly.

Review: This is where the series really comes into its own. The stories before this one are fine, but this one is a perfect blend of character development, action, drama, storytelling, and top-notch artwork. If you had to pick just one Rogue Squadron story arc to read, this wouldn't be a bad choice (and, in fact, it was the only one I had read in its entirety for a very long time). I'm always a bit reluctant for yet another return to Tatooine, but sometimes it turns out like this and it's fantastic (and the part on Ryloth was awesome as well). There's a good balance of building off of previous arcs, leaving threads unresolved for future arcs, and still giving readers a satisfying feeling of having read a complete story that stands on its own. This is a great one!

A