Rating: 1/5

"Some people do easy jobs and earn huge amounts of money. I do dreadful jobs and am always poorly paid. I am not quite sure why this is. Maybe I didn’t pay enough attention at school."

So when I was picking up Serendipity Market at the library based on its cover, I also picked up Ruby and the Stone Age Diet by Martin Millar without reading the back cover- it mostly was covered with a barcode anyway. And I mean- doesn't it look cool? Unfortunately the book doesn't live up to its cover, or even its title for that matter which is only barely connected to the story Millar tells. The book is the story of best friends Ruby and the unnamed narrator, who live by squatting in uninhabited houses in London. The narrator's girlfriend has just left him, but has gift him a cactus which Ruby says is an Aphrodite Cactus which will cause his ex to fall back in love with him when it blossoms. Unfortunately, months go by and it just won't blossom. In the meantime, there is lots to keep Ruby and the narrator busy including a variety of random jobs, eclectic friends, and adventures that may or may not actually be happening.

The book is written in simple sentences and a stream of consciousness type of writing, where you don't always know what is true and what is a figment of the narrator's imagination. However the tone and style of writing wasn't the problem, the actual story was. There were some extremely graphic scenes that I did not think added anything to the book and just made me feel nauseous. My favourite parts of Ruby and the Stone Age Diet were definitely the mini-story within it, which is the story of the werewolf who can't stop eating nice people that Ruby is writing; I think it would have made a nice short story. Everything else in the book, I can live without. Ruby and the Stone Age Diet is simply pointless and it even though it is fairly short it dragged on for far longer than I could have possibly thought. I honestly wonder if Millar even reread this book after writing it, and I am not sure what inspired Soft Skull Press to publish it in North American two decades after it was first printed in the UK, but it was definitely not a choice I commend. Admittedly, I am intrigued enough by Millar though I may be willing to try something else he's written in the future, I'll just be doing a bit more research before I pick up another one of his books in the future.

On the bright side, I think I have finally learned my lesson- stop judging library books by their covers. *