Rating: 5/5

Dancing with the Much Slandered Octopus

An invasion of the silent world under the Mediterranean Sea; Jacques Cousteau's deep sea diving left behind a wealth of photos, movies, and Science about the world that flows around our dry land. For the reader who loves to discover shipwrecks from an armchair, or the aquarium lover who can visualize the denizens of the sea by mere words; this book will suit readers of all ages. 

"Iron Ships crumble away in the lifetime of a man."

Jacques is the French hero of the sea who has tantalized generations around the world with his television series of diving. (Some of them are now on Amazon Prime free.) Even as beautiful and dramatic as the newest Aquaman movie is, The Silent World is perhaps as intriguing... seeing that it is the reality of the sea. To place it among similar works, I would say that he writes as well as Sir Edmund Hillary or Col. John Hunt about their Everest expeditions, though not quite as good as William Beebe writes about both his jungle excursions and sea diving. But, Jacques work was just slightly more modern, since here he is writing about his dives during and after the German occupation of France.

"In coastal waters during rainstorms we have seen an extraordinary excitement among the fish. They go crazy in the rain. The little ones explode in all directions. From the bottom come sedentary sars, climbing and diving, moved to sensational exertions. Mullets and bass gig frantically under the boiling carpet of rain. They stand on their tails with mouths open as if sucking the fresh water. Rainy days in the sea are wild celebrations."

Somewhere in the midst of the sea-life: merou, red corals, violets, ugly camouflaged scorpion fish, dog's teeth clams, pinna mussels, sponges, eels, sharks, and porpoises, you catch glimpses of the machinations of war and the land tyrant Hitler. Jacques and his divers set up a Science exploration center, explore shipwrecks, search for archeological treasures, and he describes it all in picturesque language. Included throughout are intriguing black and white photographs. 

"The 1st stage is a mild anesthesia, after which the diver becomes a god. If a passing fish seems to require air, the crazed diver may tear out his air pipe or mouth grip as a sublime gift." (Nitrogen narcosis- A gasous attack on the central nervous system)

He talks about Nitrogen narcosis, the 'Rapture of the Great Depths.' He describes the impossibility of obtaining industrial helium from America, and the fact that there were no known databases of shipwrecks in those days. (Now we can see them on Google Earth.) He describes war efforts to diffuse bombs under the sea, and later experimenting with underwater explosions to see how close he could get to the blast. Much that he does seems insanely dangerous. He describes the look of a wreck after decades, and after centuries. He describes the layers of the sea and the temperatures of the layers. And, he details the equipment he helped develop and the medical problems divers can experience. 

He talks about the so called monsters of the sea and how Victor Hugo slandered the octopus. He and his diving friends danced with octopi and even tried sticking their suction cups to their skin, but it clung about as well as today's cell phone holders stick to the windshield of our car. 

I read the hard-back version. This was my one hundredth classic for 2018, and therefore my completion of my "Climb Mt. Everest Mountain or Molehill Challenge" for the year. But, more than that, I would consider it a must-read. A few quotations follow: 

"There was a furious fight in the dark, in sand clouds stirred up by the struggling bodies. At last Didi got control and turned the merou toward the exit. Then he held on to the spear like a tiller and the fish gave him a fast ride through the winding maze to the open floor. It was a hard way to buy fish, but we were hungry."

"It is unpleasant to go to war after the war is over a duty that falls to the minesweepers and demolition teams who grope in the water for lethal objects mislaid by the belligerents."

"The Gibraltar straights are a unique place to study sea mammals. Migratory thousands of whales and porpoises passed to-and-fro across the narrow sill between the Mediterranean and Atlantic."

"Fishing is one of man's oldest occupations and fish stories entered folklore very early. Poets and nature fakers added their touches to marine superstitions that persist to our day."

"...the villains of undersea myth are sharks, octopi, kongers, morays, stingrays, mantas, squids and barracudas. We have met all but the giant squid which lives beyond our depth range. Save for the shark, about which we are still puzzled, the monsters we have met seem a thoroughly harmless lot. Some are indifferent to men; others are curious about us. Most of them are frightened when we approach closely."

"The better acquainted we become with sharks the less we know them, and one can never tell what a shark is going to do."

"When the moon rises above the horizon fisherman know that the fish have deserted the sea."