Rating: 3/5

You can’t judge a book by its cover. Wait, yes, you can…it’s just that your judgment may be wrong.

Take this book cover. It features a strapping lad with shoulder pads over a bare chest and his pants opened at the top to reveal laces crossed suggestively over his BVDs. It also sports the title Jocks in big, friendly letters. When you’re an m/m fan (which I am) and see something like this, you might get the idea that it’s about gay men. It most certainly is…but it’s not gay erotica. It’s true stories about gay men and, while it does feature their stories about having sex, coming out, discovering the thrill of their first orgasm with another male, it’s not gay love or sex stories. Not even close.

Having gotten over that disappointment, I settled myself down to reading. These may be true tales but they’re not dry or boring. They’re quite eye opening, in fact, featuring candid tales (even with changed names) about men in the sports industry trying to figure out where they stand in relations to the straight males around them.

Whether they were knowing about being gay from a young age or deeply clueless, never even hearing the word “gay” until late in life, these stories are honest and sometimes heartbreaking. Some men still hadn’t come out by the time of the book’s publication, having decided it was best to keep silent in terms of personal safety. 

There were people who were accepting of homosexuality even then, so much so that some of the people who confessed found it anti-climactic when they finally told their friends, family or colleagues. Nothing takes the wind out of your sails quite like having your confessor shrug and say, “Oh, you’re gay? I guessed as much. Pass the ketchup.” 

Naturally, not all the stories are as amusing as that. Homophobia is rampant in sports and in the locker room gay men swiftly learned just how bad it could get. The book ends with strategies for those who would confront accusers or questioners or offer support or stop harassers. They remain straightforward and commonsensical advice even today. 

Whether you’re gay or not, interested in sports or not, this book is yet another fine entry in the list of books supporting homosexuals. And, if you’re looking for gay porn, try Googling the name “Gregg”.