Rating: 3/5

A compelling and very well-researched study of the Albigensian Crusade. Difficult to read due to the dark subject matter but an important resource for anyone interested in this period of French and/or Catholic history. 

I found Simon de Montfort and Peter II of Aragon to be fascinating characters. The former being a bloodthirsty, power-hungry Lord and the latter a more moderate and fair King and Count. Both of these men were excellent military commanders. Peter II died courageously in the heat of battle at Muret and Monfort had his head crushed by a stone tossed from a trebuchet, he was killed instantly. The French Lord possessed an unflinching and resolute faith; he sought to destroy heresy at whatever cost. Many commoners celebrated and sung about his death. 

The Inquisition that comprised the later stages of the Crusade was devastating and unjust, the book makes that clear. Scores of innocent people were burned at the stake and the Church did immeasurable damage to the Occitan region and Herself. Oldenburg argues that the Church is still dealing with the moral consequences to this day. It could be difficult to dispute that given the amount of Inquisitions that were carried out in Europe after the Albigensian Crusade. 

The Epilogue points to the fact that these barbaric practices, once condemned by the Church and viewed as ignorant and abnormal, were now “consecrated” completely. All the more disturbing is the fact that great Church doctors like St. Thomas Aquinas supported these violent actions. There was a philosophical shift during this period in which the focus of the Catholic faith was less on the forgiveness of man and viewing him as God’s creation, and more to a hardline rigid dogma. A dogma that did not spare the sinner.

A troubling story filled with horrific chapters that portray mankind at its absolute lowest form. It was the innocent who suffered the most. The common peasant. Those forgotten to history. Cast into a mass grave or a river. Burned at the stake. Cathars and Catholics alike. Slaughtered for naught but a political maneuver orchestrated by the Clergy and a few nobles while being couched as a crusade against hearsay.