Rating: 4/5

Some backstory: many years ago (2015?), I was in the West End of downtown Greenville when I came across a bookstore/wine place that sold used books and wine (well, not "used wine," but you get my drift). I came across two books that I decided to buy among the myriad selection of good-but-not-must-have titles. This, "The Curious Case of Sidd Finch," and Tom Seaver's book about the game he pitched in the 1969 World Series (co-authored by Dick Schaap) were the only two purchases I made that day, or ever again, at this particular store. I honestly can't recall if I ever went back there (even in the days of my car being reliable, Greenville was a "once every other month" kind of a trip, especially for some hard-to-find bookstore which may or may not have lasted long after my visit), but I read the Seaver book first, enjoyed it (but not enough to keep it for too long; I think I eventually put it in a pile of donations either to a thrift store or a used-book store), and then this one sat on my shelf for a long, long time. 

I'm a big believer in "books find you when you're ready for them," and as it turns out I was finally ready to dip into George Plimpton's one novel, about a mysterious figure who throws a fastball far faster than anything ever recorded in baseball history. Sidd Finch is, as the title suggests, a curious case: an English orphan adopted by a wealthy explorer, whose journey to Tibet to search for his adoptive father's remains leads him to a Buddhist monastery where he devotes his life to studying meditation and developing the most stunning delivery in sports history. Through the narrator, Robert Temple, we get Sidd's incredible story, with wit and charm (though not "laugh out loud funny" as the copy on the flap jacket would have you believe). Can the lowly Mets, a year away from their 1986 World Series triumph, hold onto a good thing in Finch, or will success spoil the Buddhist monk/pitcher? 

I have to admit, for the first half or so of the book, I wasn't sure that I was on board with this one. Plimpton is one of my all-time favorite non-fiction writers, and I think his sports books are essential reading. But I had my doubts about his ability to sustain a novel. Great literature this ain't, let's be clear; but for what it is, it works more than it doesn't. Plimpton's prose style mostly works for this whimsical tale, and it's one of those books that gets over more on the assurances of the authorial voice than the story, which is okay for the most part. It comes together as Finch gets closer to starting in the majors, and the Mets realize what they have in this bizarre character who can throw faster than any human being alive. I was considering donating my copy of this book after finishing it, but when I got done with it, I decided that I'd like to keep it on my shelves a while longer (it might go well with the other couple of Mets-related books that I own. Perhaps I've been a closet Mets fan all this time? Perish the thought). At any rate, I don't know that I'd call this a *great* novel, but it's good, fun, and holds up very well. 

Sidd Finch may not be the greatest pitcher alive, but he is certainly the oddest. And in recounting his story, George Plimpton has gifted the world with something that is its own odd duck in terms of literature about America's national pastime.