Rating: 4/5

Why climbing? Bonington: "joy of movement and muscular control up a steep face, the satisfaction of exploring new ground, ... and of exploring one's own reaction to new experience." [...] "the sheer beauty and grandeur of the mountains, the soothing balm of solitude."
But then he states: "through it all, is the undercurrent of danger: for this is what it is all about - staking one's life on one's judgement, playing the calculating risk."
There you have it: adrenaline junkies. They always talk about calculated risks, but high in the mountains there are many factors which are unpredictable. The main ones being the weather and avalanches. Plus the human factor, being: summit fever. Going up even when one shouldn't.

Route finding is not straight forward. In the beginning they spend two days one way, but had to backtrack and find a way around the difficulties. This is to show that on these big faces one can only tell how to go when one is actually there. Trial and error in thin air! Bonington is honest in his descriptions. How he felt frustrated sometimes. And realizes it. No hiding away. And he gives praise where praise is due. Each member of the team (they are with 8 climbers; 4 teams of 2) gets it's turn in leading and finding the best route, Leaving fixed ropes in place for the next team. Each member is eager to get the lead. Finding a way up. That’s why they are here after all. And it is Bonington’s decision how the teams are stacked up. He is the expedition leader after all.

It's an arduous process. First finding a way up. Steep. Slow. 30 feet in 3 hours is no exception. Then retreat to the last camp. Going up again the next day and improving the fixed ropes. Then pushing on higher over new terrain.

Pictures show climbers going vertical up on ropes. Ice crampons of course. Extremely physical. Often they are exhausted after a day’s climb and almost unconcious fall into their camp. Rest days are extremely important.

This expedition is really one of the old style. From camp to camp. Hauling up gear and provisions. So different from what I read how later mountaineers did it. Like Peter Boardman and Joe Tasker on their Kangchenjunga climb, described in Sacred Summits

And so it goes. Day in day out. Stocking and restocking camps. Each stretch of the climb has it's own challenges. They are getting exhausted. It became very tedious. Reading about it became sort of the same. As Bonington put it: ”grinding repetitive work.” I looked forward to the summit push. Had kind of a summit fever myself.

As expected they made it. The two fitttest climbers: Dougal Haston and Don Whillans were the ones that made the summit. After 2 months on the mountain they made it!

An ok read. A little too long and repetitive. But that was exactly what this was: a long and arduous slog. But they made it. The expedition succeeded in reaching their goal via a very difficult route. That was what this was all about...

written: 1971.
Chris Bonington: 1934