Rating: 3/5

I found this book entertaining, if heavily flawed. It felt like a more modern, streamlined version of Leroux's novel in places, sometimes down to direct quotes. Everything is mercifully chronological and, strange to say considering Holmes' presence, the mystery element isn't as heavily explored. I could actually imagine this being made into a film with some slight alterations.

I can't speak at length about how Holmes and his wannabe Watson cousin were characterized as I don't have a lot of familiarity with that portion of the crossover. Indeed, I was repulsed from reading this for a while because I don't much like Sherlock Holmes. I can't stand sassy, smug, intellectuals as main characters, as I myself am a sassy, smug intellectual. You need not remind me of my flaws, Mr. Holmes. Still, I didn't strongly dislike him, I dare even say I liked him outright sometimes in this story, which is more than I can say for every other brush I've had with this character. The doctor cousin is... fine? I don't know, I didn't really care about him much, nor his internal conflict about his wife. It felt annoying to be tied to him as the point of view character, but I liked Siciliano's writing style and descriptions enough that it didn't really matter. On that note, I really enjoyed the blend of dialogue from Leroux's work and the new dialogue unique to this book. 

Now, on to characters I am far more familiar with--

The characterization of Christine and the Phantom felt the most appropriate to me, if not a hundred percent faithful to the source material at all times. I got a strong impression that Siciliano really adored these characters, even with all their flaws, and for good reason. Their relationship is the underpinning of the entire story. Christine is clearly torn about the situation and moved to anger multiple times throughout the story, which I liked a lot. Erik came off as at once piteous, gifted, and terrifying, as he ought to be.

There are some choices that are somewhat understandable, if a little dramatic, like putting the de Chagnys in an unflattering light. I especially understand disapproval of Phillipe; from what little is said about him in Leroux's work, it's easy to imagine him not being a great guy. As someone who is mildly annoyed/exasperated with Raoul at worst, though, I was horrified at how he was presented as abusive, selfish, and childish to the point of absurdity. It's hard to understand why Christine has any interest in him at all. Their childhood friendship is only barely touched on.

Other choices were downright bizarre, like villainizing the Persian, arguably the most morally good character from the original novel, and giving Erik a mute Persian servant who dies in a spectacularly disturbing way by Raoul's hand. I thought at first that daroga was being presented in a "villainous" light for the ultimate reveal that the initial perception was wrong, but... nope! He's just really, really morally bankrupt for some reason. It didn't add anything to the story beyond a moment where he pulls a gun on Sherlock.

I kind of want to talk about that ending... I feel silly for not having seen it coming. At the beginning, Sherlock solves a case that involves a blind pianist. I thought that having a blind woman mentioned in the intro would merely be thematic, but... nope, the woman is Erik's consolation girlfriend at the end. "Are you kidding me? We're doing that trope?" and "Aw, that's sweet, they're both into music and have real chemistry," were my conflicted reactions. It's funny that Sherlock played matchmaker. By  The Phantom of the Opera standards especially, this is a really happy ending.

Again, even though it has major issues that I can see putting some readers off of it altogether, I enjoyed this overall.