Rating: 5/5

Average star rating: 4.4/5
Final rating: 4.5/5

Updated full review 8/6/2020:

I absolutely loved this collection. It's a brilliant bit of work that hits all the right notes and retains its relevance as a work of queer fiction 2 decades down the line. If you want to know more about the individual stories and which ones stood out as favorites, here are the notes I took about each of the stories in the collection. I can't wait to read more of Ivan's work, I'm already sensing a new fave.

**STORIES**

She Comes Home a Moth - 4/5
I loved the use of 2nd person as the framing of this story about two kids who grew up in each other's pockets. It was about intimacy and a frightening moment, about the things you remember and what you don't. Very quick but overall stolid, and an excellent introduction to the collection.

Walks Like - 3.5/5
I feel like I'm already getting to know the style and ideas of this collection, which is nice. It's good to see those thematic elements early on. I think this didn't have quite enough page time to work fully, but it functioned well as a story about difference and those who accept it vs those who spurn it.

No Bikini - 4/5
Gender expression is what we make of it - and it does affect our children. From small things, like what we allow them to wear, to big things, like how what they're wearing impacts how the entire world views them. I loved this dreamworld of silence, of letting a group of people believe in your boyhood just to feel free enough to swim.

Three Left Turns - 4.5/5
There is a brilliant bit of capturing the early childhood fear of being queer to this story. It's a story about summer and about girls and boys and plans unlikely and un-achieved, but it's also the blinding terror of "I don't know what this was but I know it isn't right and I'm so, so scared of that".

Sticks and Stones - 2.5/5
I don't feel like I really got this one. It's a story about kids in the 70s secretly doing a dangerous activity and it felt sort of there and gone, trying to say something that it could never really put into words.

The Cat Came Back - 4/5
Oh fuck yeah, I loved this. I love stories about queerness and how it intersects with queer/potentially queer family. This is a cool cross dressing story, a little musing on a moment of being engaged with your body in a new way, and the silent acceptance of a family member. I just vibed with it, that's all I have to say.

Close to Spider Man - 5/5
BIG DUMBASS LESBIAN ENERGY. This felt like a screenplay for a short film, dramatic and silly in just the right ways and full to bursting of one person just thinking that other waitress is NEAT and taking that way too far. I loved this. It was farcical and emotional and super charming. Just. Yes.

Eggcup - 3/5
I liked the shortness of this one, it's a fun little reminiscing of a particular piece of motherly advice and the power those bits of advice have on you. I just felt like the end didn't have the same punch as the rest of the story.

Manifestation - 4/5
Oof, this was a queer force of nature. I love that there are so many possible interpretations of this super short story. It speaks to a questioning of gender and sexuality and presentation all at once. I can't believe how much force is packed into this story that is barely two pages long.

This, That, and The Other Thing - 5/5
This hit about ten times too close to home, I'll be upfront about that. I think there's such a power in ruminating on cooking and the part food has played in your own history of tragedy and joy. I love the combination of food and feelings, probably because they are intertwined for me and for so many others. There are so many gorgeous quotes that take up the story, musings on sadness and how it fades in the body. Like I said, this hit close to home and I think I'm just overwhelmed trying to write about all the things that worked here.

There Goes the Bride - 4.5/5
Fuck, this was so good. I can't get over these stories. This was an extended monologue, an ex-lover giving their best wishes to the new married couple. I think it reminded me a bit of a family I once thought I would be a part of, so it hit close to home. But ultimately I thought it was an inventive and heartfelt look at a strange emotional time. It was queer and relatable. I loved it a lot.

You're Not in Kansas Anymore - 4.5/5
This is, I think, the most clearly self-referential story in the collection. For those unaware, Ivan Coyote is nonbinary and this is a monologue about changing a name that doesn't suit you and never has. It's about the terror of changing a name, and the consistent certainty that at birth someone got it wrong, because that just can't be your name. It's an ill-fitting shoe that must be altered. I think there is a personal ring to this story that makes it work even better, and it was already a brilliant piece of work to begin with.

Red Sock Circle Dance - 4/5
This collection was released in the year 2000 and it is incredible to me how much it still reflects our world. This is a story about Ivan and a young queen, a person who will grow up with nothing but love in the face of strangeness. It's a reflection on how the world has changed, how queer family can be the only reality some kids will know. Ivan has created something truly amazing in this collection and I'm so glad I read it.