Rating: 3/5

Most likely few people know the name of Edward Bulwer-Lytton. He authored the famous opening line “It was a dark and stormy night.” Which inspired cartoon dog Snoopy to be an author and an annual contest named for the author (human not canine). Bulwer-Litton was also the author of the famous quote: “The pen is mightier than the sword.” But likely few track attributions too closely. As for his book The Last Days of Pompeii (Kindle Edition) my speculation is that many know the title, have seen one or another of the movies and at most figure they may get around to the book someday. It is a fair read, hardly great literature. Not so much purple pose as over written. Calling it family friendly is oddly not that simple. There is no bad language and no sex and minimal violence. There is more than a hint of sex as entertainment, for hire and the beginnings of sexual predation. The Gladiator fight has a kind of staid stylized violence less bloody than would make a modern audience squirm. So even as this is a book as they used to write ‘em, it is not free of “a glimpse of stocking” or whatever the ancient Roman equivalent.

Speaking of Roman equivalent, The Last Days of Pompeii was inspired by a walking tour EB-L had taken of the recently rediscovered ruins of Pompeii. A rude person might suggest that he had lifted much from his guide book and pasted it directly into his novel. Depending on you pleasure in the latest in 19th century archeology along with your light reads, these can get to be a bit of a drag. If all he is doing is showing off what he learned while on vacation it would be that much more irritating, but much of it is used to infuse romantic images onto the prosaic facts of the remains of an ancient party town. 

Last Days is a melodrama, toga costumed version of the “Perils of Pauline” variety. It is more. It is an ensemble drama more like the cast of dozens who are doomed books much later to be made famous. Titanic, Poseidon Adventure, On the Beach and of course the parody, Airplane! come to mind. None of these rates as great literature. Last Days, like the later books can be read on the beach or during the office lunch break without hiding the cover. 

We already know that the city is doomed. The title alone is a clue. The problem for the author is to engage us with the characters and their respective plights and plot turns. Overall Bulwer-Lytton achieves this. However, getting to the pyroclastic climax takes a lot of getting there. Allowing that he was writing when a more leisurely pacing of plots was expected, The Last Days of Pompeii has a few too many sub plots and narrative diversions. I suspect that having read The Last Days of Pompeii, you may not feel driven to read his entire shelf, but not so turned off as to avoid other titles.