Rating: 4/5

In the late 1980s and early 90s International Polygonics Ltd published a series of reprints of out-of-print mysteries. They brought Craig Rice, Lillian de la Torre, Margaret Millar and many others back into print. 

The books were well printed traditional size pocketbooks with bright illustrated covers. (The cover above is from a different edition. This edition has a painting of a skeleton with a rose in its mouth. I have no idea what that has to do with the book.) I bought most of them but never got around to reading all of them.

They re-published most of George Baxt's novels. He had a series of Show Biz books, "The Alfred Hitchcock Murder Case", " The Dorothy Parker Murder Case" etc. 

His other series of books, the Pharoah Love stories, was more unusual, particularly for the times. This is the first book in the series. It was published in 1966. Love is a New York Police Homicide Detective. He is black and gay. He is cool and clever.

The story is set in the New York gay/hip world. A gay hustler, Ben Bentley, is found dead in his bathtub. He was electrocuted when a radio dropped into the tub. Love suspects it is a murder.

Seth Piro is a struggling author. He has left his wife to live with Bentley. His wife is trying to manipulate him by threatening to expose that he is "queer". ("Gay" is not a word for that in 1966). There is an older gay guy who is a suspect, as is his American Indian boyfriend.

This is a picture of a scene. People get drunk and have silly fights in a bar. Gay men are being routinely blackmailed. Everyone has secrets and everyone loves to go out and be seen. 

Baxt has some pretty savage insights into the characters insecurities. Seth and his wife have a particularly brutal relationship.

Pharoah Love is a great character. He is conscious of the weakness and strength he has in this crowd as a black man. He seems more comfortable being gay then most of the others. 

The plot is somewhat rickety, and the ending was not to my taste, but this was an enjoyable odd ball mystery.

(Reminders that we are in 1966. People send telegrams to get in touch with someone. When someone says he was injured "in the war", everyone knows he means WW2. In NY you need to show fault to get a divorce.)