Rating: 5/5

Occasionally, I browse through Amazon.com looking for out-of-print books that I remember loving as a child, searching for something for my five-year-old daughter Beanie to enjoy as well. One of my favorite books was a worn Scholastic version of Helen Doss' The Family Nobody Wanted, and when I saw it had been rereleased, I added it to my very next order.

::: Creating a Family :::

The story of The Family Nobody Wanted starts with Helen Doss and her husband Carl, a journeyman painter who decides to quit fighting his calling, go back to school, and become a minister. Unable to have children of their own, the couple attempted to being adoption proceedings, only to be turned away every time due to the instability of finances, long waiting lists, and all the familiar stories. After years of waiting, Carl and Helen finally are able to adopt Donny, the child they've been waiting for, but when they attempt to add on to their family later, they discover that there are many children considered "unadoptable" because of their race.

Carl and Helen soon realize that their best chances of adding to their family are by taking in some of these children that "nobody wants" and so begins an amazing story of a couple who eventually adopted a total of 12 children, all but Donny and Suzie being of mixed or "undesirable" race.

::: The Original Super-Mom :::

While the premise of The Family Nobody Wanted sounds like something you'd find in just about any issue of People magazine, adopting multi-racial children wasn't accepted as it is now in an age where foreign adoptions seem almost more commonplace than domestic adoptions. The Dosses had to deal with not only economic issues with adopting their children, but also the typical prejudices of the age.

Even the social workers that they came in contact with seemed stunted by bigotry; one suggested that their one daughter who was part Mexican might have a harder time making friends than their Caucasian daughter. Other people asked if the Asian babies wanted chop suey instead of formula, and criticized Helen for not giving the Hispanic children spicy food. For the most part, however, the reaction to their multi-racial family takes a back burner to a far more inspirational story; how a couple could sacrifice time and time again to provide a home for children who might otherwise have ended up in an institutional setting until they reached adulthood.

The Dosses were actually made famous in a Life magazine spread in the 1950s, at which point they had nine of the 12 children they would end up with. Helen Doss actually wrote the book after the article appeared in Life, which generated interest in their story, and then the book disappeared. The reprinting includes an introduction by Mary Battenfeld, which talks about the impact that the book had, and also an epilogue by the author, which gives a brief overview of what had happened to the family in the almost 50 years since the book was published.

The best part for me was that, after I'd reread the book for myself, Beanie took off with it. Less than a day later, she returned the book (having skipped the introduction), and told me how much she loved it. I'm so happy that the book has been rereleased for another generation to love. 

This review originally published at Epinions: http://www.epinions.com/review/The_Fa...