Rating: 5/5

A classic story of immigrants on the Great Plains of Nebraska in the late 1800s. This is the third book in what the publishers call her ‘Great Plains Trilogy’: O Pioneers!, The Song of the Lark and My Antonia. Cather considered My Antonia her ‘masterpiece’ despite the fact that she won a Pulitzer in 1923 for One of Ours, a World War I story. 

Immigrants and hardships. The first thing I liked is that these immigrants are not your typical immigrants as they might be portrayed on a Hallmark Channel story: hard-working, self-sacrificing, in love with the new land, etc. Antonia (prn. An-to-NEE-a) is a daughter of a Bohemian immigrant family fresh off the boat. The father is so homesick that he is depressed and suicidal. The older brother who runs the farm is arrogant, and self-serving and drives Antonia dawn-to-dusk in the fields as if she were a man. The mother is whining, conniving and not above begging for food and clothing from neighbors, and then being rather unthankful – almost resentful of their help. 

But Antonia tolerates it all and comes to epitomize that American Dream immigrant farm girl. In addition to first-person narratives, much of the story is told by a neighboring farm boy, Jim, who grew up near Antonia. When he leaves the area to go to Harvard Law School, he keeps in touch with Antonia’s doings through acquaintances and infrequent visits, sometimes decades later. 

The immigrants the story focuses on are Bohemians (of the present-day Czech Republic), but there are also Swedes, Norwegians, Russians, Austrians and Hungarians. 

The stark landscape is like a character in the book, so I shelved it as an 'environmental novel.' I’m reminded of the vast openness of Giants in the Earth. Jim thinks “There seemed to be nothing to see; no fences, no creek or trees; no hills or fields…I had the feeling that the world was left behind, that we had got over the edge of it….If we never arrived anywhere, it did not matter. Between that earth and that sky I felt erased, blotted out.”

There isn’t a lot of plot other than the daily struggle to grow enough food to avoid starvation and to get enough fuel to avoid freezing in winter. Antonia’s family has been ripped off from the outset. In their travel to the new world, in the poor-quality land they are sold, and in the exorbitant price they were charged for what is basically ‘half’ of a sod house built cave-like into a hillside. 

A good portion of the book is made up of vignettes of farm neighbors and townspeople. We read the stories of a tramp who kills himself in the fields; two Russian brothers who fled their home country after ‘throwing a bride to the wolves’ [no spoiler – you’ll have to read it!]; an itinerant blind, Black piano player; a sleazy money-lender and his wife. (Another reason you won’t see this story on Hallmark – there are multiple murders and suicides.) 

About halfway through the book the action shifts to town. Jim is an orphan who lives with his grandparents and they move to town when they get too old to farm. Antonia eventually comes to town too. A lot of farm girls are more valuable to their families by bringing in money living in town as nannies and maids to better-off families. Some of them get jobs as clerks and as waitresses and maids in the hotel. 

There’s a kind of life-long romance between Jim and Antonia, although nothing develops when they are young because Antonia is four years older than Jim. A cover blurb from H. L. Mencken tells us “No romantic novel ever written in America, by man or woman, is one half so beautiful as My Antonia.” Since most of the story is told by Jim, he tells us ‘I’ve been in love with Antonia all my life.’ And yet the novel is not a romance in a traditional sense. I have to put all this in a spoiler.  Sure, Jim has a puppy love crush on Antonia in his youth. When Antonia moves into town in her late teen years, Jim hangs out with her and three other good-looking young women, all Antonia’s age – that is, they are all a few years older than he is. They go to dances until his grandfather, a minister, makes him stop. Townspeople think this relationship a bit odd – a young boy hanging with four older young women, not just in the dance hall, but swimming and going on picnics. Despite many opportunities, Jim never makes a move on any of them. We start to wonder about Jim’s sexual orientation. Even years later, he meets with one of the most attractive of the women who is still single, as he is, and she is obviously interested in him. He visits her apartment regularly and he even says he’s in love with her. But he never makes a move and nothing comes of it. Cather, who was very likely gay (she had a female partner for 39 years) may be sending us a coded message through Jim – coded because the book was published in 1918. 

I’ll leave the ending of Antonia’s story as a surprise for those who want to read the book. 

This book is without doubt an American classic. You could call it a heartwarming story but there’s a lot of tragedy along the way. Much of the writing, I would call lyrical, especially the harsh descriptions of winters and the beautiful depiction of landscapes – akin, I think, to the lush landscape writings of Virginia Woolf and Collette. 

The author (1873-1947), wrote a dozen novels, many of which were historical novels not set on the Great Plains. These include one of her best-known works: Death Comes for the Archbishop, set in New Mexico, as well as Shadows on the Rock set in Quebec, and Sapphira and the Slave Girl, set in antebellum Virginia (where Cather was born and lived until age nine). 

[Edited 2/10/23]
 
Top photo of present-day Red Cloud NE where the author lived from visitredcloud.com 
Willa Cather’s home in Red Cloud NE from Wikipedia
The author from willacather.org