Rating: 4/5

Richard had dyslexia which created a problem throughout his school life. Later, although his spellings were still sometimes poor, he eventually managed to overcome worst of his difficulties through training to improve his concentration. Started a magazine "Student" during his high school time. Then started his first business of mail order and named it "Virgin". One of the best things about mail order was that the customers sent their money first: this provided the capital for to buy the records. Changed the name of Student Advisory Centre as a new charity called HELP!

It continues to operate to this day, but now under the guise of Virgin Unite, which undertakes a very broad range of charitable activities. Once went to prison for the invasion of custom tax; promised himself to never invade laws again in his life. Decided to go for a manufacture and distribution deal called "Pressing and Distribution" or "P&amp;D". It was a bold move but if you are a risk-taker then the act is to protect the downside. Signed a P&amp;D with Island Records and grew into a major force in the record industry and eventually became the rival to Island Records. Developed three key aims when negotiating with bands:
1) Set out to own copyright for as long as possible. Tried hardest never to agree to a deal where the copyright reverted to the artist because the only assets a record company has are its copyrights. Also tried to incorporate as much as possible of an artist's back catalogue into contract, although often this was tied up with other record labels
2) Always insisted on incorporating worldwide copyright to the artist's work in contracts which helped position Virgin as an international company
3) Ensured that Virgin owned the copyright in the individual members of the band as well as the band itself

Part of the secret of running a record label was to build up momentum to keep signing new bands and to keep breaking them into the big time. During an awkward patch between 1974 and 1976 Mike Oldfield was our only superstar, Virgin failed to sign other big names despite fighting hard for them. It seemed that Virgin was destined to be forever the second choice and in music as in so many other things the second choice means nothing. Wanted to expand the Virgin name to stand for more than a record label, and become more involved in all kinds of media. Although Virgin is not a family company in the traditional sense in that it has not been passed down vertically from generation to generation, it is a family company in a horizontal sense. 

Relaunched Virgin Publishing, concentrating on core strengths of music and entertainment. Apart from the four main operations: Virgin Music, Virgin Record Shops, Virgin Vision and the new airline Virgin Atlantic, there were now a host of new little companies operating under the Virgin umbrella. There was Top Nash food which delivered food around industrial estates; Virgin Rogs - a line of clothes; Virgin Rubs and Vanson Property - a property development company which looked after our growing collection of properties and as a sideline was making a lot of money by buying, developing and then selling property. 

By 1986 Virgin had become one of Britain's largest private companies, with some 4000 employees. For the year ended July 1986 Virgin had sales of €189 million. The stock market crash was the final nail in Virgins coffin as a public company was the short-term view which investors took. We were under pressure to produce instant results and unless we paid out a large dividend share our share price would suffer. With Japanese partners in our two main businesses, the airline and music, we then turned to our third business and decided to expand the retail side in Japan as well. Within the space of of two years between 1988 and 1990, each Virgin subsidiary had set up a deal with a Japanese company. With Sega, Marui, Seibu-Saison and Fujisankei, we were uniquely placed to being expanding in Japan.

Two of the main ingredients of an airline's profitability are the number of passengers and the cost of aviation fuel. All independent airlines were now facing a disaster: we were having to operate when the price of fuel had more than doubles and the number of passengers flying had dried up due to the Kuwait-Iraq war. In the summer of 1990 Virgin Atlantic was still a tiny airline. We flow to just four destinations in two countries. Virgin Atlantic was our biggest liability in that we had high overheads that we couldn't cut down. The louder I complained about British Airways dirty tricks, the less any other airline, venture-capital house or other investor wanted to invest in Virgin Atlantic. 

We lost both ways: nobody to invest in a small airline if it was being squeezed out by a vast organization like British airways; and nobody wanted to invest in an airline that might embark on lengthy and expensive litigation against one of the world's largest airline. Virgin Music was our only seriously profitable business and it was our only chance to save the airline. Virgin Music was purchased by Thorn EMI to save Virgin Atlantic from going bankrupt. 

Fun is at the core of the way I like to do business and it has been key to everything I've done from the outset. To be successful you have to be out there, you have to hit the ground running and if you have good around you and more than your fair share of luck, you might make something happen. But you certainly can't guarantee it just by following someone else's formula. Launched Virgin Cola based on three key things: finding the right people, the positive use of Virgin brand name and protection of the downside. Virgin Money, our financial services company started off as Virgin Direct with Norwich Union as a fifty-fifty partner. We cut out all all commission; we offered good-value products and we were practically trampled by investors in their rush to buy. 

Virgin is a not a big group - it's a big brand made up of a lots of small businesses. Convention dictates that a company should look after its shareholders first, its customers next and last of all worry about its employees. Virgin does the opposite. For us, our employees matter most. What I'd always thought was that Virgin should be more than just a money-making machine and that as Virgin has the wealth of a small nation, we should use that wealth to tackle social issues more than we had in the past. 

What we are trying to do at Virgin is not have one enormous company in one sector under one banner, but to have two hundred or even three hundred separate companies. Each company stand on its own feet and in that way although we've got a brand that links them, if we were to have another tragedy such as that of 11 September which hurt the airline industry - it would not bring the whole group crashing down. Formed Virgin Fuels in early 2006 and began an investment programme in research and development in biofuel. Announced the $25 million prize the "Virgin Earth Challenge" to inspire innovations in the field of combating climate change. 

At the outset, each of my individual ventures was a step into the unknown for the company. In whatever world you make for yourself, you can keep embracing the new and the different over and over again. That's what I always wanted for Virgin and whether it's achieved by judgment or luck, I wouldn't have it any other way. 

Blog | Instagram | LinkedIn