Rating: 5/5

WHEW! I cannot wait to start #3 House at Sunset. 

This one is a 4.5 star. I rounded up because it holds some of my most favorite characters in all of Norah Lofts' HUGE output. This is the Townhouse in Baildon (Suffolk) which was begun by Martin Reed upon diseased vineyard land. It grows over centuries to "Old Vine" a hostel/inn and then to a boys' school. But it is in great flux once again now at the ending of this center portion of this House series trio.

The characters in this one are epic, IMHO. Especially the 3 women. I remembered the girl in the portray with the Elizabethan ruff named Elizabeth and her long life with most of the details for about 3 or 4 decades myself. She is A PIECE OF WORK! Probably I should say "WAS" a piece of work. But then again, maybe she still is.

And her daughter-in-law and the eventual owner after the Civil War and Restoration, does her legacy differently but in double time. The final woman, Ethelreada, is from the Fens isles and a pagan Viking at heart and in reality of her cognition (never seeing anything but a marsh and about 4 other people in her entire life before 15). So now we have Saxon, Norman, Romany, Norse in the bloodlines. 

And England becomes a different place in culture after the "old" queen (Elizabeth I) is gone. Building and growth in great upsurge during the years after her death, indeed on all that confiscated land. And the great Abbey is now in ruins- yet our Townhouse has neighbors and streets that hold carriages beyond the double horse width.

But the culture! Inns with liquor are out! Refined and staid starkness is in! Cromwell and the fanatic Puritans have initiated their own "hope and change". Entire words and phrases have been banned. Nothing can tweak of popery or gleam any twinge of non-judgment that is apart from the current "correct". Neighbor against neighbor and lots of "calling-out". Does it sound familiar?

And then the wool too has changed to silk for more clear profit and less availability in England. But the weavers and looms are eventually lost and burnt out. Spies who seek out priest holes! More ancestors in the fire?

We end this one far past the Restoration and with more than a spattering of modern domestic "in-house" issues. And the school will fall, that is certain. Where will it go now? These are people of the "new money" and merchant classes, not noble. And will that ugly and snappish stick of a woman let down that knee length hair again? 

Oh, I would love to see that portray in that room that was moved from the hall way of our smiling little 8 year old!

I note that the reviews for this one are mixed. This is not happy face story, nor as fast moving as other Lofts. Nor is it constant action. This is personality cored far more than the others. But more mundane drudgery and nuance of manner and approach. This is the reality behind the faces. This one reminds me of Hilary Mantel but with far more servant "eyes" to the smallest motions.