Rating: 4/5

Immersive.
Squib is no hero. A diary, a retelling of the horrors still immediate many years later. No false attempt to adorn, to explain.

Had to read it, it has a torn cover and was in danger of being thrown out in spring cleaning. 

p.120: "Although we were very short of reinforcement, the news from home told of a continuing evasion of overseas conscription by Mackenzie King's Liberal government: of antiwar riots led by fascist sympathizers: of strikes by war workers for higher pay; and of the sacrifices being less than stoically endured by the civilian population, which was having to submit to the horrors of sugar rationing." - we seldom get this view of WWII in the histories of the Good War; in this period of lockdown during the Covid pandemic, it is a reflection that people only reluctantly make the effort for the greater good - notice gun-toting morons occupying the Michigan statehouse because they cannot go wherever they want for a couple of months - the horrors of sugar rationing.

p.109: "This was a disturbing discovery, and for a time I thought it must indicate a singular lack of emotional depth in me. I was deluded by the conventional wisdom which maintains that it is personal linkages that give a group its unity. I was slow to comprehend the truth; that comrades-in-arms unconsciously create from their particulate selves an imponderable entity which goes its own way and has its own existence, regardless of the comings and goings of the individual who are its constituent parts. Individuals are of no more import to it than they were in the days of our beginnings when the band, the tribe, was the vehicle of human survival. Once out of it, it ceases to exist for you -- and you for it." - takes a while to learn this truth when you first retire, after spending years on a team, toward common goals, churning in the trenches, then to be outside, and forgotten.

John Keats (1795–1821). The Poetical Works of John Keats. 1884.
 
55. La Belle Dame Sans Merci
 
Ballad
 
 
I.

O WHAT can ail thee, knight-at-arms,	
 Alone and palely loitering?	
The sedge has wither’d from the lake,	
 And no birds sing.	
 
II.

O what can ail thee, knight-at-arms!	 5
 So haggard and so woe-begone?	
The squirrel’s granary is full,	
 And the harvest’s done.	
 
III.

I see a lily on thy brow	
 With anguish moist and fever dew,	 10
And on thy cheeks a fading rose	
 Fast withereth too.	
 
IV.

I met a lady in the meads,	
 Full beautiful—a faery’s child,	
Her hair was long, her foot was light,	 15
 And her eyes were wild.	
 
V.

I made a garland for her head,	
 And bracelets too, and fragrant zone;	
She look’d at me as she did love,	
 And made sweet moan.	 20
 
VI.

I set her on my pacing steed,	
 And nothing else saw all day long,	
For sidelong would she bend, and sing	
 A faery’s song.	
 
VII.

She found me roots of relish sweet,	 25
 And honey wild, and manna dew,	
And sure in language strange she said—	
 “I love thee true.”	
 
VIII.

She took me to her elfin grot,	
 And there she wept, and sigh’d fill sore,	 30
And there I shut her wild wild eyes	
 With kisses four.	
 
IX.

And there she lulled me asleep,	
 And there I dream’d—Ah! woe betide!	
The latest dream I ever dream’d	 35
 On the cold hill’s side.	
 
X.

I saw pale kings and princes too,	
 Pale warriors, death-pale were they all;	
They cried—“La Belle Dame sans Merci	
 Hath thee in thrall!”	 40
 
XI.

I saw their starved lips in the gloam,	
 With horrid warning gaped wide,	
And I awoke and found me here,	
 On the cold hill’s side.	
 
XII.

And this is why I sojourn here,	 45
 Alone and palely loitering,	
Though the sedge is wither’d from the lake,	
 And no birds sing.