Rating: 4/5

If there is one thing I always knew; it was that classic American western fiction was about the code of the west, usually background women, love of horses, strict adherence to the code of the west and a final mano a mano duel between a bad guy with a bad cowboy habits and a good guy with a fast gun. Zane Grey tended to pump them out and all could be sneered at.

Give me a minute while I finish my humble pie. Or is it crow? Whatever there is a flavor of dusty hat, and sage.

Zane Gray’s Riders of the Purple Sage was his biggest seller and carries a lot more depth than snobby me expected. I agree with another reviewer that there is allot of sage, and it is a lot of purple. There is a lot of things going on. Ther are some truths that are no more than what you see and other things layered down much deeper.

For me this was my second odd alignment of literary Synchronicity. Three books, one history, and two very different adventure novels with a center stage plot around the abuse of religion, by deeply sincere and deeply flawed people. Yes, I see parallels between Ridders and a history of the Spanish Inquisition. In both case people sincere or otherwise believe they have a God given duty to make others miserable rather than have their human earthy authority questioned. In Riders, we have the intertwining romance of a few people standing against the local power of the Mormon Church. 

This book is heavily anti Mormon. Absent the knowledge of the early years of the Mormon Church. Some notions about why it would promote polygamy, even in front of a woman’s right to have a loving marriage and the near absolute authority of the local Bishop, a reader has more reason to disparage Mormonism than to understand a larger context. I donot know if Dr Grey (he was a dentist) actually hated Mormons, but had he been as anti-Jewish, or anti Muslim, odds are very high that this book would be deemed as unreadable for a modern audience.

Here is the thing, there is some fine puttin tagethiering of woids. This is not a book filled with gun play and jingling spurs are the exception. The lone cowboy destined to safe the day, falls in love, and not just with his horse. The lady in question teeters on the edge of being a shallow source of aggravation but she has innate strength and nobility. There is a second love that grows from a woman rendered helpless, but she turns out to be a very exceptional rider. A skill highly rated among the two leading good guys. There are even two flavors of bad guys, even if the one group is not that bad, and the other is mostly misled. 

Riders of the Purple Sage is hardly literature. But neither is it just a dime store male oriented mass production. The dime store is long gone, the sage is still purple and Zane Grey has written a classic western entertainment.