Rating: 5/5

Uh. Didn't expect to finish this one so soon.

(The adventures of an unusual dog, part St. Bernard, part Scotch shepherd, that is forcibly taken to the Klondike gold fields where he eventually becomes the leader of a wolf pack.) ~ Blurb from Goodreads

The big thing to keep in mind about this version (and something that I didn't realize right away) is that it is not the original story. Instead, it is an adaptation designed for younger readers. 

With that said, I was surprised to find just how faithful and respectful of an adaptation it was. I think the details from the original are still in-tact, but written in a way that younger readers can digest it while maintaining this air of respect for their intelligence. Heck, they even keep the darker and more violent moments in-tact. For example, in chapter five, there's a scene where a female dog named Curly gets attacked by a husky and it's described as such, "Suddenly, without warning, the Husky leaped in the air. There was a metallic clip of teeth and a leap back! Curly was left with her face ripped open from eye to jaw." Holy crap! If that wasn't enough, after bravely fighting back and failing, Curly gets attacked by a group of huskies and dies.

I found Buck to be rather interesting. Despite having so much crap being thrown at him and never catching a real break in the North, Buck never gives up and does whatever he can to adapt and survive in this harsh environment, even if it means doing things like stealing food from one of his masters and killing.

Despite the writing style being much different than the original story, it still really worked. In addition to making things easier for younger readers while still respecting their intelligence, it really did a great job keeping things moving and delivering this consistent intensity, especially during the action scenes. In other words, this writing style is a wonderful match for a story like this.

I'm split on the illustrations. On the one hand, the style does seem like it could fit into a much older version of the story. But on the other hand, all of the dogs look way too similar to one another and had there not been captions for each illustration, I would have no idea which dog was which.

Overall, Great Illustrated Classics' The Call of The Wild was a fantastic adaptation that I respect the heck out of and I wouldn't be too surprised if I decided to re-read it a few times more.

Overall Grade: A-