Rating: 4/5

In Agatha Christie’s timeless classic, 'The Five Little Pigs', the adored detective Hercule Poirot has been asked to solve a murder committed sixteen years ago, by the daughter of the victim and the woman found guilty of his murder, her mother Caroline Crale. After receiving a post humous letter from her mother professing her innocence, Carla seeks the help from Poirot. 

Caroline Crale was convicted of murdering her husband, after a disappointing and poor defence but just as the nursery rhyme says, there were “five little pigs” who could also have done it, each with motive, opportunity and means. We have: 

Philip, the stockbroker that plays the markets with little recent success, was the little pig that went to market; 

Meredith Blake - the herb doctor, and also in love with the convicted woman, was the little pig that stayed at home.

Elsa Greer – the serial divorcée, who had her roast beef and plenty of it. Elsa has an affair with Amyas and confesses her desire to marry him. As everyone knows Elsa gets what she wants. 

Cecilia Williams – the governess, was the little pig who had none; and remained loyal to her friend Caroline Crale. 

Angela Warren (the half sister of Caroline), who cried all the way home. I don’t think this was a fitting title for her character, who I felt was an unfortunate but strong individual. 

Now on the case, Poirot wants to “… genuinely recreate the past, to feel and see the events, to see behind the obvious and to visualise the thoughts and feelings of the actors in the drama.” 

Poirot starts by interviewing each of the 5 suspects and requests that they write a detailed account of everything related to the case. He also questions the prosecution and the defence attorneys of the court case and learns that Caroline Crale didn’t put up much of a fight and accepted the judgement - but why?. However, in true Poirot fashion, he seeks to uncover the motive, opportunity and means of all 5 little pigs !!!. 

I experienced a bit of nostalgia in reading this Agatha Christie book that was written years ago and despite not possessing all the terminology and technology of the modern crime novels, there is so much intelligence in the plots and the structure. Agatha Christie’s novels rarely disappoint. I love how Christie builds the characters and makes everyone the suspect, giving them motive, opportunity and means. It brings out the armchair detective in me as I find myself following the trail of crumbs, the clues, red herrings, subtle observations, and inklings as I pit myself against Poirot to solve the murder first!!! Few detectives are as methodical and forensic as Poirot, and few possess his attention to detail, so I am a huge fan of the character not necessarily the televised characterisation of Poirot.

If I have one criticism then it would be the connection to the nursery rhyme from which the novel takes its title. The book had such a great plot and offered so much promise but despite possessing all the ingredients, the connection to the five little pigs nursery rhyme was weak. I would really like to see authors make better use of themes like the Five Little Pigs, or The Magpie rhyme. Putting that aside this is a superb read.

A little bit of Trivia: The “victim” of Five Little Pigs, Amyas Crale bears the same initials as Agatha Christie’s first husband, Archibald Christie, a serial cheater. After discovering another one of her husband’s flings, Agatha Christie vanishes for days to come to terms with her marital breakdown and stays in a hotel under the name of Mrs.Tressa Neele” (the surname of her husband’s lover).