Rating: 5/5

Noir In The Library Of America -- 1950s

The books published in the Library of America series have the goal of capturing American writing and the American experience in all their variety. Towards this end, the LOA has published several volumes of noir novels, with some volumes by individual authors and other volumes collections of works. In 1997, the LOA published two volumes of the latter type with the first volume including six noir novels by as many authors written during the 1930's and 1940's; and the second volume, which I am reviewing here, including five novels by five authors written during the 1950's. Robert Polito, a scholar and writer of noir, selected the books and provided biographical sketches of each of the authors included. The writers lived fascinating, unusual lives and most of them might well have been characters in their own novels. The two volumes are an excellent source for readers wanting to explore the best of noir literature.

Noir derived in part from cheap pulp and detective magazines. Many of the novels were first published in paperback editions with gaudy, suggestive covers and were not expected to be of lasting interest. By the time the novels in this collection were published, the genre had a substantial history and was in danger of becoming formulaic and stereotyped. Yet the novels in this collection have their own distinctive characters. The six novels in the opening LOA volume were set in different places, but all took place during the Depression, a fitting period for a dark, crime novel. Each of the five novels included in this volume is set in the 1950's following two major wars. The 1950's differed markedly from the Depression-era, and these novels, in their different settings, have the ambience of their era.

Jim Thompson's (1906 -- 1977) "The Killer inside Me" , written in 1952 is among the best in this collection. Set in a west Texas town called Central City, this book is a study of the internal life of a psychopathic killer, Lou Ford, 29, who narrates the story in the first person. Ford is an apparently mild-mannered and dull-witted deputy sheriff, but he is in fact highly intelligent and a brutal killer. The book delves insightfully into the sources of Ford's compulsion to kill. Thompson's sharply written novel captures Ford's growing sense of guilt and his deterioration into illusion and madness as he struggles to escape detection for his crimes.

The longest novel in this collection, Patricia Highsmith's (1921 -- 1995) "The Talented Mr. Ripley" (1955) is set primarily in post-WW II Italy and shows the strong influence of Henry James' classic novel "The Ambassadors". As in James' story, a young man is sent to Europe in the hopes of persuading someone he knows to return to the United States and to assume a life of responsibility. At the behest and expense of a wealthy businessman, a ne'r do well named Tom Ripley travels to Italy to retrieve the man's son, Dickie Greenleaf, from his dreams of becoming an artist. Ripley murders Dickie instead and tries to evade detection from shifting his identity back and forth between himself and his victim. Ripley is smooth and imaginative in this modernistic story of double identity.

Charles Willeford (1919-- 1988) had a long career as a writer and his 1956 novel "Pick-up" is an early effort. This book is set in the bars and rooming houses of San Francisco and includes as its chief theme a short love affair between a frustrated artist Harry Jordan, 32, and a woman he meets, Helen Meredith,33. Jordan narrates this story of loneliness and drifting, of city streets and suicide. The book also has a racial theme not far from the surface.

My favorite work in this collection was David Goodis' novel "Down There" (1956), which became a movie, "Shoot the Piano Player". Set during a cold Philadelphia winter, "Down There" tells the story of Eddie Lynn who makes a subsistence living playing the piano in a bar called Harriet's Hut. The book captures the atmosphere of lonely streets, shattered dreams, the power of love, family, and music. The LOA has recently published a volume devoted to Goodis (1917 --1967) in his own right with five additional novels.

The final novel in this collection, "The Real Cool Killers" (1959) by Chester Himes is the only one that is a who-done-it. Set in Harlem, the book centers upon two African American detectives, Coffin Ed Johnson and Grave Jones, who investigate the killing of a white man, Ulysses Galen, who frequents the area's streets and bars. A street gang of African American young men also plays a major role in the story. The story features sadomasochistic sex, sharp dialogue and social observations, and many surprising turns of plot. The primary character of the book, however, is Harlem itself. Himes (1909 -- 1984) wrote this book while living in Paris where his works were considerably better received than in the United States.

While the books in this collection all have a noir atmosphere and involve crime, each has its own individuality. These books are fast-paced, tense, and show understanding of place and character. They deserve their place in a series devoted to the American experience and American literature. I was pleased to have the opportunity to get to know these books in this volume and in the LOA companion volume. 

Robin Friedman