Rating: 5/5

On this second reading of The Aerialist, I was even more impressed than the first time, which was a few years ago. Long enough to have forgotten many of the details of what happened to our hero Gary: from how and why he joins a circus to how and why his life changes because of the decision to go ahead and walk with the elephants that first day. He did not run away to join the circus: he and the show were both in the same place at a crucial moment in Gary's life and he went along mostly because it felt like the right thing to do at the time, and he was escaping a situation he did not want to or know how to deal with.

I like books about circus life, and I like books about people becoming who they are meant to be. I don't mind gritty and sometimes gory details in such books because grit and gore are unfortunately part of life. Although I do get annoyed whenever any author uses the mating of animals to highlight sexual tension between a man and a woman. I thought the detailed collecting scene with the horses could have been scaled back quite a bit and the point would have still been made. But other than that and a bit of fuzziness in a couple of the later chapters,this book was wonderful for me. 

Gary has been a drifter most of his life (we learn why as the story progresses) and he is actually surprised to discover that completely by chance he has found a place where for the first time he feels he belongs. He learns to care, then learns to dream. The sense of the story is that of actually being in the circus, not sitting in the stands watching the acts, but with the show people: with the 24-Hour Man who drives ahead and marks the route in big red arrows so the troupe will know the way to the next town; with the performers behind the curtain waiting for the grand entrance and
dealing with that peeing elephant (what rotten timing!); with the 'butchers' as they sell cotton floss and toys in the stands during a show. And most of all being on the wire: learning to walk it,learning to trust it, learning to believe in what you can do up there, learning to love it. It is as if he lives only for these ten minutes a day, and this brief time gives him what he needs to withstand all that is not these ten minutes.

I had totally forgotten about Ben, the puppy Gary was given about halfway through the book. Ben became the other surprising constant in Gary's life, since he had not even known he wanted and needed a dog until that moment. Ben is a subtle presence in the pages of the story but vitally important to Gary right to the very end of the book. Not to mention being a bit of a character himself: But the dog has never found a way to talk sense to cats. Elephants can be dealt with, but the dog finds horses and cats hopeless. 

Gary is quite introspective, more than I remembered from my first reading, and this makes him seem more of a real person. He worked very hard to understand himself and his world, and to try to live the life he discovered he wanted. Whether he succeeds or not is up to the reader to decide.