Rating: 4/5

What a strange and memorable character is Laura Blundy, and what a remarkable novel!

We join our antiheroine in the febrile, stinking murk of Victorian London (the sewer system not yet built, the streets awash with filth and disease). And what an introduction it is: the first thing Laura tells us is that she has murdered her husband, Ewan. ‘It takes several goes. But I have surprise on my side.’ The beginning of the second chapter is no less arresting: ‘My name is Laura Blundy and Ewan was the man who took off my leg.’ Such is the way of this book. It’s propelled by Laura’s voice, at once blunt and sly.

  I’m not dangerous, I said with as serious a face as I could manage and he laughed, but it wasn’t that funny because I was lying. I was dangerous.

Laura’s story is told in non-chronological order. Each part of her life – the gilded childhood from which she is abruptly cast into poverty; the years spent walking the streets and scratching a living; the accident in which she loses a leg; her marriage to Ewan; her meetings with lover Billy – is broken up into small chunks, and all of them are scattered piecemeal throughout the book. Think of it like this: it’s a completed jigsaw that’s been flipped onto the floor (perhaps in the struggle that ensues when a woman aims a dog-shaped paperweight at her husband’s flame-haired head), and you have to crawl around gathering up the pieces to reassemble it. There are tantalising glimpses of the bigger picture, but what it really depicts is not clear until it’s complete. And at the end you quite want to upset the table yourself and put it back together all over again.

There is an irresistibly horrible charge to much of the narrative due to a possible connection between Laura and Billy, one that’s hinted at from the start. It was (partly) this that kept me turning the pages, even as I feared the outcome. Does she know what we (think we) know? Which is worse: the idea that she does, and has engineered all this deliberately, or that she doesn’t, and we’re going to have to watch her realise? The thing is, I was so caught up in wondering about that, I didn’t see the real revelation coming. When it hit, I was stunned.

Not only did the ending of Laura Blundy make me want to reread the whole book immediately, but the more I think about it, the more I love it. It’s both a brilliantly effective piece of historical fiction and an uncanny triumph of ventriloquism. Atmosphere, character, voice, plot, structure – every element is strong; they all work together perfectly and to powerful effect. Read if you enjoy transgressive fiction and unreliable narrators.

TinyLetter | Linktree