Rating: 4/5

A well researched account of the crime wave that swept across the Midwestern United States in the early years of the Great Depression. In my opinion interesting for it's look at the last gasp of the colorful, daring, individualistic, outlaw criminal class. 

By the early 1930's the world was changing. For better or worse the United States Federal government was becoming more centralized and beginning to control greater resources - quickly surpassing what state and local governments could call on. The population was becoming more regulated (income tax, social security,voter registration rolls, driver licenses), connected (telephones, automobiles, telegraphs, radio) and urban. 

The 19th century was fading away and the fast moving motor bandits ,like Dillinger, were actually artifacts from the previous century. They had a brief, but glorious comeback in the late Twenties and early Thirties for a number of reasons. Technology (automobiles &amp; automatic weapons) gave them the ability to move rapidly and overwhelm the poorly equipped/trained/paid police officers of that time. The laws restricted the ability of the various state and local police agencies to pursue across different jurisdictional boundaries and ,with the onset of the Depression, they found many sympathizers within the population who would aid them. Oh and organized crime also allowed them access to it's considerable resources. 

More than a blow by blow account of the F.B.I.'s pursuit of the motor bandits Bryan Burrough provides a look at a transitional time in America's past. Now it's true that change is always happening, but there are moments in history when the changes are almost quantum leaps and the Great Depression was one of those moments. 

In the early thirties Americans were becoming used to being part of a bigger, centrally organized society. It had been happening since the Civil War, but it accelerated with World War One and then the New Deal under F.D.R. made it essential. It was vital that Americans felt like they could look to the Federal government for many different things. The maintenance of law and order was one of the biggies. The bandits were too popular with many in the population. They were making a laughing stock of the police and undermining the authority of the government. The New Deal required people to believe in the competence of the government and it's employees. The bandits had to be brought down.. Hoover wanted the job and it was handed to him and his F.B.I.

Burrough provides a blow by blow account and at times it gets rather dry, but I like the fact that he also shows a pivotal time in the United States and writes about the changes.He did not set out to provide a pulp-fiction account. He didn't write and episode for Gangbusters. As a police officer I could see the beginning of modern law enforcement as I read the book. It's a shaky start and at times the F.B.I.'s actions are bungling and frustrating. It was a very steep learning curve and the agents were starting with no foundation under their feet. But through luck (some of it dumb), hard work, the growing realization that they had greater resources and figuring out how to employ those resources (to include passing Federal laws which resulted in the Mob cutting them off from assistance) ,and the bandits eventually making too many mistakes, the Bureau and different police agencies got most of the bandits. 

Burrough shows what law enforcement is about. Much of it is tedious, boring and requires a slavish attention to detail. Occasionally it is broken up by moments of violence and terror and humor. It's a well written account. It isn't sensationalized, it isn't a character assassination of J. Edgar Hoover and it isn't a fluff piece. It's solid, well-researched and intelligently written.