Rating: 5/5

I am proud of my heart alone, it is the sole source of everything, all our strength, happiness and misery. All the knowledge I possess everyone else can acquire, but my heart is all my own.

If one doesn’t drown oneself in its indulgent water, sorrow can deepen, can humanize and connect a person to humanity. Werther realizes this idea at different levels of self-indulgence, self-destruction and emotional dissipation. He is dreamy, sensitive, emotional, vulnerable, very romantic, made for love, to the cost of dissolution of the self. Such sensitivity in fact renders him extremely vulnerable, weakened by the power of his own emotions, because the world as constituted is not especially kind to the sensitive nature. Such a nature in this sense is not made for the world and has to be somewhat artificially (but nevertheless necessarily) re-trained for adaptation to it. A misfit has to be turned into something of a workable fit. But for Werther, a painful detour towards self destruction comes naturally in the course of living than the simulation of a personality that is not true for him. 

  Sometimes I don't understand how another can love her, is allowed to love her, since I love her so completely myself, so intensely, so fully, grasp nothing, know nothing, have nothing but her.

Werther’s sentimentality is obsessive and even morbid at times. The grief is intense and so over involving that someone just might need a moment to disconnect from the atmosphere of such melancholic dankness. The prose over spills with painful lovelorn sentiments that ooze from his heart. But then this pain is as real and as acutely felt. Werther with all his vulnerabilities, his idealism, his belief in the utmost goodness of human nature and his disdain for worldly ambition is not really made for this world. He is that sentimental loner who lives in the images of art and literature. He poetizes nature, intersperses it with memories of love, separation, melancholy, nostalgia and transient happiness that speckle the mountains, the stream, the trees, the wind and the snow. Fragments of his being that are scattered all through. Nature stimulates him, mirrors his passions, and embraces the immensity of his grief. It is the only place he truly belongs to. One realizes how hard it must have really been for him. It makes his tale a sorrowful litany of all those hopeless wanderers tormented by their own passionate nature, who want a escape from the grim impassiveness of this world they live in. An ode to all sentimental misfits, hopeless romantics, caged by their passions, incapacitated by their longings, falling apart at the seams of a world which harbors antipathy or at most a polite indifference towards them.