Rating: 4/5

Imagine a life where both your parents are dead, everybody around you is trying to help in the way you do not need, and your new caretaker knows nothing about you and is forcing their problems onto you. That is the life of 14 year old Rosalind in the comedic tragedy “Donorboy,” by Brendan Halpin. There is not much information about the setting; we know that it is in modern times and most events take place in Sean’s, (her biological father and new caretaker), apartment, her high school, and partly in a New York museum. From an event that Rosalind goes to where she travels just fifty miles to Fitchburg; I can infer that they live in Massachusetts. This is a really good book, however, I think in some parts it has failed to meet its potential; the best example being its writing style. It is written completely in texts, journals, and other communication methods; that is unique and allows the author to express the characters more. On the other hand, it limits descriptions and makes it hard to figure out the story in some parts.

	The author has the ability express what the characters are feeling, since what the characters write is more personal. In the beginning of the book, Rosalind write in her “grief journal,” a journal her therapist/counselor is making her write despite her protests. On page five, Rosalind writes in her grief journal, “You didn’t read it, Denise, you just asked if I did it and how it made me feel and I really want to smack your f***ing face when you ask me stupid s**t like that or when I tell you how much I hate you and…” That is not something that is easy just to write into a traditional book; however, it tells us that Rosalind is angry and also shows it. This is extremely helpful to the reader to feel a connection with the character; knowing what they are saying/thinking in private as opposed to just saying, “...she said frustratedly.” To elaborate on what I first mentioned; Rosalind knew that her therapist, Denise, was not going to read the journal so whatever she wrote would be unfiltered and the author can accurately portray what somebody in that position would say. In traditional reads, that has to come occasionally and breaks immersion for its duration; this does not.

	Now, there is also a downside to this style; it can come off as over-the-top when trying to describe something and leaves out entire elements of the plot. On page 89, Rosalind describes her time at a family bonding day with Sean and another family and she writes, “Corny bonding day with Sean and his dorky friend was okay, I guess, but why do gym teachers always have those gigantic guts?...And his wife is this good-looking woman just like on commercials where some fat bonehead always has a pretty wife.” This is a blatant example of the author describing two new characters; and it is hard to say if I got a good image in my head from it. Also, it seemed out-of-place, like a side note, and it threw me out of the story. This happens several times throughout the chapter and is even worse in Rosalind’s texts with her friend Kate; where the author writes with horrendous grammar. I can understand some since they are just texts, but almost everything is misspelled or abbreviated; in all my years as a teen, I have never seen such atrocious grammar in communication. That might just be me though; either way it comes off as being too “try hard” to sound like a teen texting.

Overall, “Donorboy” has a fairly exclusive writing style and relevant subject matter makes for a great read and I would recommend to a friend. However, I would warn them that at parts, it seems like the author is trying too hard to appeal to teens and the setting building is lackluster.