Rating: 4/5

I enjoyed reading this, though I should frame this review with a disclaimer that I've never read a single original Sherlock Holmes story. I would say that I mostly enjoyed this because I love The Phantom of the Opera (practically all versions except for the silent movie, which I've never seen in its entirety). I found this particulary unique to see "actual", more human versions of the characters I'm familiar with—Christine, Raoul, Madame Giry, even the Phantom himself. As this is the first book in the "further adventures of Sherlock Holmes" series, and the first time I've ever read anything by this author, I wasn't sure what the dislike for Dr. Watson was, or if it was simply a plot device, since Holmes' cousin Henry accompanies Holmes on this Paris adventure, rather than Watson. At first I thought I might not like the "OC" (if Henry is in fact an OC), but then I found that he actually complements Holmes in a decent way—whereas Holmes can be very cold, calculating, and even cruel, Henry is always if nothing incredibly human—he's terrified of rats, he hates going into the deep, dank cellars of the Paris Opera house, and he's so lovelorn that he can't get his potential suitor Michelle out of his thoughts. 

I think I especially loved that Holmes had extreme disdain for everyone except the most repulsive characters—the Phantom, Erik and Madame Giry, though he did show tenderness and concern for Christine Daae, in the beginning and middle, at least. Holmes is entranced by the Phantom's beautiful violin playing, and is enchanted by the rather large, unfasionable and gruff Madame Giry. He also silences and scolds the young, entitled and abrasive Raoul several times while he and Henry are sneaking around with the Viscount, while following Christine. Needless to say, Raoul is never happy being "put in his place", but Holmes doesn't care. Holmes does the same thing which the Opera House's new managers, which neither appreciate. 

The thing that I might criticize about this novel was the lack of action in some places. Sometimes it felt like Holmes and Henry were nothing more than interloppers in the Phantom of the Opera story, breaking off to do their own investigations, or following or interracting with the original characters. The Phantom threatens Holmes with notes but he never makes a move to hurt or endanger Holmes or Henry (probably which reinforces Holmes' theory that Erik is not the real enemy). Though, I suppose there was danger in the final chapters that definitely echoed the original book's climax. 

The happy ending. I enjoyed it, maybe because Erik is treated as an even more sympathetic character in this novel than in any of the other versions. Yes, we are made to feel for him at the end, of course—a genius with a beautiful voice, a beautiful soul with the ugly face that's kept him from "the joys of the flesh", as the musical puts it. But with this novel, we are made to feel for him throughout because Holmes cares about him, enough to choose him over all others, enough to want to help him escape though everyone else, including Erik himself (except Christine) wishes his death. Enough to convince him that there's a beautiful blind woman nearly his equal in musical genius and kindness who, because of her mixed heritage in Victorian England, has also never known "the joys of the flesh". It was kind of a very lovely ending. 

Also, I had all of the songs from the musical in my head the whole time while reading this.