Rating: 4/5

Here is my original review from the San Francisco Chronicle in May 1990:

The best thing about ''In a Father's Place,'' Christopher Tilghman's wonderful collection of seven stories, is that it does not really work together as an impeccably fitted whole.

Tilghman writes with precision, grace and an honesty that threatens to topple his astonishingly balanced storytelling. Yet he understands that a slightly mismatched batch of stories, as this is, has considerable rewards.

The title story, ''In a Father's Place,'' shares with other stories an attention to the strains and sacrifices in the relationship between fathers and sons, particularly as the sons grow into adulthood.

But in this story, set like some others along the Chesapeake Bay, the son is a young writer at work on an angry, score-settling novel about his father. This is a clear tip-off from Tilghman that he's mining the vein of autobiography.

For the most part, this unabashed display of writing what you know works beautifully. Tilghman lets the stories flow from him, rather than trying to settle scores through his stories. ''On the Rivershore,'' which opens the book, appears to grow from a genuine childhood memory that paints all too indelible a portrait of a father as a compromised and unadmirable figure, but the story's origins matter not at all.

Tilghman's willingness to work this close to the perilous territory of autobiographical fiction stands as both a bracing show of nerve and a notable accomplishment. He is obviously writing a little about himself when a male character, as his fleeing wife puts it, has ''powers'' -- a deep empathetic connection with the woman he loves, one that enables him to feel what she is feeling, right up to knowing what city she has chosen as her escape from the suffocating demands of motherhood.

''She tries not to see what she's seeing, to see any landmarks through her own eyes, because Grant will see them too,'' Tilghman writes in ''Hole in the Day.'' ''She tries not to say the name of this city, because Grant will hear it. When she married him she didn't ask for this, except maybe by wanting something different as a teenager, something with mystery. . . . Grant is so thin and blond that people think he's nothing but a kid, until they look him in the eye.''

To follow this thread a little further, Tilghman has the powers that any imaginative writer must have, and he's also not afraid to ask us to look him in the eye. The only false note this approach creates comes in the title story, when the young man's controlling girlfriend, whom the father cannot help but detest, emerges as a devotee of Jacques Derrida and deconstruction -- the inspiration, she loudly announces, for the novel the son is writing.

(The last story in the collection, ''Mary in the Mountains,'' really seems written with deconstruction as inspiration, with results not as abhorrent as expected. But the presence of deconstruction still feels like a kind of knot in the fine grain of the book, a knot that has not been completely milled out.)

The sense that this collection is a kind of reaction to intellectual fashion comes through in the delight with which the working-class lives of virtually all the men in the book are drawn. Most have jobs like Stan Harris' in ''A Gracious Rain.''

''Stanley worked as a machinist at the Black &amp; Decker plant in Easton, and often came home with feathery spirals of stainless steel caught in his hair,'' Tilghman writes. ''He knew enough to appreciate this job, in a plant that had landed as if from nowhere in a played-out corn field.''

Tilghman wants to illuminate the poetry of working people's lives, and he wants to use this poetry to make a point about the universality of all our concerns. In the end, he seems like a wonderfully versatile musician who can not only sing ballads and the occasional up-tempo number, but also can play some serious, wild blues guitar.

A set that offered less diversity, and fewer risks, might be more satisfying overall, but it wouldn't grab our attention in as charming a way, and it wouldn't speak so encouragingly about the prospects for Tilghman's next work.