Rating: 2/5

While I loved Rosie Thomas ‘Iris and Ruby’ I should know by now that not every author is gifted with a Midas touch. “If my father loved me” can be summed up in one word—a drag. It could have been much shorter, it could have been more exciting, but instead it dragged on and on for the first 250 pages before it gathered some momentum to become an interesting read. 

Sadie is a divorced mother of two, living with her troublesome son Jack and her twenty year old daughter Lola. She is estranged from her father Ted, who was a philandering adulterer and didn’t really care much for the child Sadie, especially after her mother died. Her life was spent hoping to gain his favor but alas! The man was besotted with his profession as a perfume maker, and his business ideas that never materialized. 

When he finally dies, she realizes that she barely knew the man and sets about retracing the lost years of her childhood while dealing with her own problems, her friends and their families and her son’s adolescent tantrums. When the little boy develops a comfortable rapport with one of Ted's longlost lovers, Sadie finds herself on unfamiliar ground, fighting a losing battle. 

Is Jack just like her? Is her relationship with him a reflection of the unrequited love she wanted as a child? Are her relationships with any and every man doomed to fail because of her unfortunate rapport with her father? And why should she care anymore? 

The storyline meanders in some places, making the subplots seem surreal and out of place, like underdeveloped stories of their own. The crux of the story could have been shortened and simplified, but the author chose to take the longer more torturous route. There are many shorter references that I wish were more detailed: Mel’s relationship with her father, Penny and Evelyn, Jack and Audrey. 

However, that was not to be. 

This one falls way below expectations. However, if you have not read any other book by Thomas, you may want to check this one out or give it a total miss. You wouldn’t be missing anything great!