Rating: 3/5

The writing is purpler than an enflamed sunset, but one can see why Gordon Merrick’s lurid, sex-and-histrionic soaked gay potboiler spent months on The New York Times bestseller list when unleashed on an unsuspecting world in 1970.

I read this reissue from Open Road Media with guilty pleasure, furtively in instalments over an extended period, as it is such a heady concoction of heightened lust and drama that the book threatens to overwhelm one’s sensibilities. (How different this is compared to contemporary, post-AIDS, gender and socio-politically-correct gay lit).

Some Goodreads readers have commented on the illicit joy of discovering Merrick in their schooldays. Well, if I had got my grimy paws on this book while in my teens, I would have bolted out of the closet as if attached to a springboard.

Tucked away among the melodramatic excesses of the plot is a careful account of a young gay man’s sexual edification. There is even straight sex, interestingly told from the (rather squeamish) point of a gay man. And cock-biting. But let’s not dwell on that too much.

While Merrick’s racial and gender politics leave a lot to be desired, Peter does has a fling with a black man (“ooee white boy”) he meets in a den of inquity in Harlem. It is especially interesting that even in this pre-gay rights era, Merrick almost instinctively links gay equality to universal equality in terms of both race and gender.

Such lofty ambitions aside, this is probably the closest we will ever get to a gay version of a Jackie Collins novel. I think a lot of readers will share in poor Peter’s cock-struck introduction to the vicissitudes of gay life.

What also struck me is that, despite the novel’s innocence, a lot of the relationship problems that Charlie and Peter bump into are as relevant today as they were in the 1970s. In particular, the character of Walter is beautifully evoked, lurking behind his paintings and his wealth, living vicariously through the twinks and tricks he surrounds himself with.

Some critics have argued that Merrick (perhaps unwittingly) instigated the cult of narcissism that continues to plague gay identity to this very day. While it is perhaps true that Charlie and Peter are too much of a perfect poster couple, it is so refreshing to read about such a couple, and to root for them through all their, er, ups and downs. And to have a happy ending! Golly, as Peter would say.