P. 40
(after her 1st husband had thrown her paintings in the garbage)
“And I didn’t mean to let it matter, I thought if I didn’t let it, it wouldn’t. I didn’t know that there is a place deep inside where one’s real life goes on, much like an underground river in parched, dry country, which flows whether one knows about it or not. Although it was such a blow I couldn’t even respond, having been knocked to my knees metaphorically, it was a blow that I would eventually find had nonetheless left a lasting wound.”
P. 65
“the world is more wonderful than any of us have dared to guess, as all great poets have been telling us since the invention of poetry. To discover these truths we don’t need to scale Mount Everest or white-water raft the Colorado or take up skydiving. We need only go for walks.”
P. 105
“More and more I am coming to believe that our alienation from the natural world is at the root of much that has gone so wrong in the modern world, and that if Nature has anything to teach us at all, her first lesson is in humility.”
P. 172
“The older I get and the more I see of the world, the more I understand the extent of, and the more sorrowful I feel about, the subjugation of my gender: about how men abuse women, the best men, with the best motives, by completely missing the point, by failing to support in even trivial ways, by expecting us all to be mothers to them whether we are or not, in short, in small ways, day after day, century after century, denying us our full humanity.”
P. 186
“I did not think our subjugation would end until each of us were able to say from the depth of our soul, I am a woman, meaning, I am half the universe, I am made in the image of the goddess, as men at least for the last five thousand years have been saying, I am made in the image of God.”
P. 213
“Why else, I thought, but because, whether we say it out loud or not, or to ourselves or not, or to each other or not, we all know, we all understand in our hearts that women are the soul of the world.”

Thanks for the recommend Fran