Rating: 5/5

There are a lot of misconceptions about the circus. I’m not nearly experienced enough in the circus life to know all about it, and a lot of people will tell you that you need to be born into it to understand it. For this reason, and a few others, performers born into the circus tend to be a bit withdrawn from people of ordinary backgrounds. Perhaps it is because they have been called a “carny” or a freak one too many times, or simply because circus life is hard to understand. I won’t pretend I know about living with a circus, my experience only goes so far. But in The Aerialist, Richard Schmitt attempts to explain to outsiders how the circus works.
This is a very philosophical novel. If you look very closely, you will find that the events in the plot reflect not only the direction the book takes, but a transformation a person undergoes. By the end, the main character is an entirely different person. 
Gary was a very compelling character. His voice spoke of truth and humanity, meaning, what humans do. How they act. Being exposed to the circus life, his view of people themselves changed, and he found that he became one of them.
After running away from home, Gary found a mediocre job at an auto garage with his friend, Dave. When his car gets stranded, he goes wandering for help and finds a magnificent white train. It belongs to a circus. Before he knows what he is doing, Gary signs up as a bullhand (elephant excrement remover), one of the lowest positions in the circus. Leaving his old life behind, he and his few possessions board the train that will travel across the continent. Gary adjusts to circus life, and in his spare time, he begins practicing tightwire on a small rig. The bosses don’t like when workers practice circus skills but nevertheless Gary continues practicing and improving. Eventually, he leaves the circus and settles elsewhere.
But the circus won’t let him leave. It calls to him. Gary begins practicing with a Romanian man named Tino. They perfect their partner highwire act and join a new circus, which travels around Europe, I believe. After a while, Tino has a terrible accident and cannot continue performing. Gary decides to leave as well, and marries a woman and has a daughter. But still, the circus never quite leaves him. He will receive unexpected calls from old friends and his thoughts often drift to memories under the tent.
At the circus camp I went to for a few summers, there was a joke. “Circus is intense.” Get it, in tents? And circus is very intense. It is the most physically demanding thing I have ever done and it also requires immense amounts of creativity to properly please the audience. How fitting, that word: intense. Because it adequately describes Richard Schmitt’s The Aerialist. There is no sugar coating anything. There is no glamorous fake idea that everyone is always one big happy family. That is not a smile on the performer’s face; it is barely more than a grimace because of an injury they don’t want you to see. Don’t think circus isn’t painful. Have you ever tried showering with a fabric burn? Not to mention the rips you get on your hands that spurt blood. At least you get calluses. Because aerialists (and gymnasts) are very proud of their bruises, burns, etc. Some call them battle scars.
I like that this book gets gritty and shows the negative side of circus life. It shows truth, in that circus can leave you with awful memories. Here is an example: “A burlap sack of water balloons, that’s the sound a human body makes hitting cement from forty feet up, that’s the sound my mom made when she hit. It’s an unnatural smack.” (Page 96) I’ve never experienced something quite so traumatic, but if something even slightly bad happens, it can fill you with fear and trying it again will be very difficult to do emotionally. 
A note of caution: there is a very disturbing scene in this book entitled “Ben”. It is short, but animal lovers, or those easily disturbed or whatever, may wish to skip it. Don’t worry; it isn’t a direct part of the plot so you won’t miss anything.
Another thing I like about this book is how the chapters seem to be interwoven short stories. Gary definitely takes a journey, and each chapter is an individual but essential part of that journey.
I can’t tell you how much I love this book. It makes me feel happy that I am different, and happy that I am a (very small) part of a wonderful thing. The Aerialist was published in 2000 and I am so sad that the author hasn’t published any other books (yet). His writing style is so phenomenal and the story is so vivid and simultaneously real, and otherworldly. It is a very well-presented glimpse into circus life for outsiders, or even those people like me who only do recreational circus. The Aerialist is by far one of the best books I have read. Ever.