Rating: 4/5

The World Turned Upside Down
	Like all teenagers, Rosalind Butterfield lived an average life in Boston with friends and two mothers—until a car accident kills her two moms and turns Rosalind’s whole world upside down. Sean Cassidy, an inexperienced father and young lawyer, takes custody of Rosalind. But despite the issues at home, Rosalind’s grades begin to slip as she becomes badly influenced by a friend at school. Because of this, Sean finds himself defending Rosalind at an expulsion hearing after Rosalind broke the nose of a classmate who made a joke about her mom. Despite their differences, Sean understands Rosalind’s grief as he has had his share. Entirely told through journal entries, emails, and messages, Sean and Rosalind are in for a wild ride.
	From the beginning, Rosalind Butterfield, the main character, has a hard time coping with the death of her two moms. As a result of this, Rosalind’s grades drop drastically and begins to hate her friends and comes badly influenced by a new friend. Rosalind then begins to smoke and even got drunk once. After this, Sean defends Rosalind at an expulsion hearing after she punched a classmate. After this event, Rosalind becomes to be more appreciative of Sean and begins to talk to him more and her relationship with Sean begins to strengthen. Overall, Rosalind’s 
characteristics of strength and her change throughout the story classify her as a round character.
	In my opinion, Donorboy portrays a realistic coming-of-age novel that is all too rare in today’s world. Furthermore, the book takes a creative approach by telling the story entirely through emails, journal entries, and other messages. However, this form of storytelling can make the reader confused at times as it is hard to imagine the exact scene and the character that is speaking. Brendan Halpin, the author, could also give the reader more background information about the characters instead of jumping right into the book. But overall, I would give this book 4/5 stars and would recommend this book to readers looking for a unique reading experience.