Rating: 3/5

"I like people who stick together and enjoy their marriage and go on enjoying it." So says one of the Beresfords' friends, and I agree. The chief charm of Postern of Fate is seeing dear Tommy and Tuppence once more. Unlike Miss Marple and Poirot, who start out elderly and retired (respectively) in the 1920/30s and age very little for the rest of Dame Agatha's career, Tommy and Tuppence age believably over the years. The "young adventurers" were introduced in Christie's second novel, The Secret Adversary (1922) so it is fitting that she wrote one last novel about them at the end of her career, having already penned a last one for Poirot (Curtain) and Miss Marple (Sleeping Murder). The Beresfords are *exactly* as I would have hoped--unlike Curtain, which broke my heart by having Poirot so elderly and ill, Postern of Fate ends cheerfully, with T&amp;T in their lovely country home with their children and grandchildren (and dog!) around them, and a new mystery successfully solved. 

For some reason, Postern of Fate has a poor reputation; I actually dreaded reading it because I had heard such negative reviews. I'm happy to say I was greatly relieved. Dame Agatha, in the last few years of her life in the 1970s, wrote a couple of novels that were strange (Passenger to Frankfurt) or weak (Elephants Can Remember), but Postern of Fate returns us to classic Agatha style. It's true that the novel could use a good editor; I seem to recall that by this time Dame Agatha's eyesight was not good, and so she was dictating. We are reading her thoughts as she spoke them. Therefore, there are an abundance of the "well, you know" type of tics common in verbal speech but usually removed in writing. But all that could easily have been tightened up, and the actual premise is wonderfully intriguing: a clue in a children's book points to a murder of long ago and presages more murders to come. Clues dot T&amp;T's quintessential English country house and its garden, and there's a tie back to their earlier careers as British intelligence agents. The ending is not one of Dame Agatha's epic shockers or anything, but by the time I got there I had enjoyed myself enough not to mind. I didn't really have enough clues to have solved it, but that was better than solving it early and with ease, as I did with Elephants. I would say that By the Pricking of My Thumbs is my favorite T&amp;T novel, but this is a pleasant encore performance.

And so ends my Year of Agatha, which was actually closer to 18 months. I found previously undiscovered gems, as well as some I may not read again. I may work on the Westmacotts at some point, and I want to go back and edit some of these, but for now I'm going to stop at 80 reviews, having experienced all the detective fiction the Queen of Crime ever wrote. The 81st review is my own book, a study of P. D. James!