Rating: 2/5

Sometimes, on festive days, stripped divers, small and bony, sit or stand on the sea wall, waiting to be asked to dive into the oil, water. Sometimes there is a little band - Indian drums, Western trumpets - attached to some private religious ceremony. Night deepens; the ships' lights in the harbour grow brighter; the Taj Mahal lobby glitters behind its glass wall. The white crowd - with the occasional red or green or yellow of a sari - melts away; and then around the Gateway and the hotel only the sleepers and the beggars remain, enough at any time for a quick crowd, in this area where hotels and dimly lit apartment buildings and stores and offices and small factories press against one another, and where the warm air, despite the sea, always feel overbreathed. The poor are needed as hands, as labour; but the city was not built to accommodate them. One report says that 100,000 people sleep on the pavements of Bombay; but this figure seems low. And the beggars: are there only 20,000 in Bombay, as one newspaper article says, or are there 70,000, the figure given on another day Whatever the number, it is now felt that there are too many. The very idea of beggary, precious to Hindus as religious theatre, a demonstration of the workings of karma, a reminder of one's duty to oneself and one's future lives, has been devalued. And the Bombay beggar, displaying his unusual mutilations (inflicted in childhood by the beggar-master who had acquired him, as proof of the young beggar's sins in a previous life), now finds, unfairly, that he provokes annoyance rather than awe. The beggars themselves, forgetting their Hindu function, also pester tourists; and the tourists misinterpret the whole business, seeing in the beggary of the few the beggary of all. The beggars have become a nuisance and a disgrace. By becoming too numerous they have lost their place in the Hindu system and have no claim on anyone.
- A new claim on the land : The skycrapers and The Chawls (India : A wounded civilisation) by VS Naipul
.
.
Can someone suggest ways to review this book when I am not an Indian, not even living in India (i did go to South India but only for 5 days which made me a tourist hence my experience were limited) and experiencing all the problems and difficulties about India that were described in the book. We are seeing India via lenses of V.S Naipul and let me tell you, it aint pretty. It is almost (80%) of India Bashing and this is something that i did not expect from the book. I was expecting some discourse about India Ancient Civilisation, History, Past Inventions instead what i got is more like a whiny analysis why India will never progress or why India will stay the same (outdated, caste infested nation) post Ghandi and Ms Ghandi death. My patience was really thin that i almost wanted to DNF this book but i persevered until the final page. I have to say the only part that i love is when he dissected the Indian literature written by R.K Narayan and connected it to Hindu way of life but that itself is just 1/8 of the contents featured in the book. If any Indian (that lived in India) that have read this book and wanted to share your insights on this book, i would very much appreciate your input. V.S Naipul stated in the book : India is for me a difficult country. It isn't my home and cannot be my home; and yet I cannot reject it or be indifferent to it; I cannot travel only for the sights. I am at once too close and too far. This statement at least showed that He did not deny his Indian heritage but this book did not even demonstrate it. All he got is just a contemptuous remarks and endless negativity towards a country he visited in a short while. I would like to end my review with what Jose Rizal wrote in ‘Noli Me Tangere’ : “ … and to hate one own’s country is the greatest of misfortunes”. Thats what i felt when i finish this book - pity that Naipul cannot see India beyond his bitterness and (maybe) complexity that he had with the country. I know every country has its own problems and for its incompetence to resolve it, one deserved criticism for it but this book is just not it (at least in my opinion). Putting this 2 stars simply because i learned something despite him cherry picking on spirituality and race consciousness. Overall, this was painful and not so satisfying reading to say the least.