Rating: 1/5

Terrible. I know that Christie was fond of recycling plot elements. I know many prolific authors forget what they said about a character (age etc) from one volume of a series to the next. But even for Christie this is hack-work. Ugh. 

At first it was nice to see Tommy and Tuppence as characters that age and evolve like real people. After all, Christie wrote Poirot as a man nearing retirement age in the 1920s, and he continued to detect for about 50 years. Miss Marple never aged a day. Hastings aged a bit, but then he was just Poirot's Watson. But she gets her chronology all mixed up. In 1922 when she published The Secret Adversary, Tommy and Tuppence were "bright young things" in their twenties who had taken part in WW1. In this book, published in 1973, they are "over seventy" but the war happened "before their time." Along with everyone else's! The whole story took place "before" the time of all the elderly non-characters who are obviously in their eighties and nineties and can only retail gossip from their own grandparents--about something that happened just before WW1?? (Excuse me very much, but seventy from 73 is 1903!) The Queen of Crime must have let her crown get too tight. The male characters keep referring to Tuppence as "she" or "your wife", and saying how clever she is--and she was, in the other books. But in this installment, she bumbles and waffles constantly, in spite of writing things down. Miss Marple was sharp to the last--too bad Tuppence couldn't manage the same.

Talk of "show don't tell!" Everything of interest is said or done "off camera", so to speak, to be related second-hand later in the sketchiest possible way. It's always chopped off before either of the Ts actually hears or sees anything, and too much is left for the reader's imagination. Not to mention, of course, a wearisome amount of political soapboxing thinly disguised as plot elements. The "library scene" where all is revealed goes on forever and is so badly told that I had to read some sentences twice. The business about spinach was recycled from an earlier novel, and I've never heard of a census that required you to list anyone who is sleeping under your roof on a given date, even if it's just the aftermath of a party. As for the ending and its "revelations"--ugh.

I love real strawberries, but never have I come across "strawberry" soda, candy or gum that tasted anything like a fresh berry. This example of Christie's work is nothing like her usual stuff. A few months ago I remarked in a review of another book, "Worst Christie to date." Well, this one takes that place.