Rating: 2/5

I give this novel 2.5 stars (almost three, here's why)

This book was recommended to me by a colleague who felt that it is a work of literature that addresses systemic racism in the light of all the books being banned due to "critical race theory". 

I read this book and at first, was repelled by its cliches and shameless depictions of the worn out magical negro trope. 

The book centers around a 14 year old girl named Lily (a white girl, and was she purposely named Lily to represent Lily white, or lily whiteness, I wonder?) and her nanny, Rosaleen who run away to Tiburon, South Carolina. 

Rosaleen has been beaten up by three racists after she stands up to them and tells them of her plans to register to vote; and Lily blames herself for the mysterious gunshot that supposedly killed her mother, Deborah. Lily and Rosaleen also escape Lily's cruel father, T-Ray, an all out racist.

When Rosaleen and Lily reach Tiburon, they meet the Boatwright sisters, all magical in their own ways. Proud and pragmatic August, head beekeeper; June, uptight and musically inclined and May, who is mentally unstable complete with her wailing wall. 

Lily and Rosaleen settle in at the care of the Boatwright women, and I could not help but feel that this novel was written with the magical negro trope that these black women are all there to teach Lily a lesson about race and family. 

Since this her story, Lily learns about the complexities of life: how bees are treated and kept (the cycle of life and death); falling for Zach, a black boy who helps August with her work (interracial relationships!), I felt that Ms. Kidd wants us to sympathize with how Lily has implicit bias at first and unaware of her white privilege, then becomes awakened after time with the Boatwright sisters. 

its an example of a book that really glossed over the hideous legacies of slavery and the Jim Crow South by creating a white narrator in Lily that looks at growing up in the South quite fondly. 

This book annoyed me to no end... 

BUT.....

If there is anything redeeming about this novel, I have taught it to teenagers who relate to both Lily and the Boatwright sisters. The historical background to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as well as the violence Rosaleen experiences is something students empathize and are outraged with. 

For a book that is about teaching the end of Jim Crow, and the start of desegregation- it is a good teaching tool. There are passages that are humorous and the dialogue and language between the Boatwrights with Lily are all very sweet. 

There is a fine film version, starring Queen Latifah, Dakota Fanning, Jennifer Hudson, Alicia Keys and Paul Bettany that I actually find better than the book.