Rating: 4/5

From a very famous speech in the 1800s. Hilarious in places, and with some surprising historical information. I'm listing the historic info first, followed by a few quotes on self-improvement. 

HISTORIC INFO:
1. Inventions originally by women (but patented by men) 
	Jacquard loom
	cotton gin
	sewing machine
	mower/reaper
	trolley switch
	iron squeezers in steel mills

2. Funny meeting w/ General Robert E. Lee 
"The general told me about his servant Rastus, who was an enlisted colored soldier. He called him in one day to make fun of him, and said "Rastus, I hear that all the rest of your company are killed… why are you not killed?" Rastus winked at him and said, " 'Cause when there is any fighting going on, I stay back with the generals." 

3. On meeting President Lincoln 
"He was one of the world's greatest men, and was made great by one single rule. Abraham Lincoln's principle for greatness can be adopted by nearly all. This was his rule: whatsoever he had to do at all, he put his whole mind into it and held it all there until that was all done. That makes men great almost anywhere. He stuck to those papers at that table and did not look up at me, and I sat there trembling. Finally, when he had put the string around his papers, he pushed them over to one side and looked over to me, and a smile came over his worn face. He said: “I am a very busy man and have only a few minutes to spare. Now tell me in the fewest words what it is you want." 
 ...A few days later...I saw the... the coffin of Abraham Lincoln, and when I looked at the upturned face of the murdered President, I felt then that the man I had seen such a short time before, who, so simple a man, so plain a man, was one of the greatest men that God ever raised up..."

SELF-IMPROVEMENT QUOTES:

"A diamond is a congealed drop of sunlight."

"He had not lost anything, but he was poor because he was discontented, and discontented because he feared he was poor."

"It is your duty to get rich."

"98% of the rich men in America are very honest. That is why they are rich… that is why they are trusted with all that money. That is why they carry great enterprises and find plenty of people to work with them."

"Money is power, and you ought to be reasonably ambitious to have it. You ought to because you can do more good with it then you could without it."

"You cannot trust a man with your money if he cannot take care of his own."

"Sell a known demand. That's the secret to success." 

"You don't know where your neighbor comes from… and you don't care. If you cared, you would be a rich man now. If you'd have cared enough about him to take an interest in his affairs, to find out what he needed, you would be rich."

"Your wealth is so near you, you're looking right over it."

"Greatness consists not in the holding of some future office, but in doing great deeds with little means, and the accomplishment of vast purposes from the private ranks of life."
 
"Did you ever see a man who struts around altogether too large to notice an ordinary working mechanic? Do you think he is great? He is nothing but a puffed up balloon, held down by his big feet. There is no greatness there."

"He who cannot be a blessing where he now lives will never be great anywhere on the face of God's earth."

"He most lives who thinks most, who feels the noblest, and who acts the best."