Rating: 4/5

Gripping story. Beautiful descriptions of India and its people. Rhetorical dialogue provides provocative one-line philosophical nuggets: 

"Civilization, after all, is defined by what we forbid, more than what we permit."

"The worst thing about corruption as a system of government is that it works so well."

"A lot of bad stuff in the world wasn't really that bad until someone tried to change it."

"The truth is a bully that everyone pretends to like."

"A dream is where a wish and a fear meet. A nightmare is when the wish and fear are the same exact thing."

"Poverty and pride are devoted blood brothers until one, always and inevitably, kills the other."

"Fear and guilt are the dark angels that haunt rich men."

"There's no meanness too spiteful or too cruel when we hate someone for all the wrong reasons."

"There is no act of faith more beautiful than the generosity of the very poor."

"Justice is a judgment that is both fair and forgiving... Justice is not only the way we punish those who do wrong. It is also the way we try to save them."

"The burden of happiness can only be relieved by the balm of suffering."

"Some men like you less the more they owe you. Some men only really begin to like you when they find themselves in your debt."

"A politician is someone who promises a bridge even when there's no water."

"Trouble is the only property that poor people like us are allowed to own."

"I don't know what scares me more, the madness that smashes people down or their ability to endure it."

"The world is run by one million evil men, ten million stupid men, and one hundred million cowards."

"The best qualities [of people] called up quickly in a crisis are very often the hardest to find in a prosperous calm."

"If babies had wings, he's be the kind [of person] to pull them off."

"Despotism despises nothing so much as righteousness in its victims."

"When greed meets control, you get a black market."

"It isn't a secret unless keeping it hurts."

"If you make your heart a weapon, you always end up using it on yourself."

"Fate puts us together with all the people, one by one, who show us what we could and shouldn't let ourselves become."

"It is possible to do the wrong thing for the right reasons."

"Men reveal what they think when they look away, and what they feel when they hesitate. With women, it's the other way around."

"Happiness is a myth. It was invented to make us buy things."

"The most precious gift you can bring your lover is your suffering."

"Cruel laughter is the way cowards cry when they're not alone, and causing pain is how they grieve."

"There's nothing so depressing as good advice."

"Depression only happens to people who don't know how to be sad."

"Love cannot be tested. ...love is born in that part of us that does not die."

"If we all learned what we should learn, we wouldn't need love at all."

"If we envy someone for the right reasons, we're halfway to wisdom."

"You are not a man until you give your love, truly and freely, to a child. And you are not a good man until you earn the love, truly and freely, of a child in return."

"A king is a bad enemy, a worse friend, and a fatal family relation."

"I sometimes think that the size of our happiness is inversely proportional to the size of our house."

"What characterizes the human race more? Cruelty or the capacity to feel shame for it?" 
 
"We live on because we can love, and love because we can forgive."

"I smoked [cigarettes] in those days because, like everyone else in the world who smokes, I wanted to die at least as much as I wanted to live."