Rating: 5/5

I've enjoyed reading Gould's essays since the 80s. He began writing his essays for "Natural History" magazine in 1974 and never missed a month, finishing his remarkable series with his 300th essay in 2001. So, this book is his last collection of essays, published in 2002. As with his other books in this series, he explores themes relating to biology and evolution. I've always liked how he is able to explain his scientific ideas clearly, avoiding technical jargon, but in no way "dumbing down" the material.
 This book is a very personal one for Gould, as the title refers to his grandfather arriving in America and writing in a book he had, "I have landed." The date was September 11, 1901, and, as Gould points out, that was 100 years to the day before a great tragedy struck America--and his home city of New York. And several essays in the book touch on 9/11.
 As with the other books, Gould touches on a wide range of people-famous and not-so-famous-who relate in some way to Charles Darwin and the theory of evolution, people such as Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, Nabokov, Humboldt, Linnaeus, Haeckel-- and Gilbert and Sullivan (!). And there's Bill Buckner the Red Sox first baseman, whose error in the 1986 World Series is considered to have lost his team the series. For Gould, this is an example about how our love for a good story overlooks some facts. But humans don't like to let facts get in the way of a good story!
 My favorite essay is one titled "The Great Physiologist of Heidelberg"-about Friedrich Tiedemann (1781-1861). I'm sure most would agree he's a forgotten figure in science. He studied under his fellow German, Blumenbach, the man who coined the word "Caucasian" and categorized humanity into five races--the Caucasian (white), the Ethiopian ( black), the American ( Native American), Mongolian and Malay. Such categorizations supported the view of whites as superior and justified slavery and colonialism. Tiedeman did not believe that any race was superior. He collected skulls and measured them to disprove the widely accepted belief that Caucasian brains were bigger than African ones. He showed that there were no differences in size of brain that can distinguish human races. Here was someone who actually seems to have been ahead of his time but "scientific" support for racism would only increase after his time, reaching a horrific peak with the Nazis--and it's very unfortunately still with us. Tiedemann should not be forgotten.