Rating: 3/5

Should have been about 1/2 the length.

This book started at a 5, and ended as a 2. It's VERY detailed and, while biased, it presents a pretty measured and balanced overview of the history that it covers. I certainly learned a lot of socialism's history, and the notes I took are useful.

The first 4-5 chapters in the book are fantastic. The chapter on Marx and Engels is one that I'll definitely re-read in the future since it was such a thorough account of these two. Also the later sections of the book (while it has issues that I outline below) is important to understand if you want to make sense of what China and Russia are up to today.

That being said, quite a few times throughout this book, I was left feeling like the author's book contract had stipulated a minimum page length. For multiple pages you're stuck reading some meaningless information that has absolutely nothing to do with the purpose of this book. I really could have done without the excruciatingly detailed point-by-point breakdown of political and personal relationships. That's not why I bought this book, and I have already forgotten 90% of those meaningless additional details.

About halfway through this book I just started reading with the mentality "what could I highlight in this book that I would like to come back to in the future, and that would be useful for understanding the history of socialism?" - and there would be large portions of many of the chapters where none of the information provided fit this requirement. Much of the book is stuff that you really don't care to retain.

The chapter on Tanzania and the chapter on Tony Blair are examples of this (although the Kibbutz chapter was by far the worst. If he republishes this book he should just delete that entire chapter and write a paragraph in the epilogue that covers the basics). The minutia that the author goes into about each of these characters is completely useless to the overall picture of the history of socialism.

Another criticism is that he didn't go into enough detail about some of the specifics of Marxism, which is paradoxical because of the above criticisms on other less-useful details. For instance, he very briefly mentions that both Marx and Engels were young Hegelians. I think he spends a few sentences going over "dialectic", but never really links this very well to what "synthesis" means in the Marxist secret-decoder-language. He does (sort of) quip back to this a few times in the book when he mentions other communists using the word "synthesis" explicitly, but most readers aren't going to connect those dots automatically IMO. 

I can't imagine leaving this discussion out of the book, because the link to Hegel is enormously important and explains the motivations of a huge number of communists. I think he probably needed to seek an editor that was more knowledgeable in the subject. He also should have probably included a chapter on postmodernism and its connection to Marx, since this is where the Hegelian stuff is important. 

Also he goes over a semi-history of the writing of the Communist Manifesto, but spends effectively zero sentences going over what is actually written in it. He doesn't have to print a word-for-word duplicate, but the overall theory is actually important to understand if you want to grasp the motivations of the characters later in the book. This is a strange oversight.

For instance, in the 2nd chapter of the communist manifesto, Marx goes into detail about his theory and its perspective on property. He says that he isn't against private property and its ownership generally, but that his theory is specifically against *bourgeois* property. This motivated Lenin's entire concept of property right in the soviet union. None of this is explained in this book, and that's a mistake.

Anyway, this book could have been a 5 if he gutted half the book - and if he's going to keep it over 400 pages, include details that are important and remove details that are not.