Rating: 4/5

"Be true to what you're feeling this instant! All we have in front of us is an uncertain future! The future'll take care of itself. When humanity gets around to applying its ingenuity, who knows if it won't find a solution? It's just another trial for the human species. In every age, the Devil reappears in a different guise. You can stamp it out, and stamp it out, and he'll keep coming back, over and over."

I didn't think I would enjoy that much a horror novel. But here I am, over my head with work, in need for some long night sleep, but unable to put the book down. 

I have read in other reviews that the movies are much better. I have only watched the first american version long ago, and I can recall almost nothing. I don't know if now I would like it better than the book, but I don't think so, because I found the story great, just as it is.

Of course the book has much more details the movie, how else could it be? And I enjoyed every bit of it. Actually, I think it is as minimalist as it can get, with just enough details to build the suspence and an eerie athmosphere, capturing perfectly the dread and panic in which the main character, Asakawa, finds himself in.

But my favorite was the second character, 'despicable' Ryuji. Asakawa and him are as fire and ice (or should I say ying and yan?), one good, happy in his marriage, but consumed by emotions, the other calm, with a dark past, a morbid fascination of death, and nothing to lose, but having an implacable and impecable logic. 

The structure of the story is more mystery/thriller, with some really creepy and uncanny scenes. I liked that there were no disgusting scenes, but hair-raising type only. It gripped me from the very first pages. What put me off a bit were some odd-sounding paragraphs, which I think were not properly translated, but given the pace of the events, they soon slip out of attention.

The ending was great too; in fact, the choices Asakawa is facing will linger for days in your head. In my case, one choice is clear, and there is no room for the other. But who knows what others might choose?

And I have to thank Tara for this buddy reading - it was a delight and such fun to exchange thoughts about it these days! If not for her, who knows how much dust it would have gathered in my virtual shelves? And that would have been a pity, because I had a great time reading it, and plan to read the rest of the series too.

All in all, if you want a Halloween reading, or/and a thought provoking one, this might prove an excellent choice.