Rating: 4/5

A condensed history of the American Civil War from one of its most famous chroniclers.
Having read Shelby Foote's exhaustively-detailed trilogy years ago, this was more concise at 400 pages (and, sadly, very few maps), so offered a much more digestible and "summarised" account.
And a different perspective. Catton was definitely a Tolstoyan "forces of history" historian, and argues from the start that the result of the war was a foregone conclusion - in an early chapter he writes memorably that the American people sacrificed half a million young lives "to go where they were bound to go anyway".
True as far as it goes, in that the USA could not long have continued with half the country a modern industrial nation and the other half a feudal agrarian plutocracy based on vast landed estates run on slave labour. But glossing over the fact that the war might have turned out differently at several points, and that a very different USA would have been produced each time had this happened, even if slavery was indeed a dead letter by the mid-19th century.
And some of his analysis is inconsistent: like many military historians, he deplores the missed opportunities for decisive victories (Antietam, Gettysburg, Chickamauga among others) when beaten armies were forced to retreat but not pursued and annihilated. However this rather ignores the corollary of his accounts of the other battles (the majority in this war) which clearly demonstrate that the power given to the defensive by simple field fortifications and the range of mid-19th century firearms meant that (in this and all subsequent wars) battles of annihilation were practically unachievable.
But his writing is superb, almost poetic, especially in comparison with the turgid prose of most modern military historians. There is proper writing here, and analysis, and well-argued opinion, not just a list of facts and stitched-together regimental war diaries. He has a keen ear for the quirky and blackly-humorous, and there are fresh and surprising opinions amid the well-known material. He is more critical of Robert E Lee than most historians of the Civil War. His view that Hooker had practically won the Battle of Chancellorsville before losing it in his own mind (he was certainly better-placed than Grant after the first day of the Battle of the Wilderness a year later) was new to me - and persuasively-argued. And my view of George McClellan is much kinder than before I read Catton's book - his honourable decision not to stand on an anti-war ticket in the 1864 presidential election, despite what he must have felt about Lincoln after his sacking in 1862, says more about the man than his better-known military failings.
I would still class James McPherson's "Battle Cry Of Freedom" as the best one-volume digest of the Civil War, but this is definitely worth reading for anyone interested in that conflict.