Rating: 2/5

"As a man thinketh in his heart so is he"
  

^ That one sentence sums up the whole idea of this book, or rather, an essay.

In As a Man Thinketh, James Allen strongly professes the concept that a man is only as good as his thoughts. While in a sense, it may be true, you could also argue against it. It has a lot of possibilities for an amusing, thought-provoking debate. 
Look at this – 

	●
  
    “A man does not come to the almshouse or the jail by the tyranny of fate or circumstance, but by the pathway of groveling thoughts and base desires. Nor does a pure-minded man fall suddenly into crime by stress of any mere external force; the criminal thought had long been secretly fostered in the heart, and the hour of opportunity revealed its gathered power.”
  

Unsurprisingly, I was reminded of Jean Val Jean while reading this sentence. Not surprised if you did too. We all have loved that character, who, out of sheer desperation to feed his family, stole a piece of bread and ended up in prison. Theft is a crime, no matter what they say, but feeding your family is not. Bringing up this fictional scenario to point out that Allen is wrong, is not my intention though. I’d rather you think of all the poor people there, who were tried and tested in court, many sentenced to death, because they did something similar, or worse. Does that justification make them any less guilty? No. But does that knowledge lessen your hatred for the said accused? Admit it, it did. 

	●
  
    "Circumstance does not make the man; it reveals him to himself”
  

So what does that say about the person’s thoughts? Had he always harbored ill thoughts, thought of stealing, killing, murdering? He might have. Could he have avoided those thoughts if he willed himself hard enough? The answer is NO. Point blank. 

However hard we try, a controlled mind always slips, always blends in with its surroundings, because just like a coin with two sides, a mind is composed of bad thoughts as much as the good ones. We may think bad stuff, and will ourselves not to do it. But when we actually do something bad, it is NOT BECAUSE WE HAD THOUGHT OF IT ONCE BEFORE. Of course, it is just what I feel to be true, you may have arguments that I may counter-argue. Still, I STRONGLY BELIEVE THAT THE COMPLETE CONTROL OF ONES’ MIND BY ONES’ SELF, IS NOT POSSIBLE.

	●
  
     "A man cannot directly choose his circumstances, but he can choose his thoughts, and so indirectly, yet surely, shape his circumstances”
  

That, my friends, I whole-heartedly disagree with. You can choose to be good or bad, but you definitely cannot choose to think good thoughts or bad thoughts. Duh. Try it for yourself if you don’t believe me.

	●
   “Change of diet will not help a man who will not change his thoughts. When a man makes his thoughts pure, he no longer desires impure food.”

I mean, seriously? What someone eats is his own business, you idiot. Even if you eat a snake, or a man for that matter, your body will adjust unless there are other ways for survival. Alright?

	●
  
    "The will to do springs from the knowledge that we can do. Doubt and fear are the great enemies of knowledge, and he who encourages them, who does not slay them, thwarts himself at every step."
  

However impressive the above sentence might be, I can’t think of confining the whole of human behavioral pattern and thoughts to such a simple conclusion. One does not simply NOT DO things because he thinks he can’t. An ordinary human being, being a social creature, considers a lot many more factors rather than the simple ignorant fact that he can’t do what he wants to. I couldn’t vouch enough for how wrong that statement is. Yeah, I have come across such phrases before - “Nothing is impossible”, “You can’t do it if you think you can’t”. And no, I haven’t questioned them before, because they were meant in a motivational context. But reading Allen’s work, where he analyses human mind, and spreads out reasons why we’re all doing it all wrong ‘mentally’, I had to say it. 
And I don’t mean to be demotivating. If you are inspired by this work, that’s a good thing, go on with your life. But if you are anything like me, you might be criticizing the book too, and I’m merely contributing my opinions.

	●
  
     “ALL that a man achieves and all that he fails to achieve is the direct result of his own thoughts”
  

Please don’t get me started on this one again. A man simply doesn’t fail because he thought them all wrong. And a man wouldn’t conquer the world with his stupid domineering thoughts. 

	●
  
    “To desire is to obtain; to aspire is to, achieve.”
  

You get that? It’s the same thing over and over again. I’m amazed he managed to stretch it out for a full 65 pages. That’s impressive vocabulary skills. Blah.

This one might be the truest thing he said, but it is not a fact at all. It doesn’t work in all situations. Like those physics theories we were forced to learn in high school? Applies to some places but doesn’t run true for the rest. 
	
  The strength of the effort is the measure of the result.

All in all, I get that while James Allen tried some old-school motivational lines, (okay, maybe he is the master of those ‘old-school’ motivational lines. This was published in what? 1902?), it didn’t work with me. That might be because I’m unmoved by non-fiction and motivational pieces in general, so you may still want to read this book. And yet, I say, “A man is literally what he thinks, his character being the complete sum of all his thoughts.” - NOT.