Rating: 5/5

Visit JetBlackDragonfly (The Man Who Read Too Much) at www.edenthompson.ca/blog

Thunder On The Left has become a favourite book, author Christopher Morley a new sought after author. I have a copy of his famous novel The Haunted Bookshop (signed!) and his controversial novel Kitty Foyle, but when I stumbled upon this perfect condition 1925 hardcover, it thrilled my unbelieving eyes. Book lovers know what I am talking about. In fine cursive on the flyleaf: "Mabel, from Lou, Christmas 1928"

Now that the children were getting big, the party games they create have changed. 
It's Martin's birthday with friends Ruth, Ben, Phyllis, Joyce and Bunny. The mysterious world of Grown Ups is reflected when they play "Stern Parents" (each pretending to be a parent talking about their terrible children), or "Quarrelsome Children" (where you must speak Very Seriously and forbid things). The children spy on the adults in the other room - the thrilling and exciting other world of Parents. Are they playing a game as well? Before the children can infiltrate the enemy camp and decide if they should Take Steps to always remain as young as they are, the party is over.

Twenty years later, Phyllis is married to George. To please her he has rented the beach house on Long Island, site of that summer party, and invited her childhood friends. Ruth and Ben are married, and Joyce is an artist working with George on a transit brochure. They are also having an affair.
Into this mix arrives a stranger to them, unrecognized by the others. A mysterious figure, he lets them think what they like, each believing he was invited by the other. Phyllis is enamoured with his naive charm and falls a little in love. The odd feeling I had that he was a spectral figure was added to by his being the only one to see Bunny, previously deceased, holding her hand on the beach only to look down and see his palm held a shell. Morley delves deeply into the inner life of each character and their feelings on the trappings of adulthood, the stunted marriages and the thrill of new affairs. The stranger oversees all these characters and holds the key - a secret he begins to reveal to Joyce - a secret for them all.

At once mysterious and fantastic, this had me hooked. The characters and his examination of them is heartfelt and insightful. Phyllis and Joyce are standouts, both in relationships with George who is a cad, both opposite examples of the modern woman of 1925. The stranger remained elusive and his presence kept me guessing. This is about adult lives and the childhood freedoms we leave behind. Morley captured me as a reader and I finished the last page I wanted to read it straight through again. I immediately bought three more of his novels. Although I have read a few other novels after this, it really spoiled me as any really enjoyable book will do.

One of my all time favourites. A total pleasure.