Rating: 5/5

Living as a young boy who's parents are crack heads and has beef with his dads dealer well this is what Iggy has to go through in "Saint Iggy. Setting takes place in high school, Freshman year Iggy C. was following a girl in a class when he caused disruption and is facing charge and expelled from the district. "Saint Iggy" by Diane Gonzalez Bertrand is a book about a boy who has a lot of problems in front of him in life. This book was sad a boy going through a lot in his life from parents using crack, dealing with a dealer, a friend needing money to pay off for drugs. I read this book because it looked like a book that kids go through in life in our present time.

Setting takes place in school where Iggy follows a cute girl into a wrong class and all this stuff starts popping off. The plot in the book is that Iggy is facing to be expelled from the school district and facing criminal charges which he never really did anything bad to get them. Conflict is that he needs to get ready for a hearing in a week but he knows his dad wont care or his mom since she isn't really home. Iggy the main character in the book who's facing all these problems that are coming at him and hitting him hard. Mo his friend who is an adult a drop out of lawyer school and is living in a broke down apartment and is a pot smoker. Freddy his dads dealer the guy who gave his mom drugs while she was having him. 

Iggy plans to change the way people look at him in school and outside of school he wants to be remembered later on. He goes to Freddy grabbing his gun before he got to shoot Mo or the cop and as he was struggling for the gun and two shots were fired Freddy's blood was everywhere and as he looked at the cop he was scared and Iggy remembered there was two bullets and the 2nd one hit him. This book is a sad because this kid went through so much in the book and some of this could be real happening to a kid exactly at this very moment. 
 
My opinion about this book because some kids do go through this in life right now. This is like a real life book about some kids out there in the world living in bad situations like this. I would recommend this book to people that think they lived in a bad situation to read this book to see how some kids or teens are living in a situation more bad than them.