Rating: 4/5

The Affair at the Victory Ball
An influential man is murdered at the Victory Ball. Simultaneously, his girlfriend overdosed on crack (&lt;--not crack) the same night after leaving the ball early due to a fight with the now-dead man.
Whodunnit and whytheydunnit?
Enter Poirot! &lt;--and Hastings

 The Adventure of the Clapham Cook
One of my personal favorites!
Poirot is such a snob. And in this one, he waves away an annoying middle-class woman, Mrs. Todd, who wants him to find her missing cook. Or he tries to anyway.
When she points out that her cook is worth just as much to her as some rich woman's priceless jewels, he realizes she's right and agrees to take the case.

 The Cornish Mystery
Agatha, you sneaky devil.
This has the same basic plot as Death on the Nile: A Parker Pyne Short Story, but Christie swapped Pyne for Poirot.

 The Adventure of Johnnie Waverly
Poirot locates a child being held for ransom.
When the child of a wealthy family is kidnapped right under the noses of the parents and the police, Poirot is called in to help.

 The Double Clue
Double Clue!? &lt;--That's 2 clues too many, bitches. 
And everyone's favorite Belgium detective is onto that shit.

 

 The King of Clubs
The King of Clubs is one of those fun Poirot shorties where he discovers what really happened but the police never do.

 

 The Lemesurier Inheritance
The cursed inheritance!
The story opens with a friend of Hastings &amp; Poirot getting killed almost immediately after he learns of his father's death...and right before he inherits his estate.
Supposedly there's a curse attached to the family that (because of some wrongdoing by an ancestor) won't let any firstborn son inherit.

 

 The Lost Mine
Poirot visits an opium den.
So that shouldn't be boring, right? But it is. I've read and listened to this story multiple times over the years and it's never managed to keep my interest.

 The Plymouth Express
An heiress is murdered on a train and her grieving father hires Poirot to find her killer.
The Plymouth Express was later expanded into the full-length novel, The Mystery of the Blue Train.

 The Chocolate Box
Poirot outwitted?! Say it ain't so!
But it is so.
Sitting around together one evening, Poirot tells Hastings of the one case that he failed to solve.
And Poirot tells Hastings to say the words chocolate box if he ever feels that Hercule gets a bit too big for his britches. I'm sure Hastings was tempted to walk behind Poirot with a megaphone repeating those words at the top of his lungs for most of the time they spent together. 
He didn't.
Such is the power of friendship.

 The Submarine Plans
Whodunnit?
Poirot and Hastings get called to a politician's house when the plans for a hush-hush submarine get stolen. 
The idea for this was slightly expanded upon in the longer novella  The Incredible Theft.

 

 The Third Floor Flat
And I would have gotten away with it if it weren't for those pesky kids!
Four friends accidently stumble into the wrong house and discover a murder in their building. 
Guess who else lives in that building?

 

 Double Sin
A novice antique dealer catches Hasting's attention while on holiday with Poirot.
The lovely young Mary Durrant works for her aunt who has a very successful antique shop in Ebermouth. On this trip she is acting as a courier, delivering an expensive set of miniatures to a wealthy client.
What could possibly go wrong?

 The Market Basing Mystery
Is a suicide sometimes just a suicide?
That's what Poirot wonders when he, Hastings, &amp; Japp get called in to look at a potential locked room murder that has the local constable scratching his head.

 Wasps' Nest
Is it a murder mystery if you prevent the murder?
Close enough, I say.

 The Veiled Lady
A hot chick wearing a veil walks into a bar...
Ok, not a bar. She walks into Poirot's house, and hires him to try to retrieve a scandalous letter from a blackmailer.
Always burn the letters, ladies!

 Problem at Sea
Who killed the obnoxious Mrs. Clapperton?
It should have been her henpecked husband, but he has an airtight alibi as he was on shore with two cute young women. It looks as though it was one of those dirty natives snuck into her room and killed the woman while she slept, then riffled her room looking for things to steal.
But that doesn't make sense to Poirot.

 How Does Your Garden Grow?
Did a greedy maid poison her mistress?
Poirot receives a letter from an elderly woman who wants his advice. Intrigued by her phrasing, he asks Miss Lemon to send a letter back agreeing to come to her home. Before he can see her, he receives word that she has died.
Poisoned!