Rating: 2/5

As I begin to immerse myself in studying the art of devotion, I think it important for me to analyze theological texts, as they are key to understanding the pursuit of knowledge during an era where the the only accessible and predominant form of knowledge was religious. As an atheist, I am not reading this because I’m interested in Christianity or God; I read this solely because of my devout interest in the ways historical figures have pursued knowledge throughout history. It is the act of extreme devotion which I find so incredibly interesting to study and frankly admirable due to its parallels with my own devout pursuit of knowledge. My pursuit is not in religious knowledge but a holistic knowledge in art, science, the humanities, history, and everything that fascinates me.

I do not take for granted my access to an education because in a world where if I did not have this access, yet simultaneously remained with my perseverance of a pursuit in knowledge, then I might have pursued a religion too—or whatever I deemed to be “true knowledge” in theory. I’m glad to be experiencing a life with non-religious contemporary academia.

Julian of Norwich was veritably interesting… she begged for bodily harm, death, visions, and wounds just to hear and learn messages from God, in order to be sure of his existence. When she was 30.5 years old, she had a handful of divine revelations as revealed through spiritual and physical visions. Like any books about religion, there will always be contradictions in the text. Trusting in a “higher plan” yet asking for many instantaneous things like revelations or wounds or epiphanies were of importance to note. Adulating the creation of everything as perfect because it’s made from god yet calling yourself and all women “ignorant, weak, and fail…” (pg 11). The long text version is extremely repetitive and similar to the short text version, it is essentially a regurgitation captivating a deeply serious tone with slightly less persuasion. Psychologically, religion fascinates me, so I am attracted to what made Julian say the things she said and have the visions she had. Was it neuroses, schizophrenia, a bad trip, a lie? The text is rich enough for the reader to heed the fear in her writings: fear of punishment, being wrong, and being unimportant. The material was unconvincing in its intention due to its lack of evidence, repetitive persuasion, and unanswered questions. I also think her prose came off childlike in the sense that it read like an individual who was entirely convinced that a fictional story is real. Overall a semi-interesting read, excluding the longer version written years after the short one--I don’t claim that version necessary to read at all, as it is just an extremely similar retelling of the first part, but years later... not much growth either in terms of her writing.

"I loved Christ so much more than myself that I thought bodily death would have been a great relief to me."

"Everything except the cross was ugly to me."

2/5