Rating: 3/5

This is a 1973 Cold War spy novel by American author Robert Littell. The setting is in early 1970s split between the United States and USSR. The story is as the title suggests: the defection of an American scientist called A. J. Lewinter, and how does each side (both the US and USSR) handled the aftermath. The book is designed like a chess-game, with each side taking each step that takes into anticipation of how the other side will interpret and react to each step. The book is essentially about how US tried to convince USSR that Lewinter was a fake defector and therefore his information should not be believed; and for the Russians to figure out whether Lewinter was a real defector with accurate information. Overall, I find the book very average. While the plots and counter-plots are interesting, in the end the complex level of mind-games still do not make the story a really engaging one. I would rate the book 3.5 Star on a 5 Star scale.

Spoiler Alert. The story is about the defection of American scientist A. J. (Augustus Jerome) Lewinter and its aftermath. Lewinter was an associate professor at M.I.T. and an expert in ceramic engineering. For the last four years he has been working on ceramic nose cones for the U.S. military’s nuclear missiles program. Specifically, its MIRV (Multiple Independently Targetable Reentry) Program, which allows one missile to carry multiple warheads that can target multiple targets at the same time. Lewinter, who was suspected to have a photographic memory, came across some top-secret files that contained detailed warhead trajectory information for the American MIRV program. The Russians have for years found themselves not able to build an anti-missile defense system against American ballistic missiles because a MIRV missile has too many warheads for them to track (especially many of are just decoys and antiradar systems). However, with Lewinter’s information, they would have a much easier time knowing which warhead is a real nuclear warhead just by comparing it to Lewinter’s trajectory information. Essentially, anyone who knew these trajectories could program a computer so that it could tell within seconds, using inputs from tracking devices, which incoming blips were real warheads, which were decoys, which were jamming devices.

The Americans, led by a Leo Diamond (who has previously been pushed out of the CIA because of a botched operation), immediately scrambled to figure out what valuable information Lewinter has that would interest the Russians enough to take him in as a defector. They easily concluded that Lewinter’s research expertise: ceramic nose cone, is not really attractive to the Russians. After some digging, they finally realized that Lewinter has come across the top-secret warhead trajectory file. If the Russians believe Lewinter and use the information to develop an anti-missile defense system, that could seriously compromise American nuclear missiles’ effectiveness. Diamond and company therefore came up with a plan to try to convince the Russians that Lewinter was a fake defector planted by the US intelligence community to provide Russian with fake information, so that the Russians would waste energy building an anti-missile defense system that would be useless.
The Russian team was initially led by Yefgeny Mikhailovich Pogodin, the KGB station chief in Tokyo. Lewinter defected when he was travelling to Japan for a conference and he went to the Soviet Embassy in Tokyo to seek political asylum. It was Pogodin who initially interviewed Lewinter in Tokyo and sponsored his defection and secretly flew him back to Russia. Later, the Lewinter project was taken over by Minister Boris Avksentiev, a very powerful politician and a member of Politburo. On the one hand, Lewinter’s information seemed like a gift from heaven because it finally allowed Russia to have a chance to build an anti-missile defense system. On the other hand, Avksentiev was concerned such a huge undertaking would require a very expensive crash military program that would derail a lot of the key economic reforms that he was rolling out. 

What follows then was a plan by Diamond to assassinate Lewinter. In a sense, Diamond did not care whether the assassination succeeded or not (it failed). What he tried to do was to make the Russians think that since the American want to kill Lewinter, he must be a real defector and the information he has must be genuine. Diamond figured out the Russian would then go on to realize that mode of thinking is too simple so they would go to a second level of analysis: since the Americans want to make the Russians think Lewinter was a real defector, it must mean Lewinter was a fake defector and his information was not genuine. That is what Diamond wanted and he was convinced through the end he has succeeded. Pogodin, however, realized there is third layer of analysis. Pagodin knew of Diamond and he knew Diamond loves to run complex operations. So, Pagodin correctly guessed that since the Americans want the Russians to do a second level analysis, and Diamond is involved, it means there has to the a next level, a third level analysis. Pagodin correctly concluded since the Americans expected the Russians to think the assassination plot is to make the Russians believe Lewinter was a real defector, and the Americans expects the Russians to see through it and to draw the opposite conclusion, that means Lewinter must be a real defector and his information is genuine. In the end of the book, Pogodin was thinking about taking it to the next level, which is to send Lewinter back to America. Pogodin believed that would send the US the message Russia did not believe the trajectories to be genuine, which is critical because otherwise the US may change the trajectories for the missiles to make the information (and the anti-missile defense system the Russians were going to build based on that information) worthless.