Rating: 4/5

When you bring home your first child it can be an exhilarating and a scary experience. The amazing journey of being pregnant is over. But it has been replaced with the joy and uncertainty of the obligations of taking care of a newborn. I remember thinking that it each milestone was an accomplishment not only for my child but also for me. It was a confusing but a rewarding time in our family's life.

Recently, I was given the opportunity to read the book, Baby's First 100 Days, by Margaret Stephenson Merre. It is an easily understandable guide to the often times confusing behavior of a newborn. This book is not about a list of must haves or should dos, rather it is a guide to how to adapt to your child and understanding his newborn behavior.

From eating to tiredness, parents have to figure out what their child needs. The difference between a tired cry or a hungry cry takes time to determine the difference. This book offers suggestions to determine why your child is reacting to the needs he has.

Think about it in your daily life. If you look at your significant other, does he clench his fists when he is cranky or does he scrunch his nose when he's tired. Babies have patterns and clues to tell you how they feel. Every day a new parent can learn more and become more confident in their parenting skills.

This book offers suggestions on numerous topics that first time parents, or grandparents, often face. From how to swaddle your baby to coping with crying, the various chapters provide reasons and suggestions to help a variety of situations.

If you know someone who is about to have a child or grandchild enter their lives, consider giving them Baby's First 100 Days. It might shed some light on the confusing baby behavior and give them a glimmer of hope that they will survive these first difficult days.

 

 

Disclosure: I was given a copy of Baby's First 100 Days to review. All opinions are 100% mine and have not been influenced by any person or entity. For my complete disclosure policy, please see www.more4momsbuck.com/disclosure.