Rating: 4/5

Note: There is a Joanne Greenberg who writes under the name Hannah Green, most famous for writing I Never Promised You a Rosegarden, but she is different, alive for one, from the Hannah Green who wrote The Dead of the House. So the Goodreads citation of author above is incorrect. On to the review.

Not counting one children’s book, The Dead in the House, is apparently one of two books Hannah Green wrote in her life (1927-1996). It is a beautiful elegiac novel of family, love and loss, and history, or at least the linked biological and historical connections of generations. If you are only going to write two in your lifetime and this is one, you have done right by your talent and right in your contribution to the world.

Vanessa, the young narrator, is strongly connected to her family, even those she only knows from family stories, her grandparents’ grandparents. The book is in three parts, with each part debuting in The New Yorker (1966, 69, and 70 respectively). The first section is called “In My Grandfather’s House.” The second, the most elegiac, is “Summer Afternoon, Summer Afternoon,” and the third, “And Here Tecumseh Fell.” Each is excellent, the second may be perfect.

From the first section: 
“Happy I carried in the wood from the branches of trees Grandpa Nye had felled in the woods himself. He chopped the logs and split them. He was famous for his skill with the ax. ‘None of us could keep up with him,’ Daddy said. When Daddy was little, he used to go along every Saturday afternoon when Grandpa Nye went with his wheelbarrow into the woods below his house to chop wood. …For many years the sound of Grandpa Nye’s ax could be heard in the neighborhood, and when he was very old and no longer able to chop wood, in his ninetieth year, he could still be seen on certain afternoons in the old hat he wore around the place in spite of what Aunt Janice said, and in his woodsmen coat, walking slowly down Salt Lick Avenue with his wheelbarrow.”

From the middle part: 
“One afternoon late in October when we got home from school there was a letter from Dirk in a white envelope with a Yale crest on it. I turned to the second page. He signed it ‘Love and Kisses.’ I went into the lavatory by the front door and doubled over. I couldn’t breathe. The washstand blazed white in front of my eyes.

I didn’t see him again until it was summer again. Mama was working at the draft board and no one went to Neah that summer of 1943. I was a junior counselor at Camp Claybanks near Glendale, and Dirk came there to see me the night before he went to Chicago to boot camp. It was nearly ten o’clock when he got there, and then we took a walk down the road to the camp entrance. It was a hot moonless night. The dark shape of the elms loomed against the sky, and the fireflies were like stars in the fragrant fields of hay. 

…He put his arm around my waist. ‘Gee, Vanessa, you’re swell,’ he said. Then I felt the sweet wet feel of his mouth, the soft quick feel of the life inside him. We put our heads alongside each other, and our arms around each other. I was afraid we might tip over.”

From the third section, when Vanessa is an adult with children of her own and has moved away:
“Away from here I was free of the love that made me cry all the time, but away from here I wasn’t here where I belonged. Here slowly everything changed. I had to look to what was left of what I loved.”

Green’s perspective may be one that is fading from view in the 21st century, where things continue their nuclear movement into a smaller, more immediate sense of time, family and community. The book isn’t nostalgic but it is memorial in a sadder way than the narrator may find it. The narrator’s understanding of things past is both one of loss but also of continuity. She sees herself in her family, past and present, and recognizes that she is connected in many ways to the generations that preceded and owes a responsibility to those that follow her. It’s a good way to be and Green’s sensitive, evocative, deeply felt prose renders it without sentimentality. The Dead in the House is poignant and moving, a small masterpiece that will be re-read (and be a gift) in the years ahead.