Rating: 5/5

This book was recommended to me on here by several friends. It is basically a narrative of the crime wave of 1933-1934. It traces, to the extent possible, the criminal acts of Bonnie and Clyde, Lester Gillis (aka Babyface Nelson), The Barker/Karpis gang, consisting of Alvin Karpis (whom I've already written a review about his book "My 25 years on the Rock). Karpis was teamed with brothers Fred and Doc Barker, their criminal acts supposedly orchestrated by J. Edgar Hoover (more on that later). It also features accounts of Oklahoma outlaw Charles Arthur "Pretty Boy" Floyd and gives short shrift to Machine Gun Kelly, who, according to Burrough, was a mediocre criminal. The gangster most discussed is John Dillinger. The book also explains how this crime wave, descending on the country like a locust plague, led to the formation of the FBI and federal statutes criminalizing crimes that involved moving from one state to another while perpetrating a crime. I believe the Mann Act, forbidding the transport of women across state lines for criminal activities, had already made this particular offense a federal violation. 

As an aside, from accounts I've previously read, the Mann Act was created to ensnare the scofflaw heavyweight boxing champion Jack Johnson, who happened to be black, dated and married white women. Johnson lived in Chicago and made occasional trips to Indiana--so the government was hoping he would make more trips and once he had done this he was charged and convicted in absentia for this outrageous offense--tried in absentia because he had fled the USA after fleeing Chicago.

The crimes these gangs committed ranged from kidnapping wealthy scions to bank robbery, murder of police officers and civilians while perpetrating said crimes and various and sundry offenses like carjacking, auto theft, arson and burglary.

"Public Enemies" has already been thoroughly reviewed so my review will feature takeaways from my reading of the book:

--Bonnie and Clyde--Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow were both Dallas natives and at the start of 1933 they specialized in robbing gas stations and stores and were not on the same level as the Barker/Karpis gang or John Dillinger. They were romanticized in the 1967 movie (Bonnie and Clyde), as played by Faye Dunaway and Warren Beatty. Author Bryan Burrough usually presents accounts of heinous crimes and outlaws with a "just the facts" sort of approach. He doesn't pass judgment on Dillinger, Karpis, Ma Barker, etc. With Bonnie and Clyde, however, he seems to have a real distaste. Comparing the later glorified depiction of Bonnie and Clyde in the eponymous movie and in American popular culture, Burrough avers:

"there was nothing romantic about Bonnie and Clyde in these tales, nothing free or rebellious or heartwarming. They were murderers, modern-day bogeymen whose approach could mean only death."

To be continued