It has been on my mind to read Parade’s end since I was in my late teens, still at school, doing my English Literature A-Level. I think I have said before that I am slow. At that time I certainly read The Good Soldier almost certainly because our teacher Mrs P. mentioned it in the context probably of To the Lighthouse on account of it’s use of stream of consciousness.

I don’t know yet if it was worth the wait, but I feel that Parade’s End is the kind of book that you can turn round after finishing and start again on the first page.

One reason for this is that the book’s structure parallels the experience of serving in WWI, it opens conventionally enough, upper class marital crisis in late Edwardian England - a full body immersion in the mores of a different time, two gentlemen – the central character Christopher Tietjens and his pal Macmaster knock off work from a ministry dealing with statistics to take the train down to Rye to play some golf where they are interrupted by an eruption of Suffragettes (and why not) followed in time by Tietjens travelling with one of the suffragettes on a horse and buggy through a foggy night, not quite getting lost, just to the north of Romney Marsh, and on the verge of turning the novel into a love triangle, when a car turns out of a concealed drive driven by Tietjens’ godfather and motors directly into the horse. Ah -ha exclaims the reader – this be that Symbolism that be all the rage – it’s WWI: machine versus flesh. As the horse so to the man.

At this the fog immediately clears and we skip a great chunk of the war to find Tietjens on leave in recovery from shell-shock – this in part based on the author’s war time experiences. It is as though this late Edwardian upper class marriage crisis novel has been cut through by a bullet or was caught up in a shell explosion and ripped apart, (or even hit by a car maybe) from now on we experience something disjointed and dislocated, we are disorientated, maybe even stressed, we jump from the steam of consciousness of one character to another, there are few markers as to when we are in time - perhaps the only time markers of relevance are if war is ongoing or not, the narrative will shift abruptly, after the initial section the book becomes very concentrated we are in what feels like real time as a character’s thoughts sprawl out – sometimes while they have a conversation with somebody else, a hundred pages of text might be about an hour in the character's lives.

The series of novels are bound up in ideas about the passing of time and the (violent) transition from one era to another.

That all sounds very serious, but I feel there is a strong element of parody and play making too. The surname Tietjens suggests something like Little titties – not a family then to take entirely seriously, the family home is the fictional great house of Groby in Cleveland, then in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Christopher and his elder Brother Mark conceive of themselves as archetypal North Country men, Sheffield or Barnsley are already dangerously southern and suspect and soft. Theirs’ is that profound patriotism that expresses itself by staying away from the homeland and apparently rarely if ever going there – in addition as we are told several times they are the descendants of one of William of Orange’s men who replaced some Catholic bigwig. Their northcountryness is an elective affinity. Instead they live in London and both brothers darkly suspect the other of having been corrupted by life in the south, the countryside we experience is that of a curve from Kent in to Sussex – a region where Ford Madox Ford knocked around championing the writing of Joseph Conrad and H.G. Wells, practising Free Love whenever he had the chance. This is a novel where the coast and moors by Redcar are frequently on the mind but never shown, but where we are shown, is barely on character’s minds and has only limited resonances for several of them.

Christopher Tietjens is radical Tory, at one moment anti-Empire in the style of the Tories in 1713, a Francophile, a man who claims that only one worthwhile book has been written in English since the eighteenth century (so certainly not a stand in for the author). He is a radical in his way and the last Tory in the sense that his politics are those of before the French Revolution, he sees society as essentially Feudal (all though explicitly his family wealth from from coal mines, and he is precisely aware of coal prices at the market and mine head), he might approve of ‘Oligarchy tempered by riot’ as a constitutional principle he certainly finds elections and the vote a bit of a sham. Physically it appears that Boris Johnson has modelled himself on this Christopher Tietjens - a shambolic, messy looking person.

The war that he experiences is also a parody, it is not about fighting – and this is not the WWI novel to read if you want to see someone’s entrails spill out over the page – this war is about the traditions and style of the army, getting the paperwork done, checking that soldiers brush their teeth and that their feet are fit for service, it’s about politics and transportation, and who owes who what money. The army too like the individuals we see is in shock from the war and desperately clinging to regulations that impair fighting efficiency, presumably because if they let go of them there might be no order or structure what so ever.

Above all I had the curious feeling that this novel is an adaptation of The Idiot into English with a WWI setting, like Prince Myshkin (Mousy) , Tietjens (Titty) is in a love triangle, both aspire to Christian lives, Tietjens wishes to become an Anglican saint and is, I think twice, compared with J.C. There are references in the text to the metaphysical poet George Herbert and Gilbert White (in the form of his The Natural History of Selborne both of whom appear as potential role models for Tietjens, both of which he avoids partly out of stubbornness, partly from love or the desire for the chance of (non-divine) love. The Idiot is I felt indirectly referred to by brother Mark in the text in his thoughts about Russian aristocrats giving away their wealth and lands then sitting by the side of the road and begging – but maybe Tolstoyians or Anarchists were what he had in mind. Again though I think the point is that a big Tit in the army, previously working in Government on statistics, who aspires to be an Anglican saint while approving of the extermination of defective newborn children in the interests of sound eugenics is a parody, recognisably of Tory England for whom God is an Englishman, and Blake’s Jerusalem (arranged by Parry) contains no criticism of the Patria. The carnival of characters around the still and speechless figure of Mark Tietjens, in the penultimate chapter of the entire series a strong splash of Dostoevsky I felt.

The book is also a visual one, Sylvia Tietjens and Lady Macmasters both appear as Pre-Raphaelite beauties, but also Belle dames sans Mercy straight out of Keats, they are out of time, and old fashioned already at the beginning of the book, they are in contrast to the fractured landscapes of WWI battlefields. While the book begins with the horse killed by a car and ends with the appropriately Biblical falling of a Cedar of Sardinia (a transplant like the Tietjens) which brings down with it part of the great house itself – while a few times through the book we are reminded of an Italian saying that the man who sleeps under trees will (need to) see a doctor often.

I wonder if it inspired The strange death of Liberal England . It is quite wonderful and chewy.