Rating: 1/5

Awful. There are plenty of other tarot books (Seventy-Eight Degrees of Wisdom: A Book of Tarot, Tarot for One: The Art of Reading for Yourself, Understanding the Tarot Court) that I'd recommend anyone to invest their time into rather than this one. Skip this. From how she writes (every reader/querent is "she", apparently other genders have no interest in tarot?), to her interpretations of the cards, to throwing out other random bits of "information" that have no source or founding, it all makes for a frustrating experience and i only slogged through the whole thing to write an accurate review while hoping there would be some redeeming qualities at some point. (regarding the last point: she writes "the symbols of astrology, for example, have become more and more popular until many people are at least aware that 55 is an astrological symbol even though they may not be able to name it or interpret its meaning." all my astrologer friends who have studied for 10+ years: "i have absolutely no idea what she's talking about." and searching on this yielded zero results.) 

i really wanted to like this book, because the hook of looking at uprights as outward energy and reversals as inward energy really intrigued me, but it fell very short of its goal. the author lays out clear guidelines for each suit (swords = communication, wands = identity, etc.) and number (2 = moving in a direction; 5 = change) which, on its own, isn't a terrible idea. again, i was intrigued by the idea that each suit has "cycles of three" that go from conceptualizing, to action, to manifestation. but my issue (well, one of many) comes from the fact that she sticks way too rigidly to this formula. tarot needs room for flow and interpretation. and, combined with the actual interpretations for individual cards, i can't say "stay away" any clearer.

the interpretations... i've been reading and studying tarot for a few years now, and i devote a considerable amount of my time to listening to other readers' interpretations and insight. i rarely consider an interpretation "wrong", since reading is such an individual thing, but... so many of these are just plain, flat-out wrong. how does one look at three swords literally piercing a bleeding heart and think, "ah, yeah, good communication is happening here!"? four of swords, a person at rest, is apparently "now is time to take action on your goals." (no, that card says this is a time for rest, rejuvenation, and recovery.) the swords suit in particular was very awful, as she stuck so rigidly to "swords are communication" that there was no leeway for anything else. but there were plenty of issues in the other suits. ten of cups is apparently dissatisfaction that a relationship is stable? king of cups is an indication that it's time to break off a relationship? i think you're projecting a big much there, gail.

from the card interpretation section, i got one nugget of insight to take with me. she pointed out that while the knights are protected by armor, the helmets also cover their heads to the point of being blinders and narrow-focused. they can't see the big picture. so, out of 78 card interpretations, i found one interesting thing that actually made sense.

once i got past the interpretations, i hoped that the rest of the book, dedicated to designing spreads and readings, would be better. keep in mind: there was no redeeming this book completely anymore, but i hoped for something. and... it wasn't awful. i agreed with a lot of this process. but it's also basic stuff that most tarot books cover, nothing unique, so i'd recommend skipping this book entirely and picking up one of the others i mentioned at the beginning of this review.