Rating: 1/5

this was absolutely dreadful but i had fun with parts of it? def not most. wow this was bad. read it on vacation with my grandparents, mostly on the beach! i’m sorry candace camp, but this had too many strikes against it. if u tried to write and publish this now you would be cancelled so hard u could never show ur face again in polite society
1. bad writing
2. absolutely insane reactions - as in, lack of thereof. heroine watches someone die after they try to kill her and finds out for certain her entire life has been a lie and then five minutes later is giggling and kissing her mans and accepting a marriage proposal. nothing fazes her. what do u mean you were sold to a brothel and are about to be r*ped by strangers and have to witness multiple people having s*x in front of u even tho you’re a innocent lady, and absolutely nothing about that horrific trauma is ever mentioned again. WHAT
3. the hero sexually assaults her multiple times. yes, u heard that right. not only does he start kissing her and groping her against her will in a carriage when they’re in the middle of a fight (and the heroine literally tries to jump out of the moving carriage to get away from him), he also hooks up with her after rescuing her from the BROTHEL to which she’d been SOLD after being KIDNAPPED and his first thought at seeing her drugged in the brothel is how DESIRABLE she looks and how much he wants to have s*x with her. what, and i cannot emphasize this enough, the fuck. who greenlit this. this book had to be drafted and written and edited and approved and distributed and advertised and not once did someone raise any red flags?? it doesn’t matter that she was “coming onto him” because she’d been drugged (which would never happen in real life btw) she was DRUGGED AND TRAUMATJZED AND HE STILL HOOKED UP WITH HER. i almost dnf’d. if u recall i promised to not dnf a book ever again once i got past the 20% mark but this tested me hard
4. everything in this book is implausible to a truly absurd and jaw dropping and even funny degree. it didn’t even bother being realistic on any counts
5. the india fetishization was crazy. i mean i guess the hero and heroine needed one thing in common?? bc other than that it was such a dramatic case of both insta lust and insta love it gives me the ick
6. this was so bad. im sure i’ll think of more but im spent. wow.