Rating: 5/5

Thoughts walk in uninvited.

Reading great historical novels written e.g. by E. Chadwick one can sometimes almost forget that there were serfs, starvings, minstrels and so on in the medieval.

Imagine a young smith (a serf) who fell in love with a daughter of the shepherd. They had to have permission from a priest (a matter of the pedigree), then from parents and a steward (a father of the bride wanted something for "his loss", the steward had to confirm that the wealth of the lord would not lose on the marriage) and at the end, the lord had to say "yes". And what if he didn't? They were serfs. In theory, it was the end of their hopes. But sometimes the serf rebelled (I don't mean an uprising, but an individual rebellion). What then? One such case you can read in this superb novel.

An amazing historical fiction. The family saga. Gripping with historical details and accuracy. This was one of those (I think rather rare) historical fiction where there aren't battles, royal intrigues, politics and so on. It was a great journey through the everyday life of the common people in the first half of XV century.

The book had a few narrators and between their tales there were short intervals with a narrator in the third person. So, one could see the same things from different points of view. And it was very enriching.

  When you read you must get out of your own skin and into the skin of the people you are reading about, that is the only way to enjoy it.

Like in life, there was sorrow, injustice [how went Pert Tom's life after the fire was almost unbearable for my sense of justice], hard work, prejudice, love, hate, dreams, happy and sad days. Everything was described in a way I think those people would have described. Without pathos but often with hope or/and acceptance of what life brought. This enduring fight with everyday problems and decisions.

  There lies the whole crux of the matter; what cannot be prevented must be borne

Perfect historical fiction. I have learned many new facts about how people lived then. From lavatory in a big estate (kind of castle), to how wool trade worked. Really, it is a priceless book for every fan of the medieval world.

I recommend to read Werner's review. He described the religiosity of Lofts and what 'a literary Realism' was for her. These two things made the book so good, unique.