Rating: 1/5

I found this book to be a fantastic slog. It had been so difficult for me to read, in fact, that I found myself trying to skim, and resisting, just barely.

I suppose part of the problem must have been the unmatched expectations I've had for this humongous doorstopper. I've heard of it as 'an epic tale of WWI'. But in reality, it was more involved with two people trying to outdo each other in the amount of suffering they could cause. I found the endless digging in the machinations and idiotic moves. I didn't particularly want to read a book about marital machinations and moves, I wanted to read a book about WWI.

Too, there is in me still the sense that I could never envision the main characters, Tietjens and his wife, Sylvia, as in any way real. They do what they do from reasons which, to me, are inexplicable and incomprehensible, and I don't think that's just because they're turn-of-the-century Brits. Sylvia cheats on her husband and tries to ruin his life (and hers with it, since for some reason she would not divorce him, though her Catholicism is less than nominal) because she "hates his immoral opinions". Since I never really encountered an opinion of Tietjens - not to mention a deed - that was immorally appalling, I had a hard time seeing Sylvia do what she was doing for any reason other than the author's strings, pulling at her.

The prose is abstruse and difficult to read. I found it almost prohibiting at times. It's full of elliptical sentences and unexplained utterances, and one loses the thread of what people are actually saying, and why, astonishingly quickly.

The novel (I should say novels, I read all four) does have its good moments. For instance, the scene in which Sylvia discovers that her husband was not, in fact, shamming his memory loss, is almost touching. She is repentant. Why she then proceeds to go on and continue to cause trouble for him, though, I am not sure. It's yet another enigmatic move, on the part of an utterly enigmatic author, in a completely enigmatic setting.

I guess this book was just too much of a riddle wrapped in an enigma for me. I barely finished it, though I am glad I at least did finish.