Rating: 5/5

‘What are you going to do?’
‘I am going to visit these five people-and from each one I am going to get his or her own story.’
Superintendent Hale sighed with a deep melancholy.
He said: ‘Man, you’re nuts! None of their stories are going to agree! Don’t you grasp that elementary fact? No two people remember a thing in the same order anyway. And after all this time! Why, you’ll hear five accounts of five separate murders!’
‘That,’ said Poirot, ‘is what I am counting upon. It will be very instructive.’

On the umpteenth re-read, still my favourite Agatha Christie book.

It is hard to tell why even though there are some obvious reasons. It is a classic mystery with a love-triangle, the solution hidden in plain sight and surrounded by cleverly built-up and well-laid red-herrings and yet there is something in it that touches me deeply. I am probably as fascinated by the "problem of personality" as Poirot seems to be. In this novel AC reaches new perfections in subtle and intricate characterisation and plotting, which never ceases to amaze me.

 Hercule Poirot (...) was fascinated by the problem of personality. (...)
Each person had seen her differently. Montague Depleach had despised her as a defeatist-a quitter. To young Fogg she had represented Romance. Edmunds saw her simply as a ‘lady’. Mr Jonathan had called her a stormy, turbulent creature.
How would he, Hercule Poirot, have seen her?
On the answer to that question depended, he felt, the success of his quest.
So far, not one of the people he had seen had doubted that whatever else she was, Caroline Crale was also a murderess.”

A young woman visits Poirot &amp; requests him to investigate an intriguing and challenging murder case: her mother was convicted of poisoning her father 16 years ago, but on her deathbed she wrote her daughter a letter, claiming she was innocent. 
Everyone else involved - apart from Caroline's sister- is deeply convinced of Caroline Crale's guilt, so it seems a hopeless case. And if Caroline Crale did not kill her husband, who did?

Who are the five little pigs (witnesses) concerned and could/would they have done it? Five people with totally different personalities and background, but seemingly without motive for the murder. Poirot visits all five of them and asks them to write down how they remember the events of the past. Through the filter of their memories, we learn more about the "murderer" Caroline &amp; the "victim" Amyas Crale (wonder if his having the same initials as Agatha's cheating first husband is a coincidence?), but also about everyone else concerned. Everyone sees the others just a bit differently and layers and layers are added to all characters, some obvious, others surprising. Long-forgotten, seemingly inconsequential, but surprising bits and pieces of information resurface and together with Poirot we put the jigsaw puzzle together. And when the last piece falls into place, we are stunned again by Dame Agatha's brilliancy, her understanding of human nature as we learn the identity of the real murderer.