Rating: 5/5

Just for maximum confusion, many of Agatha Christie's novels have different titles in the British vs. American editions. What I actually read was entitled Murder at Hazelmoor, but it is aka The Sittaford Mystery. Whatever one calls it, this novel typifies why Dame Agatha is the Queen of Mystery to me. I love many of her contemporaries--Dorothy L. Sayers, Ngaio Marsh, Josephine Tey, Patricia Wentworth, and (especially) Mary Roberts Rinehart--but it is rare for them to stump me with the solution IF the author plays fair. Dame Agatha, however, puts me firmly in my place, and I revere her for it. She often provides hints to anything up to half a dozen solutions of fiendish ingenuity, and we alert readers may figure them out...only to have her hit us with the ONE solution that somehow we didn't see coming!

Such is Murder at Hazelmoor. I really thought I had it, and I was really wrong. However, I don't feel at all cheated; I bow to the superior detective, in this case one of Dame Agatha's charming "flapper"-type young women amateurs. Emily could be the sister of Tuppence (as in Tommy &amp; Tuppence, Dame Agatha's "Partners in Crime"), and she's delightful. Unless of course she's the murderer, but I won't tell.

This isn't one of Dame Agatha's best-known novels, but I highly recommend it. Classic Christie, with the clues there but somehow so hard to spot, and an above-average number of red herrings to throw you off! I also love it when she does the trick of having an apparently supernatural occurrence--in this case a seance that appears to predict a murder--and then provides a solidly real explanation. So, so clever. 

Finally, this is a great "Christie for Christmas" along with "Hercule Poirot's Christmas" and "4:50 from Paddington" (Miss Marple's Christmas case). The setting is a snowy English village described on the very first page as looking like the pictures "on Xmas cards". (Side note: I didn't realize the abbreviation "Xmas" was common in 1931, but I looked into it and found it actually goes back to the 1600s!)