Rating: 3/5

I had never read anything by V S Naipaul before. Known first for fiction, his travelogues are highly regarded as well. "A Wounded Civilization" is the second in his trilogy on India, written during 1975 when democracy was under siege by the autocrat Indira Gandhi. The beginning of the triptych, "An Area of Darkness", was banned on the subcontinent for its 'negative portrayal of India and its people'.

Naipaul traveled for a year and surveyed what he saw as the decay of a past civilization. The trip is not arranged either geographically or chronologically, but followed the musings of his mind. Generally his thoughts were of a critical nature; he saw the people as backward, narrow minded and short sighted. For Naipaul eastern philosophy and religion were to blame for fatalistic and unambitious attitudes.

The saving grace of Naipaul’s approach was his writing, the reason I suppose for his fame. An easy going style undercuts the acidity of his observations. The combination is a stream of conscious rambling by a disillusioned son of the diaspora. It is easy to enter into his frame of mind and find fault in everything you come across. The risk is a lack of rigor, the same shortcoming Naipaul found within India.

Naipaul offered some interesting insights on caste, class and post-colonialism during the early decades of the Republic. He visited slums in Mumbai, fiefs in Pune and ruminated on Mahatma Gandhi's rejection of the West. It is an eclectic set of sketches and studies; how they contributed to his Nobel prize is unclear. My guess is that you would need to read his entire body of work in order to fully understand.

Postscript (2024): Further reflection on this volume of his trilogy impugns Naipaul’s assertion religion and superstition were the major causes of underdevelopment since 1947. He later indicted Islam as a culprit of poverty in Iran, Pakistan, Indonesia and Malaysia. Here he omits subjugation of the subcontinent beginning with the East India Company in the 17th century and ending with Crown Rule in the 20th.