Rating: 5/5

This meticulously documented narrative paints a chilling portrait of the impact of bias in science and politics. Author Christopher Bryson begins with the tale of Phyllis Mullenix, chief neurotoxicologist at Forsyth Dental Center at Harvard University. However the story quickly connects with the Manhattan Project. 

Dr. Mullenix was fired days after publishing a peer reviewed research project proving neurological deficits in rats with blood plasma levels of fluoride that match that of humans in communities with water fluoridation. Toxicologist and Chief Scientist Dr. William Marcus of the EPA had a similar experience when he voiced his concerns to his supervisors about the manipulation of data in a experiment looking at carcinogenic properties of fluoride. Dr. Marcus was vindicated and reinstated with a Whistleblower's defense. Dr. Mullenix wasn't so lucky. Having no interest in fluoride prior to being assigned this study, she now finds herself blacklisted from the type of work she loved. She now makes her living primarily as consultant. 

However, the twist in the story is that the kindly old emeritus scientist who looked over her shoulder as she conducted her research was Harold Hodge, former Chief Medical Officer and Toxicologist of the Manhattan Project and the person who subtly promoted water fluoridation as a method of minimizing litigation against fluoride air pollution. (Google 1948 Donora Smog and Martins v Reynolds Metals lawsuit). Who knew, fluoride was considered more dangerous to workers than the radioactive products. One of Hodges water fluoridation cohorts was Edward Bernays, the nephew of Sigmund Freud, also known as "the father of spin."

This isn't typically the type of book I review on my professional book list, however, it is a study in the destructive power of hierarchical culture, confirmation bias, and ad hominem attacks. It is also a book I believe should be widely read based on its content. 

I strongly suggest you read this book.