Rating: 4/5

This is the second book of Naipaul’s ‘India trilogy’; and, while the first book was more in the line of a conventional travel memoir – albeit with scattered observations and insights on the Indian way of life – this book almost dispenses with the travel aspect completely. Instead, Naipaul here seems to have completed a particular journey of disillusionment, and the text is almost wholly given up to an extended meditation on India’s civilizational arrest.
 
The book opens with Naipaul visiting the ruins of Vijayanagar, the erstwhile Hindu kingdom, and a rallying point for the current day Hindu nationalist movement. The treatment of Vijayanagar acts a synecdoche for the rest of the book; Naipaul notes that even during its’ heyday in the 14th and 15th centuries, its art and architecture were only heavy-handed copies of previous Hindu glory further back in time. The decline of Indian civilization has very long roots indeed.
 
Naipaul is in search of these roots. There are several references in the text to India’s impotence in the face of the changing world; and Naipaul, an intellectual himself, notes that this impotence manifests itself as an intellectual vacuum - what he cruelly calls India’s intellectual ‘second-rateness’. India does not have any especial gift for synthesis, as her defenders are wont to proclaim; rather, in keeping with their status as a subjugated people, Indians have been intellectually parasitic on the world. Unable to produce any guiding idea for its own people, India's conspicuous ‘lack of an ideology’ means that Indians rely on other, imperfectly understood cultures for their tenacious sustenance upon the world stage.
 
While he does not use the exact term, what Naipaul has diagnosed here is a subcontinental-wide form of psychological regression; in fact, he even reproduces the words of the Indian psychoanalyst, Sudhir Kakar, who offers a psychological diagnosis of civilizational mediocrity. For the most part, Indians have an ‘underdeveloped ego’ with the corresponding ‘tenuous grasp of reality’ that this implies. The subjectivism of most Indians, with all the connotations of primitive magic and fantasy that this brings along in its' wake, is a negative achievement, countenanced by the general failure to engage with reality. Naipaul quotes Kakar's speculation that this failure is due to the absurdly over-regulated social sphere in which most Indians live – responsibility for reality is constantly outsourced and travels increasingly diminished across an endless chain, leading to a people in permanent paralysis and tragically unaware of their own mediocrity. 

Thus, wounded and threatened by the churning and vibrant outside world, Indians refuse to move forward and instead take refuge in a glorious past of which too they have little real understanding. This is the tragedy of India’s intellectual myopia – and leads to Indians as a people, and India as a polity, simply outsourcing the running of the world to others. 

This stunned and insecure worldview is perfectly represented by the novelist RK Narayan. I remember scattered remarks in ‘An Area of Darkness’, that testified to Naipaul’s admiration of Narayan; but here, it seems that the admiration has become much more mixed. Narayan’s self-contained world, with the gentle humour that can only survive in such a severely circumscribed world, has a touch of the didactic eternalism so dear to the Hindus; and Naipaul concludes, that for all its humanity and lightness of touch, Narayan’s novels represent a deeply Hindu response to a world that has passed it by, and, in so doing, has injured it. It is the forced adoption of calm in the face of defeat, it is playing dead. 

The figure of Narayan also plays a double role in Naipaul’s reckoning – he is a figure of interest not only in the context of his novels and what these represent, but also himself as a novelist. Naipaul observes – and it is an observation that he had made in his earlier book as well – that the novel, being a form of social inquiry, is something quite removed from Indian sensibilities. Narayan therefore represents the pathos of engaging with the outside world, but in a half-hearted manner – India’s sole remaining genius seems to lie in importing foreign ideas and modes of world-engagement into her own depleted milieu and contorting them until they fit, null, alongside the nullity that is her own. 

The intellectual mediocrity of the subcontinent is further exemplified by what the country has done to its Gandhian legacy. It seems that Naipaul has a mixed opinion of Gandhi himself. On the one hand, there are remarks of admiration for the man’s greatness of spirit as well as the genuine complexity of his personality that refuses to succumb to caricature. On the other hand, Naipaul glumly speculates that Gandhi’s appropriation of the ancient Hindu virtue of quietism into a project of national awakening, was ultimately a null venture; the India which he awakened was an India of ‘far older defeat’, and the qualities he called up in service of the awakening were qualities which were the handmaidens of that defeat and, after Gandhi himself disappeared, would inevitably lead India back to her deep sleep once again. The caricaturing of the Gandhian legacy – captured in Naipaul’s brutal description of Vinoba Bhave, a figure whom I had only vaguely known – is symptomatic of Indian lethargy, but is the harbinger of a much more troubling civilizational attribute. Even India’s one resurgence on the modern world stage, the Gandhi-led awakening, was forced to look backwards to India’s past. It seems, Naipaul is saying, that any Indian renaissance or revival can only take the form of a looking back. The civilization is too depleted of spirit to look forward. 

It is fair to say that Naipaul locates India’s continuing defeat in Hinduism; or, more accurately, in the Hindu psychology of which the religion is only the manifestation. Naipaul has already shown his cards, declaring that a century of his forefathers being uprooted from Indian soil, had been enough of a time period to cleanse him, personally, of many of the old Indian religious attitudes; and he caustically remarks that, without the filter of these attitudes, without the filter that is, of some element of fantasy or magic, the filth and squalor of India is intolerable. Some of the attitudes that Naipaul locates and which he viciously castigates include; the virtues of quietism, of blind obedience, social indifference and apathy, the bracketing of the world not as a place for action and of individual heroism, but only as a stage for the impersonal calculus of karma; a sense of history, insomuch as it can be said to exist in Hinduism, that is primitive and which only lends itself to a perspective of history as an extended religious fable and nothing more. In sum, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that, for all the soaring heights of Hindu speculation, the religion has degenerated considerably into (or perhaps, has always been) a barbaric process of primitive magic and equally primitive wish-fulfillment; and further, more generally, that the entire religious edifice, distilled into the typical Hindu psychology and ‘way of life’ is only an exhausted religious response to worldly humiliation. 

There are other cruel, almost uncalled-for, criticisms of certain typical Indian attitudes and behaviours: Naipaul takes issue with the uniquely subjective manner in which most Indians perceive the world, whereby the latter is only encountered insomuch as it affects the inner emotional state. This ‘negative way’ of perceiving is allied to the underdeveloped ego, and mitigates against curiosity, objective engagement with the world, and effective action. This distinct lack of curiosity about reality means that the desire of India’s leaders at Independence, to inculcate the spirit of scientific temper, has been reduced to a shameful mockery. Naipaul notes that most Indians who make contributions to global science do so outside India – and, what is more worrying, are almost expected to do so. There seems to be an acceptance of the fact that India itself will not nurture scientific curiosity and will not reward it. The scientists who have made their contributions and then return to India resume their place in the stifling matrix of stagnation that is the subcontinent, and their brilliance evaporates under the pressure-cooker of India’s over-regulated social space. The merit they had attained previously under the aegis of their own efforts, now can be had simply by playing one’s circumscribed role in the implied eternity of Hindu life. 

Hinduism subtracts brilliance and energy from its adherents, Naipaul seems to be saying, and substitutes crude and readymade pleasures on their behalf. The paralyzing effect of Hinduism means that ‘men do not actively explore the world, but are instead, defined by it.’ But this permanent Hindu immobility means that India invites disasters again and again. 
 
In conclusion, I thought that this was a very sobering and especially brutal look at India and Indians. I did not intend this review to be as long as it turned out - but Naipaul's observations evoked a deep and painful dialogue within me. With the previous book, I had come away with a sympathy for Naipaul’s analyses and yet maintained a sense of unfairness at the harsh criticisms he was making. In the span of years that has passed since then, however, it really does seem to me that Naipaul is by and large correct in his analysis of Indian civilization; my protest dies under the weight of facts. Again, to return to the previous book, I had come away enraptured with Naipaul’s prose; here, my enthusiasm has considerably waned. Not to say that the writing isn’t decidedly above-average – after all, if the skill of a writer is measured by the ability to match words to needs, Naipaul exceeds exceptionally. No one can accuse him of hiding shoddy perception with flowery language. Rather, the language is as unfeeling and brutally exact as the observations. My complaint would be rather that it seems quite uninspired in spots, there is a certain rigidity about the prose that betokens a lack of vitality – almost as if the prose was in response to the devitalized country he was sojourning in. 

A strongly recommended book for people interested in India and who care about it.