Rating: 3/5

I'm working on reading this whole series, and I've noticed that not only does Perry have no clue how to write a denouement (and thus leaves her readers feeling cheated at the end) but she's also really preachy. Oh, she has her characters ponder women's rights, but the men always step in and tell the women what to do. In this book, for example, even after Joshua learns that Caroline has done absolutely nothing wrong, he forbids her from a friendship, and she accepts his control meekly. Also, Perry is repeatedly anti-abortion, never showing or addressing why it was necessary and dangerous and never showing any sympathy for characters who undergo the process.
In this book, one of her favorite topics to hate shows up as the motive for murder in a completely unbelievable way. It's so ridiculous that it becomes almost deus ex machina as she stretches for a solution to who murdered the victim and why.
SPOILERS:
One of the side plots is the character development of the unlikable Tellman. He's uptight and uneducated; he sees the world in black and white and has no comprehension of anything outside of his views. And this is why what Perry does with him in this book makes no sense.
For one thing, she has him touched by viewing Hamlet. Really? It's extremely unlikely that such a man would grasp the complexities of the character of Hamlet; it would be way over his head. Now, if she'd had him watch A Comedy of Errors or had him relate to the abusive Petrucchio in Taming of the Shrew, that would fit.
And then he freaks out when he discovers porn. This is OK on the surface, but Tellman is clearly sexually repressed, views women as less than men, and has no tolerance for anyone who is different from himself. This is exactly the type of man who would rant about making porn illegal yet become addicted to it in secret. (A lot of modern outwardly religious men do this in the 21st Century. Tellman would be no different.)

END SPOILERS
I like most of the characters in Perry's books and her plots are usually good, even if not thoroughly ended, but I'd recommend readers skip this one.
And I'm not sure I'll finish the series if she keeps up her pretense of being pro-women while she really isn't.