Rating: 5/5

3rd attempt to write this review. It's deserving a good review, and this outline will get fleshed out to avoid problems hitting wrong buttons. Annapurna South Face is a hallmark book about a hallmark 2nd generation Himalayan climbing expedition.

The most important context and a non-essential prerequisite: Read Herzog Maurice's Annapurna first 8,000 meter peak of 14 peaks total. This was true exploration (local maps lacked all detail). Most English readers don't realize the flawed nature of Herzog's book. A few readers will find David Roberts' True Summit: What Really Happened on the Legendary Ascent on Annapurna.

The next 13 8KM peaks would be climbed in the next decade and less well documented than more armchair climbers would find interesting. The end of the first generation and the beginning of the start of the second generation 1963. Peaks started having 2nd routes, harder routes taken to their summits. Then came a Cold War hiatus of 6 years.

Important during this time was the winter ascent of the 2nd Eiger North Face route (Harlin). This use of expedition fixed routes and load hauling would transition to the Himalaya.

1970: The start of a new generation. Contrast weak head lamps and flashlights and failing ink pens to a new generation warming batteries over the stove.

I read this book when it first came out about 1971 or 1972.

A different age and a different time. Where were the famous Sherpas in all this? Low down.

To understand (and appreciate) this expedition and this book: it took place when one had to raise a lot of money to mount a big expedition (during the Cold War which had an influence on travel hard to appreciate these days). The technical skills required of climbers started to exceed local porter knowledge. At this time, modern lightweight expeditions had barely made their mark (Broad Peak in Pakistan), this will change starting this same year (1970) to the next five years (see Messner at the end of this review). At the time this was Bonnington's 2nd book (after I Chose to Climb), and he's just begun a career as a professional writer (his most historic expedition days are a few years ahead of him (since most non-climbers have only heard of Mt. Everest)).

So the reader needs to keep these old developments in context. This was all before "adventure travel" came into existence.

Second most important team member was Jimmy Roberts (no relation to Dave Roberts), their logistics manager. Roberts appears in English climbing accounts both before and after the Annapurna South Face expedition. His overall knowledge would guide much planning and decision making for two decades of climbers. This was important because the Annapurna South Face expedition was one of the first to make use of computers before the advent of spreadsheets. Roberts' thought about logistics qualitatively.

Realize the English language bias on two levels: English isn't necessarily the first language of climbing and it's important to realize what was happening on other mountains at the same time.

The Japanese were on Everest on the regular route and a new hard route on the SW face eventually also climbed by a Bonington expedition Chris Bonington's Everest The Hard Way. This was also the Miura ski trip of the documentary movie note (6 years later).

But more importantly an expedition was taking place on a peak obscure to most English speakers, Nanga Parbat by the Rupal Flank (unquestionably the tallest face in the world by thousands of meters), with a climber whose name would later mark the 3rd generation with Reinhold Messner starting in 1975 and set off the branch to climb all 8,000 meter peaks and in some case in incomprehensible times (3 days) or without supplemental oxygen (as well as Seven summits or 2nd highest peaks).

So this is a short context of the hallmark of Annapurna South Face. An incredible tale in its own right.