Rating: 5/5

Focusing is a truly easy and quick way to alleviate😌 or erase😁 mental stress, even regarding big and difficult issues.🤕❤️‍🩹 In a nutshell, you notice a sensation you're feeling,🤔 find a word(s) that describes it,🔤 and tell yourself that 🗣️"something inside me feels _🔤_." That's the key: grasping that it's something inside you that feels that way, not you yourself. This instantly creates space between you🫷🏼 🫸🏼and the problem. Then you just acknowledge and listen to it.👂 There are six steps in the original process, which you can look up online, but this slender book presents them in the simplest and most practical language I've seen.

The technique was discovered by Eugene Gendlin, a professor of Philosophy and Comparative Human Development at the University of Chicago. "Eugene Gendlin did 15 years of research analyzing what made psychotherapy either successful or unsuccessful. 
  His conclusion was that it is not the therapist's technique that determines the success of psychotherapy, but rather the way the patient behaves, and what the patient does inside himself during the therapy sessions.
 Gendlin found that, without exception, the successful patient intuitively focuses inside himself on a very subtle and vague internal bodily awareness—or 'felt sense'—which contains information that... holds the key to the resolution of the problems the patient is experiencing." –from the "Focusing" Wikipedia page.[1]

Gendlin distilled the successful patients' actions into six specific steps that anyone could learn. I've read both Ann Weiser Cornell's The Power of Focusing and Gendlin's own Focusing. The latter, although written with the layperson in mind, goes into more detail than is probably necessary unless you're a counseling professional, in which case you might also see Cornell's Focusing in Clinical Practice.

There's a good Psychology Today article about focusing here.

---
[1] citing Gendlin, Eugene T. (1982) [1978]. Focusing (2nd ed.). New York: Bantam Books.