Rating: 4/5

I acquired this whopper approximately 9 years ago, and up until March 2025, I had only read a leisurely 250 pages. Finally got down to it and finished it for good, and I must say that, though it was worth it in order to form a complete picture of Wordsworth, there's a lot in here that I'm unlikely to revisit again. 

One way to characterise Wordsworth would be to call him an inspired monk. It seemed like Nature was there especially to remind one of God and his glory, much like it was for the medievals like Bonaventura, allowing one to ascend from one rung to another to the empyrean. Except that with Wordsworth, these rungs could be flowers and his empyrean a reflection upon a lake. And I am not saying this in scorn: his best poetry emits the calming glow of a cloistral taper, silently shedding light into the ambient gloom, calling the reader to meditate upon the fine, soul-uplifting delicacies of the world. The sheer insistence with which he zooms in on skylarks, cuckoos, daffodils, hawthorns, ferns, tufts, even insects, and clothes them in pristine poesy, finding in them both a secret illumination and a symbol of greater powers, is, at its best, life-affirming. I am a sucker for nature poetry anyway, and Wordsworth is a master at what he is doing: rarely does it feel like he is stumbling, or disfiguring the page with horrendous doggerel, or even overusing rhymes. For all his prolificacy, his poetic sense did not seem to grow dull throughout the decades. 

Wordsworth also goes further than your medieval monks in terms of chronicling the life sublunary. He could deliciously twine psychological states with the objects of his art, imbuing the little plants with a sense of human mystery (especially showcased in "The Prelude"). Nor was he loth to speak in favour of the unlearned and uncouth, having more sympathy towards the homely and simple than towards the learned and the ambitious. And despite being a great Romantic who had witnessed the horrors of French Revolution and the subsequent reign of terror, and the concomitant moral dilemmas (being a patriotic Brit), his poetry never ceased to exude an air of sacral calm. 

My biggest gripe with Wordsworth, however, is that, like the friars of yore, it seemed like he too was a truth-seeker who had already found what he had been looking for. If you're a Christian, it's just a matter of reaffirming the power and glory of God, time and again. And while some poems definitely cannot be reduced to being riddles of divine splendour, in many of the longer narrative poems all Wordsworth seems to do is to paint predictable pictures of God-fearing laymen, living in Christian hope and charity, in spite of their hard destinies. 

While I admire Wordsworth's consistency, it baffles me as to why he thought that all these thinly veiled allegories were that inspiring. Their one-sidedness is made at times downright tedious due to the universal character of the narratives (for for Wordsworth, the universal was ever-worth attaining). People are described in the most lacklustre, exaggerated way, and whatever local colours Wordsworth must have seen during his rambles, are painted with the predictable brush of a Bunyan. 

There were also many themes that I didn't find very engaging under Wordsworth's pen, such as the French struggles, European travel tales and dedications to lord-knows-whom. Also, in his longer works, one could get bored after a while, especially during the pitiless "Excursion", which is just a protracted sermon on Christian forbearance under the barrage of Fate. Of course, the themes are not the same as their poetic handling, but with Wordsworth, the message that shines through is sometimes so painfully obvious that a poem seems to turn into a puerile allegory. 

There are plenty of commonalities between Wordsworth and Finland's national poet, Johan Ludvig Runeberg. Both wanted to step away from the purple diction and approach the everyday and the everyman in much more toned-down language. They sought to portray poor farmers and shepherds as Christian ideals, who despite their indigence had great hearts and were capable of greater acts than your battlefield generals. For them both, the nature was an open book, where one could read edifying tales. To a lesser extent, both also nursed a curiosity towards the natural purity of the pagan times, even if there never was a question of the true Christian loyalty of either poet. Both were also stout patriots.

But where they differ is that, of course, Runeberg was a propagandist that helped to create the myth of a loyal but poor Finn, ever-willing to sacrifice themselves for their fatherland. But more importantly, whereas Runeberg's diction was usually rather trite, Wordsworth's wasn't. Upon encountering a flower, Runeberg would easily content himself with dull, matter-of-fact musings on evanescence, while Wordsworth would encase the little plant in the most splendid crystal, evoking both the refreshing morning air and the giddy teeming calm that the outdoors never cease to deliver in droves. 

For, despite his shortcomings, Wordsworth is a superb craftsman who helped to create the Arcadia of English poetry: the Nature that could never exist but in poetry but that continues to shine forth its sorcery from the page unto the light of day, sanctifying the busy world with waves of beauty.

(These 1,000+ pages-long compilations are unfair on most poets anyway, since they present the works in an overwhelming abundance, rarely intended as the ideal context by the artist themselves.)