Rating: 1/5

This book should be renamed "Pregnancy Can Kill You! Week by Week". The doctors who wrote this should not be practicing medicine. I didn't think it was possible to be more offended by a pregnancy book since I read "What to Expect When You're Expecting" but this one is just incredibly awful. The worst part was, my health insurance company sent me a copy of the 7th edition of this book when I became pregnant. If this was my first pregnancy, I would now be a terrified mess. Some of the grossly inaccurate information in here included:

Risk of gestational diabetes It states: "Gestational diabetes affects 10% of all pregnancies...if gestational diabetes occurs with one pregnancy, there's almost a 90% chance it will happen in future pregnancies." ABSOLUTELY NOT TRUE. Statistics are 4% of all pregnancies, and the risk of recurrence is around 30%. It also goes on to say that if you do have it, you're dooming your child to a life of obesity. Pure fear mongering.

Episiotomy: States that they are better for the patient than tearing naturally, which has been proven to be completely false. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists issued new guidelines in 2005, saying that episiotomy during labor should be restricted because doctors had previously underestimated the risk of bad outcomes later on, such as painful sex and possible incontinence.

Homebirth: Dr. Curtis and the American College of Obstetricians say that's hazardous and you're putting your baby in danger if you have one! Except that's not true! The ACOG actually states that the absolute risk is low and they just want patients to be informed of all risks. In fact, you're at much higher risk of infection or having a c-section if you have a hospital birth, and they state this on their website.

Hot tubs and heating pads: You could cook your baby to death or fry them with low level eletromagnetic fields! BULLSHIT.

It also goes on about the most obscure of possible complications during pregnancy, like bird flu, laparoscopy, cancer and shingles, among other complications which *could* occur in less than 2% of pregnancies. Shingles? REALLY? Maybe if you miraculously became pregnant after menopause, sure. It's insane that these are thrown in on every week like it's something common to worry about. Also the layout of the book is odd. It doesn't discuss caffeine intake until the second trimester, placenta previa in the last month when in reality it's usually detected at the 20 week anatomy scan, restless leg syndrome in week 36, when in actuality if you do have it (I did) it shows up much earlier than that. Needless to say, I wanted to throw this book at the doctors who wrote it, and shame on my insurance company for handing this out when there are so many more helpful and accurate texts out there.