Rating: 4/5

Wish I knew all this sooner.

I knew very little about the Korean War. I've studied both World Wars, Vietnam, and the Cold War in general, but Korea hardly ever comes up. I never realized how strong an effect Korea had on American policy until now. If you are interested in Foreign policy and the Cold War, I highly recommend learning about this chapter in history (if not from Fehrenbach, then from somewhere).

The writing itself is somewhat heavy on military details and will likely be difficult for someone unfamiliar with that sort of terminology. Fehrenbach also occasionally gives grand descriptions to events and players, with 'legions on the far frontier' coming fairly often in various arrangements. Having served in the military myself, I can appreciate themes like this. Given Fehrenbach's own service, it is hardly surprising to see, though I imagine others might have a lesser view of such things. 

The greatest strength of the book is the ease with which Fehrenbach transitions from macro level strategic and political concerns (written in an easy to follow manner) to the micro level experiences of individual men, who are used to illuminate the struggles faced by men in all areas of the war. Having completed the book, I can see the frustration of the men in the field, unable to understand why Washington and the UN was tying their hands partway into the war; I can see why the U.S. and UN leaders were trying to hold back, hoping to avoid a general war with the Soviets; and I think I understand a little bit better what the Communists were trying to do in Korea, though I despise their leaders actions. 

Personally, I reacted with a bit more emotion to this book than I expected. The events of the Korean War seem like some sort of tragic, pointless fiction rather than reality. I can understand why no one wants to dwell on it. But I think it is history that, bitter as it tastes, should be better known. I saw faint reflections of modern times reflected in this history of the Korean War, and I think there are lessons in it which should not be tossed aside.

In summary, I give 'This Kind of War' 4 stars. It is an excellent book which is perhaps a bit heavy on military maneuvering. I think some might get bogged down in these details, but it is worth pressing through. It is also far less dry than you might expect. 

Note: The Kindle edition is riddled with a huge number of typos, to the point that I almost rated this three stars instead of four. Some were so baffling that I had to come to a dead stop just to figure out what I was looking at. It's still very readable as a whole, but whoever is responsible for this version should be embarrassed.