Rating: 4/5

I first read “The World of Normal Boys” last year, and I liked it a lot. Upon re-reading it, I agree that it’s kind of depressing, unsettling, but also realistic. Remember that this is set in the 1970s. How much did your average gay 13yo then know about Stonewall, for instance?

I can easily imagine a young 1970s boy who knows he attracted to boys, is consumed with guilt on multiple fronts, has virtually no positive role models, jerks off a lot, and gets slapped around by everybody. But does this make for a good novel? Well, I suppose that not every coming-of-age story has to be life-affirming and love-affirming. What Robin thinks, what he does, are wholly believable from a 13yo’s point of view. At the same time, I don’t think I’d want to be Robin, no matter what decade it is -- even if I *did* get to say “screw you” and ride off into the sunset at the end.

Robin has, or ends up having, an antagonistic relationship with almost everyone in his life. The only “nice people” are his guidance counselor, Mr. Cortez, and Vincent, the Greenwich Village trick who gives Robin bus fare for sex. But take the other characters: Robin’s father is the personification of clueless fatherhood, Robin’s mentoring mother has given over to drink, brother Jackson (until his demise) is a bullying brat, sister Ruby and grandmother Nana are ridiculously religious, Grandpa Leo was a drunk, uncle Stan is a dork, cousin Larry is a total prick, and both buds Todd Spicer and Scott Schatz turn out to be losers who, for unknown reasons, like to get their rocks off (indiscriminately) with other guys. Lest I forget Mr. Schatz, the drunken child abuser. So, Robin is awash in negativity. Even Mr. Cortez is clueless about why 13yo Robin has to ditch school.

I think the main shtick in this novel is not homosexuality or parents or friends, or 13yos. It’s Jackson’s injury. It’s the granddaddy metaphor for dashed hopes. Robin’s story is filled with dashed hopes. And at the end, when Robin takes the bull by the horns, says sayonara, and gets on that Black &amp; Tan bus to NYC, the story is still about hope.