Rating: 4/5

20,000 Leagues Under the Sea was an incredible sci-fi for such a old book. I read a shortened version of the book that had less detail, but I still enjoyed the plot and the storyline. It is quite intriguing that this book was written in 1870 by Jules Verne. No wonder he is sometimes known as the “Father of Science Fiction”. 

This book is focused on the bizarre adventures of the Nautilus, a sophisticated submarine that was mistaken as a sea creature by the entire world. Captain Nemo is the creator or the submarine and he uses the ship to isolate himself from humanity. Throughout this book, Captain Nemo travels around the entire globe with Professor Aronnax, his trusty servant Conseil, and Ned Land, a Canadian harpooner. The three were forced to board the Nautilus after being hurled off of the Abraham Lincoln. 

I find that, often times, Professor Aronnax and Ned Land had very different attitudes towards their “new lives” on the Nautilus. Verne does a great job with differentiating their characteristics and mindset. Consequently, it makes each character stand out and mnemonic. Ned is a very impatient, ill-tempered and sometimes uncooperative person. He also has little interest to Nautilus and is desperate to escape. When the characters were trapped in one of the Nautilus’ rooms for a long time, “Land’s temper grew shorter as he grew hungrier. He ranted about being a prisoner. He shouted and yelled. He banged on the walls.” Professor Aronnax, however, is very curious and eager about the journey. He always accepts Captain Nemo’s invitations to underwater excursions because he wants to learn whatever possible from these rare occasions. In the end, when the three friends escaped in a lucky situation, Aronnax went home with tons of new knowledge, yet Ned went home with no new gain. I think the message the author is trying to get across is that your attitude towards doing things can have great impacts on you in multiple ways.

One thing that I both liked and disliked about the book was the element of mystery that implemented on the character of Captain Nemo. He has a unknown backstory that made me infer and brainstorm throughout the book. Aronnax speculated that his embarkation and departure from land was a sort of revenge. Verne also drops subtle hints in the book, such as when Nemo decided to visit the shipwreck of “The Revenge”. However, his backstory is never unveiled. I feel the book would’ve been better if it was unfolded, and the book felt unfinished without it. I feel like the ending should’ve included it, but Captain Nemo and the crew abruptly “died”.

One fun fact I found while reading the “About the Author” section was that the world’s first operational nuclear-powered submarine was named after the Nautilus! 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea explores a 20,000 league journey all over the globe. This book was good overall. I have a couple of other Verne books in my house, and I’m excited to read them. I would recommend this book to anyone that hasn’t read it yet.