Rating: 2/5

This slim volume contains two poetry collections by Judith Viorst, one published in 1968 and the other in 1970. Both are meant to be humorous, and both deal with the same themes: How annoyed Judith Viorst is by her marriage, how uncool she feels compared to just about everyone else, and how annoyed she is by her uncoolness. As you might imagine, this tends to get a bit repetitive. She just can't stop going on and on about how now that she's married and has kids, she has to pack lunches instead of traveling the world, and about how her husband still gets to live in the world of adults while she's home mopping the floor and picking up toys. This dissection of the foibles of stay-at-home wifehood and motherhood reminded me of something, although it took me a while to realize what: Erma Bombeck's syndicated humor columns, which appeared in many American newspapers throughout the 1970s. Except these poems contain none of the warmth and little of the emotional range commonly found in Bombeck's work.

These collections were reprinted in 1999 with the implication that they're a forgotten document of the second wave of feminism, but I have to say I wasn't overly impressed in this regard either. Sure, there's something feminist about pointing out that marriage isn't always everything it's cracked up to be, but Viorst makes a point of saying that she still thinks it's better to be married than single, and she's also explicit that she has no use for the women's movement. So this is essentially quite a conservative work, 104 pages of someone griping about her marriage but not actually interested in doing anything to change the status quo. 

So who is this book actually for? If you're really interested in poetry from the second wave, you'd be much better off checking out Adrienne Rich, Audre Lorde, Marge Piercy, or this volume (from which Judith Viorst is, tellingly, missing). If you just want to listen to someone complain about their spouse, I would suggest simply going outside, stopping a random person on the sidewalk, and asking them how their marriage is going. You might make a new friend, and as a bonus you can avoid this book altogether.