Rating: 1/5

I'd give this book 0 stars if I could. It was the worst book I've ever read and I actually regret reading it to my 6yo. The book says that it has laugh-out-loud stories. I didn't laugh once. In fact, I was appalled that anyone would think it was funny. The only thing the author got right is that Henry truly is horrid. Children don't need to be reading books about this kind of behavior....and worst, to think it's funny. 

In the first story, Henry cheats and lies about a reading contest and nothing ever happens to him. Sure, he didn't get the prize he thought he would but he never paid a price for his bad behavior.

In the second story, the first sentence starts with I HATE YOU. That's not a phrase we welcome in our house. There was also a lot of name calling and going behind backs and just overall rude behavior. 

In the third story, Henry has to work on a school project. He ends up working alone because he whines an acts horribly and then goes around and steals from all the other kids(their projects get ruined). The teacher has finally had it and yells at him(rightfully so) and SHE is sent to the principal's office. Nothing happens to Henry. How this is funny or something a kid should think they could get away with is beyond me. 

In the fourth story, Henry gets invited to a sleepover and he can't wait to go so he can ruin their furniture and eat all their candy. Of course it backfires but his attitude doesn't change. 

There are NOOOOOO consequences in this book. Not one. He never gets in trouble. His mom just yells at him to stop and he never does. Are you kidding me? I don't care if I want my kids to read or not. This is not the behavior that should be glamorized or laughed about. I was shocked at all the comments at the front of the book by parents and teachers about how wonderful the book was and it's always nice to know there is a kid worse out there than yours. Good grief. How do you think kids get this way? These books sure won't help. We won't be reading any of these again. 

I wouldn't recommend them to anyone. I had to spend more time that it took to read it, going over why these behaviors aren't acceptable. I should have quit after the first page.