Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars rounded up to 5. This is my 3rd Akimitsu Takagi book and my second Prosecutor Kirishima book. I did not like the Noh Mask book and dnf'd it. I liked the first Kirishima book that I got this one. Spoilers ahead.

As with many Japanese detective books of this era the plot is overly complicated with a lot of characters which doesn't do it any favors. The strength of any good book lies in building up interesting characters that readers want to follow. Also in this case the first half of the book follows Etsuko (the protagonist) before abandoning her and somewhat following Kirishima. And as usual the author builds up a mysterious case with lots of people dying before the detective lays bare the mystery in a single chapter at the end of the book. As my old math teacher used to say "Show your work to get the credit!" which none of these authors do.

Etusko is a young spinster who her lawyer father wants to marry off to a young partner in his office. But she has no interest in him. One day she accidentally meets Yoshihiro, a young university lecturer and over time falls in love with him. She finally convinces her parents to let her marry him. On their wedding night he is lured out and murdered. That is basically the summary of the first part of the book. 

As Kirishima investigates the case Yoshihiro's brother is also murdered. There does not seem to be any physical clues or suspects but the truth is revealed as Kirishima starts digging into Yoshihiro's past.

The writing (or translation) is very well done and the writing is easy to read and follow. The author does a good job of building up the characters. The mystery and the ending is a bit meh as the reveal is quick and doesn't really let the reader savor the discovery and analysis behind it. 

There is a good bit of back and forth between Kirishima and his assistant but I think bringing Kirishima's wife into the story was a bit unnecessary. I'm now on to the last Takagi book available in English, which also happens to be his first one.