Rating: 5/5

Okay, I admit it, I'm enthralled. When I learned that Michael Schiefelbein had written a sequel to the excellent Vampire Vow, I was elated. Finally, I thought, I get to spend a little more time in the company of that hunky ex-Gladiator-turned-nocturnal hunter, Victor Decimus. And after the enjoyable, but somewhat disappointing, Blood Brothers, I was happy to see Schiefelbein getting back to his roots, so to speak. I'm happy to announce that Vampire Thrall is everything this fan had hoped for and more.

Continuing the story of Victor's vampiric sojourn through the beginning of his third millennia on Earth, Vampire Thrall takes up where Vampire Vow left off. Victor still has his understandable Jesus complex and he's still banging monks as a distraction from the ennui his longevity threatens to force upon him. He's also still reeling from the rejection of his beloved Brother Michael, as detailed in that first book. But this time he may have actually met a man who is worthy of his attentions. Enter illuminator Paul Lewis, an American artist working on an extended project at San Benedetto Monestary in Rome, where Victor has taken up residence. Paul has a few secrets of his own and between those secrets and the ones Victor so closely guards, the stage is set for a manly love affair with plenty of pitfalls, otherworldly and otherwise, to make this highly erotic entry a cracking good read.

Present still are Schiefelbein's mastery of language and evocative storytelling, as well as fascinating historical contexts which would make any armchair tourist salivate. So too is Victor's penchant for anal intercourse—that vampire does love to fuck! Different, this time, is the extent to which Schiefelbein goes to explain and describe the transformation one goes through in becoming a vampire. We're never really sure if Paul will join Victor in his twilight lifestyle, or destroy him when he least expects it. And with the added influence of Michael's dead voodoo priestess grandmother, Jana, as a wild card, the enthralled reader never really knows how the story will end, right up until the very last page. Vampire Vow is the kind of book that will devour time and attention for hours on end, and linger hauntingly in the catacombs of the mind long after the last drop has been sucked from its pages. Now that's storytelling, boys and girls. Whether you're a fan of the vampire genre, or not.