Rating: 4/5

✰ 3.75 stars ✰

  “God, give me a new life. This one isn’t working for me.

He waits for a merciful bolt of lightning to strike his brain, to offer him some clue as to how it all works, this whole world of normal boys.”

I honestly haven't been this conflicted about my true thoughts for a book in quite awhile. I can't deny that Robin's story seeped into my soul so much that I do feel that it does deserve a higher rating. I really did like it. And yet, on the other hand, a part of me still felt a tad bit uncomfortable that I was reading the sexual exploits of a thirteen-year-old boy. But then, the rational part of me argues that 'Amina, you're not a thirteen-year-old boy. You don't know how their mind works or what they go through as they explore their own sexuality. Why should you be so offended about it, when it's his life - his journey?' 😔 For it is Robin's young age - that cusp of entering his teenage years during the late 70s in suburban New Jersey - that makes this such a poignant and heart-wrenching coming-of-age novel, as he faces the many diverse and conflicting familial and emotional and physical challenges of what it means to belong in The World of Normal Boys.

“Risk. It’s more than just a list of things to do—it’s a whole way of life, a ride off the map.”

There's something honestly quite moving about coming-of-age stories - the way the characters are on the threshold of innocence and one pivotal and crucial moment can catapult their life into another direction - that path of self-discovery and the important significant life-changing lessons they learn along the way. 😔 And here, it was no exception. It starts off innocently enough. Robin about to start freshman year with his off-set attraction to his much older neighbor, seventeen-year-old Todd Spicer, and the occasional teasing from his younger brother, Jackson and their equally aggressive and taunting cousin, Larry. It starts off tenderly as Robin gently writes out what he wants to achieve in this new school year - what are the things he wants to accomplish to be worthy of himself - to prove that he can be normal like other boys and fit into the crowd. It starts off --- and then, without warning, the writing really draws you into Robin's world - the writing that is the true champion of this debut novel. 💔💔

With such a visceral grip, the writing elevates what life is like for Robin - so visually expressive, it allows you to get inside his head as he struggles with the growing pains and pangs with questions of the heart and the conflicting emotions he faces. I felt like my heart was in its clutches the entire time - lost in the words that transported me into his life of 1978 - jiving to Saturday Night Fever, the raw pull towards the glitz and glamor of New York, the quiet suburban lifestyle of normalcy. 🤌🏻🤌🏻 But, when an unprecedented tragedy strikes the family, it immerses you even further into his thoughts that I found impossible to turn away. It was an intense emotional character-driven story that left me a little imbalanced after reading, leaving me to wonder why I had put off reading this for so long. The author's writing style was so achingly real in its portrayal of Robin that his pain became my pain - his struggles became my struggles. 😢😢

“Most people think that life offers you endless opportunities to get what you want, but Robin thinks there are endless possibilities for it all to be taken away.”

Robin was such a real character, the biggest strength lay in his voice. I empathize with his emotional frustrations, his raw anger at feeling different without meaning to be, his aching desire just to be accepted as he is, his longing just to be recognized for who he is, and still trying to find a place for himself how he is. 😟 The almost toxic-if not tumultuous friendships he starts up with Todd 'an object of fascination and also a source of great confusion', and his elusive yet wildly impulsive classmate, Scott Schatz also propels him even deeper in exploring the waters of his confusing sexuality. The way he indulges in their advances, trying to get a sense of what it is that he is - trying to explain his attractions and channel how much of their feelings for him are real or not.

His emotions were so very palpable; he pulled me into his life and his thoughts and his conflicting feelings. I may have been a spectator to his story, but it didn't mean my heart did not ache for him. All he wanted was to be normal - all he wanted was just to live a normal life, but every time he tried, something else came in his way. 'He is unexpectedly struck by the notion that he was a child here, that he is not a child, not in the same way. He wonders, how did this happen? I didn’t plan for it.' ❤️‍🩹❤️‍🩹 Something else happened that he couldn't explain, that was out of his control, that he couldn't bear to shoulder the burden any more than he had to. It all builds up with such a believable and taut tension that I was just pulled into it. It was not only his personal issues that waged a war in my heart, it was his own family that he faced so many challenges - testing his resolve and part as an older brother and a decent son - living up to these expectations and fighting within himself not to challenge them - no matter the fact that he was slowly changing from the rule-abiding, proper son that he had always been. 🥺

“I made a friend, you should be happy I have a friend. A guy friend.” His voice trembles. He hears the truth and the lies in his words battering against each other and cannot contain the explosion of it.

“Isn’t that what everyone expects, for me to be more like a guy? Have guy friends?”

And I rode alongside that wave of emotions. 😣 I was a bit uncomfortable with the way Todd and Scott's dynamic was handled - the depiction of underage sex was a little hard for me to digest, but, in their own cruel and unintentional way, they each taught Robin something about himself - something that impacted him more probably, because he was at that young crucial age of discovering himself. 🙁 He was able to experience so many firsts with them - to act upon his latent attraction and repressed feelings of sexual awakenings and desires, see the difference between him and them - from what they actually want and from what he knows about himself that helps him, in turn become stronger about himself - to assert his own convictions and find his own common ground. 'You are thinking about guys too much, he tells himself, with a mounting sense of terror. You are turning into a major queer.' 

And yet, seeing how much he cared for Scott - to try and protect him from his abusive father - really touched my heart; how it teaches him what real love is and what isn't - what makes a healthy relationship and what doesn't. Todd may have been a conflict of interest for me, how he captured the allure of an attractive older boy giving a younger one his undivided attention for his own gain, but the way Robin dealt with him - was a crowning achievement for his growth - a stepping stone in the right direction. He was so young and impressionable, but the decisions he had to make - the conflicts that arose in front of him - he fought through all the sadness and heart-ache - on his own - trying to make sense of himself - in a time where there was no helping hand to guide him.

“The problem with taking risks, Robin realizes, is that you don’t know what you’re getting into.”

All the characters were flawed and relatable and surprisingly very real. From his parents to his siblings, Robin's bond was different and it was captured beautifully and achingly honest. The desires of a young boy aiming to be the best example of himself for his parents - live up to their expectations, while still trying to figure out who he is exactly. 'What good does it do to fantasize a scenario where you not only get what you want, but it comes risk-free? Life is never as perfect as you can make it in a daydream.' 😢 For when the tragedy befalls the MacKenzie family, it was even more painful to see how it slowly affected each of them in damaging ways, how they struggled to cope in the only ways that they knew - trying to be optimistic, but still tearing themselves up in the process.

His relationship with his mother, Dorothy, was one of the highlights for me - a drawbridge that connected him to the last remnants of what mattered to him - that close visceral bond he clung so hard to - 'His mother is organizing the memories into something with a point. She’s never spoken like this before, about him, to him, and he doesn’t like it.' Robin's train of thoughts on it throughout the book never wavers - never lets you forget that it did happen - it stays there like a dark cloud, a heavy weight on everyone's shoulder, especially Robin's. I teared up at the end, I'm not gonna lie. The ending was a lesson in waiting -it was heart-breaking and Robin's raw reaction was just --- 💔😟

It is a testament to the author that he was able to draw out all these significant relationships and still find a way to balance it all out so naturally - to have the events unravel simultaneously and still draw them together seamlessly and still get me so heavily invested in each of their scenarios. All the interactions felt alive - the characters were crafted so convincingly that I could believe that they were just an ordinary family - hit by an unexpected tragedy that tests their bond and their spirit and their resilience. It is in the way each of his family members shares a different connection with Robin that pushes his growth forward; it's what pulls him in even deeper in trying to understand what he has to prove - to do, to be himself. 

“It was truer than he could have known—he feels so very far away from the person he was that day: the first day he ditched school, the first day he got stoned, the first day he kissed a boy.”

It was truly a heart-wrenching and very realistic exploration of family dynamics, sibling bonds, and first time chances. I really wasn't expecting it to hit me so hard with the feels, but it did - in all the right ways. I couldn't stop till I reached the end; that is most assuredly  the mark of a captivating read. And to have it be the story of how we take chances and risks to be different from who we are, because that is what is expected of us left me with an even deeper perspective of myself. 👏🏻👏🏻 It is unflinching and unrelenting in having Robin endure every possible thing - to understand that being normal - isn't all that it is cracked up to be - that he finally can accept that he is as normal as normal can be. 'Robin says, summoning up his exit line. “I don’t have that much time.' The irony of it is not lost on me, as everything that he wanted to change for himself - everything that mattered to him - slowly gets pulled away from him - that nothing quite works out in favor of him. And yet, it still leaves us with this hopeful promise that he is off to find a better and brighter future for himself - heading in the right direction. 🙏🏻🙏🏻