Rating: 3/5

Rating: 3* of five

A classic-era mystery by one of the world’s most praised and revered mystery writers. First published in 1931, it was a stand-alone tale (no Poirot and his little grey cells! No Marple and her knitting!) of crimes thought buried rising up from their unmarked graves to feed, zombie-like, on the perpetrators in the present day. Sadly, the whole world they inhabit gets to suffer along with the perpetrators; after all, crime doesn’t pay so much as it pays back. The setting of a snowbound country house with bored wealthy guests is chilly enough. When the pieces of the criminal puzzle start coming apart (or together, depending on your perspective), the emotional chills go from the fridge to the freezer.

What an awful place to live in England is...If it isn't snowing or raining or blowing it's misty. And if the sun does shine it's so cold that you can't feel your fingers or toes.

By the time you’ve finished this modest-in-scope (288 pages) novel, you’re unlikely to feel your fingers for a few hours. Though in this case it will be from gripping the darn thing so tight in sheer desperation to see why anyone would kill the victim, shifting to a desperate need to know what took someone so long to kill the bastard. $9.99 for the Kindle edition, or free from your OverDrive-participating library.

Agatha Christie's Marple: The Sittaford Mystery

Rating: 3* of five

How in the goddesses' names do they get this story of the Wages of Sin Punished out of a pretty straightforward criminally greedy plot to snag money not one's own, and send its roots back to the Empire's hotter corners (an archaeological dig in Egypt), I do not know. This novel never featured Marple at all. They bookhorned her in to make weight, since the old girl appeared in only twelve books. (And twenty or so stories, but apparently those were largely deemed inadequate for adaptation.) 

Since old Marple has to be given a reason to be there, her nephew Raymond West was blown through the keyhole as a resident neighbor of Capt. Trevelyan's. (He's the dead guy.) In the blizzard that occurs as the starting gun (!) for the plot, it's really incumbent upon Trevelyan to do the decent thing and invite Marple to shelter with him while the storm rages.

An amusing aside: Inspector Narracott, the policeman in charge of the investigation, has morphed into "Constable Narracott"! But the horror of Marpling a pretty average Christie novel isn't the worst sin the producers committed. It was the idiotic way a lesbian subplot gets plopped onto the proceedings from out of nowhere and to no good purpose. It feels like they were so bored, or became so befuddled, while Frankensteining the murder back together that they added this to make things more fun for themselves.

Timothy Dalton plays Captain Trevelyan, so it's worth watching for that alone. But really, in the cosmic scheme of things, is it necessary to search out so meager a pleasure when there are so many much more satisfying stories being told?