Rating: 3/5

What an insane book about an absolutely crazy individual. He reminded me of Keyser Soze from the usual suspects. I had a friend at school called Danny bell who once told me a long long time ago well before I had heard of chopper that he'd actually met chopper read in the pub in Australia somewhere. I didn't think much of it at the time but now almost 20 years later I can see what an interesting encounter that must have been. So this book’s about a crazy gangster from Melbourne in Australia who is a bit of a Robin Hood in the sense that he really targeted criminals. Not that he was a saint in anyway and redistributed to the poor but it's just that he liked a challenge and was completely fearless. He's been stabbed and shot at multiple times and survived to live the tale until he died around 2013 from cancer. A very funny individual but completely insane: there's been a film that's been made about him starring Eric Bana. I guess the most famous instance about chopper that comes to mind is when he got someone to chop his ears off for him at prison so he could get out of a particular ward.

Here are some of the best bits from the book

our gang kept weapons hidden in the toilets of the South yarra arms, the morning star hotel and later on the Bush inn hotel. We stashed 1 sawn off shotgun one tomahawk one meat cleaver and one iron bar in each pub. And idea I got from the Krays brothers and reading about what they did in London.

All my life dad has slept with a gun beside his bed. And after his divorce from my mother he took to sleeping with a fully loaded pump action shotgun alongside him with the double bed barrel pointing down towards his feet. It now goes under or alongside the bed on the floor. Getting up at night to go to the toilet with my old dad and his trusty pump action shotgun in the next room meant yelling: going to the toilet dad so he knew who was walking around.

When cowards have no place to run they will drink the blood of 1000 heroes to survive. Those words were used to describe the foreign legion 100 years ago.

One of Jimmy Loughnan’s favorite party tricks At H division during the war was to get hold of chaps we felt had been putting holes in their manners. We would grab the offending party and give him a touch up otherwise known as a sound beating. Then we would stand him up. I'd put a butchers knife to his neck and Jimmy would pop a razor blade in his mouth and he would be told to chew on it. There would be a little protest at first but it was a case of chew or die and a mouthful of blood was better than a neck full of cold steel. So chew it would be. If you've never seen a man chew on a razor blade you have never seen blood flow.

I do it. Click. Nothing. This was Russian roulette. I would then remove the slug from the gun and hand them both to the rice eater I was playing. However I had made sure I had little advantage no one else knew about. I knew my gun was perfectly balanced so that if I put a slug in at the top and spun it the right way and snapped back the cylinder it would snap back with a slug at the bottom well 19 times out of 20 anyway. Which is good enough odds for me. I practice with my gun so that I had the odds on my side. Hours I spent spinning the cylinder until I worked out that I had the safety edge of about 20 to one. I had faith in my gun and believe the odds were on my side. Sunny: this reminded me of a scene from the Deer Hunter staring De Niro :) if you know you know :)

lemon twist: a drug gang wishes to maintain its standing in the eyes of the criminal world yet remain out of jail. They pick a known police informer some physically weak wimp who's easily frightened. They call him in and explained to him that he now works for them after a nice little beating of course.

If I remained in the world of crime where I have been for 20 years I would be splitting the face of my own logic. I've read military tactics and strategy all my life. To walk away and never look back is the smart move. It is the only logical tactic left to me. For every Napoleon there is a Wellington waiting.

Je ne regrette rien? I regret nothing? What a sick joke. I regret everything.