Rating: 5/5

This is a totally different spin on Batman first published in 1986 by Frank Miller. 

Don't expect it to be like the old cartoons. 

Definitely not like the Adam West Batman from the 60s. 

Not the Justice League of America. 

Batman and Superman are hardly on speaking terms. The governments have passed laws against vigilante super heroes so most of them are in prison or banished, or, like Superman, secretly working for the government. 

Batman, after a series of traumatic incidents, has not been seen in the last ten years. The Joker and Two Face are both in psycho wards. 

A series of incidents force Batman to come back out to the shock of the world. Gotham is turned on its head and the public isn't sure what to make of him; especially the younger people who thought he was just a legend. 

img src=
  
/&gt;

In this Batman faces off with two-face, the joker and a mutant gang which has practically overrun the streets. 

Look for a face off against Superman, an intro. from the new Robin and a setup for the next book in the series, where Batman decides to free some of the super heroes in prison. 

  

Artwork is very gritty. Lots of focus on Batman's age in his late fifties, as well as his lack of forbearance in not realizing his age makes him less agile and strong. So, he gets into several jams. Heh. 

 Oh, and a few times, Batman actually uses guns but it's for good reasons. 

Enjoy. A sequel written and illustrated by Miller, The Dark Knight Strikes Again, was published in 2001. 

Miller said that the comic series' plot was inspired by Dirty Harry, specifically the 1983 film Sudden Impact, in which Dirty Harry returns to crime-fighting after a lengthy convalescence. Miller also said his own increasing age was a factor in the plot. (Wiki)

 IGN Comics ranked The Dark Knight Returns second on a list of the 25 greatest Batman graphic novels, behind Batman: Year One,  and called The Dark Knight Returns, "a true masterpiece of storytelling" with "[s]cene after unforgettable scene." In 2005, Time chose the collected edition as one of the 10 best English language graphic novels ever written. Forbidden Planet placed the collected issue at number one on its "50 Best of the Best Graphic Novels" list. Writer Matthew K. Manning in the "1980s" chapter of DC Comics Year By Year A Visual Chronicle (2010) called the series "arguably the best Batman story of all time." (Wiki)

PUSHES THE BATMAN GENRE OR TURNS IT ON ITS HEAD: A minus to A; STORY/PLOTTING: B plus to A minus; CHARACTERS/DIALOGUE: B plus; ARTWORK PRESENTATION: B to B plus; ACTION SETUPS: B plus to A minus; WHEN READ LAST: 2008 (3 times total); OVERALL GRADE: B plus to A minus.