Rating: 5/5

“A wolf is all right ef he knows the jungle”

“Theah’s life anywheres theah’s booze and jazz, and theah’s cases of gin and a gramophone whar we’s going”

Published in 1928, in the heart of the Harlem Renaissance, Claude McKay’s “Home to Harlem” was not without its critics in the black literary and political community. W.E.B DuBois said of it:

“Home to Harlem for the most part nauseates me, and after the dirtier parts of its filth, I feel distinctly like taking a bath...It looks like McKay has set out to cater to that prurient demand on the part of the white folk for a portrayal in negroes of utter licentiousness”

 It was published at a moment of soul searching within competing factions of the black community in which some were ready to move away from the vernacular, and realism based novels of men like the Jamaican born McKay who would argue that he wrote what he saw, and those who believed that even if this was in fact the present reality, blacks should, if not explicitly, aspire to a literature that mirrored the “educated” voice of white writers or at the very least be more based in struggle.
 I think it is perhaps unfair to label McKay in this way however. In many of his novels “Romance in Marseille” is a good parallel, McKay does in fact engage in criticism of the white power structure that packs black men and women in places like Harlem.
 While it is undoubtedly filled with colorful characters such as pimps, gamblers, hustlers, and others, it also is I believe a celebration of life, no matter the obstacles one may face.
 McKay for example gives us the character of Ray, a relatively educated man with a love of reading who always finds himself at odds with his surroundings and expectations for his life. He finds it difficult with what he knows to enjoy life and it is not until he meets Jake, a kind of free spirited womanizing, gin swilling wanderer, that he can at least temporarily live in the moment instead of his world of unmet expectations.

“Nobody knows, Jake. Anyway, you’re happier than I as you are. The more I learn the less I understand and love life. All the learning in this world can’t answer this little question, Why are we living?”

 This is not to say that McKay is advocating living hand to mouth, bowing to white folks, and not educating themseves. Take this passage when two characters are discussing a labor strike:

“Nope, I won’t scab, but I ain’t a joiner kind of fellah. I ain’t no white folks nigger”

What he is saying I believe however, is that struggle is baked into life. It could be racial struggle, it could be family struggle, or any other myriad kind and that sometimes you need to just go out and dance, find a good man or woman when you’re lonely, or spend some time with your friends.
 While this kind of libertine attitude was found to be offensive by many who saw projecting a new image of being black to white audiences as their primary objective, McKay wasn’t writing for them.
 He wrote for the average black man and woman who spoke this way, who danced, who drank, who occasionally met violence with violence, and whose only objective was to live their lives with a little joy. 
Or as McKay himself write in response to criticism:

“I make my Negro characters yarn and backbite and fuck like people the world over”