Rating: 4/5

Review for the complete series

At a young age, Sumeragi Subaru is head of his family's omnyouji clan. He spends more time solving supernatural mysteries, performing exorcisms or releasing spirits than he does at school. His twin sister Hokuto is always looking out for him and trying to include him into the normality of life. One way of doing so is by trying to pair him up with the veterinarian Sakurazuka Seishirou who claims to be in love with Subaru.

Although an interesting work in its own right, Tokyo Babylon is also a prequel to the more famous X/1999 and can leave you feeling dissatisfied if read by itself. 

This is a very episodic manga in which each chapter revolves around a new case, most of which are supernatural. But each chapter also addresses different issues of society, be it bullying, rape, child abuse, animal cruelty, organ donation or neglect of the elderly. And while these are directly aimed at 90s Japan, a lot of the criticism still holds true for the 21st century and can certainly be applied to other countries. 

Although the general theme of the story is dark, the characters allow for a light-hearted opening. Subaru is an incredibly kind and selfless character - he'd almost be annoying with it if it weren't for his twin Hokuto. She is in many ways his opposite and has a lot of spunk. I confess, I found most of her outfits hideous, but her personality still manages to charm! Her and Seishirou's combined efforts of making Subaru fall in love with Seishirou is as much weird as it is cute. I also appreciate how CLAMP includes gay characters without the whole story belonging to the designated genre - something I find rather rare. 

Of course, behind the episodic nature, there is another main plot which slowly unfolds and takes centre stage during the final chapters. Events take a much darker tone and anyone familiar with CLAMP won't be too surprised to find themselves not quite prepared for the characters' trials and sufferings. Although it definitely has a gripping finale and some form of climax, the main conflict remains largely unresolved. It is a real shame, even though Subaru's and Seishirou's story continues in the sequel, X/1999 is in itself incomplete.

I can see Tokyo Babylon appealing to a wide range of readers thanks to its diverse themes and genre, though it must always be read with a grain of salt due to the loose/incomplete ending.