Rating: 3/5

One of my daughters shared this book that she had read in "Passing" a high school class. It's a really interesting topic. Anatole Broyard, the descendants of Sally Hemings and Thomas Jefferson, crypto-Jews during the Inquisition all the way up to famous gay celebrities like Rock Hudson passed in real-life and passing is the fictional theme of books and movies including Black Like Me and The Human Stain. People might pass temporarily to "spy" on or get insight into a group they don't belong to, as on online persona (famous in the documentary and TV show "Catfish") or for a long time to avoid persecution or discrimination. Passing can get complicated. Caitlin Jenner was born and raised as male, but one might also say that she passed as a man. Famous and "common" people both pass, and uncovering passing is a public passion. 

This book is in the format of six in-depth case studies that run a gamut of types of passing. Some delve into the complicated, and are a little confusing as a result. This book reads strongly as a thesis or scholarly research project converted into a book. The cases are researched thoroughly and expert ethicists consulted and interviewed, significant points are raised (if and when people who pass are lying - if you are biracial why is it lying to claim your white heritage, for example), but sometimes the author seems to get lost in discussing these cases and the arguments circle around but don't really go anywhere. There aren't a lot of meaningful or strong conclusions that result from the author's efforts. This isn't surprising - even as I've tried to briefly outline it above, passing is a huge part of the human endeavor and likely broader than one book of six cases can comfortably contain. Some of the cases seem quite esoteric - perhaps chosen because the author knew the person and found the situation personally captivating, rather than representing the range of passing in a balanced way. The transitions are clunky too. And yet, passing (aka "reinventing yourself") is as much a public passion as uncovering passing, and it isn't surprising this book was so popular when it was published. I recommend it too, in spite of its flaws, for anyone who wants to give a little deeper thought or gain more insight into the mindsets of people who pass across a gamut of situations and reasons.