Rating: 3/5

Donorboy takes on the fairly common young adult topic matter regarding reorganized family structure in a unique way. One can't help but root for Sean as he takes on this surprise parenthood. Not only is he suddenly responsible for a teenage girl (which I am sure to find out the challenges of myself one day), but he takes on the monumental task of caring for this Rosalind immediately after the tragic and unexpected loss of both of her parents. This becomes a tale of trepidation on multiple levels, with both new parent and child trying to find themselves in the midst of this mess. Halpin established the story with relative ease, and I was expecting to be further into the book before we moved past the basics. I would have to note that the manner of the mothers' death was offputting and took away from the somber tone that sometimes became necessary for the reader to become fully engulfed in the experience.
 Character development is a vital draw in this text. The diary and electronic formats are done in an extremely fluid and efficient manner. I did not want for a narrator as I did during TTYL. It's as if we use one character to learn about the other. David becomes a key player in Sean's life and communications from Sean to him allows the reader to get an uncensored window into his thoughts on each new situation. I expected Sean's father to play more largely into things, but David remained the source of guidance.
 While the key events were definitely enough to keep the story going, Halpin ensures that teenage exploratory behavior touches the surface from time to time. Rosalind does experiment with smoking, drinking, and the party scene. Also, her struggles in school assist in the transition of her feelings towards Sean. He uses his legal prowess to not only defend his new daughter, but to dissolve some of the potential malaise and uncertainty between them. One final item of note is the undercurrrent of sexual questioning that Rosalind ponders. This is a not overdone, but adds to some of the more enigmatic features that Rosalind develops.