Rating: 5/5

ST. URSLUA'S GIRLS AGAINST THE ATOMIC BOMB by Valerie Hurley is about a young woman, Raine Rassaby (what a great name!), who is awkward and precocious, outlandish and blatantly honest. Her social conscience is in overdrive at all times -- making up for both her parents who seem to have next to none. She cannot stay out of trouble, partly because she acts out her fears in sometimes inappropriate ways. 

Raine is drawn to Pavel, a young Jewish man who rescues wounded birds and talks to old people at picnics. Hurley describes the difference between Pavel and Raine: "He was fascinated by the Holocaust, but he was not obsessed by it. Raine took the doom much more personally, feeling threatened by humanity's cruel streak. She made lists of all the obominable things human beings had done througout history and pasted them in a scrapbook called HORRIBLE BUT TRUE THINGS YOU'D RATHER NOT KNOW." 

Raine is a compelling character throughout the book because of the adventures that her unstoppable social conscience leads her into. But what I find most appealing about her is how she becomes a sponge for wisdom. At age eighteen, she is influenced by her Slovakian grandmother, who exudes wisdom. Raine likes to spend time in the kitchen with "Vikey", who talks with Raine as she cooks kosher. Vikey was born in 1903. Hurley writes: "It was a good time to born, she said, because to live is a privilege, even if the Nazis decided to march into your homeland and kill two of your cousins and your sisters, Gitta and Sessi. Still the world was beautiful, she said--full of astonishing things." 

"When Raine told her about her fears, Vikey said, 'Fear isn't something to be gotten rid of. It's something real and human, something to pay attention to. Drunks are fearless but that doesn't make them courageous. Fear is a signal, to be honored and listened to. It was proper for us to be afraid of the Nazis and Hlinka Guard and not berate ourselves for our fear.'" 

Raine is not a very successful student, so she has a guidance counselor at the Catholic school in which her parents have enrolled her. The guidance counselor tries, to no avail, to keep Raine more interested in her studies than in starting her "bomb group." He says: "Raine, I would be derelict in my duty if I encouraged your involvement in this silly, illusory bomb group." Raine responds with: "I love being a Jew, but I kind of wish I was Catholic because Catholics feel so guilty. [...] I'm expecting my group to spread like the plague at St. Ursula's because Catholics feel guilty even when they're innocent." 

Raine has a strained relationship with her parents, though in a rare, frank conversation with her father, he reveals what it was like for Raine's mother who lived in Slovakia for the first six years of her life, and how she took food out to the Jews who Vikey had hidden. He ends by saying: "I wonder what that was like."

"She won't talk about it," Raine said. "Maybe I'm picking up all the horrible stuff she's repressing. Did you ever think of that?" 

It is hard not to love someone so witty and wise as Raine. When she finds out that her guidance counselor's wife, Frieda, is going biking with a man from work, who Frieda says is nice, Raine is ready with her remark: "Nice guys do not finish last, Al. That's a myth." It turns out Raine is absolutely right.

As Al's relationship with his wife falls apart and Raine's relationship with Pavel also falters, Raine and Al find themselves thinking of one another constantly. Not only is he counseling Raine, but she ends up counseling him. They each have their turn at bailing one another out of jail. In one of Raine's revealing journal entries, she writes about Al's childhood and then this: "So he marries Frieda, plops down on a desk chair at St. Ursula's, and doesn't move a muscle for fourteen years. Then he meets me, and we try to resurrect each other, which is like Klaus Barbie and Rudolf Hess having a picnic on the town square in Berlin. I was depressed about nuclear weapons, and he was depressed about Frieda. Now I'm depressed about Frieda, and he's depressed about nuclear weapons. Oh well. Not every truth can be blown on a trumpet." 

When Raine is fearful about a calamity in her life, she describes a dream to Al in which her fear became a monster. Al said, "When fear talks, cowards listen." 

The give and take in Raine's and Al's relationship as they share in one another's fears, triumphs, humor, and wisdom draws the reader in slowly. They bumble along until they find their lives have intertwined in ways one would never have expected. In the beginning of the book, there is a hint of Raine's and Al's attraction for one another, but then I found myself dismissing any thoughts of a romantic involvement between the two, partly because they are such an unlikely pair. And I admit, I didn't want them to become involved -- rather I was hoping each would find their equals in someone their own age, and... well... in a more APPROPRIATE relationship. And that is just exactly what this book was good at--complicating my view of an "appropriate" relationship. ST. URSLUA'S GIRLS AGAINST THE ATOMIC BOMB illustrates our need as humans to be understood, and how that understanding can evolve into love, even in an unlikely partner.

I love reading philosophical novels, and ST. URSLUA'S GIRLS AGAINST THE ATOMIC BOMB is one of my favorites.