Rating: 3/5

“The Lord Won’t Mind” is a peculiar but entertaining novel. Gordon Merrick writes of the all-consuming pre-War love between two young men from respectable families both of whom put Adonis to shame. God’s gift to beauty, they even look alike. A possessive, overbearing grandmother introduces the younger Peter to her beloved 23yo grandson Charlie. She has mentoring in mind, but the two men fall instantly in love. But this is the early 1940s, right before World War II, an era in which being openly gay is taboo – unless you’re in the big city and into theater or something. Despite their ever-present hardons, Charlie is in denial about his true sexuality. He doesn’t consider his love for Peter to be “queer.” 19yo Peter, on the other hand, embraces this his first-ever love with complete openness and ardor. That’s about the first 100 pages -- one steamy sex scene after another. 

Pulp fiction gay romance? That’s what I was thinking at this point. But after Charlie and Peter’s relationship is indelibly established, the plot thickens. I got hooked. This novel is not only about forbidden love in the 1940s but about ideal beauty, self-awareness, the role of power in a relationship, and who you can trust. It also says a lot about the place of African Americans at the time, peripherally.

As far as his writing, Merrick’s use of ellipsis can be a little off-putting at times, i.e. jumping ahead too quickly. He’s perfectly comfortable with the usual slang terms relating to sex, like the “f” word. Yet he consistently uses the word “sex” to refer to the penis. I found this somewhat annoying, I’m not sure why. And his writing can be rather stilted and mawkish:

 “He felt consumed, absorbed, penetrated, possessed beyond the possibility of his own identity’s survival. It was an oblivion he had sought and dreamed of.” 

“Peter stepped forward and his sex rose to complete its erection.”

“His sex reared up and grew under his knowledgeable touch and locked into rigidity.”

“Hattie had one reading that made everybody stir slightly with sounds of amusement.”