Rating: 5/5

An'-ton-ee-ah

That's how her name is pronounced, and not like An'-tow-niya which is how I always thought it was. I found this clarification, at the very start of the book, remarkable(for me) because it changed the way I read about her, till the very last page. At every mention of her name, my mind tried to pronounce it the Bohemian way, thus, never letting me forget the eccentricity and congeniality of this unforgettable character.

I have somehow spent almost a month reading this little book and in that course a lot of people around me asked what sort of a book this was? What's it about? And, I never had the same answer for any two of them. Sometimes, it was about the Bohemian migrant family; Sometimes about the flat, windy, golden, snow-clad, rather indelible prairie; Sometimes about the narrator Jim Burden; Sometimes about me; Sometimes about nostalgia; Sometimes about romanticism; And sometimes about struggles that one goes through and what they come out of them to become.

A young ten year old Jim, after losing his parents in Virginia, comes to stay with his grandparents in a country farm in Nebraska. He sees the landscape and is taken so deeply by it that it no longer is just the backdrop of his new life, but the very foundation of it. His undirected strolls in the prairie made him feel at home and at peace.

  The light air about me told me that the world ended here: only the ground and sun and sky were left, and if one went a little farther, there would be only sun and sky, and one would float off into them, like the tawny hawks which sailed over our heads making slow shadows on the grass.

I recently made a short trip to a place long from home, but with a prodigious landscape that I felt spoke to me directly and was like a new-found friend. I found this very strange and I wondered how could I feel such a strong connection with a boundless space? Then I met Jim sitting idly against a haystack on a field wondering:

  I was something that lay under the sun and felt it, like the pumpkins, and I did not want to be anything more. I was entirely happy. Perhaps we feel like that when we die and become a part of something entire, whether it is sun and air, or goodness and knowledge. At any rate, that is happiness; to be dissolved into something complete and great. When it comes to one, it comes as naturally as sleep.

The farms, the fields, the burrows, the cattle, the seasons and his Ántonia. When he first met her, she was a little girl with eyes which seemed big and warm and full of light, like the sun shining on brown pools in the wood. This brown skinned, wild curly haired chirrup, coaxingly took his hand and ran with him to a steep drawside to show him a nondescript view. And this did not change even when they both get old and Jim visits her after a long time of hardship and tooth fall. She shows it all to him, her children and her life. Oh Ántonia, how I wished that you got the best in the world, and how you never cared and made the best of what came along.

What more detail can I give here to do justice to this meta-biographical gem by Cather. All of the nitty gritties seem pointless. The more I dig deep, the more I see her(Cather's) feats of drawing out characters with such prudence that not one of them can now be faded with the sleight of time. Ántonia's father, Lena, the two Russians and their guilt, Jack and Otto, the Cutters, and everyone else.

In the end what remains with me is one more thing other than those images of prairies and a strong feeling of nostalgia. Jim, at the University of Nebraska, while studying Virgil's Georgics, was informed that when Virgil was near death, Aeneid unfinished, he would have found consolation with having written that perfect Georgics and would have thought, with the thankfulness of a good man, "I was first to bring the Muse into my country". Just like Cather would have, when she moved to Nebraska and wrote this beauty about a place which was like a blank spot on the map of America.

[I should thank Stephanie Vaughn for directing me towards that last bit through her brilliant introduction to this book]