Rating: 4/5

This book's premise is spelled out in the title. I read about 200 pages completely, then the other 200+ in chucks as they interested me. 

If I based my review / rating on the first 100(ish) pages, it would be much lower. In railing against school, Llewellyn was snide, judgmental, and unnecessarily harsh. It was also a bit like TEEN ANARCHY, RAWR! Basically, it didn't resonate a whole lot and made me cranky. 

I disliked passages like this:

p 30 - "If you truly enjoy school and all its paraphernalia more than anything else you can possibly imagine doing, I suppose I'm not writing for you, because I don't understand you. I'm not sure you exist, but if you do, we live in different universes. I used to think everyone was strong willed and independently inclined. Now I'm not sure. Sometimes I think perhaps school really does completely destroy that fierce, free spirit in some people."

p 76 - "If you plan to scrub floors or assemble plastic toys all your life, then yes, school will break your spirit ahead of time so you don't fight when you get nothing wonderful out of adulthood."

p 81 - "But it's easy to go to school - I don't have to think for myself! To you, I have nothing to say. Stay right there at your graffiti-adorned desk. When you turn eighteen, proceed directly into the army. Be all that upi can be, for someone else."

But even in that first stretch, there were moments of inspiration that I enjoyed:

p 69 - "Adolescence is a time o dreaming, adventure, risk, sweet wildness, and intensity. It's a time for you to "find yourself," or at least go looking. The sun is rising on your life."

p 74 - "You know: life is not the color of linoleum halls or the drab hum of industrial lighting or the slow ticking of the clock. Look at the stars. Look hard at all the faces of people throwing frisbees in a park, singing in church, passing the potatoes, planting tomatoes, fixing a kitchen table or the engine in an old pickup truck. Look at a baby or a piece of handcarved furniture or a three-hundred-year-old tree or a pebble or a worm or the sweater your grandmother knitted for you." 
 
THEN, the rest of the book happened. It's a really fantastic resource! There's still some cheekiness, but it's not the dominant vibe. It's just endless suggestions for really getting the most out of life, intellectually and emotionally, including a gazillion book recommendations. And, despite the author's own views, I think it could benefit all kids, all types of homeschoolers.

p 156 - "Now that you're out of school, why bother at all? (...) Because if you find out and soak up some of the conflicting mesmerizing shocking funny logical illogical beautiful sparks we call "knowledge" or "information," you will grow a broader mind, more capable of seeing the connections and relationships between things that make the world and life so mysterious and beautiful.

Because knowledge mixed with wonder shapes your mind into the interesting, lively kind of place you'd like to inhabit for the next eighty years, maybe even eternity. 

Because if you don't know what's been said and thought and tried before you walked in the door, you may repeat someone else a few times before you contribute anything new. The world does need new contributions, which is one good reason the schoolboard has for wanting you to be educated. 

Because it's not fun to be ignorant and confused..."

p. 181 - "The idea is not to fill your mind up like a crowded refrigerator. The idea is to weave a prayer rug out of everything that comes your way." 

Some books, mentioned in the text, that I want to look into:
Mathematics: The Language of Science by George O Smith
Eyewitness to History, edited by John Carey
Mine Eyes Have Seen, edited by Richard Goldstein
Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain by Betty Edwards
Classic Walks of the World, edited by Walt Unsworth
The Independent Scholar's Handbook by Ronald Gross
Bear's Guide to Non-Traditional College Degrees by John Bear
Wishcraft by Barbara Sher
Lend a Hand: The How, Where, and Why of Volunteering by Sara Gilbert
The Kid's Guide to Service Projects by Barbara Lewis

Other things of interest:
Center for Global Education seminar trips
Volunteers for Peace International Workcamps