Rating: 5/5

In the penultimate paragraph of The Blue Mask, the protagonist Neil is walking home from an evening with his ex; 
“As the bus came up the steep hill, empty and staring, he said out loud: ‘I miss you’. Who was he thinking of, he had no idea. Somehow, he felt it was everyone. Even himself.”
In the next paragraph; 
“As the bus waited by the shelter, it’s engine running, he thought about that. Then he thought about the dark streets. How complex and endless the world was. How the idea of revolution was just a dramatic way of saying Can we start again? And as the bus finally jolted back into life, he realised that where he’d gone wrong with Matt was in trying to make a home. It didn’t matter whether you could make a home. What mattered was whether you could leave it.”
In Joel Lane’s writing it’s not just that the personal is political, although that is true, but that the personal and the political are metaphors for each other. When Neil says ‘I miss you’ he’s expressing a braided bereavement; for his ex, for pre-Blair socialist politics, for his previous life. He goes on to suggest perhaps that stasis or comfortable fixed positions are problematic. The opposite of home is revolution which is itself a dramatic way of saying ‘Can we start again?’ He illustrates this idea of stuckness with the image of the stationary bus. When the bus is ‘jolted back into life’ Neil is given an understanding, and we are given a final image of forward movement, and of ‘homelessness’, but it isn’t tragic in the classic capitalist individualist sense of the lone-wolf, heroic male cowboy riding onto the sunset. The reference to revolutionary politics and ‘starting again’ is important. The book is populated by characters who have experienced forms of grief and bereavement, but who endure. One character who regrets a suicide attempt says 
“…I didn’t really want to die. I just…wanted to feel better.” 
Wanting to feel better, wanting to start again are things to believe in. Although how to achieve them isn’t so easy.
Part of the real tragedy of this book is that it doesn’t have a sequel, and never will. Joel Lane will never write a novel responding to our current political situation. It’s set during ‘the end of history’ in the late 90’s before 9/11 or the Financial Crash of 2006/7. Neil would have undoubtedly gone on to become involved in the anti-war movement. Would have become a supporter of Jeremy Corbyn and Bernie Saunders. He would have watched the rise of populism and right-wing nihilism with shock but with deep understanding, because, reading The Blue Mask now it’s incredible how it foresees the current rise of facism. 
I read this in the beautiful new Influx edition which has a wonderful introduction by Joseph O'Neil