Rating: 3/5

”So far as I know, Goethe was the first writer or artist to become a Public Celebrity. There had always been poets, painters and composers who were known to and revered by their fellow artists, but the general public, however much it may have admired their works, would not have dreamed of wishing to make their acquaintance. But, during the last twenty years or so of Goethe’s life, a visit to Weimar and an audience with the Great Man was an essential item in the itinerary of any cultivated young man making his Grand Tour of Europe.”

The majority of these young men had only read one book by Goethe, the one he wrote when he was twenty-four. I can only imagine how delightful it would have been for the old boy to meet someone who had read his more mature works and enjoyed them more than they did his passionate, overwrought novella titled The Sorrows of Young Werther. From all accounts, it seems that Goethe was a good sport, indulging and tolerating these young men who were enamored with the wrong book from his oeuvre. 

Readers are generally split these days on whether they want to meet those writers who have inspired them. I’ve always been in the camp of meeting them, realizing they are hardly going to match my perceptions of them from reading their books. Paul Theroux is brooding, egotistical, and rude. (I found it a brilliant persona for a book tour.) Peter Mayles is the other end of the spectrum as a charming, congenial, and a highly amusing man. I do believe a few women in the back actually swooned. Most writers fall somewhere in-between. You must understand that writers are just human beings, and as one writer confessed to me at the end of a long tour…”these are not the people I thought were reading my books.” 

It was the first time I realized that writers conjure up ideas of their readers just as readers conjure up ideas of who the writer should be. The chance for mutual disappointment is always a possibility. In many ways, the writer, once he/she has given their book over to me, is no longer part of the process. I will make of it what I will, and the writer’s intentions no longer apply. Goethe and his biographers mostly insist this book is not autobiographical. They base this upon the fact that Goethe, in real life, did not fall into the deep abyss that Werther, after much distress, finds himself. 

While reading the book, I found myself, during idle speculation times, frequently referring to Werther as Goethe, so it was impossible for me to separate the writer, in this case, from the novella. He would rise up from the gutter of the book like a spectral ghost. Goethe did have a doomed love affair as a young man, which spurred the writing of this book. It must have been cathartic, putting Werther through his paces and experiencing many of the passion driven outcomes that Goethe in real life resisted. 

I think the heroine, Lotte, sums up the situation with Werther very well. Or is she speaking to Goethe or is Goethe speaking to himself? ”Oh, why did you have to be born with this violent temper, this uncontrollable clinging passion for everything you touch!”

Werther meets Charlotte when she is already engaged to Albert. Werther falls head over heels in love with her, despite her obligations. She is as intelligent as she is lovely and, in everyone’s assessment, will make a wonderful wife...for Albert. It is so much more convenient when a rival is an odious bore, but Albert is actually someone who Werther can’t help but respect and admire. He treats Werther with respect, despite Werther’s increasingly annoying declarations of love towards his fiancee. Albert is actually very cultured and advanced in his thinking. He seems to understand that Werther is suffering from some form of temporary insanity. He is nearly achieving sainthood by the end of the novel. I would have felt compelled to frog march Werther out of my house and bar him from ever returning long before the plot reaches its inevitable conclusion. 

We learn of Werther’s thoughts through letters to his friend Wilhelm. We can tell by Werther’s responses to Wilhelm’s returning letters, which we are not privy to, that his friend is becoming more and more concerned about the state of his friend’s mind. 

Albert expresses his concern as well. ”You exaggerate everything, and you are certainly wrong when you compare suicide, which we discuss here, to great actions, since no one can consider it as anything but weakness. For it is certainly easier to die than bravely to bear a life of misery.” What Albert could have went on to say is, as miserable as you are now, you will not be this miserable forever. The clouds darkening your brow will eventually give way to blue skies once again. 

Lotte does say with insight tinged by exasperation, ”’Why must it be I, Werther? Just I, who belong to another? Why must that be? I am afraid, very much afraid, that it is only the impossibility of possessing me that attracts you so much.’” Doesn’t that sound like something out of Shakespeare? 

As discouraging as Lotte is to the reception of his love, she does also encourage it. She is flattered by his attention. She does like Werther a lot. He is in many ways a better match for her intellectually than Albert, but a much higher risk than the steady Albert. She does wish to have it all. She wants to marry the security of Albert, but still retain Werther as a dear friend to entertain her with his discussions of books, art, travel, and music. This is not dissimilar from a man who wishes to stay married to his wife but would appreciate the stimulation of a dalliance with a young woman. It is like holding a cake in one hand and trying to eat a slice from the other hand while walking a tightrope with certain death below. 

As I was reading, I kept asking myself, after pinning the spectre of Goethe between the flyleaf and the front cover, if I would have enjoyed this novella more when I was twenty. Certainly a bit more, but I’ve never really been into overwrought, high strung, nearly hysterical obsessions with love. Still, this book did have a huge impact on young men of the 18th and early 19th century. Maybe it made some of these young men dream about feeling such a passion for a woman, a man, or really anything at all. They were, after all, taking a tour of Europe in search of themselves before settling down to a dreary life of marriage, career, and child rearing. Maybe some of them fell desperately in love with a fiery eyed Italian waitress or with the lovely profile of a Spanish Princess and stoked their passion by reading Werther’s tribulations with the lovely Lotte. 

I really hope so. 

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten