Rating: 3/5

The initial appeal here is the logical continuation of the title, What Cops Know--- specifically, And You Don't. When you consider all the hidden aspects of the human psyche that are cloaked, concealed or disguised, you begin to get the idea -- cops know about it, cops have been there, cops are always there.

As recording cameras for the creaky contraption of justice, as unblinking eyes in the long watches of the night -- cops are the ones whose observations and powers of recognition must stand between functional civilization and its opposite. Not what they see, but how they've learned to see it. Quiet, thoughtful --sometimes life or death-- scrutiny.

Well. If only this were the narrow agenda for Ms Fletcher's book. As it is, there is a goldmine of relatively disconnected factoid here, and many intriguing aspects unearthed. For example, the majority of burglaries are committed during daytime hours, before it is dark. Score one for the sherlockian "hide in plain sight" dictum. 

But rather than just letting the unrestricted cop-blogging comprise the whole book, she might have done better putting it into a framework that would impose some kind of order on the lists &amp; anecdotes. I can understand the idea of letting the cops speak without modification or spin by the author, and that helps this to be a good read. 

But you do get a whole lot of very embellished sounding tales, (ie we've been telling this one so long it's become an arabian nights tale), and you do get a lot of stories in which the teller just happens to be, albeit always self-deprecatingly, the coincidental hero. Lots of "well we caught the perp from the most-wanted sheet, but his chimpanzee escaped with the swag ... go figure," ... kinds of stories. Lots of real precinct-house perennials, ending with stuff like "so I'm up there storming the attic while the perp's sliding down the front bannister" classics. 

The last section on Mafia practice-- honestly, I think she got the wrong guys to talk about this -- could have been written at the Extras Craft Service table on the Sopranos set. 

I would've hammered &amp; clawed my way through 8oo pages of what cops notice and why-- but I don't think it's really here, honestly. I kind of get the impression that their real life-&amp;-death signs and cues are held close to the vest, for the reasons of not blowing the gag to the opposition. What's here is entertaining overall, but a little bit too much cop-cliché about that time that Flanigan took on the room full of narco desperados and defeated them with an unloaded firearm, you know, cause he's forgetful, old Flanigan. That old Thin Blue Line does its own public relations, case by case, and these are the stories they tell. 

Plus and minus sides accounted for, this is still a lot of good solid material for the Crime Fiction or Mystery afficionado, and I'd put it on a musts list for a crime writer. Read it and weep-- just don't expect the real inside story, mac.