Rating: 4/5

“A Book Review of: The Witch Trade” 
 Book: The Witch Trade Author: Michael Molloy
Did you know that there is more than one type of witch? Well, read this to find out more. First, Abby was waiting for her aunt to bring to a boat tour. All the kids of Speller were going. Next, a mysterious bird caught her eye and she followed it. She missed the tour and went back home. Earlier, her uncle found a strange boy on the shore who was unconscious. He became part of their family. They named him Spike and Abby really liked him. Then, one day on the shore Abby hurt her ankle and it was going to rain. A stranger that lived in a lighthouse helped them and brought them to his house. Adam, Abby, and Spike became friends immediately. Abby and Spike found out about Sea witches and Night witches.The next day Abby and Spike went back. He showed them a secret passage to a marina that no one can see. In the marina there are lots of big boats and one weird boat, the atlantis boat.They all got in it and turned it on. The cavern opened and they rode out. The stranger’s name was Adam Starlight, he is also called the Ancient Mariner. The next day, they went to see Adam. He asked them to go on a dangerous mission to find more ice dust. They go to find their aunt and uncle. They say yes and they leave for England. 
They are going to find Sir Chadwick St., the leader of all light witches. They find him and meet Hilda. Hr tells them that they are going to put on a play Peter Pan. Then, he announces that there is a traitor, a night witch sitting with them. While, Adam was roaming the streets he got kidnapped to the Lost Land. Finally, Hilda, Sir Chadwick St., and The Great Mandini get on the Atlantis boat and they all head to Antarctica to get a lot of ice dust. They find a river with ice dust at the bottom. Read the book to find out what is next.
Michael Molloy, the author of this book, was in art school where he studied painting. He was the editor in chief of the Mirror group. He lives in London with his wife, three daughters, and two dogs. The settings in this book are, Speller a small island with sea witches. London where Sir Chadwick St. lives and a lot of light witches. Antarctica where night witches live.
	Abby Clover is a brave and kind girl who lives in Speller with her aunt Lucy and uncle Ben, and no one knows where her parents are. Spike was found by uncle Ben on the shore with a marlin spike, and cannot remember how he got to Speller.
Two strengths in this book are: He gives good detail with describing characters. In example, “All he wore was a swimsuit made of a strange slithery material”. He also uses descriptive words like when he writes “The creatures wore tight black uniforms over their lumpy bodies, but the most disturbing aspects about them were their faces.Two weaknesses in this book are: It is a little confusing at some parts like when Abby, Spike, Sir Chadwick St., And The Great Mandini switch minds. He also could have added more to the end because, it just stops.
I would rate this book four and a half stars. People that would enjoy this book are people who really enjoy fantasy. Will they find Abby’s parent’s? Will they free the slaves? Read this book to find the answers to ALL your questions!!!