Rating: 5/5

A well written book, The Pact it takes the reader to a whole different world through the lives of three different teenager boys. An unexpected turn came into these two boys they started out on not caring about school ditching getting into fights going into the wrong group of people. Sampson Davis, George Jenkins, and Rameck Hunt when they were in high school they made a pact that they will help one another through no 
matter what goes on in life. This novel is really interesting; It’s a three part book with each part is different stories and different author from different character’s point of view in this story. Each author takes on their parts of a crazy childhood/life for the main characters; when it gets to the middle/end of the chapter of the book, all the previous crazy past the main characters had a huge life changing in their lives.

Sampson Davis, George Jenkins, and Rameck Hunt did a great job with telling their personal lives. When i was reading the book i didn’t know that it was written by different authors until i was finish and going through each chapter and saw different names in the chapters. The authors did really good on working together, the authors made it seem that it was only written by one author. The stories didn’t change at all and the switching of each author’s point of view. 

the best part i love about this book was that you can get to read about very different stories about these three different guys that want to become doctors and dentist. Each character experience about being in college and also getting to experience on being a doctor and working with people. All three guys have experience on being alone getting apartments to stay in, family problems, best friends, heartbreaks, topics that the readers can relate to in this story The Pact.

This book will start out slow and boring but once you get to the middle/end of the book it will start getting interesting that you won’t be able to take your eyes off of the book. I would recommend this book to whoever have gone through something rough in their lives with college or friend’s problem, or family trouble. When i started reading this book and thought i wouldn’t like it but once it got to showing who these three teenagers really are and how their lifestyle is then i started to get into the book and loved it!