Rating: 5/5

Agatha Christie does it again.

No Marple or Poirot in this one. Instead, Emily Trefusis is our plucky heroine. Christie adores creating a smart, attractive, sharp female character. 

Emily is determined to get her fiancée, James Pearson, out of jail. He's accused of murder - but Emily knows there's no way he could have done it. "Jim is a frightful idiot. But he doesn't murder people.”

Once again, Christie's wit and humor blow me away. She is such a funny writer! I would almost classify her books as comedies. 

Of course, Sittaford is populated with a number of colorful characters. A curmudgeon of an old military man who is perpetually grumpy. Another military man who's an invalid. He's always complaining about 'civilized people' and their tendency to hurry. He's got the hots for young Emily and claims she needs a “real man”, meaning himself – even though he's thirty years her senior. There's the old woman invalid, a sharp-witted nosy busybody in the vein of Miss Marple who knows all the goings-on. There's the young man, Charles Enderby, a journalist who is helping Emily to solve the case – while falling hard for her. Inspector Narracott, the clever and resourceful policeman assigned to the case. Mrs. Willett and her daughter Violet – who very suspiciously moved to Sittaford's cold winter climate from sunny South Africa – if what they say is true. Etc. etc.

Another gem in this novel is Christie's choice to start out the mystery with a 'table turning'. This 'old-style' form of playing Ouija board involves six or so people sitting at a table and asking spirits to 'knock' on the table to indicate 'yes', 'no', and letters of the alphabet. The ghost tells the players of the murder. Of course, there's no real supernatural element and everything is explained to satisfaction by the end.

The vocabulary was wonderful. Also worth noting was the mountain of 1931 slang that was colorful and highly amusing.

Emily Trefusis is a gem – plucky, smart, funny – and able to get any man, woman or child to do what she wants through subtle manipulation, praise and occasional tears. Her tactics work wonders on all – especially the hapless males who cross her path. She has no less than 4 men chasing after her in this novel. Actually, Christie creates a brilliant and gradual love triangle with Emily, the jailed Pearson, and the intrepid reporter Enderby. Who will Emily choose? I was on tenterhooks wondering how this triangle was going to resolve itself.

Last but not least, Christie fooled me again. I never suspected the true murderer in the least. I was shocked. My two or three running theories and suspicions were all for naught. It's very rare that I'm able to solve a Christie novel correctly and this one is no exception.

YA novels with Mary Sues and love triangles have NOTHING on Christie's Mary Sue of Emily and her intense yet chaste love triangle in this novel. These Agatha Christie novels were probably the very thing teenagers were consuming by the dozen in 1931. Pretending to be Emily Trefusis instead of Katniss Everdeen.

Published as Murder at Hazelmoor OR The Sittaford Mystery.