Rating: 5/5

My rating for My Ántonia? 5 stars shining brightly in the cloudless Nebraska sky, so vividly and lovingly evoked by Willa Cather in this elegiac novel about farmers and immigrant settlers making lives for themselves in the harsh, beautiful, bountiful prairies.

(Sorry about that graceless run-on incomplete sentence. Cather, with her clear, descriptive, unpretentious prose, would never commit such a sin.)

Some people and places are forever etched in our memories. Can you recall the landscapes of your childhood? The fields or sidewalks where you'd play? Do you have friends who – even if you see them decades later – you still remember as young? Have you ever seen a sparkle in a child’s eye that reminds you of his or her parent?

Cather makes you think of all that. And much more.

On the surface, it’s the tale of Jim Burden’s friendship/quasi-obsession with Ántonia (pronounced Anton-ee-ah) Schimerda, the oldest child of a Bohemian (Czech) immigrant family that moves to a neighbouring farm that’s really a hole in the ground.

Through Jim’s eyes, in a series of episodes, we follow Ántonia, from scrappy farm helper to hard-working “hired girl” in town (there was a tradition for immigrant girls to work in town to send money to their families) to restless charismatic young woman with a talent for dance to… well, I don’t want to spoil the plot, such as it is.

The book provides a fascinating look at various European immigrant communities in that era. Sometimes a scene will consist of a character simply telling a story to entertain others (remember, this was a time before TV and radio). Cather, a lesbian who never married, also offers up a glimpse into the lives of strong, determined women in a hardscrabble world dominated by men.

A gentle, nostalgic feeling suffuses the book, and it’s full of love and affection for the industry and ethos of a bygone era. It’s not all pleasant, however. There’s suicide, cheating, death by wild animals, attempted rape, and lots and lots of mournful longing – as symbolized by the lonesome chugging of a train.

Here's a passage, from early on in the book: 

  I wanted to walk straight on through the red grass and over the edge of the world, which could not be very far away. The light air about me told me that the world ended here: only the ground and sun and sky were left, and if one went a little farther there would be only sun and sky, and one would float off into them, like the tawny hawks which sailed over our heads making slow shadows on the grass.

Simple, unfussy, evocative. I’ve never been to Nebraska. But Cather’s powers of description are so strong, I now feel like I have. And I look forward to a repeat visit in her other prairie books, O Pioneers! and The Song Of The Lark.