Rating: 5/5

The bat is haunted by the shadows 
 
Of a past he can´t forget
No matter how much free cosmetic surgery, the true, ugly face of reality will always stay burned inside the memory of the poor billionaire. Aging also doesn´t really help in a world that hasn´t become better since he began his crusade against crime and injustice, so he has to 
 
Strongly rely on tech compensating the fading reflexes and strength
A not real superhero, just made of tech like Batman and Ironman, is more sympathetic and easier to relate to and identify with than the mutants, aliens, wizards, and people born with these powers. But not even winning under dire circumstances can make Bruce happy, because 
 
Human nature sucks
Even after some success against the dark side, the whole victory gets toxic because the proselytized baddies are so overachieving that they satirize the whole doing good concept even more than Batman himself. Not to speak of the ethical and philosophical implications of what is really good and bad in individual and meta contexts. In both this aspect and its deeper meaning and innuendos it kind of
 
Reminds me of Watchmen
Like no other graphic novel I´ve read so far. But because I´m still a genre rookie, that might just be a subjective fail, but I won´t beg for forgiveness like a battened criminal. There is no real hope, the world is depressing, and the only main difference between the two works is the integration of fantasy elements in Watchmen. In both cases, the really big deal is to
 
Compare the movie and the graphic novel
To milk massive mind penetrations of how complex these things are. Just as in conventional, colorless literature, there is such a deep layer of big history, postmodernist deconstruction, dark satire, and loads of innuendos and connotations that it´s just a joy to see all the Potemkin villages of functioning, fair Western fringe sockpuppet democracies collapse under the intellectual vacuum created by poor, abused voodoo humanities. The rotten core is so bigoted, inhuman, and cynical that in the end
 
Hope fails epically
Thanks to bad old school psychiatry and conservative right wing politicians. Both of these elements are so freaking complex that one could go forever vivisecting them, but let´s just say Ronald Reagan got roasted and that repeating psychological and psychiatric studies leads to interesting replication crisis catastrophes shaking the foundations of humanities. Even 
 
Adding Superman to the mix can´t create a happy ending
When 2 heroes, one truly superpowered and the other one gifted with technical ingenuity and physical, once, superiority, are unable to fight the system, what should one little, weak human being do against these sinister forces? Maybe online socializing, organizing, and thereby eco social improving the world instead of trolling, hating, and fake newsing? Wait, that was too optimistic for the dark tone of this novel, I mean we are doooomed and all hope is gone. 
 
Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: 
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...