Rating: 5/5

I was reluctant to read this book because of it's simple format: the two hundred year history of socialism told through the biographies of 13 people. Most, of course, are well known, such as Frederich Engels and Benito Mussolini. Even the lesser known ones, Eduard Bernstein, the German Social Democrat who in "Evolutionary Socialism" tried to redefine Marxism for a more peaceful, economically improving age, or Julius Nyerere, the intellectual Tanzania autocrat who liberated his country and then wrecked it), already have extensive biographies. But Joshua Muravchick is a gifted writer, who is able to find the nuggets and surprising facts in every story and relate it to the whole. None of the biographies are told with rage or absence of perspective, but with genuine interest, as one would expect from an author who grew up socialist and spent time on a kibbutz. 

One consistent theme in the book is that the true socialists were always middle or upper class reformers who understood that workers were reluctant to embrace utopianism, but whose education allowed them to jump to the head of socialist parties anyway. From Vladimir Lenin in Russia to Clement Atlee in Britain, all the socialist heads were guilt-ridden individuals surrounded by servants from youth. The real working class, even if they felt enlightened by Marxism (and one lesson here is that Marxism was in every such party, in one shape or another, from social democratic to labour to communist to national socialist), ended up pushing for gradualism, as did Samuel Gompers, the poor son of East London cigar-rollers who came to America to found the AFL and who kept socialists out of it. Another theme is that although many of these utopians were blood-thirsty from the start (as was Francois-Noel Babeuf, the Robesspierre confidant who is often cited as the first socialist) others such as Nyerere just came to realize that socialism required force, and it was never pretty.

This book was published in 2002, during what one could call the heighth of capitalism, so the "fall" of socialism looks complete here, and stories like Tony BLair and Deng Xiaopeng are told as curtain-calls for past dreams. Yes, one could say the state is back now, but in fact the old socialism, of, say, the Labour Party's Clause IV, which demanded up until Blair the complete socialization of the means of production, is truly dead, held onto only by the most recalictrant of renegades. Other dangerous philosophies, including some of socialism's offshoots, live on, but we can take comfort that this most radical and utopian idea of modern history has finally been buried along with millions of its victims.