Rating: 5/5

UNF! Why has Mr. Benson been hiding from me all this time?

And here I go a little further down the rabbit hole… 
 

Mr. Benson is iconic to the leather community. After reading it, it's clear several current BDSM writers have read this book. Some of my favorite reads had to have been at least partially influenced by it; so, it's worth the read just for the classic factor alone. 

I can tell you this happened to me often whilst reading it.

Accompanied by… 

Yap. Tis true. Needed some me time.

Mr. Benson played me like a fiddle! Honestly, I couldn't have asked for anything more. 

Sadomasochism
Humiliation
Exhibitionism
Leather
Fisting
Feeding
Age play
A bear
And the granddaddy of them all… 
TPE

Fair warning: HEAVY on the watersports. I've gotten inured to it. The boys like it and I like the boys so… compromise. *shrug*

Mr. Benson is set pre-condom/AIDS era. I'm guessing it's lates 70s/early 80s because of the high prevalence of:

Tons of flannel, mustaches, Levis, burly "hunks" that are cops and construction workers even an Indian makes an appearance! Some of the lingo was priceless. Why are they all sweaty and hairy? Many of the happenings in Mr. Benson are not for the faint of heart. There are several instances that are reckless at best, however, let's be honest, a lot of this stuff still happens and the draw for both the reader as well as Jaime (our protag/slave) is the danger factor. The difference being this stuff is frowned upon in contemporary erotica in the PC era. Well, at least until the MCs have fallen in instalove and swapped tests.

There is nary a mention of contracts, hard limits, safe words, nothing, nada. That's not to say that Mr. Benson doesn't give Jaime opportunities to leave. He does. After their first encounter he tells him to decide if he really wants what Mr. Benson is offering and sends him on his way. Naturally, Jaime cannot stop thinking about him and even once he comes back, endures the "test", he's still given the first week as a trial period. Still, Mr. Benson undoubtedly would have extreme difficulty being published today.

Mr. Benson and Jaime's relationship is what drew me in. Jaime is obsessed with Mr. Benson. I found being inside Jaime's head fascinating. How he derives his self-worth in relation to not only Mr. Benson but by being viewed as desirable. How he defines himself as a slave and what all that entails. How afraid he is of failure and being left alone. Jamie tells the story of Mr. Benson aside from the epilogue and the way he sees and thinks about him is nothing short of godlike. He'll do anything for him, is lost without his guidance, spins out without him, desperate to find someone to fill that void, to complete him and take away the emptiness. Benson is harder to read but I saw glimpses of his true feelings for Jaime even prior to the epilogue.

Mr. Benson is just as much about the leather community as it is their relationship. The depiction of this early leather society is gritty and raw filled with hunters and prey, black knights and the suburbanite set from New Jersey who come into the big city to live out their fantasies and/or scratch an itch for a night. Backrooms, wharves, cruising, Crisco, amyl, anonymous sex, the game is hardcore and Jaime jumps in with both feet. Jaime makes so many decisions that are flat out reckless; he's lucky to have survived in all honesty.

As Jamie spirals through his self-flagellation he stumbles right into the secondary plot line which takes a hard left into some cheese filled 70s porn. Some of it is so nonsensical, so laughable… I have no words. Wait, no I have 4 words: beware of the kraut!

I laughed so hard at this line, I had to put it down. "Well, that's a relief," said Mr. Benson. "It would have killed me. I don't know if slavery's so bad," he repeated in his disbelieving low voice. "But Jersey City?"

It could've done with a final edit to clean up some typos and I'm waffling on the writing style. On the one hand it's told exclusively in a 25 year old's voice which seems authentic, but on the other hand it's choppy and unpolished. Either way the dialogue is oftentimes stilted or cheesy or hilarious, depending upon your perspective.

Mr. Benson entertained the hell out of me. It fascinated me, made me laugh, titillated me, educated me and most importantly it kept me engaged. I can't quite muster up 5 stars for it, but it's definitely in 4.5 star (rounded up) territory for me and I'll be reading more from this author. 

In short/gif, Mr. Benson,