Rating: 1/5

"Thought allied fearlessly to purpose becomes creative force." This is the basic idea behind all of James Allen's sugary half-truths. When I found an audio file with this text pre-packaged into my new learnoutloud.com cart, read by "Brian Johnson, Philosopher and CEO of Zaadz.com," I was briefly intrigued. 

Then as I listened a bit more, I thought it was some kind of joke or parody -- surely in just a moment Brian, "Philosopher," will put on a more genuine, critical voice. Surely he would tell us that of course you can't change your circumstances with your thoughts. That's not philosophy, but magical thinking. Surely he would remind us, as Barbara Erhenreich has tried to do, that perfectly virtuous people fail and suffer everyday. And that perfect scoundrals, animalistic beasts, succeed and prosper all the time. (For some reason I think of Adam Sandler. I believe he once commented with pride that he did not finish high school.) 

Surely people all know, in this day and age, that "serenity" is not a viable goal in life? That the best we can do is meet the challenges as they come, acknowledge that life is always a struggle, and find reasons to continue the struggle? 

Surely people don't fall for this dully polished hogwash, already dreadfully unoriginal by 1903? Doesn't the pompousness, the selfishness, the sheer vacuity of Allen's thinking show through?

Sadly, there truly is no end to how gullible readers can be. I suppose when you combine basic ignorance with the anxiety and ambivalence we all feel these days (trust me I feel it too) then the result is that a large part of the population will continue to purchase the age-old idea that "right thoughts" will change the world. That's why Brian Johnson can live the glamorous, self-oriented life of a "CEO." That's why Allen's 1903 text is plastered all over the internet, from Wikipedia to Project Gutenberg and so on and so forth. I've hit on yet another node of the most compelling fantasy that exists in this market-and-work oriented world. 

"There's a sucker born every minute." - P.T. Barnum (died 1891)