Rating: 2/5

Unfortunately, I didn't read the reviews until after ordering the book, but at least I was able to verify firsthand the generalizations, misconceptions, and made up information for myself. It's a strange book, and I can't figure out exactly who the target audience is. Maybe it's to help wicca celebrate Christmas if they feel guilty about being too nontraditional. I just found it sad and depressing that a Wiccan High Priestess and founder of a coven would talk so much about Christmas and leave out so many of the important traditions and history of pagan Yule. The book is not what I would expect from the cover notes.

The book generally goes through an exploration of holidays (usually Christmas) around the world, and it contains a lot of recipes and some activities/chants that might be useful for someone trying to create their own fusion holiday and traditions. But for a book that talks so much about "history" I was horrified by the lack of footnotes, her admitted subjective interpretations for many "facts", and the making-it-up-as-you-go sensibility. For an example of the latter, she describes Tsao Chun, the Chinese Festival of the Kitchen God, as something you could celebrate on December 20. Supposedly women stay out of the kitchen and men cook. Ignoring the inherent sexism of such a tradition for a moment, she suggests the men ask the God's blessing with a rhyme, "something like:

Kitchen God, now hear our plea
Help us whip up a delicacy
Let no dish be ruined or burn
Help us shine, for it's our turn"

It is clear she is just making up a rhyme in English to fit her interpretation of the holiday. Yes, she is creative, but unfortunately it makes one wonder how much of her book is fact and how much is fiction. Not what you want in a "nonfiction" text (Dewey Decimal 394.261). Going back to the issue of footnotes a final time, she lists an "Appendix IV: Yule-Related Websites" at the end of the book. It contains nine web addresses with the words "christmas" or "xmas" in them, three with the words "santa" or "north-pole" in them, and only three possibly pagan sites, containing "yule", "pholidays", and "aps_legacy". Of the 15 total sites, most are now inactive, as it has been 14 years from publication as of this review, but just looking at these addresses gives a good approximation of the contents of this book, and her technique for "research". Buyer beware.