Rating: 2/5

FINALLY! Gregory David Roberts says it took him 13 long and troubled years to write this book. I felt it took me that long to READ it! Because it was recommended to me, I strove to read it in its entirety.

Why I found this to be a troublesome read:
1. Lin (main character based on the author). Although I enjoy reading about flawed protagonists (and Lin definitely was), he comes across as an arrogant, hypocritical modern-day Robin Hood. GDR legitimizes child slavery, scoring drugs for tourists, giving "dirty" money to slum dwellers, counterfeiting passports, licenses, etc. while being involved with organized crime - all this didn't win any Brownie points from me, and often left me angry. Truly, an unsympathetic character from start to finish.
2. This book was too long-winded! What was the editor thinking??? She should have taken some HUGE pruning shears and cut out at least 400-500 pages, starting with the endless use of inane similes and metaphors about everything, as well as his eyerolling philosophical musings! GDR writes about facial and bodily features and clothing worn by EVERYONE he meets! And how many times does he have to describe Karla's eyes, hair, lips, clothing, etc.? I get it! She's drop-dead gorgeous with green eyes, black hair, luscious lips and likes wearing green clothes! Too bad she's a one-dimensional character. The constant use of description would be something my Grade 3 students would attempt in their story writing.

Some redeeming qualities:
1. Slum dwellers, Johnny Cigar and Joseph, slum manager, Qasim Ali Hussein, Lin's hilarious friend, Prabaker, the Standing Babas - even Kano the Bear, were all entertaining characters, and I would have been fascinated to learn more of their stories.
2. Lin's time spent in an Indian prison was the most hair-raising, engrossing part of the story for me!

Unfortunately, the cons outweigh the pros for me in regards to quality story writing. GDR tries to describe India, its culture and its people, but if you want to read a truly captivating story about this topic, I highly recommend A Fine Balance by Rohinton Mistry.