Rating: 2/5

I expected this book to inform me on the topic of territory and its significance in the shaping of the animal's psychology and social relationships. The book has, by this measure, succeeded in illuminating the subject with detailed anecdotes and studies of a wide array of animals and birds. I especially like the manner in which arena behaviour and the 'noyau' was explained with detailed accounts of the Ugandan kob and the bowerbirds. I also found the experiments with planarian worms very fascinating and thought-provoking. I had also expected the author to hypothesize cool things (for the relative youth of ethology in 1967). The facts are the only reason this book gets its two stars, having been disappointing in every other way.

First, the book could have been written in about 160 to 200 pages, quite easily. The author, a former dramatist, has a knack for going into run-on sentences that do little except restate the previous sentence in a more colourful manner and test your patience. The rule of three is abused sorely, drastically and excessively. The book could have benefited from Simple Sentence construction. One is tempted to give the book the benefit of doubt since it belongs to 1967 but then you read another page and realize prolixity would not be so severe a crime if it actually helped the elucidation instead of doing a little dance around every statement, perhaps to win credibility by repetition.

Which brings me to the second point: the author has little to talk about after the first half of the book. He describes the different types of territories, hypothesizes the motivations behind these formations and then, very smoothly, proceeds to go into assumptions that might convince the unsuspecting and uncritical reader. One gets the distinct feeling that the author has reached a conclusion that he will justify through whatever means possible. The humility in admitting that one does not have sufficient information to make a claim is exploited in the worst way possible: to state the claim and assume that the half-truth state is sufficient to move ahead with the hypothesis. The Scientific Method is treated like an optional guideline and the results are quite difficult to digest.

Third, the author constantly seems apologetic about his lack of formal training in the field. This would not be so irritating if the author were not constantly non-committal and equivocal. It is not a crime to make qualified claims but it is one to make so many of them, so closely, with so much hedging.

I have not read any other books within the field yet but I am quite sure there are briefer, clearer and more fruitful resources to peruse. Read the first few chapters, if at all.