Rating: 2/5

*** MAY CONTAIN SPOILERS ***

I want to like David Drake. I'm trying. And there are some great reasons to like him. His imagination, for example, is fantastic - so many parallel plains of existence, magical bubbles outside of normal time and space, ruins of ancient and future civilisations, underworlds and fantastical enemies, all of them unique and each with its own intriguing imagery. He has good characters, too: his heroes are heroic, his enemies are evil, and we meet so many interesting sub-characters along the way. There is so much potential here, and he has definitely improved since book one. The thing is, I just can't get past some frustrating habits he has.

The other worlds, for instance. There are many. So many, in fact, that over the course of this book we probably spent more time in them than in the "real" world of the Isles. Drake has put a lot of time into worldbuilding his maritime landscape with all of its cultures and political struggles. I would like to read more about it. But instead, Sharina has to get captured every five minutes; Cashel has to find himself on unexpected quests (solving them without effort or understanding); Tenoctris exists mostly to send other characters left, right and centre; and we are plunged into Hell and travel across wizard bridges so often we almost get dizzy. Did Drake really dislike his world so much that he spent as much time as possible not being in it? One or two of these alternative realities would be great, would be fun, but Drake is like a child in a sweet shop with unlimited budget - he wants more than is really good for him.

My other major bugbear is the heavy-handedness of his characterisation. Take Cashel and Ilna - both are interesting characters, both strongly formed, distinct, with their own engaging personalities. But at every opportunity, Drake feels the need to reinforce that character, as if we might have forgotten over the last twenty pages. I have read the previous two books. I have read the beginning of this book. I *know* that Cashel views things simply, that people mistake him for stupid, that he makes a habit of not getting angry. I *know* that Ilna is proud and sharp-tongued and full of remorse for past actions that, in the grand scheme of things, really weren't that bad. I don't need to be told in as many words every time the opportunity arises. It's as if he expects us not to have been paying any attention.

This is perhaps where the sub-characters stand out. Because they are only ever seen externally, we don't have to suffer all the clumsy internal reflections of "she said this because that is the way her character is". And in this book there really were some great sub-characters. Chalcus, for example, with his pirate past and marvellous skill and charm. Or Dalar the bird-warrior (who in my head looks a lot like Tokoyami from Boku no Hero Academia - just me?) with his samurai honour and absolutely no explanation of how his race exists in a world only otherwise populated by humans. The element of mystery keeps them interesting. 

As I say, there are things about Drake to like. If you want basic high fantasy and heroic adventure, maybe these are the books for you. I will definitely finish the series. But if you want slightly better quality from your fantasy, I would recommend looking elsewhere.