Rating: 5/5

While I was hoping to not do much at all between Wednesday and Friday on either side of ANZAC day, which was on the Thursday - besides watch the traditional Roosters v Dragons, and switch over to Essendon v Collingwood in between - I began reading The Naked Island on the Wednesday evening and finished it on Friday morning, so that most of it I read on the ANZAC day Thursday. I must say that I’ve never ever experienced a more reflective Anzac Day than this one. I barely left my apartment. I intentionally traded in the dawn service for the reading of this book. It occurred to me that I didn’t know any stories relating to Australian (I’m a New Zealander, but same same in this regard) or Kiwi engagements in any war, so why not change that over three days of leisure, 
while enjoying the footy. So close Warriors, so so close.......

The Naked Island by Russel Braddon was the best place to begin. I was in Kanchanaburi a few years back, but I just didn’t quite get the significance of it all. Now I do, and Braddon is one of those guys you’d give a week’s pay to spend ANZAC day with, down at the RSL, throwing back schooners, listening to his story about the time the Japs turned up in Parit Sulong, or the theatre stage they built at Changi, or the hope that seemed to somehow find a form of expression in the Kanchanaburi malaria huts. I’ve learned a lot from this book. Not just war facts, but also about the courage and determination that can be found in the most threatening of situations.

It really brought back this sense of identity to me, because I remember these Russel Braddon types from my childhood in New Zealand, these tough buggers, and I miss them. This book made this year’s Anzac Day something special, probably the most educated, meaningful reflection upon war, something that’s an absolutely terrible business, but it has happened, and helpless young men recruited themselves, guys like Braddon, who went from Sydney schoolboy to killing with a bayonet in disease infested jungle, all on behalf of state interests. If you want to understand war from a soldiers perspective, then this is a book I highly recommend.

In fact I would recommend any Australian or New Zealander to read The Naked Island over the Anzac Day period. It’s a true classic of storytelling and antipodean literature.