Rating: 1/5

This book is an atrocity and the world needs to know. Composer's sex lives are absolutely fascinating and Cawthorne understands NONE of the reasons why, creating this sensational, inaccurate, and frankly offensive mess. Not only does Nigel Cawthorne admit in the introduction to not even enjoying classical music, but he clearly has no idea what he is talking about, and I can only assume that these "facts" are coming directly out of his rear end, because I've read many of the books on Cawthorne's bibliography (only listed at the very end of the book, with no noted citations) and have seen how he's grossly misunderstood their contents.

When discussing sexuality and historical figures, it's important to not ascribe modern terminology to describe concepts that appropriate the actual culture that these people lived in. Cawthorne does this recklessly and without abandon. It's clear that he doesn't actually understand the social nuances of sexuality in each composer's lifetime, and is trying to create scandal for scandal. (Even when the truth is infinitely more interesting!) The bit about Clara Schumann and Johannes Brahms is a bastardization of their actual intellectual relationship.

Cawthorne's prose is acceptable, but each section is far too short. I would have rather him covered a few composers in more detail, rather than a shotgun approach like this. Perhaps he could have centered it around one era? Or perhaps sectioning it into communities like "1800s Vienna" or something to get a better picture of how each composer's sexual preferences/activity was different from their peers.

Furthermore, Cawthorne misses the most important part of discussing an artist's sexual background, which is how it affects their art. Especially in the case of those with more "specific" tastes like Grainger or Britten, seeing how their preferences seeped into and effected their music is the exact reason we study this, no? To boil it down to "famous person is a freak" is such a disappointment, when the actual nuance and real, lived experience is so much more interesting.