Rating: 2/5

Gould overcomitted himself to a number of big ideas over the course of his career, including but not limited to punctuated equilibrium, spandrels, and his ideological objection to evolutionary psychology (as well as introducing such stultifying notions as NOMA) but his powers of explanation have nevertheless been so highly praised by otherwise intellectually capable people that I had to check him out for myself. 

Overall, his arguments lack the force and clarity of other titans of popular biology writing, like Dawkins or Pinker. (I will say that I once knew a diehard creationist who absolutely loved reading Gould – make of that what you will). There are plenty of examples of Gould’s weak reasoning decorated with lots of rhetorical flourishes and embellished with quotes by more capable writers, but the meat of what he really wants to say is usually buried beneath a lot of $10 words that allow one to gloss over his lack of substance. In that way Gould reminds me of the teacher for advanced students in the Simpsons episode “Bart the Genius”. The teacher makes a truly, objectively terrible joke, but does it in such an ostentatiously grandiose way that you almost forget how bad the joke is:

“So y = r cubed over 3. And if you determine the rate of change in this curve correctly, I think you'll be pleasantly surprised. Don't you get it, Bart? Derivative dy = 3 r squared dr over 3, or r squared dr, or r dr r.”

In the same way, Gould will constantly belabor a point that simply isn’t as clever or original as it sounds.

I hope one example of Gould’s sloppy thesis construction suffices for illustration. In expounding on the joint significance of the year 1859 to the lives of Darwin, Humboldt, and Frederic Church, Gould details the Humboldt’s profound influence on Church’s landscape painting. Humboldt believed that the forces of nature were ordered and harmonious. When Darwin published Origin of Species, Humboldt’s philosophy shattered. Gould argues that with Church’s guiding principle undermined, his muse abandoned him – he simply couldn’t bring himself to paint landscapes any longer. Okay, pretty compelling stuff… except Gould later reluctantly, and almost as an afterthought, grants that it’s also just *possible* that Church’s losing the use of his painting arm *might* alternatively explain why he stopped doing landscapes. Hmm, d’ya think?

One recurring theme in this collection is the resurrection long dead and discredited beliefs or practices and proceeding to give them entirely too much respect (while also admitting that, yes, we were right to discard them). His m.o. here is constructing a straw man argument that assumes that Crollian/Freudian/pre-Adamite/preformationists etc. adherents/practitioners weren’t engaging in a good faith attempt to understand the world to the best of their limited knowledge at the time. He then goes on to defend these Crollian/Freudian/pre-Adamite/preformationist ideas as the best that a particular thinker could do at the time, within their particular scientific-cultural context. This particular bugbear of his became quite tiresome very quickly, and it’s one he returns to repeatedly.

Listen, the guy does his homework. Gould is a highly intelligent, highly literate writer. Maybe I’m just bitter because this book wasn’t everything I wanted it to be. Maybe this collection of essays (his final one) doesn’t represent his best ideas because he’d already used them up over the previous 25 years. All I know is that I didn’t enjoy it. I found Gould an insufferable pedant who belabors inane points to show how clever he thinks he is (e.g., “... one might argue that he used the wrong tense, confusing the compound past of continuous action with an intended simple past to designate a definite and completed event...”). It’s really a shame, because Gould has been a primary point of contact for learning about evolution for a huge number of people. I’d hoped that would have a deep reserve of books that I could fall in love with. I might eventually give his books another shot, but I’m hardly excited to do so.