Rating: 4/5

I can't decide whether to give this book 2 stars or 4. Ultimately it does succeed as a powerful story of the effects of the Great War on English society. Instead of the sweeping narrative of the typical war novel, FMF takes his story completely inside the characters' heads, looking at society and war in the microcosm, an approach that must be respected. 

And yet. I did not enjoy reading it. The third book does finally portray a good bit of the misery and danger of the trenches and the front lines. The first two books are really more about a love triangle in England during the time of the first war. At all times, the story is narrated through the inner thoughts, relevant or irrelevant, of the 3 main characters. Often these are overwrought; it is exhausting to read so many sentences ending in exclamation points. It's like a soap opera, in that you can skip forward 30 pages and be confident you'll still be in the same scene. The reader is left to tease out the few narrative points amidst the torrent of banality. 

I did not read the fourth book, choosing to side with Conrad and others who called it 'a disaster' and who state that FMF never intended it to be published. 

A further disadvantage of the extreme interior view FMF gives, of the war and the times, is that context is never developed or revealed. I am not sure whether, for example, I would have perceived the portrayal of the disintegration of classes, had I not already known that WWI was the catalyst for this. I can't imagine what a reader without prior knowledge of the era and the war specifically would make of it. 

Editorial addition after watching the HBO miniseries of Parade's End: It pairs perfectly with the book. How often can that be said?! The book is not terribly visual, while the miniseries is lush with color &amp; period detail, supplying the images the book didn't. The TV series, of course, could not contain the pages and pages of interior reflection that make up 2/3 of the book, so it leaves out the part I found most tiresome. At the same time, there were many times in the miniseries when I thought, 'I sure am glad I read the book and know everything that was meant by that 15-second scene'. And revisiting the scenes &amp; characters from the book was like finding valued old friends. I now think, or maybe I always did, that Christopher Tietjens is one of the great literary characters. Thanks to the symbiosis of book &amp; movie, I'm upgrading yo 4 stars. 
A final comment on the version - I bought an inexpensive ($2.99) Kindle version, which was very sloppily converted and suffered far more than the usual 'Kindleisms' of sentences illogically broken and scrambled words. The book would benefit greatly by well done commentary &amp; footnotes, and it would be worth it to pay more for them.