This was an impulse buy from I no longer even remember where, just that it is second-hand, and wherever it was, I could not not go through the romance section. A little bit about the edition, it's my second large print read, after Bittersweet Deception, both of which I got together, and it was kind of funny to breeze through it. It is an old edition that goes by the name of Linford Romance Library.

Kendall Jamison, twenty-nine, is kind of envious of what Jacob H. Sentell, Smithboro County (Texas) Sheriff has---a loving family. While she is job hunting after spending five years in prison for a fraud she did not commit, she chances upon Sentell's program of trying to get ex-cons back into the workforce and society.

Jake lost his wife three years ago, but it is hard for him to let go of his seventeen-year-long marriage. In spite of the misgivings that they both have, they flirt in between their respective jobs, sometimes not even realising that is what they are doing.
Someone to love and love her in return, someone to share days and nights and dreams and disappointments. Forever. ... and that he too ached with the fear of never sharing himself with someone again.
Narrated in the third person, Fair Warning comes without a warning about how sweet this story is; I had an idea about it being a slow-burn, especially because it was published before I was even born, but it was nevertheless refreshing to read about those times when there were no gadgets except a television and a landline and people used to pass their time just basking in the sun in the meadows.

A time when attending Sunday service was still mentioned in books (I may be wrong about that, or should I say romance books).

The year is not explicitly mentioned but Jake married his now-dead wife seventeen years ago when he returned from Vietnam. And he has five children from that union, the oldest having already gone to college and the youngest being three. With his permanent housekeeper moving to another state for a family emergency, he needs a replacement and that is where Kendall comes in.

I wonder if this is the standard in stories this old, where despite doing things behind each other's backs, there are no betrayals as eventually, they tell each other everything. Before something terrible happens, that is.

The story was quite laid-back, mostly involving mundane familial things but it was all so very lovely. There are secrets though, more of the criminal variety, especially in Kendall's past.

The story had a great ending, with a sweet epilogue, and a bit of action. This is my first read by Catherine Sellers.

P.S. It came with its own Adjustable Lyfjacket from London. (I don't even know why I'm writing this down, just that it made the book feel more special.)