Rating: 2/5

A big, old-fashioned, and rather laborious novel tracing the fortunes of a family from North Dakota; this was once hailed as a contender for Great American Novel status, but has since fallen out of both favour and print. It’s not quite a family saga in the classic sense, as it really concentrates on just one generation, but it seems determined to explain their lives in almost punishing detail.

The chapters are little standalone narratives, from varying points of view, many of them originally published as stories in the New Yorker; gathered together, they tell a story of a poor family in the ‘bleached bleak infinity’ of the Dakota plains, struggling with work, love, religion and the usual tragedies that existence throws your way, until eventually death intercedes.

In the best works of literature, this can be made into something transcendent, but here for the most part I just found the litany of life-events to be faintly depressing. There is something a little sickly about Woiwode’s closely-remembered childhood, not least the recurrent confused sexual experimentation between siblings (‘I read or heard somewhere that it happens in about sixty or seventy percent of families where the boys and girls are anywhere close in age,’ one character justifies later) as well as, for me at least, the vague sense of religiosity that underlies some passages.

Later in life, Woiwode would describe himself as a ‘writer-in-Christ’ and eventually be barred from the New Yorker for being too overtly religious, but here it’s nothing like that strong – just a strain of feeling that at times can be quite beautiful, and at other times feels frustratingly unthoughtful. It’s not just the supernatural elements, but the social ones – in this Catholic milieu, all the women are condemned to endlessly popping out babies every year, and even after one of the most endearing and sympathetic characters in here finally dies in childbirth, no one stops to think whether maybe contraception might not be such a bad idea after all.

It contributes to the overall feeling I had that this book, clearly of huge autobiographical importance for its author, represents a life which, however touchingly evoked, is less a life examined than a life unquestioned.

(NB, the image on the front jacket – what is that? a quail? – turns out to be done by Maurice Sendak, of all people!)