Rating: 4/5

If you read works like "Black Elk Speaks" and other Native American histories (told by the people who lived through them), you get much the same philosophy, though in a more implicit way. This book basically laid out the deeply premodern Native American way of life, especially emphasizing the many ways that it differed with modernism, western thinking/science, and modern Christianity. Since it is a collection of quotes, sometimes quite out of context (other times painstakingly deep in context), it was up to the author to select quotes that he wanted non-Natives to see. As such, this book contains a particularly rosy view of Native American life, philosophy, and religion, whereas "Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee" felt very balanced, and it didn't sugar-coat anything. Sometimes it was the US government at fault, sometimes it was Native Americans (usually the former). This book is still valuable as a quick reference for authoritative NA quotes on various topics, but I suspect that the Native Americans had their own problems before the white man came.

Regardless of that suspicion, I found this collection to be very edifying and worth my time, and it does serve as a good introduction to the Native American way of life. Mainly, it helps point out how similarly most premodern peoples lived before the advent of modernity and its radical technological and social change. The Native Americans in this collection consistently find Christ not only relatable but a figure whose teachings they claim they already follow. I should clarify that when I say "they", i.e. those quoted in this work, it should be noted that of course not all Native American tribes and peoples thought the same thing, and actually had quite a bit of variety; instead, we are here talking of the median beliefs, not an exhaustive or absolute discussion of them.

Anyway, back to Christ. The Native Americans quoted in this collection were very justifiably disappointed at the behavior of a "christian civilization" after hearing the high words of Christian missionaries. I very strongly agree with the assessment of one of the men quoted, who basically pointed out that "Christian Civilization" isn't very Christian, but is more modern and materialistic than anything. Instead of "Civilization" bringing tolerance and understanding, it brought materialism and superficiality, because they saw it as based upon trade and competition instead of unity and harmony. There was one point halfway through the book which was poignant in its conflation of Christianity with domination, because that's what supposed Christians have done all-too-often. This disunity and lack of harmony with nature and others seems to come from two places: separation of man from nature, and the exclusivity inherent in Abrahamic religion. The "invention" of a category ("Nature") separate from "Man" is an ancient one, and it seemed to find its most absolutist form in Judaism (Nietzsche notes the same thing). This division in some ways allows people to "Other" nature and mistreat it (despite the calls to steward the earth); similarly, claims that "Our one god is the real god" also opens up the possibility of seeking exclusive truth (which is very important for science), but it also can breed a superiority complex if you aren't properly humbled. The thing is, there are failsaves in place to prevent these excesses, just as there were failsaves in place in more heterogeneous societies/religions like the Native Americans had. But in each case, distance from those fail-saves produces aberration. For example, in Christianity, distance from the truth of the Resurrection and of the profundity of Christ's sacrifice creates apathy, and apathy allows this queer notion of a separation of your "Religious" life from your "Daily" life, which is a very false dichotomy. Similarly, in the Native religions, once the transmission of stories, of language, and of tradition was shattered, (mostly due to warfare and injustices), then Native Americans were loosed from their previously strong morals; add alcohol and guns to the mix, and it becomes extremely hard to exist as a Native American.

Another major difference between the two religions, and hence the two worldviews, is their views on oral vs. written transmission. The Native Americans were taught from childhood to memorize, and were very good at that, and they laughed at the white men who would panic when they lost their papers. There is certainly wisdom in this, but one need not go quite as far as Plato in hating writing. This bled into their religions, where the Christians claimed an unerring Bible, despite their many differences in interpretation. This latter point invalidated the religion to many Native Americans, who didn't understand why God wouldn't be clear enough to dispel the need for denominations; I however think we would have had denominations no matter how clear the bible would be (even Islam has different sects).

The Native American religion(s) overall tended to be less wordy, less explicit, but they still had a lot of emotion and depth to them. They lacked the temples, altars, priests, and other things common to most other religions, instead using silence as their loudest form of worship. Their worship was a sense of awe and respect for nature and the Great Spirit who created and lived in nature (being somewhat pantheistic). The Native perspective was that the world was a place of beauty to be appreciated, rather than the Christian perspective of the world being a place of evil and suffering, merely to be endured until the next life. Native Americans didn't worry too much about the afterlife, they just generally believed you'd be rewarded or reunited with ancestors, and left it at that.

This silence that the Native Americans practiced also dominated their social life, as they emphasized thinking before speaking, not while speaking, as we often do. This seems very wise to me, because if you think while speaking you're much more likely to use post hoc reasoning to justify yourself, rather than weighing your options and then explaining. For some perverse reason, in our media-saturated world that never slows down, we mistrust those who are silent (we call them "brooding"), and instead we feel some "need" to speak and "fill the silence". I think it's a symptom of our superficiality and auditory gluttony. The Native Americans in this collection couldn't stand cities and their hustle and bustle and constant loud noises, and I very much relate to that disdain.

A couple times in the collection, the speakers mentioned that it doesn't require many words to speak the truth, and this resonated with me. It is echoed in the line from Ecclesiastes 5:2 "God is in heaven and you are on earth, so let your words be few." We often vomit words when we're nervous, but the disciplined speaker should do the opposite, despite the jeers that that would invite today.

I am also alarmed by the trend of telling all kids that they are all writers, when very few have the gift of eloquent language. I am not among them. I aspire to take the same approach that Chief Wabasha did: "Silence is the cornerstone of character. Guard your tongue in youth, and in age you may mature a thought that will be of service to your people." I've said this before, that we need to stop assuming that the moment we put a pen to paper or paint to a canvas that it will be worth sharing and fawning over. They're called baby steps for a reason. I hope that one day I might come up with something (a book, an idea) that will actually help others, not just something that will make me famous. I'm in no rush to come to that, I expect it late in life, if at all. There is a disgusting cult of youthful celebrity which has so distorted my generation into suicide. It is really unhealthy to be divorced from the classics, because almost all of those were written by very old people after a lifetime of practice and contemplation.

It was from the grandparents that Native American children got their education, and who better to teach the children than those with the most life experience? Surely they would know more about what is really worthwhile than some yuppie. But to our society's discredit, we have locked away the elderly to rot in solitude and depression. It's really shameful what we have done. On the other side of the spectrum, I found it interesting that the Native Americans quoted in this collection were deeply "pro-life", claiming that from the moment of conception until about 2, the mother's duty was to spiritually teach the child, that from the beginning there was a deep connection between the two. To ask if the happiness of the woman outweighed that connection would be a question too disgusting to ask a premodern such as the Native American. I think that they are completely right to reject quantification as anything other than limitation and imprisonment. Sure, it gives a superficial level of certainty, but it if you can quantify it, it doesn't deserve to be your "god". Qualitative prioritization frees, makes living. Love is not love if it can be measured. Those who try to measure love (or homeland) by dollars are gravely mistaken. As Chief Joseph said, "This country holds your father's body. Never sell the bones of your father and mother."

I think the main difference between the premodern and the modern mindset is the prioritization of either the quantitative or the qualitative. To me, it feels self evident that the quantitative cannot, by definition, be better than the qualitative. Unfortunately, the tides are shifting toward the quantitative, partially because we are mere stomachs and not people, and partially because the last great premodern society was crushed by modernity, who fought an unfair fight (disease, warfare, and broken treaties). This entire collection, and in fact everything I've read of great Native Americans feels like a dire warning. I'll leave you with the words of Chief Seattle, who began the collection: "Why should I mourn the untimely fate of my people? Your time of decay may be distant, but it will surely come. For even the white man, whose god walked and talked with him, as friend with friend, cannot be exempt from the common destiny. We may be brothers after all. We shall see."