Rating: 4/5

I’ve spent a lot of time reading and re-reading the opening third of this book. It’s really good, softly spoken, but ambitious. Mary’s misgivings about her gender are right there from the off, but her inner monologue with Margaritte the Guinea fowl is not without humour and pathos. 

All around Mary’s narrative are family members, villagers, teachers, Co-workers, doctors- all of whom similarly wrestling with identity, the difference between what they want and what they have. Mary/Martin does not know it, but they are not alone in their aspiration/dissatisfaction. Butchers pine to become country singers. Reclusive cricket bat makers desire a family. Dentists who yearn to be openly gay. Little brothers who want to be priests. And all of them long, slow roads, not simple - full of fallings short and some intermittent degree of happy. 

This book is good at moving through time with a strong sense of what will follow and manages to make multiple perspectives make sense. It has depth and scale, while not letting go of little painted details, small jokes. The village of Swaithy is both claustrophobic and homely - people are both kindly and disappointingly cruel. I had some wispy recollections of the tableaux that is Middlemarch. 

But the last third set in the US, bringing freedom, as it does, was lost on me a little. Martin lacked some if Mary’s dry colour, and the Americans all felt more like painted scenery than Estelle and Sonny and that bloody dog had done. I missed them. Change brings resolution, but it is not easily one, seems to be the upshot. Some great vignettes in here, illustrating all the ‘want’ inside people all the time, filled and unfulfilled, articulated, unspoken - the sideshow palm reader you can have sex with, Mary bringing baby Pearl to school - a signifier of all the feelings yet to come. In as much as wanting to change gender is part of this fairly common need for something that feels unattainable - this is a story of a transgender person. But equally it’s the story of anybody that outgrows their circumstance. I really enjoyed it.