Rating: 3/5

This is a thinly disguised chapter from Will Eisner's life, done up in "graphic novel" style. It's a quick read: only about 46 pages. It's a black and white production, uncolored. 

As the story opens, "Billy" (clearly a stand-in for Will Eisner), an aspiring artist, is looking for work and still living with his parents. It's the dawn of comic book publishing: the mid-1930's, not long before Superman's first appearance in Action Comics. (While the basic outline of this event is portrayed, Eisner avoids using real names, even substituting something generic like "Big Hero" for Superman.)

Frustrated with the meager, short term work he's able to find as an artist, Billy teams up with a sales partner to create a "shop" that contracts with publishers for comic book work. Eventually, they are able to hire some additional artists and create a production-line business. 

The shop eventually agrees to produce art for a super-hero book with similarities to Superman (probably Captain Marvel), and gets embroiled in a lawsuit in which Billy is required to testify. His client loses the suit, in part based upon Billy's honest testimony at trial. 

Ultimately, Billy is offered a chance to create his own Sunday newspaper insert comic book for a syndicate. Despite obvious risks, he accepts and retires from his own production shop. The story ends abruptly at this point, with a suggestion that Billy's contract with the syndicate will lead to fame and success. (And it did, which you already know if you're familiar with Eisner and his work.)

The newspaper insert, of course, was Eisner's own comic book, The Spirit. While this reference was obvious, I didn't catch what were obviously several veiled references to other big names in comics. That said, it was hard to miss references to Jack Kirby (who intrepidly kicks a mobster out of the comic production shop) and Harry Donenfeld (the ruthless publisher who presided over DC's (then National's) acquisition of its"Golden Age" superheroes). 

Although the story isn't terribly exciting unless one has an enthusiasm for comic book history, Eisner's art is superb. From the opening splash page to the end, Eisner brilliantly depicts New York City life during the late 1930's with a cinematic sensibility comparable to the best of film noir.