Rating: 2/5

Moon Shot is the ghostwritten account of Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton's experiences at NASA during the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. This is, of course, fascinating stuff, and I had difficulty putting the book down in terms of the subject matter.

However, the writing is TERRIBLE. It is SO BAD. SO BAD, you guys. It's ridiculously flowery in the way of newspaper writers who have no clue how to write something other than a newspaper column. The book gushes like mad over the astronauts, almost completely ignoring their bad side. It's embarrassing. But what's REALLY embarrassing is how the writer gushes over reporters. Yes, reporters. He describes how the scum of the earth descended on the astronauts' wives and harassed them almost continually for years - and he does so glowingly. It's very, very, very obvious that this author is a reporter.

Here's one of the worst bits. The author is describing the time that Alan Shepard, a Navy pilot, lost his instrumentation and had to land on a carrier aircraft by feel. At night, during a storm. Shepard is clearly in trouble, and is contemplating declaring an emergency. But he's decided not to do so. The author says, "It had nothing to do with being macho. Alan Shepard was way beyond that nonsense. Neither was the issue one of inability to live with failure. No ego trip here."

Nothing to do with being macho, and no inability to live with failure. Okay, got it. Now check out the next paragraph: "To Alan, declaring [an] emergency...meant that he had already concluded in his own mind that he had flown himself into a hole from which he couldn't get out. No way."

Yeah, not even a hint of machismo there, am I right?

And the next paragraph: "Declaring an emergency meant that he couldn't handle his airplane in this situation by himself. That radio call was a blatant admission that he needed help. To admit that, he swore to himself meant that somehow he had failed, he no longer had that special something to handle his own problems."

I sure don't see any inability to live with failure there. No sirree.

And if you noticed a number of missing commas in the above quotations, rest assured that I transcribed the original exactly. There appears to have been a severe comma shortage while this book was being typeset.

Long story short, the subject matter is excellent, but the writing is so awful that I would very, very strongly recommend you find a different book on the topic.

Oh, and this edition is updated for 2011. It includes a new last chapter, a scathing denunciation of President Obama's lack of support for the space program.

Original review: It's hard to rate this book. For the content, naturally, it gets a million stars, but the writing! The writing is SO BAD. It was an obstacle I had to overcome to continue reading (kind of like Umbridge was for many readers of OotP). So I'm not giving it a rating right now.

Detailed review coming later.