Rating: 5/5

I just finished Moon Shot: The Inside Story of America's Apollo Moon Landings by journalist Jay Barbree and astronauts Alan Shephard and Deke Slayton. This book was a fascinating account of one of the greatest achievements by humanity to occur in my lifetime; the launch of humans into space, followed by a landing on the moon, and then a joint mission by American astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts. 

I was born at the right time, 1957, to remember every space launch with child-like wonder. I can recall sitting in front of our black and white TV at home or the behemoth of a TV that was rolled from classroom to classroom as we sat transfixed for every launch. 

I remember sitting in the living room of our apartment on the evening of January 27th, 1967 watching TV when whatever show we were watching was interrupted to announce the death of astronauts; Gus Grissom, Ed White, and Roger Chaffee in a tragic fire during pre-flight testing of Apollo 1. This 9-year old cried. 

I remember sitting in front of the same black and white TV on July 20th, 1969, as astronaut Neil Armstrong said: “The Eagle has landed.” My eyes were locked on that TV all night waiting to witness a human’s first steps on the moon, and capturing the moment for posterity with my Argus C3 camera pointed at the TV. Just two years after the Apollo 1 tragedy, this eleven-year-old was amazed at what humanity could do.

Today I often ponder where humanity would be if there had been no space program. Would I be writing this on a computer in my own home if there had been no space program? It seems likely that I would not be posting what I’ve written on Facebook with a smartphone, vastly more powerful than the computers that safely guided Apollo 11 to and from the moon. The journey to the moon brought us much more than moon rocks. Humanities advances in communications, computers, and medicine were all beneficiaries of the space program.

President John F. Kennedy gave us a vision and a goal when he committed us to land a man on the moon before the end of the 1960s. The times were far from perfect, but that vision resulted in progress on many fronts. 

Today, more than ever before, the whole world needs leadership with a similar forward-thinking inspirational vision. Sadly, we seem to have de-evolved into fractious tribes who think only of ourselves. Preparing our species and the planet to survive climate change will require a more resolute effort than the moon landing. I only hope we are up to the challenge.

I found Moon Shot: The Inside Story of America's Apollo Moon Landings to be inspirational and yet also a cautionary tale about what could become of humanity if we fail to continue to aspire and dream.