Rating: 5/5

From stories of young Nick Adams fishing the rivers of Michigan to a novella about an old fisherman named Santiago fighting off the sharks in an attempt to save his catch, fishing permeates Ernest Hemingway’s writing. In “Big Two Hearted River,” Nick fished near a logged over forest and a burned town, and the narrative established Hemingway’s career as a master of the short story. In The Old Man and the Sea, he revealed the depth of his craft and received a Pulitzer Prize and a Nobel Prize as stamps of approval from the larger society.
 
The posthumous book Hemingway on Fishing is a collection of some of his best writing on the subject. It includes short stories, journalistic pieces, and excerpts from books. The forward by Jack Hemingway, author of The Misadventures of a Fly Fisherman, reveals a love of fishing shared by father and son. The introduction by Nick Lyons, who edited the volume, gives a more detailed account of fishing as intertwined in Hemingway’s life, his writing, and even his relationship with his family.

The first section of the book is all about fresh water. It begins with four short stories about trout fishing, including the iconic “Big Two Hearted River,” which is, on the surface, just about fishing. The logged woods and burned town suggest deeper issues in the protagonist’s psyche. 
Another short work, “Now I Lay Me,” is about a man in a hospital, or possibly a prison, who avoids sleep, and perhaps the accompanying dreams, by consciously remembering every stream he has ever fished. The story hints at Hemingway’s lifelong may have been inspired by knowledge of Jack Hemingway’s own experience as a Prisoner of War, waiting to be liberated by allied forces as they moved through Nazi Germany.

Most notable of the book excerpts is one from The Sun Also Rises, in which the tragic hero gets a respite from the drama of Lady Brit and his other friends by fishing for trout in Spain. The editor also included book excerpts drawn from A Movable Fest and The Green Hills of Africa. 

The center section reveals the lesser known Hemingway, the journalist who wrote feature articles for periodicals ranging from the Toronto Star to Vogue, Esquire, and Look. The articles report on opportunities and reveal the finer points of fishing for trout in Wyoming, Canada, and various European locations. Articles devoted to salt water fishing report on tuna fishing off Spain, and marlin fishing in the Gulf Stream, and off the coast of Peru. The story “On the Blue Water: A Gulf Stream Letter,” includes a report of fishermen who rescued an old man in a skiff far from land with the head and front part of a great marlin lashed to his skiff. The remains of the catch weighed 800 pounds. This gem surely inspired his prize winning novella, The Old Man and the Sea. 

Section three includes salt water fishing battles of epic proportion excerpted from The Garden of Eden, Islands in the Stream, and The Old Man and the Sea. The first two are drawn from posthumous works, edited and prepared for publication by members of Hemingway’s family. 
The fisherman in Islands in the Stream is a boy on the verge of manhood, obviously modeled after one of Hemingway’s own sons. In fact, the cast of characters is drawn from the family and the fishing friends of Hemingway’s days in Havana. 

These stories remind us of heroic struggles fought well and fought hard. Some end in victories while others conclude with great loss. All of us have of course experienced victories and losses. We fight and endure as we celebrate victories and recover from defeats. We hope to rise victorious like the Phoenix, above our circumstances. The nonfiction works are strictly about fishing, but in the end, the fictional works are not so much about fishing as they are about struggle and the triumph of the human spirit.