Rating: 3/5

Bronowski's Identity of Man. 

The first two essays of four are not worth reading, because they concern determinism which has been refuted already. Bronowski wants to discern between mechanism and soul, though, for some reason, so he works at it.

The third and fourth essays are interesting.

"Man is conscious that he is different from his environment but more that this he is conscious he is alive and this sense carries him from the past into the future. To be conscious is both to know and to imagine, and our humanity flows from this deep spring. When we imagine nature outside ourselves into the future, we create the mode of knowledge which is science; and when we imagine ourselves alive into the future, we create another mode, knowledge of the self. They are the inseperable halves of the identity of man."

Bronowski suggests that a poem's knowledge has many aspects, while a scientific paper's knowledge has only one aspect. We assume the mind works like one another, but in reality we learn more about minds we come to see that each mind is unique, and that our differences in fact point to a common humanity. So our knowledge of the poetic many in turn illumines the scientific one. 

Another way of putting this is that our ability to compose poetry has been outpaced by science. Betrand Russell notes that Ptolemy came up with planetary movement 13 centuries before Dante put it into the poem by which most men came to know about it in the past.

In the fourth essay, Brownowski says just as the self is a process like a poem, so nature is a process like science. He says we can come to know ourselves and nature best through processing scientifically and poetically. He says, we know what it is for a man to be tired, but we do not know what it is like for a metal to be fatigued.

Brownowski is a humanist, and suggests multi-factorial ethics, which is basically relativist ethics disguised as science. He contends that science, like the self, have no end, when in fact we know a lot more about both that did the ancients and have progressed far towards better knowledge. 

It is cynical, even nihilistic ultimately, for Brownowski to say that the self and science are processes without an end. That's tantamount to saying they have no meaning at all, which is perhaps why this book is justly obscure.