Rating: 4/5

Because the best kind of classic has pictures...

 

So. I've actively (and successfully) avoided reading TDKR for many years now.
Why, you ask?
Well, to be honest, I was kinda scared. Now, if you aren't a comic book reader, then you might not understand how big of a deal this book is, but if you are...?
Yeah, you know.
Which means, you're also aware of all the rabid comic nerds out there who go all stabby when you don't like their favorite character, publisher, title, bobblehead action figure...the list goes on.
Hey, I'm not judging! I'm one of those nerds. Believe me, I know how dangerous it can be to wade into dork shark infested waters.
And if (God forbid) I wrote a review saying I didn't like this?!

 

I've picked this up from the library multiple times, flipped through it, stuck it in my bag, and then took it back to my local branch at my earliest convenience.
Because.
deep breath
Because of the huge amount of dialogue, and all those fucking Talking Heads!

 

I mean, for real, Miller? You're killing my tiny dinosaur brain with all of those woooooords. 
And the art? Weeeeeell...
It's kinda ugly. &lt;--personal opinion
Sometimes the characters look like they're lumpy or something. Perhaps Miller &amp; Janson envisioned a world where everyone was made of congealed oatmeal or cottage cheese?

 

 ducks, runs
Ok. Put your pitchforks down!
Jesbus. Touchy.

 

Anyway, I ended up finally giving in, giving up, and giving TDKR a fair shot, sigh because my teenage son wanted to read it. Which, maybe wouldn't have been enough to turn the tide all by itself, but right around the same time (serendipity?) a friend here on Goodreads was kind enough to gift me a copy. 
And then bug me till I read it.
Plus, after my son got done with it, he basically shoved it at me while making all these weird squealing fanboy noises. &lt;--please don't tell him I said that!
So.
I read it.

And I really enjoyed it!
Whoduthunkit?! Not me, that's for sure. I assumed this would probably go down as one of those comics that I had to read, but didn't really like. 
Sure, sure...its importance for Batman mythos can't be denied, but that doesn't always equal something that can stand the test of time. And it especially doesn't mean that someone with my pea-sized tolerance for dry/crunchy/old comics will savor the reading experience.
But I did.

This was a great Batman story, but not quite what I would call 5 star stuff in 2016. Those Heads just...yeesh, they almost did me in! The cluttered feel of so many of the pages kept me from wanting to linger, and the knobbly faces of the characters were (at times) a turnoff.
BUT.
The story itself was fantastic. It was just as gritty and dark as I was promised, but there was also a glimmer of hope to it that I wasn't expecting.
It caught me off guard and made me smile.

Overall, I thought this was good stuff!