Rating: 3/5

This book set up an interesting plot: What if Sherlock Holmes was hired to ferret out the Phantom? He is originally hired by the managers, but then Count Phillipe attempts to procure his services to prevent Raoul and Christine from marrying and Raoul attempts to procure his services to end the Phantoms's reign. There is much to enjoy here in this book. I think the author did very well with the characters from two different worlds. The Sherlock Holmes here resembles what I know of the character (which, admittedly is drawn from random TV references and the show featuring Jeremy Brett). Watson (who is really rather disparaged in this book) is discarded in favor of Sherlock's cousin, Henry Vernier, and the two set off to Paris in search of the infamous Phantom of the Opera. The character of Erik (the Phantom) is done rather well, as are Raoul and Christine.

There are some minor plot alterations to fit in Holmes and Vernier, but none that really detract from the original Phantom of the Opera story.

The major beefs I had with this book, and here starts some of the spoilers:

1. The character of the Persian. I always got the impression, from the original Leroux and then Kay's extrapolation from that, that the Daroga was a fine, upstanding citizen and someone who genuinely liked Erik even though he was not willing to discard his morals in order to let Erik get away with his murders and kidnapping of Christine. In this book he's depicted as a leering monster, the head of the Persian "secret" police and someone just as willing to kill as Erik is. I felt the characterization was far off when it came to the Persian and it always left me with a sour taste in my mouth.

2. The book begins with a piano concert by a young woman. She is, of course, a brilliant musician, everything Erik could ever want in a woman. And she also happens to be blind. This if often a plot device that authors use. No seeing woman would be able to stand Erik's face; they would of course turn away in horror. So let's make this wonderful amazing smart musical woman blind. It irritates me to no end, as does the need to pair Erik up with someone other than Christine.

Other than those two elements I did enjoy this book.