Rating: 2/5

As with all my comic reviews, this is an overview of the entire series (all seven volumes).

Model is... written vaguely to the point of not really feeling cohesive. The author clearly wanted to instill some deeper thought about the nature of art, humanity, love, etc. but mostly it's overly vague, frilly words that are inserted into an otherwise disjointed narrative.

The series wants to present itself as simply being "Jae, a Korean artist, makes a deal with a vampire to paint his portrait at his mansion after he's dumped in her apartment one evening by happenstance" but really focuses way more heavily on Jae poking around in the lives of the vampire, his housekeeper, and the housekeeper's son as she stays in the mansion, doing very little in terms of actual painting or artistic expression.

Jae's personality and goals are very contradictory, Michael (our vampire) is long winded to the point of being pretentious, we're spliced into flashbacks of everyone's history to little effect, we barely understand the characters motivations or personalities, Ken and Michael and Jay have this weird, vague love triangle-hate triangle thing going on... it's like the author just threw in ideas that seemed mysterious and bold without considering how the lack of story-crafting would ill effect it.

I felt kind of lost throughout the process; like, I still don't fully understand Michael's past or what Adrian was or what Eva was all about or Ken or even Jae... it's strange to read seven volumes and feel so... confused about the story and plot. I didn't feel any emotion and my interest wasn't kept well. 

In truth, I can barely write this review because the story was so... gaseous, you know? Like smoke. Just very unclear and vacuous, empty. I don't think it's a title I'll care to revisit.

Also, the art can be very strange. Necks and hands and fingers and limbs are all extremely long and spindly, everyone has dark, full lips and the way the author approaches noses can be strange. It can be sort of pretty one panel and unsettling the next. Not really my favorite.

It only gets 2 stars because I've still read far worse, I just can't give this any recommendations, though with it being an out of print series, it's unlikely many people will stumble across it easily these days.