Rating: 4/5

The ‘can you solve the mystery of the tattoo murder?’ on the back cover was quite inviting. I love how the plot brought me to an intricate details of its postwar setting with enticing history and culture commentary on the Japanese tattoo art that became the plot arc of this inventive ingenious crime.

Tokyo, 1947. The first postwar meeting of the Edo Tattoo Society was held where Kinue Nomura reveals her full-body snake tattoo for the first time. When Kinue was found dead in her locked bathroom days later, her snake tattooed torso was found missing from her dismembered corpse. Her lover, Kenzo Matsushita was determined to help his brother, DCI Daiyu Matshushita to solve the case but after two months with blind alleys and two more related deaths, Kenzo seeks to find help from his math and physics genius friend, Kyosuke Kamizu.

Such a twisty whodunnit narrative with engaging red herrings hinged with complex and intriguing list of suspects— I fancy Dr Tattoo the most as his obsessiveness was somehow so wicked and intimidatingly appealing. Loving Kyosuke’s dynamic even though he only came out later; he was so clever and mysterious (he reminds me to Manabu Yukawa a bit), his deductions were outstanding and the exploration of howdunnit too was so entrancingly thorough. 

The development can be a bit slow sometimes as the author tends to drag Kenzo’s perspective with a handful of details. Love how the tattoo culture part relates to the legendary folktale of a curse that was said could bind one’s life; of the three siblings that carried the enchantment of the three wicked sorcerers on their skins— if one dies the others would follow. The prejudice and skepticism were greatly highlighted that it amazes me on how certain people would go blindly judging others with tattoo to be a thief or murderer or a lowlife scum. Raw and so evocatively written, the tension gets me curious and it goes so fiendishly thrilling even until the end. 

Would definitely go for another Kyosuke Kamizu if this were ever a series; the idea of having a civilian amateur sleuth was somehow quite admirable to me. 4.1 stars to this! 

Thank you Pansing Distribution for sending me a copy in exchange for my honest review!