Rating: 1/5

One star = "Did not like it". I'm following goodreads star criteria before anyone gets offended.

I scanned this book trying to get an overall idea of it and where it goes. I personally don't think it's useful, and I can't think of anyone I know who also struggles with trauma history who would benefit from this book.

This book feels like a list of things and characteristics without any insight or providing a way to connect the dots between where you are now and how to get to "normal". 

It has a very standoffish feel, I feel like I'm in a classroom with a nun talking at me about how I should behave. Or maybe a text written in the 1950s. The standoffishness plus the "we" and "our" is jarring. They say "we" and "our", but I don't feel a connection with the author, instead I feel imposed upon.

I also find it offputting as I'm very different from the author. I can't relate to what they're saying. The "we" is not only an assumption, there are subtle and not so subtle commands written in about how I "should" deport myself, and and frankly all of this crosses a boundary. 

Example. Here it talks about emotional needs.

"This includes our need for emotional closeness and sharing, emotional closeness and sharing, emotional intimacy, sharing of feelings and personal things about ourselves; giving and receiving validation of each other; sharing of hopes, dreams, problems, sorrows, joys. Even these more intimate needs can be met in part by people who are not our most intimate friends. We see this happening in healthy 12-step groups, where we share personal things about ourselves but in a safe, limited way. Of course, our deepest emotional needs are most often met by our closest friends, our partner, lover or spouse."

Another list of things ending with "Of course.." Basically here's the tone of the nun instructing you what to do and not to do with the "we don't do these things". Actually I disagree that this is the case with everyone who have a trauma history, I have talked to people who do not have emotional needs met by people "closest" to them, if they are able to form those connections. And this book doesn't seem to provide helpful info on the how of that.

I kinda find the "healthy" 12-step groups comment humorous. So that basically implies there are healthy and unhealthy groups, and hopefully you have the capacity to distinguish between them, or find one. If 12-step groups are something that feels ok, not everyone is comfortable or ok with that platform.

"These needs include simple social interaction, going to parties or get-togethers, small talk, and the easy, less intensive give-and-take that so many of us from dysfunctional families have such a hard time with."

For some, this is the most troubling block, as they can't get past it to actually make friends or get close to people.

This was published in 1990, and thankfully a number of books have come out since which may be more relatable and useful.