Rating: 4/5

Death Announced by Séance
A review of the William Morrow eBook (March 17, 2009) of the Collins Crime Club (UK September 7, 1931) and Dodd, Mead &amp; Co. (US 1931 - released as The Murder at Hazelmoor ) original hardcovers.

  But it’s too good to be true,’ he added despondently. ‘That sort of thing only happens in books.’ 
‘Nonsense,’ said Emily, ‘it happens with me.’

Emily Trefusis in 1931's The Sittaford Mystery is another of Agatha Christie's early female sleuths such as Tuppence Beresford (The Secret Adversary 1922) and Lady Eileen "Bundle" Brent (The Seven Dials Mystery 1929), but who was not developed further as a series character.

Emily is stirred to action when her fiancé is accused of murdering his uncle. The unlucky man had been in the vicinity when the event occurred and appears to have a compelling motive. The death itself was announced at a table-turning séance at the Sittaford estate on a snowbound evening when the victim himself was miles away. A precise time of death is declared which later proves to be confirmed. 

The reader's immediate deduction is that someone at the séance must have known the murder was taking place, but were they an accomplice or did they actually get a paranormal vision? The reveal comes when the suspects are all gathered in a room in order to recreate the séance. Emily's investigation in conjunction with an intrepid newspaper reporter was a delight to follow.

The front cover of the current 2026 HarperCollins / William Morrow eBook. GR does not permit you to add alternate cover editions (ACEs) for Kindle eBooks for some reason. Image sourced from Amazon.

I have extended my Agatha Christie binge from 2024 (when I read the Miss Marples) and 2025 (when I read most of the Parker Pyne, Inspector Battle, Tommy &amp; Tuppence &amp; Hercule Poirot books) into 2026 so that I can hopefully finish the remainder. I'm not yet sure about tackling the 6 novels published under the Mary Westmacott pseudonym as I understand that they are romance dramas. 

I estimate that I have 23 novels (if I include the 6 Westmacotts), 7 short story collections, 16 theatrical plays (It will be difficult to source all of them, but I have the 8 collected in The Mousetrap and Other Plays which I already own) and 1 autobiography left to go. 😅

Trivia and Links
The Sittaford Mystery (UK title) aka The Murder at Hawksmoor (US title) will soon enter the public domain in the USA in 2027, 96 years after first publication in the USA. 

The Sittaford Mystery was considerably changed in an adaptation for the Agatha Christie's Miss Marple (2004-2013) TV series, when they needed additional plots. Although several character names remain, their roles are different and Miss Marple has been added as the sleuth. The adaptation was The Sittaford Mystery (2006) in Season 2 Episode 4 with Geraldine McEwan as Miss Marple.