Rating: 3/5

As research for a novel I'm writing, I'm reading detective fiction and ripping off everything of value. My story takes place in L.A. of the early '90s, but I'm traveling to all eras and hiring all types of sleuth as tour guide. Published in 1998, The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency launched twenty novels and counting by Scottish author Alexander McCall Smith based in Botswana and centered around Mma "Precious" Ramotwse, a young woman who opens the country's first private detective agency run by ladies. The book is leisurely and episodic, much like the arid sub-Saharan land of the story. I felt as if the day was too hot for excitement and I was stopping for a sip of water and gossip before moving on.

The book unfolds as a series of vignettes. Ramotwse is living with her cousin and her cousin's husband and working at the bus company they operate. She possesses a sharp mind for figures and as a child, developed an aptitude for drawing and for observation as well. She is close with her father, visiting him in their nearby hometown of Gaborone each weekend. A widowed miner, he dies leaving her a herd of cattle which Ramotwse sells at a handsome sum to open the No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency, as well as purchase a white van she uses on her cases, and a house, where she lives alone, having decided that one marriage was enough.

I found that Ramotwse to be a very feminine character without the author making her gender a central focus. Oh, look at how cute this is, a sassy lady with a stylish purse chasing bad guys. Ramotwse is a detective, not a lady detective. I can see why the series took off. Ramotwse is someone I'd love to hang out with, sip some bush tea and chat up. Smith structures a lot of time for hanging out in this book. 

The southern African setting is picturesque and offers a stunning contrast to the Los Angeles or London worlds where most fictional detectives lurk. The cases that Ramotwse lands say something about the country. Botswana is a place where disappearing husbands end up in the bellies of crocodiles, the new trauma doctor from Nairobi is an imposter and a boy is abducted by men who need someone to look after cattle. 

Smith adds a lot of color to the proceedings. My favorite part in the whole book involves Ramotwse encountering a snake that shoots across a road and she runs over with her van without thinking. The problem is she can't find the serpent anywhere and has to assume it's crawled into the van. While Ramotwse climbs out and flags down help, she tries to recall what the snake looked like and concludes that it is a cobra. 

The encounter with the cobra is The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency. It's a delicious treat for the sake of being a delicious treat. The cobra doesn't fit into any story. The cobra isn't a clue that helps Ramotwse solve a mystery. The cobra doesn't belong in the novel. It's like when Mom told me I couldn't eat any candy because dinner was in an hour. Smith is gobbling lots of candy here and spoils his appetite for a healthier and more satisfying meal.

Smith's prose often seemed like a translation to me, and not in a good way. It is very on-the-nose, very obvious. I got the sense that Smith overstated the obvious at times to pad his word count and get enough paragraphs in for a novel.

Mma Ramotswe had thought that it would not be easy to open a detective agency. People always made the mistake of thinking that starting a business was simple and then found there were all sorts of hidden problems and unforeseen demands. She had heard of people opening businesses that lasted four or five weeks before they ran out of money or stock, or both. It was always more difficult than you thought it would be.

And this is a chapter opening, expensive real estate in a novel. This is space I want to discover something I don't know, not read stuff I already know.

Smith devotes Chapter 2 to Ramotwse's father, writing in the father's voice about his experiences in the diamond mines of South Africa. This choice baffled me. Arthur Conan Doyle didn't introduce Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson and then spend Chapter 2 on the life and times of Mrs. Hudson. Fortunately, the rest of the book is about Ramotwse without any other characters shoving her off stage.

There were several false starts in the book. I felt like the genre Smith was writing as well as good storytelling demanded Ramotswe meeting a client and going off on a case right from the start and through that, the character’s past and how she started a detective agency could be revealed. Characters she meets could provoke that information from her. Smith didn’t need to tell me about Ramotwse winning an art contest in school or her ex-husband.

I also didn't prefer Smith building Ramotwse up as unmarried--most of the great fictional detectives I can think of just don’t have a spouse or children waiting for them to come home--only to update her marital status to “engaged” at the very end . I'm sure many of his readers were delighted by this but it felt like a cop out to me. Ramotwse seemed more complex as an independent who’s too dedicated to detective work and also too hurt to settle down. Even in a cozy mystery, that was too cozy for me.

Ramotwse is not only an African woman, but a big African woman. The sage advice of "my" writing instructor Malcolm Gladwell rang in my ears here. Smith doesn't worry about writing a better mystery novel than anyone else and doesn't try. What he does is write a different mystery novel than anyone else and on that count he succeeds wildly. If you asked me for a recommendation for a detective series set in Africa, his books would be it.

In 2008, The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency landed on the small screen as a BBC production in conjunction with HBO. The 109-minute pilot was adapted by Anthony Minghella &amp; Richard Curtis and directed by Minghella, who divided audiences over his Oscar-winning The English Patient. Six one-hour episodes followed. Jill Scott was supremely well cast as Ramotwse and Anika Noni Rose as her secretary Grace Makutsi.