Rating: 2/5

OK, so it wasn't bad . . . once I got past the fact that not only was there no Watson in this, but that his replacement hated him to no end and tried to impart some of that hate on Sherlock's opinions of Watson (seriously? Where did you get the idea that Sherlock was a misogynist? I only took that he was asexual/aromantic at best when it came to women). 
Then came the Phantom's side of things. I had my copy of The Phantom of the Opera on standby to compare the two and, well, its starts to read more like the Broadway musical rather than the book itself (despite the fact this book gets Erik's deformity right). Raoul may not have been passionate about the arts, but he was certainly a passionate supporter of it. The Daroga was not antagonistic towards Erik at all, Erik considered him his only friend (and was the last person to see him alive)!! The Daroga would not have helped the Viscount for money, he was doing it because he understood that Erik was wrong to try and force Christine to love him. At least the author didn't downplay Christine's intelligence, though he made it seem like it was a hard choice for Christine between Erik and Raoul (she never felt romantically inclined towards Erik, not once . . . which left me to ship him with someone else, but that's just me. ;P).
All in all, it was a pretty decent fanfic. Would have much preferred Watson as Holmes' friend and sidekick (and they brought in Toby!) and no thrown-in love interest for Erik (is he just doomed to fall for women who like music only? How about an artist, or a seamstress? Or a fantastic story-teller? Not a blind Christine just so she can't see his face . . . despite the fact she can feel it and probably has a decent enough of an imagination that she can visualize it). 
Will I keep this? Yeah, might as well. I'll nitpick through it another time, this time with the Hound of the Baskervilles to help Erik. ;) Then I'll write a fanfic based off of this to get Erik into the services of Hades. ;P I'm sure he'll be much happier, and Hades will probably (what am I saying, most likely) prefer him to Apollo any day. Persephone might even agree. XD I am just grateful I have both Hound and Phantom in my library that I can reread them to get my mind off the inconsistencies.