Rating: 4/5

Bruce Catton's 1956 work provides everything that a newcomer to the history of the American Civil War could possibly want from a single volume. It covering the major campaigns of the war from a Union perspective, its portraits of the key generals - McClellan, Grant, Jackson and, particularly, Sherman and Lee - are well-drawn and insightful; but it also does an excellent job of showing the lives and hardships of the ordinary soldiers.

At the book's heart is a moving lyricism. The author always finds and describes the scene or detail which captures the spirit and drama of an event. The bird hopping on the cotton hill which sang Lincoln's proclamation to the slaves, the burning pine forest ringing to a chorus of 'John Brown's body' and the tramp of thousands of Union soldiers, the chaotic footrace to the ridge at the climax of the Battle of Chattanooga.

At a human level the personalities of the commanders of the armies are illuminated by the things they did or said, and these small details are probably more telling of character than a full psychological exposition based on guesswork and the author's prejudices would be - Catton appreciates that we can never really know these people except through their actions and that their motives were known only to themselves. This is a sensitive and well executed decision by the the author.

The author makes the point that slavery became untenable, even with a Confederate victory, once the war came to the southern states, because an escape to freedom - guaranteed by Union soldiers, who despite their prejudices, had come to see the evil of slavery - was now possible, and runaway slaves (known as contrabands because of a legal fiction used by the north to prevent them from having to be returned to their owners) poured into Federalist camps in their thousands. This is more or less the broadest piece of analysis in the book, which otherwise invites the reader to draw their own conclusions about the wider historical forces at work, the discussion of the causes and the legacy of the war is as much psychological as it is historical - particularly in the latter case. The focus is rather on providing a poetic and engaging narrative of the war. The personalities of the commanders, the terrain, the battles; all are analysed at length, as well as the lot of the ordinary soldier on both sides - although the focus of the book is always on the Federalist side.

It does have some faults though. Abraham Lincoln and Jefferson Davis - overall supremos of the two sides - get much less attention than might be expected, and little effort is made to explore the impact of political events on the war. McClellan, the peace candidate, was favourite to win the presidential election of 1864 until a month before polling day, making that event very probably the closest the South ever came to achieving their war goals. For a book focused on the Union cause, not to cover the election of 1864 in more detail is quite surprising.

On the whole though this is a really excellent treatment of the war. The research is excellent, although sixty years since its publication the interpretation of events has very likely been revised and re-revised by historians, but in book which focuses on telling the story of the war rather than interpreting it, perhaps this is not so much of a problem as would be in other cases. The excellent prose is a great adjunct to the author's ability to find the drama in every battle, every march, and every blunder, and this allows the book to deal reasonably thoroughly with these events without ever being dry or tedious.