Rating: 4/5

I always say that humor books are both a mixed bag and review- and rating-proof on websites such as Goodreads; either you like the humor and appreciate the book, or you don't, and the ratings and reviews vary accordingly. For myself at least—a lawyer by training, litigator in practice—Dracula Was a Lawyer: Hundreds of Fascinating Facts from the World of Law, by humor-cum-trivia authors Erin Barrett and Jack Mingo, was fun and entertaining, even if I could barely repeat for anyone else anything I read in the book ten days after the fact.

First off, Dracula Was a Lawyer, despite the title, is anything but a book of lawyer(-bashing) jokes such as, say, Skid Marks: Common Jokes About Lawyers. On the contrary, Barrett and Mingo tell their tidbits of trivia with real appreciation for the legal profession (i.e., along the lines of lawyers as a necessary element of the smooth functioning of society rather than Skid Marks' necessary evil), and they aim to enlighten rather than mock. Yes, Dracula was a lawyer, in a manner of speaking (he acted as judge, jury, attorney, and executioner for his subjects, according to Barrett and Mingo); however, the overwhelming majority of the other factoids and stories in this volume serve to shed light on a profession that a lot of people think they know how it works, but really don't. Barrett and Mingo's efforts—backed up by a small but thorough bibliography—are well appreciated by this attorney, and I especially appreciated that Barrett and Mingo are treating lawyers with respect rather than contempt, as may be argued lawyer-joke books do.

I did say that I'd be hard-pressed to remember Barrett and Mingo's many, many factoids, but after all, I do remember the basic details of the cases in which John Fogerty got sued for plagiarizing himself and in which a pub called the Brooklyn Dodger got away with it, despite the L.A. baseball trademark, so I don't really know whether I will, in fact, remember these factoids; since I do own the book, that makes a difference, but there's no way I can so predict. To that end, Dracula Was a Lawyer is a nice addition to an armchair-legal library, insofar as it provides a great deal of humanizing of an oft-misunderstood profession. All in all, a sweet little book that I rather recommend.