Rating: 3/5

While the landed gentry have never gone away and still occupy an influential part in society, it is probably fair to say that that they have been displaced by a new generation of capitalist businessmen who dominate society and control the levers of power. This has reached a point in America where one businessman (Musk) essentially bought the election for another businessman (Trump).

This is hardly an improvement in society. We feel the effects (in America and here in Britain) every day of leaving control in the hands of ruthless capitalists who sacrifice people, the environment, nature, public services and morals to the pursuit of making more money than they can ever spend.

However, as Maria Edgeworth’s books show, we should not get too sentimental about those Lords and gentry who used to run the country by owning large areas of its land. All too often it meant waste, extravagance, neglect of responsibilities and exploitation of the people who lived on the land.

Edgeworth’s solution was certainly not to hand power over to cold bureaucrats. She still believed that the landed classes could be saved if they would be persuaded to attend to their duties, and take care of the people whose livelihood depended on the good husbandry of the landowners.

Maria Edgeworth and her husband were humanitarians by the standards of the age in which they lived. She was certainly not perfect. During the Irish famine, she gave relief to only those peasants who paid their rent in full and supported her Tory preferences. Nonetheless she was involved in many good schemes.

After all, Edgeworth did at least believe in some relief during times of famine. She worked hard to raise the standards of poor people in her area, and provided schools for children of all denominations. She supported self-realisation for women and Catholic emancipation.

Castle Rackrent and The Absentee both portray Jews in an unflattering light. Mordecai is a villainous creditor in The Absentee. A Jewish wife is shown with more sympathy in Castle Rackrent. She is treated badly, forced to eat non-kosher meat and imprisoned in the castle, but nonetheless partly blamed for family problems. 

However, Edgeworth was sensitive to criticisms of anti-Semitism, and added likeable Jewish characters in a later book, some of the earliest sympathetic Jews in English literature. (Charles Dickens similarly atoned for putting the villainous Fagin in Oliver Twist by putting the more compassionate Mr Riah in Our Mutual Friend.)

Both books here deal with issues of misuse and abuse of the land by Irish aristocrats. Castle Rackrent is a short work which deals with several generations of the Rackrent family, who move from extravagance to thrift, and back again to wastefulness. Eventually the land falls into the hands of the narrator’s capable but cold-hearted attorney son.

We might see the work as reflecting the history of the landed classes as new forces emerged in society that were less averse to the vulgar business of money-making. This makes Castle Rackrent an interesting but flawed work. It is both too short and too long. It mainly comprises lengthy paragraphs describing the affairs of the Rackrents in expository terms, but contains too few scenes in which the characters are given the chance to speak or perform specific actions that would interest the reader.

This mistake is not made in The Absentee, a much longer work, which dedicates more time to dialogue, characterisation and action. The story is told in four phases. The first part satirises the aristocracy in Ireland. Lady Clonbrony has been living in England, and has picked up an affectation of an English accent that is mocked by the women in her social milieu.

While the Clonbronys try to fit into Irish society, their attempts are doomed to failure. The spiteful and catty ladies of the society take pleasure in exposing her purchase of an artistic fake. Only her son Lord Colambre stands outside this attempt to impress himself on the locals. He is indignant with their treatment of his mother, who is not an entirely bad woman.

Colambre is in love with his penniless cousin, Grace Nugent, but his family want him to marry the wealthy but plain heiress, Miss Broadhurst. Curiously, Edgeworth makes Miss Broadhurst one of the more likeable characters in the book. She is not destined to win over the book’s hero, though she does find another husband, but her articulate expression of her plight and her cynicism about wealth makes her a much more interesting character than the pallid Grace or the priggish Colambre.

Miss Broadhurst does not stay in the story for long, however. Colambre is determined to find out more about Ireland. He is seduced by the society of Lady Dashfort, who wants him to marry her daughter, Isobel. While the two women do a good job of trying to poison Colambre against Grace or against seeking greater ties with other Irish gentry, their plans fail when Colambre comes to realise their shallow and selfish nature.

In the next part of the book, Edgeworth takes us away from the land of privilege, as Colambre goes incognito onto the estates of his father. Lord Clonbrony is an absentee landlord. He has handed power to an unscrupulous agent, and is planning to sack another agent who cares about the locals, but cannot raise the money Clonbrony needs to settle his debts.

This exposure of wastefulness, mishandling of funds and neglect is interesting, but Edgeworth pulls her punches. This situation is entirely the fault of Clonbrony, but Edgeworth does not want us to view this as his darker side, or to turn Colambre away from his parents. All that is needed is for Colambre to point out to his parents the error of their ways and encourage them to act as good owners of their land in future.

The final section of the book is a little prolonged, and involves Colambre’s search to see if Grace is of respectable parentage before he can marry her. Frankly, I would have respected him better if he had chosen Grace before he conformed the legitimacy of her birth.

The Absentee is not overly exciting as a piece of storytelling, but it has its humorous moments, and the progressive social message is interesting. On the whole Edgeworth is a capable and steady writer, but not an especially brilliant one.