Rating: 5/5

Inspector Sloan, chief detective in Banbury visits nearby Cullingoak Convent with DC Crosby, after Sister Anne is bashed on the head, by smooth blunt object as yet unfound, and dumped down cellar stairs. Pathologist Dr Dabbe places the murder soon after supper, yet someone took her place at evening service. Anne's cousin Harold will not say why he came to see her. 

Like a real investigator, we have no idea what red herrings will turn out to be most important. Regulations about raising a private company for a public stock offering are made simple p119. Clues lead to substantial family money, cut off for 30 years years, and thin evidence requires baiting a trap. 

Foreshadowing is rare, so tolerable. 'I don't think Bonfire Night at the Agricultral Institute will concern us, sir.' Wherein he was wrong." p55. Nearby live-in future dairy farmers, clothe an effigy as a nun for their in the Guy Fawkes bonfire. One student responsible is strangled speedily by "fuse wire" p125, of three put at risk by lazy janitor Hobbert, thirsty for beer. 

Sprinkled with humor, fun speech phrasings, laconic aphorisms, some literary obscurities, minor roles filled in, the style is worth following. Dabbe refers to "Mr Fox", and Sloan has to ask police cameraman Dyson to explain; the appellation refers to "one of the inventors of photography, blast him" p42. Irish Sister Polycarp still breathes IRA rebellion. Mother Superior (once Jones) chides "impossible is a word no true religious should use lightly" p76. Not as appetizing as Hogwarts, still cuisine flavors setting. I'd rather make sticky toffee pudding than parkin p32, a dark oatmeal gingerbread for 5 Nov bonfire night. http://www.bbc.co.uk/food/recipes/spa... 

Deaf Sister Damien knows "minor disabilities were sent purely to test the weak on earth and were as nothing compared with the sufferings of saints and martyrs .. made it easier to be properly recollected, if he knew what she meant. He didn't. He gave up" p94. Crosby sings Noel Coward p155. The Superintendent tries to impose his night school classes, last in Logic, onto procedures, calling a "silly fool" .. "fairly safe to assume he meant the bigamist", not the arresting officer p161. 

We easily absorb lessons on the unusual closed religious culture, "a Living Death" p66. He is hindered by "custody of the eyes .. the opposite of observation" p93, rendering witnesses the most unobservant ever. Like Agatha Christie's Evil Under the Sun, where sunbathers resemble one another from a distance, or others, where killers rely on servants or older women 'of a certain age' passing unnoticed, a nun habit and wimple more than disguise, they envelop and hide the wearer. Similar to BBC-TV Midsomer Murders "A Sacred Trust" only in that one nun is mistaken for another seen decades before, investigated by Barnaby and Jones. 

Sloan reminds Crosby "Caesar's wife. She was above suspicion" p111. He knows human behavior can be "Innocent, but not harmless" p163. Can we thank pub quizzes for trivia mastery? Wool "they make nuns' habits from [is] .. black sheep" p113. One observation sets Sloan "you wouldn't suspect a woman .. you would tend to trust her" against Dabbe "you would, but then we do do (sic) very different jobs" p127. 

Forensics, over-rated, beloved by fiction now, take a back seat. Big footprints are unhelpful when "this lot wear men's shoes -- every one of them" p55. The book is enjoyably brief, speeds to the solution. "The police don't like coincidences" impels to answers.

 Boy's Institute Principal Ranby "Namby Pam" p105 intends to marry religious Miss Faine in the Convent. Already married, he was suspect in earlier case. He'd left Lucy at the altar, "more than a little beauty still .. not so very long ago" p46, then, in dim light, mistook Anne, carrying the large ring of household keys, for Lucy. Lucy's face, whiter after exposure to her ex than after seeing dead body, has to be drawn to our attention to become important. 

Typos:
p127 "we do do very different jobs" is strange, but does make sense with one or two "do"s 
p147 "she's being very kind thought she doesn't understand how very different everything is" is "though"
p149 "murder murder" is one too many "murder", unless she is upset, tripping up, too moved to continue "now I can't think about anything else"