Rating: 3/5

✰ 3 stars ✰

​​“​​​Again his singing told those who listened that the joy of the saved is the sorrow of the savior, that the tiny child might wish another fate.”​​

​
 ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ Tender and touchable, reflective and introspective, poignant and emotional that brings tidings of Comfort and Joy to to the conclusion of Dan Crell's story. For the instant twenty-eight-year-old Ford McKinney, the charming and handsome doctor, golden boy of his old Savannah family, heard the melodious voice of the reserved but strikingly enigmatic hospital administrator sing the tunes of "God Rest Ye, Merry Gentlemen," he's been mesmerized and in awe of this beautiful and haunting soul. And when a tentative friendship strikes up between the two, it slowly peels away their own personal inhibitions and reservations that have prevented them from finding the comfort of life with someone else, that also slowly reveals to them the joy it is to have someone in their life to share it with. 🙏🏻

​ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ The story is a two-fold character-driven narrative, one that weighs on Dan's own personal war waging in his heart over the traumas and guilt of his past that has him defensive in his hesitation to pave a permanence into Ford's heart, angered and grieving for his own inability to be whole. And another that reflects on Ford's initial interactions with his parents that are fervently adamant to have their son settle down with a wife, in order for the family name to live on, while he internally struggles with opening up to them that he has no intention of settling down - with a woman, that is. 😔 It is during these persistent demands, that he meets Dan, and a hesitant, but earnest relationship begins between the two that is both a frustrating challenge, albeit a wanting one, in how he wants to be with him, but is to afraid to be open about it. 

  "I don't want a roommate."

What do you want? ... the sound so real he nearly turned to find its source, be it ... or his own conscience. What do you want?

"I just want to make sure you're not my roommate. I want you to be something else."

 ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ It does become a bit heavy and heartbreaking to see how Ford is reluctant and still unable to admit how Dan is special to him, how Dan has to silently embrace those worries, but there is a certain grace to it that made it understandable. How Ford knows innately that Dan is special to him, but cannot understand what is so wrong about it - even when their hearts ache for each other. 😥 'How do we get past this? Danny, this won't last if we don't do something.' Moments of their past intersperse into the present timeline, where he and Dan are on their way to spend Christmas with Dan's family. It is in that Christmas gathering that the author gives us a glimpse into how their different upbringings have shaped them into the men they are, while also their personal expectations are what force them to act or behave, and even love in a way that may not be entirely forgiving, but one they feel can offer the best hope and solace to each other. 🫂

 ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ It speaks volumes of what Dan knows he's asking of Ford to stay with him, whilst Ford has realized what a gift and a treasure it is to love someone like Dan. Through the course of the few years leading up to this pivotal Christmas trip, we see the petty and valid arguments, the sincere and heartfelt connections, the intimacy that is a double-edged sword of yearning and desire - it is being saved and saving someone that I realize was the emphasis of having the story told as such. ❤️‍🩹❤️‍🩹 'They stood in the dark, Ford's fear overcome by his wish to keep Dan close to his body at that moment.' For their doubts and insecurities of what their future means, is what led them to the final stage of confrontation with a solid resolve that this truly is the final stage for both of them, without remorse or regret. 

  "Don't run away, okay?"

What surprised him was not the urge. What surprised him was the need to stay."

 ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ The scene where the two of them revisit the Circle House was a ghost of a haunting memory - silently powerful in capturing Dan's emotions - 'he again felt his own ghost in the house, the small boy who still wandered in these rooms, searching for what he had lost.' - the terrible memories that he is unable to escape from. Jim Grimsley's writing evokes sadness, but with this innate feeling of wanting his characters to reconcile with their emotions. 😢💔 It is hard to see Dan put up with Ford's inhibitions, while struggling with his own hemophiliac dependency. 'To stand so near, to allow touch, to love with the fingertips, were victories.' There is this deeply intimate connection between the two, that speaks of a silent understanding, but fervent longing, that they are meant to be together - just unable to shed those inner demons they can't let go of. 🥺 

 ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ ‎ The sharp contrast of their family dynamics is the keystone of those restraints - where Ford's upbringing was shaped with money and ease, it is their reluctance to accept his sexuality that makes him appreciate the kindness and warmth and acceptance that radiates from Dan's family, despite the harsh and bleak childhood that haunts their memories. 😟 And it is that courage and love that has Ford make a crucial decision one - to choose between his family and Dan that is the breaking point - one that is of defiance and certainty - of love and openness - of shedding his fears and confessing his heart's true intentions - 'I don't come home unless you come with me.' A quiet but impactful victory, one not without its hurt or pain, but still with a profound strength of gratitude and forgiveness that despite the hurdles yet to come, there is comfort and joy in sharing it with the one you love. 🫶🏻