I've been bamboozled! Duped! Hoodwinked! Fraudulated! Deceived! I've fallen victim to tomfoolery! Shenanigans! Monkeyshines! Nefarious antics! 

(What's that? Yes, I do own a thesaurus. Why do you ask?)

This tricky man Zane Grey fooled me into reading a book of the genre I swore I never would read: the official genre of grocery stores and bargain racks everywhere, capital-R Romance.

It all began innocently enough. For one thing, this Riders of the Purple Sage is published by Modern Library. It has been heralded as a foundation of the Western genre. Its opening pages depict a woman being harassed by her Mormon patriarchs for cavorting with Gentiles. Things look like they could get messy. Then on the crest of a hill, silhouetted against the setting sun, appears the image of a man and his horse (always disturbing for the bad guys and hopeful for the good guys.) This is Lassiter, a gunslinger of the highest order, and he's here to chew gum and shoot bad guys in the buttocks! And he's nearly out of gum! He's only got like two sticks of Juicy Fruit left.

This is not only a great start to a Western. It is the start to a Western. But what does Lassiter do? Does he shoot bad guys in the buttocks? No. Does he shoot them in the head? No. Does he shoot them in the penis? No. For a gunslinger, there is a distinct lack of shooting people in Lassiter's life.

What Lassiter does instead is fall in love. And so does everyone else in the book. That would be okay if Zane Grey did it in one of two ways. 1) He could throw in some more shooting. Buttocks, heads, penises, whatever. Just give me some shooting. 2) Or he could write really great prose that makes me have feelings for his characters and tricks me into thinking they are real people.

Instead, Grey gives the reader scenes like this: "No more did he listen to the rush and roar of the thunderstorm. For with the touch of clinging hands and the throbbing bosom he grew conscious of an inward storm—the tingling of new chords of thought, strange music of unheard, joyous bells, sad dreams dawning to wakeful delight, dissolving doubt, resurging hope, force, fire and freedom, unutterable sweetness of desire. A storm in his breast—a storm of real love." That's the way characters in this book fall in love. There are plenty of heaving bosoms, but no real emotions.

Thus, I propose a makeover for this book. Following are a couple proposed cover designs.

If those covers look good to you, you will like this book. Also, there is something wrong with you.