Rating: 5/5

Zane Grey's "Riders of the Purple Sage" is probably one of the most famous westerns ever written, but, despite its popularity since it was first published in 1912, the book may not hold as significant a place in the Canon of the American West for the simple reason that, until 2005, many people had never actually read the book that Grey wrote.

When it was first published, as a serial in Field &amp; Stream magazine, the editors had trimmed much of the original manuscript. When it was ultimately re-published in book form, much of the trimmed material never made it back. Not only that, but much of the book was actually re-written by the publisher, ostensibly to be more palatable and inoffensive to gentle readers. One could argue that the editors and publishers were simply "improving" upon Grey's tendency for purple prose (and many people did, apparently), but essentially what it boiled down to was censorship, a topic which is foremost on most people's minds here on Goodreads. 

Thankfully, Jon Tuska, with the help of the Ohio State Historical Society, in 2005, published a simple paperback version that restored as fully as possible the original, uncut version of Grey's western masterpiece. Much of the cut material had to do with Grey's criticisms of Mormonism and organized religion in general. Never having read the bowdlerized version prior to this, I can't make a comparison. I have no idea what was added or changed in this restored version. I don't think it matters, though. What matters is that the book that Grey wrote is what readers are reading with this edition, and that's the most important part.

Grey was an incredibly prolific writer, even if he wasn't a notably excellent one. He wrote for pulps early in his career, so most of what he wrote was paid for by the word. He wasn't writing for awards. He was writing to put bread on his table.

Yet, there is something beautiful and dynamic in his writing. His joy and love for the American West and unsullied Nature is evident in his descriptions of the wide-open prairies and deserts and canyons of the Wild West. His books are populated by dynamic, lovable characters who live, and love, in the moment. I daresay that Grey was the western's equivalent of Charles Dickens.

One of five film adaptations, this version directed by Hamilton McFadden in 1931 was the first version to have sound.

"ROTPS" has a carefully-crafted convoluted plot of which Dickens would be jealous. Jane Withersteen, a proud Mormon woman, is left the only heir to a vast plot of valuable land and a large herd of cattle, a plot of land that Elder Tull, the vicious leader of the Mormon church, covets. He also wouldn't mind seeing Jane added to his group of wives. The man she loves, the ranch-hand Venters, has been captured and sentenced to death (on clearly trumped-up charges) by Tull's men, but before the dastardly execution happens, a lone figure on horseback rides into town. It's Lassiter! The notorious gunslinger and killer of men saves Venters, inexplicably, and returns him to Jane. They are grateful but confused. Lassiter wants to know where a certain grave of a young girl is. Jane knows who he is talking about, but she can't figure out for the life of her what Lassiter would want with the information. She keeps it to herself. Lassiter stays on to help. Venters, following the trail of a masked horse thief, follows the rider into a secluded oasis in the desert, a place he calls Surprise Valley. After a gunfight, he unmasks the masked villain only to find that it is woman, the most beautiful creature he has ever laid eyes on. He nurses her to health, and tries to discover the secret of her identity. It's no secret, though, that she has fallen in love with him. And, despite his love for Jane, he has begun to have feelings for this girl, who calls herself Bess. Lassiter, in the meantime, has thoughts of settling down, and those thoughts are generally tending to involve Jane.

This is such a ridiculous soap opera romantic story, and yet it is incredible, and I loved every darned bit of it. Supposedly, Grey wrote a sequel to this book, and I reckon that I will search through hell and high water to find the darned thing...