Rating: 4/5

The Hide grows increasingly unsettling as it draws one further into its stifling atmosphere. The social web enmeshing these characters is as dense and interwoven as the 'hide' from within which Simon crouches as he spies on the world around him. He lives with his sister Audrey on an sprawling estate slowly being overtaken by the unruly forces of nature. Simon does not interface well with the world, and has in fact taken to 'tunneling' throughout the wilder sectors of the property, the better to indulge his solitary peeping habits, directed as they are toward specimens of both avian and human varieties. The widow Audrey barely tolerates her brother's presence as she distracts herself from lonely middle age through her engagement with the local Dramatic Society. Living with these two is the 'maid' Marion, a relative of Audrey's late husband Howard who took her into the house as an orphan, and who now acts as a de facto servant to the two siblings, primarily Audrey.

The novel rotates in first-person narration between Simon and the character of Josiah, a young itinerant worker under the powerful sway of the older, worldlier Mortimer Cade, who in manner and morals read to me as a less flamboyant Honeybuzzard from Angela Carter's first novel Shadow Dance, published just a few years before The Hide. The worlds of these two narrators collide once Josiah is hired on by Audrey as a gardener/handyman for the estate. This seemingly benign act upends Simon's world and sets in motion a series of escalating dramatic events bearing all the hallmarks of impending tragedy. 

While Unsworth's style here is ornate at times, particularly in his descriptions of nature and the estate grounds, it is also efficient and tightly controlled. He effectively inhabits both the minds of the eccentric, intellectual upper-class Simon and the naïve, impressionable, and lesser-educated Josiah. Through the eyes of these two characters we also receive nuanced portraits of the other significant characters: Audrey, Marion, and Mortimer. Plot-wise the story is not overly complicated, but it offers compelling character studies and delves into themes of class, romance, aging, etiquette, and various forms and dynamics of human relationships.