Rating: 3/5

A group of neighbors in a remote village decide to hold a séance during which a spirit announces that Captain Joseph Trevelyan, the owner of the house they’re in, has just been murdered in a neighboring village. The best friend of Captain Trevelyan, Major Burnaby, needs to know if his friend is alright. So he decides to walk six miles through a snow storm, to get to Captain Trevelyan’s current residence. And when he arrives there, he finds his friend has indeed been murdered.

The inspector who investigates the murder uses a very simple but effective method: follow the money. He goes to all the murder victim’s family members who stand to inherit his money, to see if anyone could have killed him. And since only one family member visited the murder victim at the day of his death, the inspector concludes that the victim’s nephew must have done it.

Emily Trefusis, said nephew’s fiancée, does not agree with the inspector’s conclusions though. She takes a journalist under her wings and sets out to find the truth.

Emily Trefusis is quite a fascinating protagonist. The thing is, she’s quite a cunning, intelligent, strong and independent woman. And we see the gender stereotypes she has to fight against in her life on a daily basis. Now, she wants to take control of her own life in a time where that was easier said than done. And it quickly becomes clear that she wants to marry the murder victim’s nephew not necessarily for love or money. The reason she picked him in the first place is because he’s so softhearted and easy to manipulate. And she thinks that the nephew simply wouldn’t be able to commit murder, because it’s just not in his nature.

Agatha Christie’s inclusion of supernatural elements definitely seems to have been inspired by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Since there are quite a few references to The Hound of the Baskervilles, and Arthur Conan Doyle himself is even briefly mentioned here.

The murder mystery plot in this stand alone novel is very solid. Though it’s not always the most exciting. And it takes quite a while for the plot to really get going. There’s a subtle hint of the supernatural to create a more atmospheric setting and elevate the book as a whole. Though it’s the character of amateur sleuth Emily Trefusis who stands out the most to me here.