Rating: 3/5

A book that makes it to its twelfth edition must be doing something right, as has Milton Osborne's introductory history of Southeast Asia. First published in 1979, my copy is from 2016. 

The word 'introductory' is correct, as the subject is massive for a relatively short book. There are also severe limitations on our knowledge of much of the course of this history. Written records and other documentary evidence is scarce prior to European colonisation, and indeed for a long time thereafter. Nor would we wish to rely too heavily on European rather than Asian perspectives. And even as recently as the 1970s in Cambodia, much of the detail of its history remains shrouded in a cloak of mystery.

Within these restrictions, Osborne does a decent job of outlining what we do know of the development of a region that is geographically massive, ethnically, religiously, and politically diverse, and which in recent decades has become highly populated. Six nations in the region have over 30 million people today and four rank in the world's top twenty for population.

It is therefore a synthesis that points to the key issues for further reading in given disciplines rather than thoroughly explaining any of them. It touches on some of the key figures such as Lee Kuan Yew, Ho Chi Minh, Norodom Sihanouk, Ferdinand Marcos, Mahatir Mohamad, Sukarno, and Suharto but without overemphasising individuals. It discusses economic matters by giving examples such as tin, rubber and rice. The complexities of race relations are often indicated, as for example with the differing roles of Chinese, Indians, and ethnic Malays in Malaysia.

Much attention is given to the radically different paths to independence from colonialism, and to the subsequent major breaks from the 'post-colonial settlements', which is to say how the first attempts at native government were frequently overthrown as steps on a long journey towards the relative political stability the region enjoys today. Thailand is often compared and contrasted as a unique case, never officially colonised but having to make many concessions to foreign powers to maintain its independence.

The extensive appendix and suggested reading list make no attempt to be exhaustive (as that way madness lies) but are nevertheless a goldmine of fiction and non-fiction material for further exploration of any narrower aspects of the subject matter that strike the reader's fancy.

There are far more typos here than I'd expect to see in a thoroughly proofread academic text - particularly with words omitted, used twice in a sentence incorrectly, or with the wrong tense or suffix. It's not a killer but it is a distraction.

I've read historians with more engaging and smoothly flowing prose, and with greater clarity of thought, but nevertheless this is a solid starting point for understanding the region.