Rating: 5/5

4.5 heart-stopping stars! Anytime a book can make me question reality, fear dark shadows, &amp; afraid to turn off the lights, it's horror done right!

In The Woods opens in medieval times with Prince Freeacas leading the charge to save his lands and heritage from an evil force so deadly, so horrifying, that even the bravest of knights turn tail and run. King Haggert travels to Sethrye, making a deal with a sorcerer for dark magic to save his people and loved ones. He doesn't realize that dark magic comes at a high price - one more precious than silver or gold. The evil beast is eradicated, its body journeying with men traveling to the New World, bearing instructions to bury the beast in the middle of a forest, and so they do. The grave lies within a circle of barren ground, guarded only by a cross, as centuries come and go. But is true evil immortal? Is it dead and buried forever…or just lying in wait?

Fast forward many years to a small town community, living in fear. People are disappearing without a trace. Could one of the town’s people be a serial killer? Two friends entered the woods on a day hike, a day away to unwind. They came upon a grave lying in a circle of barren ground, guarded by a cross. Could this be where the serial killer is burying victims? If so, the families deserve closure…the chance to give their loved ones a proper burial. The men tossed aside the cross and began digging. One of them removed an old bag wrapped in ancient leather thongs from the grave, ripped it open, and an evil transcending centuries sent them racing from the woods.

"Behind them in the woods, in the strange clearing that had been unvisited for centuries, where dirt spilled back from a gaping rave, a thick mist rose. From out of that blanket of fog, something shifted and began to move. Something that had no business stirring in this modern century. The dark form gathered and grew, taking a monstrous, unholy shape that lingered only an instant to taste the air, to stare in the direction the firemen had taken, before disappearing into the trees." (from In The Woods)

An evil force descends upon the town. Bloody body parts begin appearing in one of the men’s backyards, almost like a gift, an offering. Are they pointing an accusatory finger at this firefighter. Are the bloody offerings from the bodies of victims of the serial killer? Could this firefighter be the serial killer? Something is horribly amiss here. No one is safe. A reign of terror has begun.

In The Woods should be experienced firsthand. It’s hard to talk about the storyline without giving away spoilers, so I’ll just say it has all the elements of horror done right. But it’s the author's expert use of what I call the human element and a soft kiss of romance that upped the stakes and took it to the next level – making me really care about these characters. The couple struggling to save their marriage, the firefighter trying to drown his guilt in alcohol, the young, innocent girl lured from her first car on a dark road at night – all people I fear for and all in danger from the unknown evil descending upon the community. And there it is - horror done right. Nancy Gideon’s In The Woods will have you looking over your shoulder, peering into shadows, and sleeping with the lights on. Fans of horror, thrillers, and suspense will love this book. It is a Must Read! Crack open the book and…don’t forget to leave the lights on!

Full review @ Cross My Heart Writings &amp; Reviews