Rating: 1/5

This is supposed to be funny, but it isn’t! This is the thought that struck me over and over again throughout the entire book. The book never annoyed me, but it leaves me totally unmoved and indifferent. I am giving it one star because as far as I am concerned it is not worth the time spent reading it. 

This novel is about the eponymous Jane and Prudence. Jane is a vicar’s wife. She and her husband have just moved from London out to a small provincial town, where at the start they know no one. She had gone to Oxford, studied literature and had planned on writing books. Instead, she married and busies herself now with matchmaking, particularly in relation to Prudence, her friend. In Oxford, Jane had been Prudence’s tutor. Jane is forty-one. Prudence is twenty-nine. They are opposites. Prudence is a working woman living in London. She is single and attractive and goes through boyfriends one after the other. They leave no impression on her and not on readers either. Will Jane manage to marry her off or not? There is the plot. Only if the writing had been exceptional would such a plot interest me.

The book begins with an introduction by the novelist Jilly Cooper. Whatever you do, don’t read it at the start. It contains spoilers.

 Cooper loves the book. I don’t; our views differ. She delights in Pym’s focus on food and clothing. There is not a page without lines and lines about what characters are eating and drinking. I was driven nuts by this. Even when Prudence is working, the major topic of discussion is who should make the tea! Does it interest you if so-and-so drinks tea or Nescafe? Do you care how many cookies are eaten? Is it interesting to know that Jane’s petticoat hangs down one inch below her dress? I find the excessive talk about clothing and food prosaic and b-o-r-i-n-g! 

Cooper praises the plot, the characterizations and the humor. None of these aspects of the novel work for me. Above, I spoke of the plot. The characters I see as one-dimensional, flat and uninteresting. Shallow! There is not one that displays a pinch of emotional or intellectual growth.

Let’s look at the humor. Pym attempts to poke a finger at the restraints imposed by class, religion and gender. She attempts to express criticism through satirical humor. Unfortunately, the humor fails to come across clearly. I did not chuckle as I read this book. The messages Pym intends to convey through satire remain hazy. 

An essential problem of the whole book is that nothing and nobody changes.

The author attempts of compare life in cities versus life in the country at the middle of the 20th century. In this Pym fails too. This is just my view of course. 

Maggie Mash narrates the audiobook. She dramatizes. This is a technique I rarely enjoy. Her intonations for several of the characters were unpleasant to listen to—particularly the intonation for the tyrannical spinster, Miss Doggett. Two stars for the audio narration. I could hear every word but did not enjoy the listening experience.

On picking this up I thought I should give Barbara Pym another try. I have, and again I am not pleased—no more books by Pym for me.

*************************
*Excellent Women 1 star
*Jane and Prudence 1 star