Rating: 4/5

This book was mentioned on an adoption blog, and I remember reading it years ago. Doss' active faith lived out through rainbow adoption remains an inspiration to me. The story stayed with me, but the title got lost. Happy to be reunited with a classic and looking for a copy for my library.

I found this article written at the time of the author's death...
http://www.redlandsdailyfacts.com/art...

Onetime Redlands author Helen Doss Reed dies at age 97
By
By Kristina Hernandez
kristina.hernandez@ inlandnewspapers.com, @TheFactsKris on Twitter

POSTED: 04/18/13, 12:01 AM PDT | 0 COMMENTS
REDLANDS -- Helen Grigsby Doss Reed, the matriarch of the Doss Family who made their home here in the 1950s, died April 12 in Spring Valley. She was 97.

Reed's story was the inspiration of her best-selling novel, "The Family Nobody Wanted." Published in the 1950s, the book talked about Reed and her then-husband Carl's large family, how they came to adopt their first child and their everyday routine.

The family would later share their story on a number of television programs, and the Dosses' work would become the inspiration for many looking to adopt outside of their own race, her family said.

Reed was born Helen Louise Grigsby on Aug. 9, 1915, in Sanderstead, Surrey, England, but was raised in Illinois, where she met Carl Doss. The couple married in 1937.

The Dosses adopted their first child in the 1940s, and after wanting a "brother and sister" for the children they already had, they decided to open their home to more. They adopted a total of 12, each coming from a different ethnic background, including Chinese, French and Scottish.

In 1953, the family came to Redlands, moving into the old Lyon House at Wabash and Sixth avenues. The family's reputation as the "United Nations Family" preceded the move. The Redlands Daily Facts featured a story on the Doss Family after they settled in town.

"Everyone wants to know how we can afford such a large family and how we manage," Carl Doss, a Methodist minister, said in the article. "It's a long story and I've been asked to explain it at several special engagements, but I find that it takes longer than an evening to tell all. In the first place, we have a different philosophy of life than some people. We buy only the bare necessities. " Several articles on the family would follow.

In 1954, Helen Doss' novel was published. It became an international best seller and was the inspiration for a 1956 episode of TV's "Playhouse 90" directed by John Frankenheimer and a 1970s film starring Shirley Jones.

The family also appeared on an episode of "You Bet Your Life" with Groucho Marx the year "Family" was published to share their story. The family also made TV appearances on "The Betty White Show," "Art Linkletter Show" and "Cavalcade of Books," to name a few, and was also the inspiration of a three-act comedy based on Reed's book. High schools still perform the play, said her daughter, Diane Doss of Long Beach.

After her book was published, Reed drew a crowd when she signed books at Harris Co. on Fifth Street. She later told The Facts she had aspirations to write a handbook on the adoption process, which she did in 1957 with "If You Adopt a Child."

She would continue writing books for all age groups through 1981, totaling 13 in all, her family said. "She wrote books and then she wrote articles prior to even writing books," her daughter said. "She was a freelance writer for the American Girl Magazine ... that was associated with the Girl Scouts. And the earliest articles I found on that were in the 1940s, and the last was in the mid-1950s. She also wrote a two-part article for McCall Magazine that was pretty much about our family, but it was separate from her book. "

Helen and Carl Doss divorced in 1966. He died in 1994. In 1984, Helen Doss remarried and moved to Tucson, Ariz., with her new husband, Roger Reed. The couple retired in 2006 and moved to Mountain Miguel Covenant Village in Spring Valley. Reed died on March 18.

Helen Reed was also a public speaker and ministered in Christianity, her daughter said. She also dabbled in painting and enjoyed music, especially selections by her favorite conductor, Leonard Bernstein. At family gatherings she would play the auto harp and her children would often sing with her. She also contributed regularly to the Salvation Army and the American Red Cross.

"She made many sacrifices to make a difference in the lives of others," her daughter said. "She made a difference in the lives of 12 orphans. She made a difference in the lives of those who read her books and her stories, and were touched by their message. She made a difference in the lives of orphans around the world that were adopted by couples who read (her) stories and gave validation for adoption outside of their own race."

In addition to her husband, Helen Reed was preceded in death by three sons, Greg Doss in 1996, Richard Doss in 1997 and Alex Doss in 2009.

In addition to Diane Doss, Reed is survived by sons Don Doss of Santa Rosa, Ted Doss of Rosemead and Tim Doss of Mentone; daughters Dorothy Lopez of Yucaipa, Elaine Flanigan of Redlands, Lora Jaramillo of North Hills, Susie Vorderstasse of Oregon and Rita Villareal of Redlands; stepsons John and Jim Reed of Arizona; a sister, Jane Watts of Spring Valley; 32 grandchildren; 47 great-grandchildren and three great-great grandchildren.

Private services will be at Mount Miguel Covenant Village in Spring Valley. The family suggests donations in Reed's memory to the American Red Cross, the Salvation Army or to their favorite church.