Rating: 3/5

Summary: These old-timey science books are hard to rate b/c they are so profound for their day, but full of weird stuff with the lens of 2020. Also, I think I'd like to read the non-concise version. The editor's interjections are a little bit annoying and disjointed for me.

Notes:
p. 2 - Larmark argued that two laws of nature gradually changed life over time. Simple life forms perpetually came into existence, and they were all driven toward greater degrees of perfection. Species also adapted to their particular environments through experience." There aren't two branches, so this is one of the differentiation that Darwin isn't into.
p. 22 Darwin and Lamark are both thinking in terms of use and disuse. DNA doesn't quite do that.
"As species evolve new habits, some of their genes become unnecessary. Mutations that disable them are not eliminated by natural selection, because animals with those mutations suffer no penalty."
p. 53 - The editor is talking about the idea that Darwin had to look at indirect evidence of evolution in humans b/c our history is only 200k years old and not long enough to really see any fossils and the like. He uses the pygmies, American Mayans. "If a trait could increase a person's reproductive success, it could become more common over the generations." The problem is, in this case, it was a nutrition that was causing this group to be notably shorter.
p. 65 “It is familiar to everyone that watchmakers and engravers are liable to be short-sighted, whilst men living much out of doors, and especially savages, are generally long-sighted.”

p. 109..This is pretty f***-in racist, but it's the time he came from. "No doubt the difference in this respect is enormous, even if we compare the mind of one of the lowest savages, who has no words to express any number higher than four, and who uses hardly any abstract terms for common objects or for the affection with that of the most highly organised ape." Ouch. Luckily from there the rest of the chapter, largely speaking (still a couple of weird jibs in there) is comparing human to other animals, not specific groups of humans to specific animals or brits to the rest of the "savage" world. 

p. 118 - "The principal of Imitation is strong in man, and especially, as I have myself observed, with savages." Dude... you are a visitor that speaks nothing of their language. These people are trying to communicate with you and you gonna say this is just what savages do? Oh my my....
Then, just in case you think it might be a compliment he says:
"In certain morbid states of the brain this tendency is exaggerated to an extraordinary degree; some hemiplegic patients and others, at the commencement of inflammatory softening of the brain unconsciously imitate every word which is uttered, whether in their own or in a foreign language, and every gesture or action which is performed near them." 
p. 130 He talks about how monkeys do in fact use tools, so that's not a way to differentiate man.
p. 193 "Nevertheless the difference in mind between man and the higher animals great as it is, certainly is one of degree and not of kind." Nopey. That was proven in 2013. But it's ok. 
p.195 - The editor differentiates between what Darwin says and what is later used to justify stuff like Eugenics. Even if he agreed/disagreed, it is immaterial. It's not what he actually published and wrote and there is some evidence he would not have felt that way (although I could not yet tell from some of the authors that have published biographies. More to do there).

p. 198 "Nothing speeds up evolutio fatser than disease, because any mutuation that can provide some resistance may save an animal from death." Actually true or not, very freakin close having no idea at the time about virus/bacteria.

p. 225 he thought we evolved from apes. Kind of, not exactly.

p. .227 A person considered black in the United States might be considered white in Brazil.

p. 291 - "Polygamy...leads to the same results as would follow from an actual inequality in the number of the sexes; for if each male secures two or more females, many males cannot pair; and the latter assuredly will be the weaker or less attractive individuals." Interesting. Not sure what to think.
p. 369 "When faced with certain kinds of mental challenges, men and women use different parts of their brains -- and end up performing equally well." Actually not totally true, but again this research is more recent in neurology. This editor is a little off.