Rating: 5/5

Sharon Butala must have put her heart into these reflections on her life and nature. It seemed to me a brave act to reveal thoughts and troubles in a manner that came through as self-confessional - though at one point she said it was not that. In 1975, at age thirty-five, Sharon Butala married her second husband, Peter Butala and moved to his ranch in southern Saskatchewan near Eastend located in the arid Paliser's Triangle. She left an urban lifestyle, a son, an ex-husband, academic pursuits and employment, friends and family, to take up life as a rancher's wife, completely unprepared for and untutored in rural life. Except, as she gradually realized with the deepening of her attachment to the prairie grasslands, the union with a natural environment was in her bones beginning with an early childhood on her parents' farm in Nipawin, Saskatchewan.

The beauty in "Perfection of the Morning" is the sensitivity to Nature, communing with animals, the meditative walks, and receptivity to the spiritual vibes emanating from the land and indigenous peoples. 

"Close proximity to a natural environment -- being in Nature -- alters all of us in ways which remain pretty much unexplored, even undescribed in our culture." (Pg 92)

There is much to learn from the indigenous peoples in their respectful regard for land - and observed that their "understandings of the spirit world ... come with nature, come out of Nature itself; come with the land and are taught by it."

The 1980s was a decade of crisis for the prairies - drought, heat, wind - a catastrophe that portended the future. Farms failed, farming families of multiple generations lost their land, and agriculture became more corporate. As Butala wrote:

"North America, obsessed with the notion of progress and the technological means to achieve it, and increasingly urbanized, has failed to make a place for people on the land. Thousands of people, rural for generations, have been driven off it. We have raped our natural resources and despoiled them, overused pesticides, insecticides, chemical fertilizers and huge machinery to subdue Nature, and devalued the rural peoples and his/her way of life along with rural culture." (pp 178-179)

Humankind needs to adopt and live a different model, learning from the indigenous, or else we lose our humanity.

Butala in her reflections and observations on Nature, including the bloom of the yellow clover, evokes for readers the "purity of the morning".

About ten years after the publication of "Perfection ...", the Butalas donated over 5200 hectares of the ranch land to the Nature Conservancy Association of Canada. This is currently being used for sustainable cattle razing, plains bison, habitat conservation, and protection of indigenous encampments.

Throughout, Butala refers to authors whose writings helped her understand and learn. A rarity in memoirs, I think, the back of the book has two pages of sources.