Rating: 5/5

[UPDATED]
I kind of dropped off reading comics when I was a kid, so it was only thanks to the Christopher Nolan trilogy that I went back and read several of the sources of stories used in the movies. I talked to comics geek friend m.poulet and he recommended Batman, The Dark Knight Returns in particular. I recalled also an episode of Comic Book Men where Kevin Smith and the boys reminisce about the impact that this particular comic had on them. I had read and enjoyed Sin City (and LOVED the Roberto Rodriguez film adaptation with the amazing return of Mickey Rourke) but somehow had passed right by the comic that CHANGED IT ALL. Apparently, this particular cycle took the comix world by storm. Learning all of this, naturally, I was curious to read it and I was not disappointed.

The ragging on Reagan is great and I love the graphic style. The story itself is riveting – the Mutants are killer bad guys, Robin is unexpectedly feminine (that was a surprise!) but what works best for me is the Superman-Batman disagreement and fight. Something about seeing Clark Kent and Bruce Wayne arguing while playing golf was awesome. I can see that although no particular sub-themes or characters from this graphic novel were recycled into the Batman Trilogy, the return of Bruce Wayne after retirement and his state of physical exhaustion was pretty similar in both I felt. I also thought that the darkness of Batman in this comic and in the film were very simular.

I read also the other Frank Miller Batman: Year One but was less amazed by the graphics and story. Batman, The Dark Knight Returns was truly a masterpiece of the genre.

On re-reading this in 2022, I found that the narrative was so complex that I was constantly going back to see if I missed something. Frank Miller spins such a complex web of a story with hundreds of minor characters (and victims of the bad guys of course). What was also impressive was how HUGE this 4-issue cycle was because he covers the coming out of retirement of Batman and another fight with Harvey Dent (The Dark Knight Returns), the defeat of the Mutant gang (The Dark Knight Triumphant), the conflict with Superman and the final conflict with the Joker (Hunt the Dark Knight) and the incredible Superman vs Batman mega fights concluding with the death of basically everyone except Bruce Wayne (The Dark Knight Falls). The themes are all the classic Batman ones of vigilante violence vs law and order, outsider versus societal acceptance...

The new Robin, Carrie Kelley is a nice (but maybe disturbing given her age of 13 as Lolita was 13 at the end of Nabakov's book too, right?) addition and we do have references to Batman's regrets concerning Dick Greyson's departure (Batman #408, DC Comics, 1987) and Jason's murder by the Joker (Batman: A Death in the Family). So, she comes at an important point and as an alternative to these previous Robin incarnations. She is brilliant, intuitive, funny, and independent as well. A great character!

Honestly, this is probably the best comic book ever and you can read it over and over again and get different angles and perspectives each time.