Rating: 3/5

I feel like I betrayed myself, my family and some of my friends because I did not like this book more. My statement seems a bit rough but my heart is really heavy. This is why!
I started this book 10 years ago while on a trip to Mumbai. Where else! As I was studying in Italy at that time I bought the book in Italian. I remember that I loved what I read but dropped it somewhere at page 200 in order to read it in the original language, English. I do not know how and why but 10 years have passed before I finally got to start again. In the meantime, I recommended the book to my grandma (became one of her favorite books, read it multiple times), my father (loved it) and some friends which all enjoyed it. I was so sure I will love it as well. Well, I did like it but I did not love it.

For the good part, it is a ambitious adventure book with interesting facts about the Indian culture and it was mostly entertaining. 

My main issue with this doorstopper is that I hated the main character. That is a problem as the book is all about HIM. The book is a slightly autobiographical novel about an Australian armed robber who escapes from prison and lands himself in Mumbai. There, he moves into a slum, starts a free clinic and gets involved with the city’s mafia. Many things happen to the guy and between those extraordinary events multiple philosophical ideas are inserted who tend to be quite repetitive. His struggle between his good part (savior of the slum) and his bad part (criminal activities with the Bombay Mafia ) take many boring pages. It felt like the narrator tried very, very hard to convince the reader to have a good opinion of him, that even if he is a criminal he is one of the good guys and his acts are justifiable. He has two full chapters in which he presents his philosophy of what is really evil and what is a decent crime (things like passports falsification, money laundering etc). To me Shantaram was a pompous, self-absorbed prick who tried more than half of the book to look like such a wonderful person, some sort of “messiah” for the residents of Mumbai. Really!? How had those Indians survived without him? Everybody loved him and respected him. He was welcomed by everybody in their homes and heart. Also, for half of the book all the characters were wonderful, with no apparent defects. I mean, even the criminals were loving, heartwarming philosophers which felt really odd.