Rating: 5/5

💜reread for my Shakespeare class

I really do love this play but I was also in it, with an Overly Large Yet Worth It Role, and at this point I have no energy to have thoughts on it, we'll talk about why I love this show and then we'll end with 
  the long list of terrible memes

(also why the FUCK did I give this four stars. it's a five goodnight I love this underrated play)

WHY THIS PLAY IS FUCKING AWESOME

Okay, first of all, and no one else cares: it's pretty damn historically accurate as Shakespeare goes. And I'm a stressed Latin student. So that was nice to see. 

It's also a really good play as characters go. Every character parallels around three other characters in interesting ways; Brutus especially is a foil to all of the other three leads. All the relationships between the characters are so interesting and heartbreaking. 

This is also just one of the best-written plays I've ever read. I love how Shakespeare varies his meter for every character. Okay, example time: Brutus ends at least half his statements with weak endings rather than in typical Iambic Pentameter. Cool, right? Maybe it's not if you don't know what any of that meant. Nevermind. But my nerd ass loves it. Also, so much rhetoric. That assembly scene changed me as a person. You could write a freaking term paper on that scene and still not fully analyze the whole thing

And it's still a relevant story today!! This play has some really fucking relevant political commentary. There's actually a line in this play about how this bloody scene, this surprise betrayal, will be reenacted a thousand times over in the future, and it's maybe the most brilliant line of all time, ever. I love it. I can't believe we cut it. 

Beyond all that, though, this is just one of the most narratively strong plays I've ever read. This is my favorite kind of tragedy. Every single character has sensical motivations!! There's no villain!! There's no fate as the villain!! Every bad thing that happens is the result of a character decision. I just really love this play narratively. 

SOME MEMES, FOR YOUR ENJOYMENT
— I can't believe Brutus and Cassius are being chewed on by Satan in hell they didn't deserve this @Dante you take that shit back they were just trying to stop a fucking dictator good god
— comparing Caesar to Trump is unfair?? Caesar cared about poor people how is that comparable to our current president
— please just look at this
— add “bro” to every single line of The Tent SceneTM and it's 100% better trust me I Am A Scientist
— et tu, brote
— some people?? stab emperors?? to coup??
— Cassius every single time something goes wrong: time to die lmao
— au where this whole thing takes place on tumblr and Antony's speech is just a callout post and no one stays in their lane 
— that Mean Girls version of the speech is really fucking accurate she even gets in "Brutus is just as cute as Caeser" and if that's not something Cassius would say I don't know what is
— sorry Shakespeare I really do love your work I don't only make memes about it
— and yet: holy fuck

(i'm really sorry)

— this play is literally Macbeth except less supernatural, more Roman, and more gay 
— there's also this weird Romeo-and-Juliet esque triple suicide? in which a character who has never shown up before is suddenly Cassius' best friend and then they kill themselves and lie dead next to each other over a misunderstanding? it's weird
— and then Brutus comes in and dies too so... triple suicide? cool??
— I feel like I should mention that random new character is quite literally named Titty-nius
— Shakespeare, on his 1610 ao3 account: lmao let's write a crossover of Romeo and Juliet and Macbeth except... Roman au 
— this play invented the bury your gays trope
— or maybe someone just yelled "the floor is stabbing Caesar"
— I'm so very sorry for this review I regret it already

Blog | Goodreads| Twitter | Youtube