Bone is a fiction story and the characters are Bone, Grandma Ben, Thorn And Bone cousin. Thorn was the daughter of a queen and transform to a dragon. Now her mother is the queen of all the dragon that come when somebody is dreaming. Only Thorn and her friends like Bone and Grandma Ben can see the dragons. There`s a army that is trying to capture all of them but the dangerous thing is that were they are staying is there city.Grand`ma Ben and the others where there because Grand`ma Ben had a friend on the city and it was Grand`ma Ben sensei. There`s another army coming to the city and they get there in the morning.

What a like about the book that it has alot of adventure.They go around and explore to find what happened to Thorn mom.Thing that a love is Phoney one of Bone cousins,he is the funny one on the group and the thing is that he gets everybody nerve`s.The thing that what i like to see different is the places that they go on there adventure.The less thing that i don`t like is when Grand`ma Ben sensei dies. The leader of the city was ready to fight the other leader of the army but the problem is that the bad guy s leader has more power and experience fighting other people.They start the fight and the bad guy leader flys and came back down and cut off the city leader head. The thing about that part was that I really like the city leader guy because he fights a dragon and he almost gets killed the only thing that happened to him was that he got a big scarf a cross his face.

I really like this book so much that I can read it again to waste my time when I'm bored. It makes me field that I'm inside of the story is like I'm fighting the bad guys army and I'm just a person that now "Thorn" because of her mother but she doesn't know that I knew her. I will recommend this book to 7 year old and up because it has to much valence on it. I will react this book a very high 5 because I really like the book that are made by there imagination. The good thing that is fast o understand the book like in the few first page you can understand what is happening because is like a real life conversation.