Rating: 5/5

Naipaul is not a much-liked figure in India. There are good reasons for it. First, nation-states do not like being condemned or harshly judged, and India is no exception. Second, if a writer in his bashing enthusiasm goes on hitting while ignoring some key facts about a particular people and their history, he loses some of his credibility. However, there is a lot in Naipaul's oeuvre that cannot be dismissed, no matter how much his work makes one cringe.

He sees deep flaws in contemporary Indian culture and goes on to trace the genealogies of these flaws in Indian history and Hindu religion. Flaws that still reign the ordinary Indian mind. One of Naipaul's key findings is that Indians are neither skilled nor do they have any solid understanding of the real world. (For instance, Indians cannot make cheese). When facing a crisis, they take refuge in their glorious past, and retract from the immediate. Naipaul looks at history, key Indian figures, contemporary literature to prove his point. 

What is so good about reading Naipaul is that he makes one listen and pay attention. There is a lot of truth in what he says about India. It would be foolish to dismiss his work. However, what is so annoying about the book is that he does not see anything good or worthwhile in India's present or even in its past. He completely ignores the syncretic traditions of India, its music and classical dance forms and so forth. He does not see much in them because he cannot. He does not know any Indian languages to judge the finer aspects of Indian culture. Even an average Indian person does not automatically become proficient in admiring and understanding classical Indian art forms. 

Before Naipaul, in colonial India, there have been British historians, writers, politicians, who wrote extensively and perceptively about Indian culture, drawing attention to what was wrong with it. One can reject these texts but what is in them is actually all around us in present-day India. However, like Naipaul, the Europeans also showed ignorance and plain stupidity in the same texts. In other words, Naipaul makes similar errors. 

However, what makes Naipaul different is that his dismissals are brilliantly crafted. I also feel that his engagement with the country is a way of dealing with his own past. One criticizes because one cares.

Reading Naipaul and thinking about his chief problems with India, and looking at today's world; civil unrest, climate change, diminishing resources, water crisis. It is okay that some people (Indians) are not practical enough, that they recede rather than take charge, that they dream and practice 'karmic' theories, that instead of raping environment (further) and turning rivers into drains for material gains. Naipaul sees this non-doing as an Indian Flaw.

In some weird way, primitive India, with its backwardness–that Naipaul so dislikes– is what in today's western Europe is referred to as sustainable living. Gandhi, with all his flaws and quirks, seems wise now. His idea of 'Swaraj,' which, apart from its layered meanings, is an appeal to Indian people to adopt sustainable and eco-friendly lifestyles; to embrace ways that are more inclusive, that go beyond the merely anthropocentric ones.

I must say that what is so exemplary about this book is Naipaul's language. If one reads him for long and then picks up a book by any other contemporary writer, one immediately recognizes that one is not in the same superior, exciting world of words any more. One should read his prose to enjoy its softness and porcelain like texture.