Rating: 5/5

"Miss Mapp had long been considered, by others as well as herself, the first social citizen of Tilling, and though she had often been obliged to fight desperately for her position, and had suffered from time to time manifold reverses, she had managed to maintain it, because there was no one else of so commanding and unscrupulous a character. Then this alien from Riseholme had appeared and had not so much challenged her as just taken her scepter and her crown..."

I am so sad this book is finished! It only has thirteen chapters, and at the end of each day, it felt like such a luxury to return to the seaside village of Tilling, and to see these two genteel ladies grapple for the title of "queen bee" one bridge party at a time. Once full out war was declared, you couldn't help but watch from the safe distance of your parlor window, because it was very entertaining!

  "Things are beginning to move, Georgie," said Lucia. "Elizabeth of course. I'm sure I was right; she wants to run me, and if she can't (if!), she'll try to fight me. I can see glimpses of hatred and malice in her."
"And you'll fight her?" asked Georgie eagerly.
"Nothing of the kind, my dear," said Lucia. "What do you take me for? Every now and then, when necessary, I shall just give her two or three hard slaps..."

I knew who I was rooting for. Team Lucia all the way! And the way all the characters from Riseholme and Tilling come together in this novel, like a DC Comic mashup, was so ahead of its time considering it was written in 1931. So funny and so witty, Benson had his finger on the pulse of village life and the women that run them. 

"...ringing the bell for her tray, [Elizabeth] ate the large remainder of caviar sandwiches and nougat chocolate and fed her soul with schemes of reprisals. She could not offhand think of any definite plan of sufficiently withering a nature, and presently, tired with mental activity, she fell into a fireside doze and had a happy dream that Dr. Dobbie had popped in to tell her that Lucia had developed undoubted symptoms of leprosy."