Rating: 3/5

This review is of the 1999 revised edition. I haven't read the original 1984 edition, so I do not know how they compare. The original title was Mad's How to be a Successful Dog. (I know -- nothing much of a title change. Got a feeling the revision just included a couple of 1990s references, such as to Beanie Babies and Seinfeld, and that was about it.)

I'm used to thinking of Mad books as the series of paperbacks that consisted if selections from the magazine instead of -- well, instead of previously unused material. You know, like BOOKS books. But a few Mad writers and artists did books that came out under the Mad name, if not the magazine. This was by writer (not artist) Larry Siegel, who wrote for Mad mostly in the late 1950s and in the 1960s. He's best known for his television work on shows like The Bob Newhart Show and The Carol Burnett Show. 

As a result, the book is amusing and does have some painful puns and clever social commentary, but is a bit bland. The book is supposedly written by Siegel's 20 year old dog Spot, who sounds like a grumpy Jewish grandfather (expect a sprinkling of Yiddish, Bubby.) 

Believe it or not, this book is not just a self-help parody, but a parody of all of those self-help books about cats that came out in the 1980s and early 1990s. And there were a lot -- although really, the only one you ever need to read is How to Play Ganes with Your Pussy. I grew up with cats, so my parents were suckers for cat humor books -- including about the first 20 Garfield books. Siegel's comments that he's also writing a cat book to help pay for this dog book was spot on (pun intended.)

There are some tiring jokes about how much dogs sleep, that they love to scratch and some not-so-funny dead dog jokes. He also writes that dog owners all go to pet stores to get their dogs, which at the time was sadly true. There are some poignant jabs at how awful people treat their dogs at times, so there is some method to this madness.

The illustrations by John Caldwell are better than the text. He does some funny images not suggested in the text, but relevant to the chapters where they appear. He not only draws a diversity of people in his cartoons, but a diversity of dogs. Most look like mongrels, which are the best dogs, in my not so humble opinion.