Rating: 4/5

Happily there are now endless outstanding books and online courses to teach yourself to draw, and this is one of them. 

Here we have forty exercises across a range of subjects and mediums (pen and ink to crayon). Actually, one of my favourite lessons from the book is not one of these exercises but a piece of advice that comes right at the beginning: How to fight procrastination. 

We all have these great plans to set aside a day a week or an hour a day to practice drawing, but it never happens – something always gets in the way. I have no idea where that inertia comes from, because once I actually start drawing the time flies by in pure enjoyment of the process. But the key is how to get to actually sitting at the desk with a pencil in your hand?

Edwards says forget about timetabling drawing time. Instead just set a minimum goal which she calls the ‘two minute miracle.’ The idea is that you set yourself tiny, easily-achievable goals whereby you coax yourself, kind of trick yourself, into starting to draw. So you say to yourself, ‘Ok, I’m only going to look at what the next exercise is.’ ‘Ok, I’m just going to lay in the edges of the drawing.’ And before you know it you’ve already started putting pencil to paper, and then it’s easy to forget all those pressing excuses to do anything else but.

It reminds me of some exercise advice I saw, where a gym instructor said the same kind of thing about setting minimum goals: Just turning up to the gym, even if you sit there and read a paper for 20 minutes, is a good start. Before long once you find you’re actually there it’s so much easier to start exercising. 

The exercises I found most useful were: 

Drawing upside down 
This is straight copying an upside-down drawing (it works better with line drawings), which really forces you to look at the relationship between lines and shapes, to look at negative space, and ignore all those ‘symbols’ floating around in your brain and making inaccurate shortcuts in your drawing. This really helps you to ‘unlearn’ what you think you know and draw what’s really there. 

Drawing negative space
This concentrates on just drawing the negative space around a chair and a bunch of flowers in a vase, leaving the flowers themselves blank. This reminder to look at negative space is useful because you often forget, even when in the ‘trance-like’ drawing mode, to stop concentrating on discrete objects and look at everything as being equally worthy of consideration. Plus when you concentrate on negative space it does make your drawings more vivid, ‘drawing that emphasize negative spaces are a pleasure to look at, perhaps because the compositions are strong (emphasis on negative space always improves composition) and the spaces and shapes are unified.’

Drawing the head in profile
‘Eye level to chin is the same distance as back of the eye to the back of the ear.’ Drawing profiles is good for practising edges, spaces and relationships. Good to use negative spaces when you run into trouble. And when ‘drawing the hair, squint your eyes to see the larger highlights and the shadows. Avoid drawing symbolic hair – repeated parallel or curly lines. Hair forms a shape, focus on drawing that shape.’ 

Edwards herself says that she found one of the most useful to be this one:

Pure contour drawing
Sit at a table, with your pencil in hand on the sketchpaper. Now turn in your seat 90 degrees away from the paper (so that you can’t see your drawing) and look at the palm of your other hand. Concentrate on drawing the line on one square inch in the palm of your hand. 

She says that this is the most efficient way for preparing the brain for visual tasks. The verbal, system-based ‘left’ side of the brain switches off at such a boring task, allowing the visual ‘right’ side of the brain to take over. 

I have a different, but related, way of doing the same thing: I begin my drawings with my non-drawing hand (which is my right, as I’m left handed). This takes so much concentration in basic motor control that I kind of phase out anyway, and I’m left with an interesting sketch I can refine with my drawing hand afterward. 

Drawing on the picture plane
This one is for those who haven’t got the hand of foreshortening yet, and probably of great use to beginning or younger students. You balance a hard, transparent plastic sheet on your non-drawing hand, then use a wipeable marker to draw your hand as you see it directly onto the plastic sheet. Then place the completed drawing on a white background so you can see it properly. 

Foreshortening and the picture plane are concepts that are like a switch, they seem incomprehensible till you grasp the idea and then once you have the epiphany it’s just a matter of refining your skill. 

On the cover it says this books is ‘guided practice in the five basic skills of drawing.’ What are they, according to Betty Edwards?

1 Edges
Contours. She defines ‘contours’ in the beginning as ‘a line that represents the shared edges of shapes, or shapes and spaces.’ What a lay person would call ‘outlines.’

2 Spaces
Meaning ‘negative spaces,’ instead of looking at the table legs, try and draw the shape of the space between the table legs.

3 Relationships
Perspective (portraying three dimensions on a two dimensional surface) and proportion (the size, location, or amount of one element in relation to another).

4 Light and shadow
At a basic level, this is ‘shading,’ using light to bring out the three dimensional portrayal of the subject. Can also mean the communication of time, atmosphere and mood. In traditional art instruction there are four aspects of light and shadow: Highlights (the lightest lights), cast shadows (the darkest darks), reflected lights (not as light as the highlights) and crest shadows (the shadow that falls between the highlight and reflected light, not as dark as cast shadow). 

5 ‘Gestalt’
‘The “thingness” of the thing.’ This one is perhaps a bit difficult to explain eloquently, but I think is actually the most essential element, especially in heavily stylised drawing. Does this drawing convey the essential qualities of a bicycle, a koi carp or Albert Einstein? This is what I love about illustration, in that true masters can capture their subject with just a few strokes of the pen.