Rating: 1/5

This book is poison to the mind. I say that without engaging in any hyperbole. 
I grew up implementing the things mentioned in the book, not only this book but "every man's battle" and the DVD that went along with it. 
It approaches sexuality in a very archaic way at ends with modern psychology. 
In the "Every Man's" series, they interview male prostitutes, members of broken families and serial killers (yes, they interviewed Ted Bundy) who are all too willing to blame porn and 'lust' for the way they 'ended up'.

I distinctly remember the story of one teenager who watched so much porn that he discovered that he had 'turned gay'.

On the night before his execution, Ted Bundy 'leaked' the earth-shattering relation between violent offenders in prison and their love of pornography. His correlation makes little sense when you consider that;

"A University of Sydney study of 20,000 Australians found 84 percent of men and 54 percent of women had watched porn, and more than half of men and women agreed that pornography could improve sexual relations among adults."

and that,

"The Relationships in America data reveal that 43 percent of men and 9 percent of women report watching pornography in the past week."

Everyone who even has the slightest understanding of human psychology knows that when you make something a "no" in your head, it creates a stronger desire to chase that thing. 

My advice to anyone this series has hurt would be to put down this book and approach your internal shame with kindness as you destigmatise your sexual desires. If you believe you have unhealthy habits, take steps to introduce healthier habits. Too much junk food can make you fat, too much alcohol can increase the likeliness of habitual drinking. 

Take a step back and focus your attention not on "stopping", not on "judging yourself", but on doing positive things that encourage healthier sexual behaviour. E.g. instead of staying up until your partner goes to sleep to watch porn, see if you can offer them a massage and build some intimacy. It's not what you want to do, sure... you would rather stay up watching porn, but you also would rather eat that entire bag of chocolates and then not go for that run, but if you do that, you'll get fat. I would recommend the book "Mating In Captivity" for an excellent approach to healthy desires. 

Things are not as grim as described in this book. If your sexual behaviours are causing severe detrimental effects on your marriage, life or relationship, put down this book and seek professional help from an accredited behaviours therapist, not a pastor or a counsellor, but a psychologist who uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) or acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT)