Rating: 4/5

I admit at first I was a little turned off by this novel. As I have seen one reviewer quite passionately derail, I also did not quite like the way the narrator (Dr. Henry Vernier) trashed Dr. Watson. I also didn't like the stipulation that Watson and Holmes had never been quite close. If they had not been close, why on earth would Watson write the stories and follow him around? He could have easily been his flat-mate and kept well away from him; I know if I did not have quite a good relationship with the person that I lived with, I wouldn't decide to traipse about the continent and risk life and limb to aid them!

I could sort of see why he would write it out as such in order to let him expound on the mentioned-in-canon VERNER but still it took some getting used to. (And beggared the question of how on earth Holmes managed to convince a man who openly detested/loathed Watson to the point of refusing to read the doctor's written material twisting his cousin's character into buying his practice FROM Watson? And again raises the question why on earth Holmes would wish for Watson to return to him and live at Baker Street again, pulling out all the stops to entice him back if neither person liked the other so much as they pretended to for the public? Ah well.)

Another quibble I had was with how they transformed Holmes's character. It is, sadly, an argument I have all-too-frequently with pastiches and little stories/adaptations of the Holmes canon. Inevitably a woman is introduced for Holmes to pine after or vice-versa (but often with reciprocated feelings) and if she is not conjured out of thin air then they use the time-honoured IRENE ADLER. Please, let WELL enough alone. I feel that there are millions, perhaps even TRILLIONS of characters in all the novels and books out there who lust and love--can Holmes alone just be left well enough alone?

It is on that point that I was annoyed because he was introduced to a Miss Lowell, and immediately his cousin would poke and prod and bring up the not-very-subtle suggestions that perhaps Holmes ought to settle down with her. Holmes would tell him that he should drop the subject and he would only to pick it up again when anyone talked of loneliness/love/women and so forth. I get that she's a musician--and a good one--but I feel there ought to be something more there than WOW CAN SHE PLAY THE PIANO LET'S GET MARRIED. It's Holmes, for Christ's sake! It's going to take a little more than THAT to interest him. Especially given his mostly-negative views toward women (people now declare an argument both for and against this but HONESTLY read the canon), which the author duly tries to erase and blame on Watson.

So with all of this in mind, the story got off to a rather rocky start. For me, at any rate, but I persevered and wished to see how Leroux's characters were rendered.

This is amusing, for I have again seen an impassioned reader complaining about how Siciliano modelled them in his book and claimed he changed them utterly. I quite beg to differ. In regards to Raoul being a simpering, whiny, forceful cad: is there any difference? If we recall back to Leroux's story, he FREQUENTLY bursts into tears, crying far more often than does Christine. In regards to being forceful, he promises Christine he will take her from the Opera House--and he means TAKE. If she resists in any fashion, he will drag her away. In regards to being a cad, how often did he scream at her that she had ruined her virtue with another, with this mysterious man he heard her talking to? In the story he also mentioned how he didn't know what to do given his lineage, I believe; do you think he might succumb to temptation and ruin her virtue? I believe so--and so did Siciliano. Often he would vacillate, apologising and begging forgiveness before shrieking at her again the moment she mentioned her angel of music. How has Siciliano differed from this character?!? HE HASN'T, and I'm GLAD. Furthermore, I'm pleased that both Holmes and his cousin share a spirited dislike for the boy (for he is a boy at twenty) and often voice such disapproval. I have never liked Raoul, and I never understand how people can say that he is a sainted character. He has many flaws--flaws that are almost mirrored by the phantom but worse for Raoul because he has NO REASON to act in such a fasion!

In regards to Christine, said reviewer/reader complained that she was shown as only being repulsed by the Phantom's face. IS THIS NOT ALSO TRUE? She was content with her angel of music, and they (pardon this here) made sweet music together until she was tempted and removed his mask. Suddenly she could have nothing to do with him! She was horrified! Oh, if you could only see his face! His horrible face! ERIK never ripped his mask off. ERIK never thrust his face in hers (at least not at first) and made her shrink away. He HID himself, as he had done at an early age, and SHE chose to do that. SHE brought it on herself. One must think if he wears a mask it would be for a good reason, and I liken her actions to taking a false leg from someone and then pointing out they're missing their leg. I understand curiosity but to then wail about it night and day--it's terrible.

Not only that but it is remarked OFTEN in the story that the phantom had such a deep love but had to stay in the cellars and how he could have been one of the most famous/greatest people whom the world had ever seen but had to hide his face because of its grotesque characteristics. Seems to me, then, that the problem DOES, in FACT, reside with his appearance.

But returning more to Siciliano's novel, once I got over the beginning uneasiness I found that I quite liked it. I never cared for Raoul or Christine either one because they were children and prone to the likes and dislikes OF children. More Raoul than Christine, but Christine was markedly shallow. To Siciliano's credit, I actually held a great deal more sympathy for Christine and felt more of her actual plight in his story than I did in Leroux's. In Leroux's, it always seemed to me that she was hardly so torn; she was terrified by the phantom's appearance and that largely led her to Raoul. She debated, briefly, but then was resolute. With Siciliano, she did seem truly at an impasse, and even when she went with Raoul it was clear that she rued her choice. Still, the ever present shallowness remained.

I was especially touched with how Holmes seemed to reach Erik on a deeper level and to soothe some of the hurt done to the man over the years. Erik had only really wanted some compassion, sympathy--some true human feelings apart from repulsion, I feel, even above love itself. Holmes showed him no revulsion; in fact, he showed contempt for the enemies of Erik and I think that part truly pleased me in the story.

Some people complain about Erik having a "happy" ending. Why on earth is that such a dismal thing? It's a simple pastiche--no one is saying that it alters the original book in anyway. It's like an Alternate Universe--a What Might Have Been. To me, it is nice to see Erik united with Miss Lowell. Whether love blossoms or doesn't blossom hardly matters. She is blind; she will never turn in fear from his visage. Sight will not render her any shallow emotions. To her, Erik is the brilliant violinist. The beautiful singer. The enchanting composer. It is nice, and it is also a very literal nod to "Love is Blind". 

I quite enjoyed that little bit, and I also liked at the very end when Henry's wife, Michelle, kissed Holmes in the same fashion that Christine did Erik. At first I was uncertain, but now the more that I think on it I quite liked the parallel. It doesn't have to be sexual at all--and isn't, in my mind. It hearkens back more to Leroux's novel than this Siciliano one. Christine kisses Erik and then leaves and he dies, alone. Michelle makes Holmes promise not to wall himself off, and he does, but the reader can always make their own decisions and I choose to feel that Holmes does precisely that, keeping himself at a distance from society as he always does.

I would definitely recommend this to other people, especially those who might have strong (negative!) feelings about the de Chagny family and Christine, haha! (Although you might find some sympathy for Christine as I did...)!