Rating: 5/5

This. ARG! This play really made me FURIOUS!
*takes a deep breath*

First things first, the plot:
Edward IV is king, we learn from his brother Richard (called Gloucester for his dukedom) how he became king. Richard is described as an ugly hunchback and he vows to behave as is expected of him.

Next, he plots to have his brother George Clarence put away in the Tower of London (there is a prophecy here, actually quite a number of them, but this one says that Edward's heirs will be killed by "G" which Edward thinks is George but which could also be Gloucester, meaning Richard) because he is next in the line of succession after Edward. 
Richard manages to get George imprisoned but here is where Shakespeare once again gets VERY inaccurate. George was imprisoned and eventuelly executed on Edward's orders for high treason (he was apparently not a very nice person, not even to his own wife who died in childbed 2 years before George was executed in a casket of his favourite wine, but he also defected several times and even when not siding with a faction plotted against Edward). Here in the play however it is a clever ploy by Richard that gets George into the Tower and then he sends assassins (who take one looong time before they finally do the deed).
In the meantime, Richard woos Anne, Warwick's other daughter (keeping from her the fact that he killed both her husband and father and just sent assassins to kill her brother-in-law). In reality, the marriage was arranged by Edward and apparently Richard and Anne were happy although the sickness and eventual death of their only child, a son, changed the couple (only natural, I'd say).
The court we see is as awful as ever, the backstabbing merrily continuing. 
Enter Margaret of Anjou, still alive, returning against her banishment (again, historically NOT correct) to curse basically everyone she can spit at. I really felt for her. All the things this woman endured and still she fought, never giving up. She was so STRONG. And Shakespeare must have liked her a great deal too considering how he portrayed her. I said in my review of the previous play that I shuddered when she seemingly had her victory over Richard of York (King Edward IV's father). But this play made her even more spooky! Far, far more spooky (with a slight supernatural element)! That insane laughter from the mountain of corpses (if only I had known how accurate I'd be with my saying "having her final laugh" in my earlier review) ... *shivers*
When King Edward hears of his brother's death in the Tower, his already dwindling health is gone for good and he dies (again, not true, but a nice touch).

Thus, his son, Edward V becomes king but is intercepted on his way to the coronation by Richard. He persuades Edward and his younger brother to stay at the Tower for some time but it is quite clear that all of Richards puns and schemes will not work with these two boys. They are clever (although cruel when making jokes about their uncle) and thus an actual threat to him.
Nevertheless, he starts a campaign that names him King Richard III while the boys are kept in the Tower. All opposition is killed one way or another by Richard until he also orders the murder of the two boys. 
This sparks outrage and a new rebellion.

Richard meanwhile sets his eyes on his niece Elizabeth (the oldest daughter of Edward) and therefore poisons his wife (having already said earlier in the play that he will dispose of her once she has served her purpose). The former queen (Elizabeth's mother) however is not stupid either and plays for time. She also sides with Margaret of Anjou of all people to curse some more.
Richard gets more and more paranoid culminating in a great scene in which he dreams to be haunted by all his victims who tell him to die, making him realize that he has no allies whatsoever.

The rebellion arrives in England, headed by Richmond (who is Henry Tudor). We get to see the Battle of Bosworth, the famous end of Richard, where he is (historically probably inaccurate) killed in hand-to-hand combat by the future king. This is where the famous cry "A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!" comes from. 
Richmond becomes King Henry VII and marries Elizabeth of York to unite the Houses of Lancaster and York, forming the Tudor dynasty (giving him legitimacy).

So much for the plot. Now for what enraged me so much:
Richard must have been a pretty ruthless character but not more ruthless than other men of his time. He was also not known as a scheming hunchback but as a very good general and able fighter, never feeling too high-born to get his own hands dirty but rather fighting alongside his men. Plus, he was loyal to his brother Edward (helping him against various plots from George). There are A LOT of rumours as to what happened to those boys in the Tower and why Richard had himself named king instead of simply Protector of the Realm but it is disputed that the boys were killed on Richard's orders for several reasons. 
The fact that Shakespeare, from the get-go, suddenly portrays him as a hunchback (physically disabled people were associated with the Devil at the time so the true-life Henry VII had paintings repainted to make Richard appear a hunchback) and made him be sly and use poison (a coward's or woman's practice) just didn't sit right with me (just like the way his corpse was paraded around after the actual Battle of Bosworth - they stripped him naked, put a sword up his butt and paraded him around for humiliation).

Yes, this play is written fantastically and it is thrilling and has a superb villain but I feel for the historical figure now that I've read quite a number of non-fiction stuff about that time.

Interesting is the supernatural element Shakespeare implements here. Many people rightfully say this was the beginning of Shakespeare becoming a master and having so many great ideas for characters and plot lines that we get to enjoy in numerous plays later.
I think the reason this play is so underrated (I've heard quite a number of times that it is supposedly not very good) is that of all the histories it is the most inaccurate and not just as propaganda for the Tudor queen under whose reign he lived but simply for sensationalism's sake. 
And I agree: that is bad. 
Nevertheless, for what it is, I have to give this play full 5 stars because all characters portrayed were fantastic in their roles (although not historically accurate) and I was sitting at the edge of my seat so to speak.