Rating: 4/5

4.5/5 
Positively gripping if I must say so myself. Loft's novel, quite literally, surpasses time to tell us all a tale of living humans ~600 years back starting from the very bottom of the socio-economic hierarchy. She spares no detail, and the novel is set hard with historical accuracy. This by no means is inaccessible, however, as you walk through the shoes of a serf determined to escape the confines of his birth. The pack-whacker, wool merchant, smith life is all in there along with the obligatory overall corrupt church and good and bad church persons. Every decision is within human reason, with all the faults of human reason. Every emotion is ladled with character, prejudices, hopes, dreams, and regrets. Do you want a realistic picture of the 14th~15th century English life? Here you go.

PART 1: Martin Reed's Tale 

"When it came it was merely a thought in my head. I had no soul. Serfs had no souls. They were treated like animals and they were animals. The pretense that we were immortal, with Hell to fear and Heaven to hope for, was simply a trick to make us well behaved. (pg 80)"

This first volume in the trilogy starts in the 14th century when Martin (Walter) Reed, a serf runs away with his lover to escape a life of, let's be real here, age-old slavery. I spent most of the book feeling sorry for this poor man, who toiled away without a break to squelch his continuous miseries. I watched him, the hot-headed youngster, taken over by a multitude of passions, being met by cruel unbending realities. And through the courses and years, changed to a wizened hard-set old man. I felt for his efforts, for his hatreds, for his loves and his struggles, his regrets, and his recognition of such. Let's not forget Kate or Magda or Kate's children Stephen and Robin oh dear. On another note, his unrequited love? with Magda is hard to get a clear picture of because of Old Agnes's hatred for Magda. Magda obviously had a love for her craft and was unhappy with the permanence of marriage, but it's hard to say if they loved or not. I guess we will never know.

PART 2 : Old Agnes's Tale

"Because...' she paused, smiled, shook her head. 'There is no because.' To dance I am born, so I dance.' 'To me that sounds daft.' 'Must everything be because? There is a poppy, very red, beside the road for just one day. Because? Is a red poppy. No good for eating. You pluck him, he falls to pieces. Is enough for a poppy just to be a red poppy. And so with me. (pg 124)" 

Oh, Old Agnes's. We see an old woman who's life was destined to ruin just for the fact that she was a young widow that made poor decisions. She retrieves her sense of belonging only back at the Town House, where simultaneously her loves and prejudices bring about life and death. You have Magda, the free-spirited gypsy woman - wholly dedicated to the art of dancing, unwilling to marry, and  dies a sad death. Her childbirth and her end symbolizes the ends of her dreams, but also the start of a new generation.

PART 3: Anne Blanchefleur's Tale

 "Within a few minutes of our meeting I was certain that Mother's slighting remarks about Richard were due to prejudice and, perhaps, a little to jealousy... I thought if only he'd had breeding how Mother would have praised him and said I was lucky. And what is breeding after all? LArgely a matter of money and land and staying in one place long enough to establish a name and a family; or pleasing the King and getting some honour conferred on you. (pg 167)"

This part is very much a character study on Anne Blanchefleur, who comes from a family noble in name but poor in riches. Anne is passionate and loving, but also somewhat of the prideful sort. She makes one mistake that weighs on her throughout her life, linking one causation to another, and has a mentality susceptible to self-loathing. She drowns herself in alcohol rather than to face grief, and projects two natures to her two twins- one of love and one of hatred. She's difficult to like that's for sure, but she's not difficult to sympathize with either. 

PART 4: Maude Reed's Tale

"I lay and wondered what was wrong in saying, 'I forgive you.' Perhaps it was a wrong thing for a child to say to her mother. (pg 219)"

And the fourth part is where my beloved Maude comes into the world, instantly disliked by her mother. Maude's story takes place not in the Town House, but the Beauclaire Castle where she spends a good amount of her childhood. The most important relationship aside from Mr. awkward Henry Rancon, is the relationship with Maude and Melusine, who's name rings with a fairy lady in a French Romance. This relationship starts off with nothing short of a bang - 
  "My name is Maude Reed and my Uncle Sir Godfrey Blanchefleur invited me here and now he is gone and I don't know what to do and I want to go to the privy very badly indeed! (pg 230)"
 I had to chuckle at that one. Maude who doesn't receive any love from her mother instead finds a mother figure in this woman, who is a person of her own, one who loves the romances and the books: 
  "To escape even for an hour from the everlasting chatter and bickering; to get out of that carp pond, delights me.' Another time she said that it should be a law that every woman who was not a busy housewife should learn to read. 'If they could find stories in books they would be less ready to make up tales about those they live amongst. And they would learn that their own small joys and troubles do not fill up the world. (pg 246)"
 Ah if only life were of such simplistic joys. It's not hard to get a heart to warm to a relationship such as this, full of endearment and happiness. Unfortunately for us, Lofts is very much a realist in her novels. Just get a box of tissues ready cuz this world is no forgiving saint.

For those who want to know the difference between the standalone and this one: I read The Maude Reed Tale before this one. What I thought would be a word to word copy &amp; paste was actually not. Each version, I'd say, has its own merits, and I won't ever put one over the other because they resonated with me differently. The Maude Reed Tale is viewed through a more YA lens and wraps the whole story up at the end, whereas this book takes a more mature tone and pedals you through the continuous story of life through the generations. Maude Reed feels as if a fiery girl has come to life, hopping and skipping through those pages, while the Town House can be likened to a crying child, after realizing the darkness of death, has wiped her eyes and seen the world for both its beauties and its cruelties. The Maude Reed may just be a more idealistic version of the "real" one, but each is priceless in its way. 

PART 5: Nicholas Freeman's Tale

I'm not gonna quote this dude. He's an avaricious and ambitious clerk in his young 20s. Who just so happens to fall in love with Maude. Pedo alert. At least he waits until she's an adult (cough cough 14? 16? in medieval terms cough cough) and wants to propose beforehand. Well. My own parents have a 2 decade age difference. Just have that mutual consent (not coerced mind you) and be ADULT adult age. No kids. Nope. Big nope. Don't worry. Maude's safe. He mainly keeps all his obsessive dreams in his head, nothing came in action. Nothing professed. Maude mainly sees him as a mentor ish role. Dude's apparently going to be a celibate cardinal someday, because of the unrequited love that he keeps suppressed. I was breaking out sweat the whole time phew. This part is mostly Maude's coming of age through an outsider's perspective, and a signal to the end of Martin's era. Maude's the heiress and a certain someone comes back woohoo. Now I'm going to race on to the next book.

Extra quotes just cause:

"That was to be a serf. A serf had no right even to human feelings; it was only by throwing away all claim to human feelings a serf could support his way of life. I had, this very morning, acted like a man, not a self; and with what result! (pg 17)"

I realised that marriage meant much more to her than it did to me; a woman who lives out of wedlock with a man is called a whore; there is no such damaging term for the man. (pg 68)"

The wars between the Red Rose of Lancaster and the White Rose of York are blamed for the change but I sometimes think they were bound to end, those great establishments, out of their own unwieldiness and waste. And perhaps because under all that glitter and splendour there was something rotten, something that made human beings of small account and wealth of too much. (pg 253)