Rating: 4/5

"The best way to observe a fish is to become a fish." -Jacques Cousteau

This was pretty fantastic! I'm quite shocked at how much I enjoyed it, considering the fact that it's non-fiction, a genre I typically tend to stay away from. 

To start, Jacques Cousteau is one of my role models for the career path I'd like to take (marine biology). I hadn't known that he aided in creating the first aqualung, which all the more made my respect for him go higher. He can be humorous at times, but yet he's very intelligent on the subjects he talks about and is most definitely educated on the facts that were discussed in this book. Although most of TSW was about dives or events alluding to that matter, it was a treat to read about little personal happenings here and there. My particular favorite was when he took his sons to go underwater for their first time. It was adorable when he mentioned that they both couldn't stop rambling about all the wonders they saw while being plunged under the waves. 

Another aspect I throughly enjoyed was how the chapters were split up perfectly, and specific occurrences weren't jumbled up together. I liked how it was formated. It made my mind process the information easier and more clearly. 

The only things I had trouble with was (I really hate to say this), but I did find it a bit boring at times. Only a little bit though. Not too much. I did keep the mindset that all of the events did happen and that everything was real. That helped greatly. The other thing was I felt that they treated marine life poorly. Every time Dumas brought a harpoon on one of the dives I winced. But besides those two things, it was perfection. 

This book added fuel to my ocean-loving fire. At every detail, whether it was how the light softly bounced on the encrusted rocks or how the fish would observe the divers in a silent curiosity, it would fill me with more love for the sea. This book reminded me of why I want the ocean to become the center of my future career. Mister Jacques Cousteau, I thank you.