Rating: 5/5

A rather lengthy but profound quote from the book. This advice alone may be worth the purchase of this book:

'I would guess that the biggest difficulty you will experience in working through these pages is finding the time to draw. Telling yourself that you will draw for an hour each day, or even an hour each week, rarely works. The commitment of even that much time will probably seem too great. You must remember that your brain's language mode-the left hemisphere, verbal-analytic brain mode-does not want you to draw at all, because it becomes "set aside" while you are drawing. The language
mode is very good at presenting reasons why you should not draw: you need to pay your bills, you need to call your mother, you need to balance your checkbook (sic), or you need to tend to business.
Once you actually get into drawing, however, time passes seamlessly and productively. Therefore, I will recommend what has worked for me: a version of the so-called "two-minute miracle," a technique physical therapists use to enable people to exercise even when they do not want to. They are taught to say to themselves, "I don't have time to take a walk right now, but I will walk for just two minutes." Once they are actually walking of course, they forget their objections and continue walking.
Here is my version of the two-minute miracle. Keep this drawing workbook in a convenient place, along with your pencils and eraser. Sit down for a moment and take the workbook in hand, saying to yourself, "I'm not really going to draw now, but I'll just turn to the page of the next exercise." Then, take the next step: "I'm not really going to draw, but I'll just pick up the pencil and make a few marks to start this drawing." Then, "I'm not really going to draw, but I'll just sketch in some of the main
edges in this drawing..." and so on. You will soon find yourself with a completed drawing-and unaware that time has passed. I realize (sic) that this may sound, well, stupid, but it does work. I have
completed entire projects using this technique-a technique of (let's face it) tricking the language mode of the brain into letting one do creative work. You may find this hard to believe, but the single most difficult problem for art students and even for working artists is getting the work done. One is always fighting the delaying tactics of the verbal system, whose mantra is "Not now." At its most extreme, the result is writer's block or artist's block; a milder version is called procrastination.'