Two years ago in the summer, possibly on my birthday  for 'tis true, I do have a birthday I visited Charles Darwin's home Down House, in the village of Down, Kent, that address is slightly misleading as it is a very short bus journey from Orpington Train station (outer London), past some houses then suddenly a couple of fields with surprised looking horses  actual content of fields may vary , a small village with a couple of pubs and there you are, Down House, featuring the mighty Wormstone, a collection of insect eating plants in greenhouses, some excellent Hollyhocks and marrows in a kitchen garden, and other noble attractions  too numerous to tire your eyes with, but the place is maintained by English Heritage if you are interested.

It was a natural evolution for me to progress from visiting the house to wanting to read more Darwin, although I was sorely tempted by The expression of the emotions in man and animal I eventually selected The descent of man... which because I am a sinner I ordered on line, because I am not entirely evil not from a certain well known one-breasted warrior woman but a different retailer this I swear by the lengthy beard of Darwin.

The book arrived quickly enough and then sat unloved on the shelf for the long years down to the present as I was seduced by the vain surface attractions of many slimmer volumes. But finally read it I did, and it was not what I had expected.

I am still giddy from his powerful assertion that the nature and intelligence of humans is not different in kind from that of animals simply in extent. This book has this fierce statement of equality not only among all human people but also to all other animals; furry, feathered, scaled, and creepy crawlyetc, etc I apologise for my use of technical language so early in the review, discussion of non-human intelligences still seems to me to be modern, that there is this voice crying out that message in 1874 is radical.

Further, for Darwin humans survived and thrived, because they were social and moral, sympathy for each other, he argues allowed our ancient ancestors to live and breed future generations. Kindness is as important as technology (perhaps more so) in his view for human survival. This too I felt is gob-smacking. Indeed I can run with his thought and say that universal sympathy, for humans, animals, plants, the whole planet and all who sail on it will allow our evolutionary survival, while the sad want of it will lead to most of our deaths  however, as will be mentioned below this is a kind of just-so-story, or evolutionary psychology type explanation, nice but not exactly verifiable.

Much of the rest of the book was shockingly at variance with this, Darwin was also an English Victorian gentlemen and this is strongly apparent. For him too all human groups exist in a hierarchy: almost all Europeans at the top, beneath them a ranked order down to the bottom - the Irish who apparently are the lowest form of human life. Here one observes that the Englishman doth protest too much since when the Irish began to campaign for Home Rule the reaction of the English governing classes was not to say 'thank goodness, off you go' but to grasp hold of John Bull's other island all the tighter.

Entirely to my surprise Darwin here follows Lamarckian evolution - I was taught that Darwinian evolution was completely separate from Lamarck's theories and never the twain shall meet, yet here Darwin accepts Lamarck as broadly correct (at least at this stage in his life) which shows how you always have to return to the sources. Equally curious he asserts that belief in a benevolent creator God is also a sign of evolutionary sophistication, this I find strange because Darwin famously is said to have lost all faith in any kind of benevolent God after the death of his daughter Anne in 1851. No doubt in Victorian England it was wise to claim belief in a benevolent God is a sign of sophistication just as he says hairiness is though he also says that idiots are hairier than non-idiots, a relief to the bald everywhere.

A lot of the book is gentlemanly acknowledgement of other Victorian naturalists with gentle descent or ascent to or from their views, and what would now mostly be called evolutionary psychology, or just-so-stories. Darwin, like Marx, and later Freud, is enormously creative and inventive but the evidence and even the means of investigation are well beyond what was available to them when they were working. He gets into some interesting difficulties, being an English Victorian Gentleman who was not John Stuart Mill he has to assert that women are inferior to men, but naturally he can't prove that, he can only argue in a circle: in my society women are inferior to men, this must be because they are inferior to men (because implicitly my society despite copious evidence to the contrary must be perfectly rational), therefore women are inferior to men. Logically from what he says about the evolutionary power of altruism humans ought to marry and reproduce with the most altruistic person they can find, however he suggests that in fact beauty is the determiner and that the British aristocracy is more beautiful than non-aristocratic Britons, while admitting that in practise in Britain people marry on the basis of wealth and social status  or their cousin in Darwin's case - there's a complete muddle between the theory and such evidence that he does have.

The bulk of the evidence is convincing because it is exhausting, an examination of sexual selection in birds, insects, scaly creatures and furry ones, featuring sexual display (like the Peacock's fan tail and so on) and mating behaviours - competition between males or sexual dimorphism.

Overall my sense was of the book like a busy railway station, thoughts coming in and going out again in new direction (eugenics, social-darwinism) mingling on the station concourse, this is the High Victorian thought world, full of faith in human perfectibility and full of fear of being out bred by 'lesser' humans surely a logical impossibility given Darwin's theories which is perhaps the true problem - that the man in the frock coat may not be the pinnacle of evolution. It was rather less interesting to me that The Voyage of the Beagle or The Origin of the Species because it lack the immediacy that those two book have both of which seem super powered by the impression that his travels made upon him. This book is essentially a book length digression on a paragraph in Origin detailing how humans fit into the evolutionary scheme that he outlines there. Still he points forward to some other books to read - Humboldt's Personal Narrative of a Journey to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent might be particularly interesting. Then again the ghost of Malthus hangs over Darwin's work, and indeed much of our thinking in general either in acceptance or vehement denial.