Rating: 5/5

I should likely pretence this review by saying that this is the first book of Austen's that I have read and it certainly will not be the last. Perhaps it is odd that I began with her juvenile works however, I am new to the world of classics and wanted something that would be rather simple. However, it is important to note that whilst all of the stories in this edition of 'Love and Friendship' had simple stories, the complexity of meaning was undeniable and her talent of course shone through.
(I must note some mistakes within this edition of 'Love and Friendship'; this has nothing to do with Austen's work. As I have borrowed this from a library, someone who borrowed it before myself corrected a date that I would have otherwise have believe to be true as I was not then well versed on the dates of Austen's life. In the foreword it said 'Pride and Prejudice' was written in 1822 when, of course, Austen had passed; this novel was in actuality written in 1812. There was also another mistake in the biographical note- it said that Austen and her mother settled in Chawton in 1819 when, again, she had passed by this time, and she actually moved the Chawton in 1809. These mistakes were rather obvious and shows a lack of quality that is unfitting for a book that contains Austen's work.)
LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP review:
Austen wrote this short story at fourteen years old which truly struck me. As I said before, the story was not advanced yet the quality of the writing displays Austen's clear talent and passion for writing. I loved it. I read it as a satirical and unserious text, an insight into young Austen's mind viewing the world. Clearly, it was unrealistic that anywhere that Laura went, she would see people she knew as no coincidence in reality would ever bring everyone that she knew to Scotland when the story had begun in Wales. I liked the dialogue between Sophia and Laura that Laura recounted in her letters; I found the speech when they were beside the river particularly humorous. Philander and Gustavus' roles paid no role to the plot, not really, but their addition was amusing and their story about joining a theatre company made me laugh. 
There was a line near the end that really struck me as Austen's unparalleled perception: 'could not help observing that the unsympathetic baronet offered it more on account of my being the widow of Edward than in being the refined and amiable Laura'. This is said when she speaks about Sir Edward, her late husband's father, giving her an annual allowance. In this mere sentence, Austen explores the insincerities of society and the unjustness of a system that favours titles over person. She also displays a self-assuredness through her character Laura who speaks highly of herself, a quality that was discouraged in women of Austen's time. 
An interpretation I got also was perhaps the characters called Edward (there were two) were an exploration of young Austen into how she viewed her brother. This is of course only an inference but, upon learning that her elder brother was called Edward and there were two characters in 'Love and Friendship' by the name- one pleasant and the otehr not so much-, I thought that it could be Austen exploring her conflicting feelings about her sibling. One moment he is annoying, controlling and detestable but the next he is caring and loveable and sibling relationships are very intense at the age Austen was writing at so perhaps this could have influenced her. 
THE THREE SISTERS review:
This short story arranged in letters was also written by Austen in her teens however slightly later than when she wrote 'Love and Friendship'. I absolutely adored it! The dynamics between the characters, especially the sisters, were so fun to read and rather surprising for such an era. The way that Mary speaks so openly about detesting Mr Watts and how she argues with him before the wedding is such an interesting thing to read and is rather unlike anything I have seen; it was satirical and funny, finding a funny side to the fate of a woman stepping into a loveless marriage. 
What I realised after having read 'The Three Sisters' is that I loved that there wasn't truly a sense of entrapment for the girls. Though the mother seemed rather set on one of her daughters marrying Mr Watts she did not appear forceful and Mary's reasonings for putting herself into the postion of her union were light-hearted and petty. I enjoyed the power that Austen gave the women in this short story; they were strong and funny and fond of each other, everything that many sisters were and are. 
More undeniably, Austen investigates sibling relations, more specifically between sisters. We see Sophia and Georgiana 'team up' in a way to get their sister to marry Mr Watts so they do not have to. This sounds malicious but their reasonings truly do not sound like they are; they truly believe that their sister will be happy to live her life with money in a marriage based on pride. And they do care for her as Sophia especially feels guilt over their deceit. Georgiana also picks up on when Mr Brudenell is only questioning Mary to laugh at her and that made me feel quite sad for Mary and also interesting to see how men have continued to use women as sources of amusement unbeknownst to the women to this day just as Austen wrote Mr Brudenell to in this text. 
I am sad that the letters end rather abruptly! I would have loved to have had the wedding narrated but alas I cannot. It would have been rather amusing to see a marriage play out between a wife who so openly detested her husband before they were even married. 
A COLLECTION OF LETTERS review:
Austen wrote this series of letters at age seventeen and I see the same level of maturity in these letters as was in the writing is 'The Three Sisters'. They had themes of youth, motherhood, love, embarrassment, loss and class. Each one of the five were of women to women and that shows the common and full theme of friendship. Female friendship. Austen portrayed that fluently throughout these works which was wholly refreshing. 
The first letter gave an interesting perspective from a mother sending her children into society, the second was a letter penned from the perspective of a girl feeling confused by her feelings about a man who she had unbeknowst hoarded an affection towards who had just got engaged and exchanging her troubles with Miss Jane, the third is an account of a girl, Maria, being mistreated by an older woman of a larger fortune and the fifth was a girl wallowing is hopeless love and her story of how she fell into such a feeling. 
One of the most noteable moment for me was in the second letter where the narrator says to Miss Jane- after Miss Jane questions if the story of her life was 'pathetic'- 'for when one is unhappy nothing is so delightful to one's sensations as to hear of equal misery.'. I suppose that is a depressing truth; it does soothe one when one is in distress to be informed of another person experiencing problems of the same nature. Humans' dislike to be individual especially when it comes to misfortune and another person experiencing ill fate that parallels your own makes you feel less alone. This quote encouraged much thought.