Rating: 4/5

“I make him sound like a snob. He was not. He felt that given the advantages, (family background, security, and good education), a certain obligation existed to follow a proper pattern, as solid in his mind (the right jobs, clubs, marriages, and so forth) as if he were a Brahmin, a “top-drawer” Hindu.” P.33

“Baseball is the perfect game for the mystic mind. Cricket is unsatisfactory because it has time structures. The clock is involved. Play is called. The players stop for tea. No! No! No!” Burns sounded quite petulant. “On the other hand, baseball is so open to infinity. No clocks. No one pressing the buttons on stopwatches. Foul lines stretch to infinity. In theory, the game of baseball can go on indefinitely.” P.51

“She was tall, with legs that she folded under her on sofas, endlessly restless and shifting about, as if life itself was to be spent settling into a comfortable position.... Returning, she never seemed to slide into a sofa, but rather to fling herself upon it, and then, flop in an utter relaxation, as if the effort to soar in among the pillows has spent her completely. I tend to exaggerate, but in truth, she was exhausting to have around. In comparison, Sidd and I moved through the bungalow, as if undersea – she darted across our path like a spirited, tropical fish.” P.60

“It struck me how often the ball is inspected it during a game, as if anyone who touches it has to make sure the ball has not changed its properties. If the ball disappears over the fence, another, like a youngster’s dream pinball game, emerges from a black sack at the umpire’s side. He looks at it and give it to the catcher, who rubs it briefly, and after a glance, fires it out to the pitcher; he looks at the ball, and rubs it with both hands, his glove dangling from its wrist strap, and then, as he stares down at the catcher for signal, his fingers maneuver over its surface, feeling for the comfort of some response – yes, this time it will do exactly as he wishes!” P.214 

“Perfection meant, trying to match the gods, and it was important not to do that. Arrogance. 
 My father began tap in a bowl of his pipe into the palm of his hand, and unconscious and somewhat ping consequential habit since he had smoked thing in years... “He once said that there were a great number of ways to reach tharpa, or supreme liberation, I said. Sometimes one achieves tharpa by not reaching the goal. Sometimes there are more important goals than the one that is visible. Not to give oneself the twenty-seventh K is a possibility.” P.268