Rating: 5/5

Idiot Proof: Surely the Best Book on Writing Out There, March 15, 2011 

I finished reading Stephen King's On Writing and thought there could definitely be a better book about writing available for the struggling youngster trying to master the craft. King's own was an autobiography and a frank dismissal of anything except his own and other horror as "bull." He also did a very dangerous thing when he dismissed other writing books as trash. But King’s book was more about his struggle with alcoholism—a vice which claims the solitary writer more often than even self doubt it seems. 

Thomas F. Monteleone's book is most certainly not trash and is quite insightful into everything about writing: POV, pacing, grammar, presentation, characters, plot, setting, dialogue, reading to write, nonfiction, and research. All subjects covered have a chapter of their own, and he goes into some detail about each.

Personally now, I want to cover a few of the things I liked and didn’t like about the book. 
First off, I should say that Tom Monteleone was a relatively unknown writer to me. I had heard of his 1993 Bram Stoker award winner Blood of the Lamb, but had never read it and I probably won’t in the future. However, Tom has talent and he does a good job telling others how to nurture their own. But he was never a New York Times bestselling author; he just doesn’t seem to me to get there. His books are weird and violent and his subject matter is a little reprehensible (I mean, come on! Lyrica: A Novel of Horror and Desire is erotica about a female vampire for goodness sake!) I stopped with vampires after Anne Rice, Bram Stoker and Stephen King. And by the way, Tom is not really on the same level with those other three. 

But Writing a Novel is truly a great book regardless of who wrote it. I have read the 2nd edition, and you can put me down for the 3rd. I got the 1st, bought it right when it came out. The second edition (in case you want it; I did) has all new info on genre fiction and what the categories require. Also included is an updated look at “The List” including the top picks for readers for 2009. And a new chapter on e-publishing (publishing on the internet not involving putting pen marks on printed paper) puts things into perspective.

A note on the current changes for all you older writers trapped in the 1980s: get over it. E-publishing is here to stay. As Tom says, we stodgier people who like things old fashioned can either learn to adapt or miss out on a plethora of opportunities and resources for our fiction. 

Also, the book includes an expansive glossary and interviews with writers (albeit horror ones like Peter Straub and Richard Matheson). Monteleone claims his book is the best and after having read a dozen books on the subject, I think he's right. The only overarching problem is that he is a horror writer, and as such maintains a form bias in that direction. 

But, hey, good news! Tom also broke in writing science fiction (SF) which is what I enjoy reading … and sometimes trying to write! His book is accessible and entertaining and it is a pleasure to revisit as a kind of “novelist’s bible” book to give you that extra nudge you may need to get writing and produce something of merit. Kids, if you want to learn the game of writing pick up this book and get going. Also, pick up The Complete Idiot's Guide to Getting Published, 4th edition (includes a CD of templates). Monteleone tells you how to finish a rough draft, but the latter tells you how to wade the market. Get going and drink deeply the sweet wine of creativity. Write away and good fortune be your guide! 

Enjoy!

I don't read Stephen King anymore, but his words apply here too: the well of creativity is always open. "The water is free. So drink. Drink and be filled up."