Rating: 5/5

In pursuit of vengeance…

  “I am going to kill a man. I don’t know his name. I don’t know where he lives. I have no idea what he looks like. But I am going to find him and kill him . . .”

So begins the book, the first part of which takes the format of a diary kept by the aspiring murderer, Frank Cairnes, or, as he is better known to the public who read his murder mystery novels, Felix Lane. Lane is not mad – well, not in the traditional sense anyway. A few months earlier his little son was hit by a car and killed, and the driver sped away. The police have not been able to trace the driver, so Lane has decided that he’ll find him himself and mete out his own justice. Since he has always kept his real identity hidden from his reading public and even from his friends, he decides to use the Lane pseudonym on his hunt, feeling he can then revert back to his own persona once the deed is done, and effectively disappear. This will also stop the driver from recognising his name as the same as that of the child he killed. And so he begins travelling around, quite aimlessly at first, looking for something to give him a clue to the killer’s identity…

This starts out well. The set-up is intriguing and the writing is excellent. Like his character, Nicholas Blake also has another persona – in real life, he was Cecil Day-Lewis, Anglo-Irish poet and Poet Laureate from 1968 until his death in 1972, so the superior quality of the writing is not too surprising! Lane’s bitterness and desire for revenge is understandable, although he’s not a particularly likeable character. There’s a kind of coldness about him and, as the story progresses, a kind of carelessness in the way he treats other people as he pursues his obsession. He soon gets on the track of the man he believes was driving the car, by a coincidence which stays just about within the limits of credibility. And the man in question is perfect victim material – a horrible man, cruel to his wife and to his own son; a man whom not many would miss. Lane already has a good idea for how he’s going to carry out the murder.

Then it stalls. Lane becomes a bit like Hamlet – dithering personified. It’s not that he has any moral qualms or second thoughts about the rightness of his actions – it’s more a kind of mental paralysis when it comes to actually doing the deed. It becomes repetitive, the tension falls away, and by a third of the way through the book I was really beginning to wonder if I could struggle through another two-thirds of the same. 

What I hadn’t realised, as a newcomer to Blake’s work, is that the book is part of his regular detective series, starring Nigel Strangeways as amateur ‘tec along with his wife Georgia. The diary in fact is a preamble, albeit a rather too lengthy one. 

NB I feel the next part is a little bit spoilery but it is actually included in the book’s blurb and it’s hard to talk about the rest of the book without mentioning it. If you prefer, though, skip over the next short para, and you’ll be back in spoiler-free territory…

Part two starts with Lane asking for Nigel’s help. The man he was planning to murder has in fact been murdered, but Lane declares he didn’t do it! The police have hold of his diary though, showing his intentions, and so they obviously feel they need look no further for their criminal. Nigel and Georgia talk to Lane, decide they believe him and agree to help. The only way to get Lane off the hook is to find the real murderer…

From this point on, the story becomes much more like a traditional mystery in format. Nigel is a bit insufferable as these upper-class amateur ‘tecs often are, but Georgia is fun and quite able to bring Nigel back to earth when required with a bit of sly wit. The murdered man had collected a fair number of people who would have been quite happy to see him bumped off for one reason or another, so there’s plenty for Nigel to get his teeth into. There are aspects of it which are quite dark, especially the murdered man’s treatment of his son, and I found it quite suspenseful – there were one or two characters that I felt may well be guilty but really hoped weren’t, or that if they were, some way would be found to avert justice. I do like when a victim is so deserving of being murdered!

In the end, I wasn’t totally surprised by the solution but I found it satisfying nevertheless. The various psychological aspects – bullying, guilt, the desire for revenge, etc. – are all handled well and give the book a depth and darkness that is nicely off-set by the enjoyable pairing of Nigel and Georgia. I’m so glad I didn’t abandon it when it hit the doldrums briefly at that third of the way through stage, and I’m looking forward to reading more in the series soon.

www.fictionfanblog.wordpress.com