Rating: 4/5

Dorothy (from Kansas wherever that is) lives with her Aunt Em and Uncle Henry on the flat American prairie, the harsh Sun beating down from the gray sky making everything turn gray ... the gray grass, house, clothes and especially the people, animals are probably gray too might seem the least likely place that she visits that is real. No trees, brooks beautiful birds singing or anything colorful around the poor farm. But our adventures begin when a tornado lifts unlucky Dorothy , her dog Toto and only friend, while inside their small one room house up into the swirling, whistling ominous black sky, scared Aunt Em in the cellar ( a dark hole in the ground under the floor) hiding and Uncle Henry outside taking care of the frightened farm animals. The little girl is all alone with her dog as the strong winds of the storm takes her higher and higher always going above and further from Dorothy's loved ones, which is the blood relative is strangely never stated . After countless hours pass she falls asleep on her bed. Awakening by a loud noise the house crashing down on the ground the next day terrifying Dorothy ... opening slowly the door she is stunned, all is beautiful... brilliant colors green grass a lovely stream gorgeous flowers, trees with delicious fruit hanging on their branches birds sweetly singing everywhere her eyes can see, blue skies. But weird quite small people are timidly coming towards Dorothy (they think she is a horrible , powerful witch) the juvenile feels uneasy looking fully grown , like the Munchkins yet still a little girl's size ...they welcome her to this wonderland. And thanking the girl for their freedom by killing the wicked Witch of the East whose body lies underneath the house. The pretty Witch of the North and is good also, unheard of (news spreads quickly in the Land of Oz) gives Dorothy the magical silver shoes of the dead sorceress. The farm girl wants to get back home to Kansas, asks directions nobody knows it but all tell Dorothy to follow the yellow brick road to the Emerald City where the Great and Powerful Wizard of Oz, presumably lives and rules. Trouble is people never see the terrible wizard but he is the only one who can help Dorothy get back . On the long journey the young girl and Toto meet the brainless failure the Scarecrow, stuck on a pole the Tin Woodman rusting outside in a forest ( tin doesn't rust), the Cowardly Lion attacking the group on the road and afterwards crying, all join Dorothy on her impossible quest for a brain a heart and courage ( the joke of this story is, that every traveler already has them, even Dorothy's wish can be easily achieved). Wide ditches have to be jumped wild animals fought rivers crossed, ugly flying monkeys, bees, poisonous blue, red, yellow, white and purple flowers thick gloomy forests, strange people some unfriendly and not made of flesh ( the evil dreadful Witch of the West in her impenetrable, dismal castle but that is later), must be overcome to reach the fabulous Emerald City. They have a secret weapon Toto is not afraid of anything ... he can look behind the curtain.