Rating: 4/5

I usually stay away from English Renaissance drama altogether, because the language alone is killing me (don't laugh, how do you fare at 400+ year old versions of your fourth language?). Yesterday, I came across the Schaubühne stage production of Richard III. though, directed by Thomas Ostermeier and starring Lars Eidinger - holy sh**!!! This was so insanely fascinating and powerful (proof: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qEt4z...) that I actually picked up the original English text, and you have to give it to good old Billy that he invented a brilliant villain - and this is an invention, because the play is not historically accurate - and had a couple of smart things to say about the nature of power. 

Richard, a physically disabled Duke, grew up knowing nothing but war, and sure acts as if he read his Machiavelli and Nietzsche (the latter is impossible, of course). Fighting the odds of social darwinism (also not yet a thing back then - not too shabby, Billy!), he plots and kills his way to the top, always smartly using the ambition of others to serve his own goals. There are no inherently good characters in this play, there is no hero who steps up for moral virtues when the physically handicapped Richard sublimates his feelings of inferiority into a ruthless quest for power for power's sake. The women generally look pretty bad here, especially Anne who falls for the guy who killed her husband and father - this scene is particularly enigmatic, and in Ostermeier's stage version, it becomes particularly haunting and impressive.

So is Richard III. the devil? Such banality would of course be beneath Shakespeare, he does not allow his audience to distance themselves that easily from human evil:

"And thus I clothe my naked villany 
With odd old ends, stol’n forth of Holy Writ, 
 And seem a saint when most I play the devil."

He plays the devil, he is a plotter among plotters, a schemer among schemers, an actor in a play called "The King's Court" -he succeeds not because of his high character or noble aim, but because he's better at this power game than the others. This is a truly fascinating play.