Rating: 5/5

Updated review: 5/30/21. 

It was very daring of Patricia Highsmith to write a realistic love story between 2 women in the 1950s. It just wasn't done, at least not in public in real life nor in a novel. I appreciated the slow story and the fabulous ending all the more once I finished the novel and thought about it and the meaning of the original title, .A Price of Salt.. The title was the key to the meaning of the story for me. 

I have to say I was on edge the whole time I was reading this novel, not because there was any real tension written into the novel, or was there? The gun. Now that was a tease, Ms. Highsmith. I was constantly on the lookout for something awful to happen; a suicidal gesture, a homicide...something. But Highsmith wasn't up to anything like that in this novel. She wrote Therese and Carol with great dignity and maturity in a very difficult situation. 

So what does the title mean? 

.Joan Schenkar in her book .The Talented Miss Highsmith: The Secret Life and Serious Art of Patricia Highsmith. contends that the title, The Price of Salt. may have come from the book of Matthew in the New Testament: "if the salt should lose its savour, wherewith shall it be salted?"

Highsmith uses salt in the novel to represent this savor of life, i.e. the pleasure and goodness. 
After Carol leaves her, Therese wonders, "How would the world come back to life? How would its salt come back?". Later, when Dannie shows up, she says he brings "a little salt” to her life.

But where is the "price" for this salt? 

There is another biblical reference to salt which also applies to the title. Some people believe Highsmith had in mind the story of Lot’s wife when she titled her book The Price of Salt . Lot’s wife was told to only look forward and not to look back to her former life. She looked back and the price paid by her for doing so was the loss of her life. She turned into a pillar of salt. There are dozens of meanings to the story of Lot's Wife. For this book and its title the story strongly suggests the importance of moving forward in life and not looking back at what you have left behind. 

At the end of the The Price of Salt both Therese and Carol know that they need to move forward with their lives whether they are together or not. Towards the end of the book, when she knows she will see Carol, Therese tells herself over and over again that she is a “new person” and many people confirm this by telling her that she looks like an adult. She has a new "look;" a new haircut and a new, more mature wardrobe and she has a new job. This new Therese will not go back to the old Carol. She refused to speak to her or see her after the breakup - she knew she had to move on with her life and she does just that. She can only go back to a “new” Carol unencumbered by past relationships.

 Carole also feels the need to move forward. She cannot return to her former life, pre-Therese, and a marriage that forced her to deny her true desires. This former life includes her daughter. Carol gives up the custody of her daughter rather than let herself go back to her old life where she feels “dead.” At the moment of her decision she asks, “What use am I to her (her daughter) if I’m living against my own grain?” To go with her own grain, to live by her own terms and savor life she pays a huge price.