Rating: 3/5

This is a hard book to review. Conceptually, it's super cool, albeit very strange. Like strange, strange. In execution, this book is kind of confusing and has an experimental feel to it. Brussolo has invented a world where mediums exist, and no, not the kind of medium that is psychic. These mediums have the ability to go into a deep trance-like dream for days, during which weird, smoky stuff floats out of their mouths and congeals into an ectoplasm thing upon waking. Let that sink in for a minute. 

These ectoplasm things (sculptures? creatures? I'm not really sure what they are) have important value to society. A museum of these things exist where people can go and be surrounded by them. The ectoplasm things can give off certain vibes--a powerful one, for instance, can prevent warfare if placed in the right location. 

The main character in this story is one of these mediums. He is contracted by a museum to go into these dream-trances and produce them with the supervision of a psychiatrist to make sure he does not experience adverse health effects while in these trances. He has been having difficulty producing powerful ectoplasmic creations that have a lot of positive impact, and he is afraid he will lose his contract, essentially. It's also worth noting that the more intense his dream-trances are, the more powerful and successful his ectoplasmic creations are. Which in theory means that if he's in danger of losing his contract with the art museum that displays them, he needs to have some intense fucking dreams so he can bring back a really effective, profit-making ectoplasmic creation. 

During these dream-trances, he imagines he is going on deep sea diving art heists. Yes, you heard me correctly. He imagines he is going 60,000 feet underwater with his trusty imagined Sexy Sidekick to raid...underwater jewelry stores? Art museums? I'm not even sure why these things are underwater or whatever, but this is his dream, so I'll just take it at face value. The art he brings back from these heists converts into ectoplasm when he is done with his dream-trance. He has also fallen madly in love with his Sexy Sidekick and wants to figure out a way to be with her. If you and I think alike, you're probably thinking, huh? How is this possible? He has imagined her, probably off of some book he's read, so he cannot do this. I'm just relaying the facts; I don't get it either. Basically, this book is about him trying to figure out a way to keep Sexy Sidekick despite the fact that she does not actually exist, as well as to bring back a kickass ectoplasm creation for the museum to display so he does not lose his contract. 

The concept of this book, while really complicated and layered, is very cool. I like the general idea of where Brussolo is going, though the story could have been much less layered as well as more clearly explained. Like seriously. I don't know how Brussolo comes up with his inventive ideas, but I have a feeling he could make a killing if he sold what he uses. Maybe more than from his books, and he is very, very popular in France.

The complicated nature of this storyline felt a bit pointless, too. I don't think there was much reason behind this layered approach when it felt like Brussolo's main focus was more on the Sexual Awakening of our main, casually-misogynistic dude via his trusty Sexy Dream-Trance Sidekick. Dude is desperate and doesn't make any effort to hide this fact. I couldn't figure out where the art heist plot ended and the sexually-driven must-get-girl plot began. The two were very deeply intertwined but not in a way that was particularly clear. 

All told, I had higher hopes for this book than were presented, but I'd still recommend it. The writing style is fascinating and the translation excellent. If you're down for a weird read, as I usually am, you'll be transfixed by the paranormal concepts Brussolo presents here.