Rating: 4/5

I actually really liked this one, more than I expected. This is my second from Italo Calvino, and although this is a far difference from ".... If on a Winter's Night a Traveler", it was almost as great, in different ways. Nice to find an author than can write well in multiple genres/styles. 

"Morcovaldo" ["The Seasons in the City"] is a collection of vignettes, connected but separated by seasons and time. 

"Marcovaldo is an unskilled worker in a drab industrial city in northern Italy. He is an irrepressible dreamer and an inveterate schemer. Much to the puzzlement of his wife, his children, his boss, and his neighbors, he chases his dreams, but the results are never the expected ones." 

I especially liked that Morcovaldo was a realist, even a pessimist, as opposed to the typical Panglossian. Like me, he does not have the easiest life; after years enduring this, he has understandably become bitter at times, somewhat cynical. The important thing, however, is that every so often he has a unique ability to notice the small things in life; to zoom in on a small beauty in his surroundings and allow it to bring him as well as those around him great happiness, even if it is only temporary- until work the next day. Like me, he may not be what is defined as 'happy" overall, but definitely can be "distracted" to have frequent, significant periods of temporary happiness. Which is sometimes all we can do. 

My favorite vignettes were: 

Park Bench Vacation 
[He sleeps on one on a summer night when he tried of the crowdedness of his own place with his wife and children. Alas, various mishaps prevent him from getting any sleep at all. Had a few laughs. Almost Charlie Chaplin style.] 

The Lunch Box 
[Wonderful, eloquent, tangible, descriptive personification with his lunch box/bento box. Includes more than visual; explores the nostalgia, as well as the meaning behind it (his wife makes it with love every morning for him.)] 

The Wrong Stop 
[Mesmerizing descriptions of seeing the city as if it came from a dream; Morcovaldo has recently seen a film delivering the beautiful scenery in Calcutta. Amidst the thick fog in his own country, he begins to see, in the nothingness, the beauty- all in his mind's eye. What do you know, at the end of his trip, he accidentally boards a plane leaving for Calcutta.] 

Morcovaldo at the Supermarket 
[Along with his family, they discover that it is inescapable to follow the movements exhibited by the richer, more successful class shoppers, as they are drawn to various products, ever more than they intended. Ask desire Marcovaldo's extreme lack of funds. As they float in the blue called denial, it is not until the supermarket closes that they magically find their way out, forced to pull themselves away from the items in the cart, resisting like magnets.]