Rating: 3/5

🌟🌟🌟 to Storm of the Century by Stephen King

Having just finished the brilliant Bag of Bones I wanted to start on the next book on my reread of King right away. That book it turns out is this, a screenplay for Storm of the Century, a three part mini series that aired in the 90s. There is actually connective tissue between both books as Bag of Bones with a storm that is also referred to as the Storm of the Century. 

Anyway, the screenplay focuses on Little Tall Island and the community there. It’s been the setting for a few short stories and a novel called Dolores Claiborne, however King has never really had any supernatural activity happened there, at least not the evil kind. The story focuses on the island community that becoming cut off from the world by a brutal storm as a mysterious visitor by the name of Andre Linoge arrives in town and murders a local. This leads part-time Constable, and family man, Mike Anderson dealing with holding Andre in the towns tiny jail cell while dealing with the progressively worsening storm and increasingly panicked towns people. The make matters worse there seems to be something more to Andre that meets the eye. 

If it sounds familiar, it’s because Storm of the Century echoes Needful Things in its beginning sections. Both are stories about town’s under siege. Andre comes across as a watered down version of Leland Gaunt, the villain of that book. Storm has the same big cast with a morally right individual in the form of Anderson at its centre. Reading the screenplay was difficult at times to remember who everyone was and to also invest in them as by its format alone it lacks the depth of a novel, which is why it loses some stars for me. It does have some good scares, one scene in particular where a group of characters are being stole away one by one in the middle of a snow storm. It also has one of the bleakest endings King’s ever written that in the build up for the reader is left screaming at the page saying ‘this can’t be happening!’ You have to give King applause for going there, he starts off this story in familiar territory and takes it somewhere uncharted for him in these big ensemble pieces. King is known for having hopeful endings so ending this story in this way is an interesting choice for him. 

Original Review 2019

Storm of the Century to me read like a more thought out version of Under the Dome. The story focuses on a small community that becomes cut off from the world by a brutal storm while a mysterious visitor arrives in the community and begins murdering the locals by sinister means. There is no environmental message here like Under The Dome but this causes Storm of the Century to excel. There is no feeling of being preached to plus it has a distinct villain for readers to hate and fear whereas the later published story gave us what felt like a tact on explanation and villains behind the dome. Everything else is the same, a huge cast of characters, a town that is run by a dirt bag politician and even a reference to a member of communities secret drug business. After reading this, which was published years before Under the Dome, it feels like King decided to recover the ground he already covered in this story but with the extra environment message in. Perhaps, the idea behind was that seeing as Storm of the Century is a screenplay not a novel that he could expand the story he told here. Having read both I feel he got it right the first time with this story. Despite, it being a screenplay my reading experience was unaffected by this, in fact the story itself felt more like the type of stories King published in the 70s and 80s, which too many is considered his best period. The only criticism I found with this format is it is difficult to remember who everyone is, especially the supporting characters. Though, it doesn’t trip you up to bad as they are all fodder for the villain anyway. Plus, the screenplay has one of the bleakest endings King’s ever written that in the build up for the reader is left screaming at the page saying ‘this can’t be happening!’