Rating: 4/5

This book recounts the five-day history of a major American scientific crisis.

As in most crises, the events surrounding the Andromeda Strain were a compound of foresight and foolishness, innocence and ignorance. Nearly everyone involved had moments of great brilliance, and moments of unaccountable stupidity. It is therefore impossible to write about the events without offending some of the participants.
I decided to reread The Andromeda Strain to get ready for the new sequel,  The Andromeda Evolution, by Daniel H. Wilson. Published in 1969, the story is pretty simple: there’s a government project to send satellites into near earth orbit, collect organisms for study, and return the satellites to earth. But after one of the satellites crashes two days early, almost all of the residents of a nearby town are found dead. The government activates Project Wildfire, placing a small group of scientists in a race against time to identify the cause, and find a way to stop it, before it’s too late.

I remember really enjoying this book when I read it 30 years ago. It feels wonderfully realistic, focused in granular detail on the processes of setting up Project Wildfire, the facility, the scientific team. And it is effective with a common theme in Crichton’s books: mistakes made by people doing their best are a vital part of the story.

While the book was ahead of its time in some ways, I have to admit it was not as good as I remember. There’s not much characterization, and pretty much every character is a white dude. While a defense to that could be the book was written in 1969, one of the doctors was changed to a woman for the 1971 movie. Moreover, the after-action report style is realistic, but it removes a certain amount of drama from the story. Crichton would strike a much better scientific explanation/dramatic storytelling balance in many of his later books, especially what I consider to be his masterpiece:  Jurassic Park. And the ending is ... abrupt, to say the least.

Hopefully the sequel will take the best parts of this story and update it. I’d still recommend this book, but probably only if you like Crichton and have just never read it.