Rating: 1/5

Ever been to one of those writing circles that desperately wanted to imitate the Inklings? I've been invited to a few different ones over the years, and they almost always boil down to a group of neckbeards and legbeards sharing their half-baked attempts at SFF grandeur. Despite every writer present being an adult, the shared works are overwhelmingly juvenile and maladroit, leaving me with douche chills that last for years. 

Slan is like something from an amateur SFF writers' Friday night get-together: a tale about a Gary Stu set in a ham-fisted extended metaphor about Jewish people and the horrors of anti-Semitism. Essentially, Jommy Cross is the best Slan/X-Man/Jewish guy ever, and he's going to show that the true Slans/Jews are amazing to the unenlightened sorta-Slans and unevolved regular humans. (I'm guessing "humans" is code for Gentiles in this scenario.) There's even a weird nod to blood libel. But then it turns out that the true Slans were all along in charge of the anti-Slan global government, but this is somehow a good thing, because reasons. Honestly, with the way the whole plot unfurled, it's not surprising Slan started out as a serial: van Vogt gives the impression he was just winging it with each episode. That's probably why the plot twist at the end accidentally undermines his entire messaging of anti-Semitism = bad---van Vogt wasn't thinking that hard about it when he penned that the Slans had indeed infiltrated the elites and were secretly ruling everything. 

I feel mean giving Slan a 1/5---it's probably more accurately rated a 1.5/5, since it wasn't a total train wreck, but whatev. It had enough doodoocaca tidbits to justify the 1/5, such as when our intrepid hero has a woman about 15 years his senior thirstily beg to be part of his future harem. 

EDIT: I've slept on it, and the more I think about it, the dumber Slan becomes. 

How are you supposed to sympathize with the Slans when van Vogt won't shut up about how they're so perfect? He has no understanding of how to craft likeability. Droning on and on about how I gotta be wowed by a bunch of people hiding weird doodads on their heads just makes me disinterested at best. 

Why should I like Jommy when he hypnotizes an entire town? Isn't that weird and creepy and unethical? Van Vogt's answer: don't think about it, just go with it. -The secret Slan organization caused all these weird social problems years ago---doesn't that just prove some of the in-universe conspiracy theories correct? -Don't worry about it. -Wait, so Slans are kinda inbred? -Shhhhhh....

If van Vogt's writing wasn't so sophomoric, I'd almost say he was shooting for a nuanced theme on the nature of truth kernels in (at least some) conspiracy theories, but there's no way he pre-meditated any of his bafflingly ClAsSiC novel.