Rating: 4/5

You know this smart and swiftly paced Victorian mystery is written for young adults, right? You know that doesn't mean dumbed down or raw, but rather that it should not be cluttered up with obtrusive literariness or head-scratching ephemera. You say that Pullman struggles with figurative language and that he doesn't find his own voice and I have to say... what exactly do you mean by 'figurative language' and how is he struggling with it? I saw no such struggle and I read a very specific voice. Pullman pulls off a YA adventure without dumbing it down and his voice is clearly an intelligent and political and subtle one. perhaps too subtle? he up-ends various conventions of the genre: the heroine doesn't solve the mystery herself (it happens off-stage! highly unusual and refreshing and without melodrama); her skills are in accounting rather than detection; she lives in the Victorian era and all that implies regarding the status of women - yet she doesn't sigh or moon about wistfully over love, she doesn't stress about manners, she is forthright and intelligent and bold without becoming a unrealistic wish fulfillment version of a Victorian heroine. she fits perfectly within her time and still manages to stand out in her own particular way.

You say the characters are flat and uninteresting; I say we must have read different books! the characters, both heroes &amp; villains, practically jumped off of the page for me, each one a tasty and compelling creation. there was a not-so-underlying theme of the importance of equality and one of the most clever ways that Pullman gets his point across is by bringing together an entirely disparate crew of well-realized supporting characters and making them all perform and interact as equals. that was a lovely thing to behold and it was made so heartwarming - yet without sickly sweet sentiment. the book makes equality feel like the most natural thing in the world. You thought the central villain was dull! that vicious old lady is one of the more memorable villains I've experienced in young adult fiction. mad, bad, and dangerous to know; cruel and cunning and given a particularly surprising and compelling backstory. You say the heroine isn't much of a role model; I must beg to differ! sure she does a questionable thing or two - does she need to be perfect? don't challenging times mean a person has to do a challenging thing or two, something they very well may regret? is it the opium that bothered you? well it bothered me too - just as it clearly was intended. England's sickening role in the opium trade with China bothers me and it certainly bothers the author; thus no punches are pulled. I applaud that. did you not understand that you were actually picking up a book by Phillip Pullman and not by the Lollipop Guild?