Rating: 4/5

While Malraux was writing l'Espoir, he was still a communist and he, like the other Europeans believed that the conflicting forces in the Spanish civil war were fascism and the people. However, nowadays, I believe historians agree that it was in fact an entirely particular problem in a country that hadn't gone through an industrial revolution, in which partisans of "law and order" and the remnants of a colonial army (with so many officers that it could only collapse) fought for control, but without a truly fascist ideology.
Publicity said otherwise.

Now, this book is very close to publicity. Malraux finished it in 1937. The war was not yet lost but things were turning ugly for the republicans. He wanted more support from France and Britain. It focuses on the clash of ideologies much more than on the atrocities of a civil war. His characters are foreigners of the " brigadas internacionales" like Magnin, or don't have a real family, like Manuel. My grandfather was a republican. His own brother fought with the nacionales. Not many really chose their side; it was mostly a matter of were you lived. Travelling to the other side, abandoning friends and family was not easy. The tragedy of a civil war is that it's literally brother fighting brother, without a shadow of meaning or choice.

You can't really see that in Malraux. Although violence is not disguised and there are some gruesome scences, man and sometimes war are glorified. 
 Ximenès boitant toujours [...] marchait de nouveau vers l'hôtel, seul parmi les balles au milieu du square immense.
Ximenès limped still towards the hotel, alone amongst the bullets in the middle of the huge square" 
Ximenes' courage is said to be his homeland.
The war, for Malraux, is justified. There can be no doubt for the reader of who is the good guy. The nationalist side is barely represented in the novel. The enemy is the only thing that unifies anarchists, communists, republicans. In L'espoir, it is seen as from above, like Malraux himself would do from one of his planes: armed masses. 
He writes: In every village Franco has taken, everything becomes a little less free
Which was very probably true.

However, it's definetely fiction. Another frenchman, Simon, who was in and wrote about the civil war, said:

 L’Espoir ? Pour moi c’est un peu Tintin faisant la révolution. C’est une sorte de roman-feuilleton, de roman d’aventures, écrit par quelqu’un qui est lui-même un aventurier, dans le cadre de la révolution. En plus, il raconte des choses qu’il n’a pas perçues lui-même, c’est le romancier- Dieu, il est partout : au sol, dans les avions, chez les uns, chez les autres...

L'Espoir? I think it's a bit like Tintin playing revolution. A kind of novel-feuilleton, an adventure novel, written by a man who was an adventurer, in a revolutionary context. Moreover, he tells things he hasn't seen, it's the God-narrator, he's everywhere: on the ground, on the planes, following someone or the other...

Why, then, do I love the book?

The characters:
There are enough characters (Manuel, Magnin, le Négus, Garcia, Scali, Ximenès, Ramos, Heinrich, Leclerc, Polski...) to rival a novel by Tolkien, so many it's sometimes difficult for the reader to keep up. But they're usually very well portrayed, with only a few words, a nationality, ideology, a bit of background... but develop into fully fledged people.

For example, Magnin's introduction:
 Dès que Darras fut dégagé, Magnin sauta à terre. Il était en combinaison de vol; ses moustaches tombantes, d'un blond gris, lui donnaient sous le serré-tête un aspect de Viking étonné, à cause de ses lunettes décaille

One of the pilots has just crashed the plane they were both in and Magnin, "le patron" is not all that impressed. He's got that distracted-competent air about him.
They have mannerisms. Manuel likes to fidget and often has something in his hands, usually a branch or a pen. I do that too.

The art:
Malraux and his characters talk about art; religious art, street art, anything. Artists and intellectuals were of course mostly in the republican side and Scali was, I think, an art teacher in Italy. It's in fact surprisingly present in the novel. There are constant visual symbols. Two cadillacs in the streets of Madrid are likened to a scene in a gangster movie. Ximenes holds a "bâton de chef" of the guardia civil while walking into the deserted square. 

The poetry:
Malraux's language is lyrical . For example, like Flaubert before him, he compares an attack to a wave:
La vague d'assaut, balayée par les trois nids de mitrailleuses, laissa son festo de tués et reflua
Troughout the novel, he mentions colours, smells, striking sceneries that build the epic to an almost operistic level.

Ideology:
Although I have criticized that before, the discussions about ideology are numerous and I find them extremely interesting. Anarchists and communists had a leading role in the civil war, as they had in the resistances across Europe during WWII. It's not that they were many, it's that they were organized and believed in what they were doing. Malraux writes that communists were the better soldiers, because they had the discipline of the Party. These conflicting people were forced to collaborate, and Malraux has them talking at a time when communism had not yet failed. Not only them; there is also Ximenès, the deeply religious colonel discussing God with a member of the anarchist militia. The psychological novel is woven together with the adventure novel.

War:
I dislike war movies, but love war books. The strategy, the technology, the fight with overwhelmingly bad equipment are described in L'espoir and are really shoking. I mean, they fight tanks with grenades and throw bombs from " le trou des chiottes" , the hole for the toilet in the planes, because that's all they've got.

I stress, this book is not boring. Most of the times. I think it's sometimes read in high school, which is almost never good for a book. I agree it's easy to get lost with so many things happening and so many characters. But I would re read it anytime. Well, re re re re read it.

Malraux manages to write a book which is not a reportage, roman a thèse, nor pure publicity. There's adventure and art and poetry. It's great.