Rating: 3/5

This psychedelic novel, is set in the far distant future, 2010! When we can look forward to picture phones, holographic t. v. sets , Moon bases looking down on the poor, struggling, threatened Earth, and battery powered cars everywhere, (can't wait) but no cell phones or internet, the book was written in 1968, which shows how useless forecasting the future is, if the obvious has to be stated again... The happening man is Mr. Norman Niblock House, he lives in a domed Manhattan, the rest of New York City's citizens, are not important enough to have that structure, is this a Republic? Busy Norman works as an executive and only black man, for General Technical Corporation, (G T to its loyal and not so loyal employees) and still run by the legendary founder Georgette Tallon Buckfast , a sprightly, 91- year- old. Donald Hogan is his rather lethargic, mysterious , intellectual roommate, the city, much overcrowded, who apparently from an unknown source of income, somehow has plenty of money. That era's mad prophet Chad C. Mulligan, a best selling writer, read by millions of people, (real books too) trouble is, no one follows Mulligan's advice, so the wealthy, disgusted man drops out, and becomes a street wino...Yes, he is rather weird , things are not perfect in the second decade, of the 21st century, the endless Vietnam War, is going on after 50 year , also the draft, the population bomb has finally arrived, and crime rates have increased to unprecedented levels, anarchy prevails. The Earth is dying slowly, a sad end for the former, magnificent, blue planet, Donald disappears and Chad reappears, not to worry though, Shalmaneser, G. T.'s , powerful computer, that doesn't make mistakes, (they believe) will come to the rescue, and the all knowing machine will save the day...An American diplomat, stationed in the little west African state of Beninia, ( I haven't heard of it either, my friends) comes up with a scheme to take over that impoverished country, in all but name and bring prosperity to Beninia (this, right after the end of oppressive, colonialism in Africa). Plus a nice little profit to the great corporation , being strictly a business deal only, they're not a charity organization, Norman becomes head of the project in Africa, as an African-American, it looks appropriate, to the rest of the world. Mr. House has a vast amount of reading to do, though, too bad there is no internet or cell phones in this alternative future, the job would be a whole lot easier, all those books to carry around... A product of its time, but still a terrific novel, worth reading, a fascinating glimpse of what could have been..