Rating: 2/5

2 and half stars.

I have a thing for bad-ass women of history. You know, the ones that totally didn't do what conventional women of their day and age did and proceeded to kicked some serious ass. So obviously, the first time I heard about Hatshepsut in history class, I fell in love. The second female pharaoh of Egypt, she had an amazing reign during which her country flourished in peace and prosperity, she built stunning monuments and some historians go as far as calling her the first great woman of history. So a novel about her life easily piqued my interest.

As second daughter of the Pharaoh, Hatshepsut grows up to be educated and privileged, but not burdened with responsibilities. But the course of her destiny changes abruptly after her sister's death, when her father understands that his son does not have the strength or intelligence to follow in his footsteps, and he must ensure that the next ruler of Egypt is not a spoiled and easily influenced child. Gedge also tells us the story of Senmut, the young peasant we'eb priest who dreams of building temples and monuments, and how he comes to cross Hatshepsut's path, and one day becomes her stewart.

We now know Pauline Gedge's book is not very historically accurate, but she was working from data available in the 70's: a lot of new discoveries have changes some of the things we thought we knew about Hatshepsut since (especially her relations with nephew Thothmese III), but she was doing the best she could with the information she had and I can't hold new science against her. She really put the emphasis on the simple idea that Hatshepsut could not understand why women were not allowed to do the same things men can, as she was convinced that they were just as capable in every way. Obviously, that must have ruffled a fair amount of feathers and hatched numerous plots and power-struggles, as well as attempts to discredit her.

This is a lot of interesting material to work with, but I found the book to be a little on the dull side. The writing is good, and she makes fully realized characters out of the historical figures she weaves into her tale, but I never got the feeling of really being transported, I didn't feel captivated by the world she created. It seemed to lack a certain vividness that would have really hooked me. I know it might seem silly to accuse historical fiction of being predictable - we kinda know how this ends, after all - but the intrigue and romantic entanglements felt a bit clichéd. And then endless conflicts between Hatshepsut and Thothmes III got repetitive and silly.

Not a bad book, but I was glad to turn the last page and move on to another one.