Rating: 5/5

June 2026 update:

Well... One episode of 'The Vampire Lestat' in and I am screaming and crying in excitement and glee. Best TV show, ever, and the music is incredible. I wish Anne could have seen her creation on stage, it's all glorious.

--

"And after all, I had never been very good at obeying rules." 

Update after re-read in 2023, and comments linked to the AMC tv series.
 
I am unrepentantly #teamlestat always and forever. I just adore Lestat de Lioncourt. He’s the coolest vampire ever, and probably one of the most amazing, charismatic and contrary anti-hero characters in horror and fantasy literature. I have always had a soft spot for him, and after losing my mind over the recent television adaptation of “Interview with a Vampire”, I decided to revisit the first three books of Rice’s Vampire Chronicles, and now just wrapped up what must be my fourth or fifth reading of the treasure that is “The Vampire Lestat”. This time, I absolutely pictured him as Sam Reid, who plays him masterfully on the new tv show, and I could hear his lovely voice narrate the text. I can safely say that he is the ultimate Lestat.
 
I know, I know. He can be really, really awful, and Louis’ narrative really paints him into a horrible abuser and psychopath. But I think that the genius of “The Vampire Lestat” is to flip the reader’s perspective on him and the events described in “Interview”. This was something that really drove me crazy watching the brilliant show with Sam Reid and Jacob Anderson: the show is a vivid portrait of a toxic and abusive marriage, and you occasionally get a glimpse under Lestat’s armor, which hints at an ocean of damage Louis is completely unaware of (Reid is amazing at those brief moments when Lestat shows vulnerability, especially in contrast to the casual cruelty he uses as a defense mechanism the rest of the time). While never condoning his truly appalling behavior, knowing that Lestat was himself the victim of horrible abuse, suffered repeated abandonment from the people he loved and endured unspeakable trauma… well, it excuses nothing, but it certainly explains some of his behavior and attitudes. So if you finished the first book (or the first season of the show) wondering how could Lestat be such a massive douche to Louis and Claudia, this book has the answers!
 
The scope of “The Vampire Lestat” is huge: it covers Lestat’s life before he was made into a vampire, what happened to him in Paris, his meeting the mysterious Marius, listening to his story and learning where vampires come from, his revisiting of the events detailed in “Interview with the Vampire” and what he plans to do next (rock out with his fangs out!). And holy shit, is it one hell of a roller coaster ride! I have mentioned before how much I love when Rice writes immersive historical sections, and I get more than my money’s worth in this book: both Lestat and Marius’ backstories are amazing deep dives into fantastic historical settings (pre-revolution Paris, imperial Rome, Gaul and Egypt) and I just lapped it all up happily. Marius is probably my favorite of Rice’s vampires – after the Brat Prince, of course - and these long sections about his life as a scholar and traveller were so wonderful. I also have a soft spot for Gabrielle de Lioncourt (and not just because she and I have the same first name and we would both rather read than do pretty much anything else): she is a woman who was too smart and too strong for the time and place where she was born, and while I believe that she did adore her son, I cannot begrudge her the urge to seize her freedom and run.
 
I am also a big fan of Egyptian history and mythology, and that Rice chose to have her vampires originate from that specific time and place is stupidly exciting to me. The story of Akasha and Enkil (which is explored even more deeply in “The Queen of the Damned”) is fascinating and chilling. But I didn’t even have to get that far to get hooked all over again: just a few pages in, and I was already mesmerized, like a little bird being hypnotized by a cobra before it strikes. I don’t find vampires sexy (they are dead, finding them sexy implies necrophilia, good luck changing my mind on that) but Lestat would have had me wrapped around his pinky in seconds.

There is also a deep philosophical element in "The Vampire Lestat": one of the main events that defines him as a mortal is a realization of the meaninglessness of existence and the feeling that he struggled with after that realization, and how, in a very existentialist way, it lead him to love life even more in its meaninglessness, to treasure beauty even more, and to love those he cared for with renewed intensity. His dialogue with Marius, and how Marius points out that they are both from a time that rejected superstition and how that makes them particularly well-suited for immortality is fascinating.
 
 
Re-reading the book made me so excited for future seasons of the tv series, because I cannot wait to see Sam Reid’s Lestat interact with Nicolas, Armand, Marius and Gabrielle… and I dearly hope we get to see him serenade Akasha. 

As I was reading it, I was listening to the album "The Death of Peace of Mind" by the band Bad Omens almost on repeat; it's sort of how I expect Lestat's music would sound like. It's metal, but it's also really sexy, and the lyrics about longing for love, loss of faith and inner turmoil suit the character beautifully.
 

---
 
Original review from a few years ago:

I was raised by an unapologetic bookworm with rather eclectic tastes and whether its nature or nurture, I eventually turned into one of those myself. During my formative years, if I dared to say I was bored to my mother, she would simply throw a book at me and say “Read. You won’t be bored anymore”. It was very good advice, that I keep to this day: you will never catch me without a book in my purse! But the thing about my mother is that most of her library was not children/teenager appropriate, and she does not believe in censorship… so I read an awful lot of very adult books very young. I think that I picked up my first Anne Rice when I was about nine years old.

I have read many vampires stories since – some really good and some really bad – and Lestat remains to this day my all-time favorite vampire.

Granted, there was a lot of stuff I missed when I read “The Vampire Lestat” the first time because, well, I was nine. But rereading it as an adult made me appreciate it so much more. First off, the amount of historical research that went into creating this book is staggering. Say what you will about Anne Rice as a person (she sounds rather insufferable) but the woman does her homework and weaves an amazing, complex and intricate story that bounces through the Âge des Lumières France, Roman Empire Egypt, colonial era New Orelans and modern day California. I am a sucker for history, so when a historical setting is as vivid as Ms. Rice makes them, I find myself utterly fascinated.

Of course, the character of Lestat is what truly makes this book wonderful: he’s a brat, with an greedy curiosity and a devil-may-care attitude that he takes a bit too literally (“If I was a damned thing, then let the son of a bitch come for me!”)… This was my first encounter with a villain who is not really a villain because he’s a bad person and it might just be where my weakness for bad guys comes from! The things about Lestat is that while he can be an absolute monster, he’s also a tortured being who wrestles with a strangely twisted conscience, strong feelings and an insatiable need to be loved. When you read “Interview with the Vampire”, he seems like a selfish, pompous jerk; but his background, so wonderfully detailed in “Vampire Lestat” shows him for what he used to be as a mortal and how the sorrows of his younger days are still a burden he carries within him and tries his best to camouflage by acting like a rock star – ages before such a thing even existed. He is a complex hero/villain, who throws it all in your face with charm and panache – and that is just irresistible.

I am glad to see I am not the only one who like this book better than “Interview”: Louis is super whiny and kind of a drama queen, as where Lestat just rocks. The supporting characters are really well fleshed out: the relationship with his mother Gabrielle is wonderful, if somewhat disturbing. The introduction of Marius, who is my second favorite of the Rice vampires, is also a huge plus! His story is fascinating and his voice is just as delightful as Lestat’s, albeit less bratty. And of course, he tells us the massively awesome story of “Those Who Must Be Kept”! This sort of elaborate mythology that blends history with supernatural elements never ceases to fascinate me, and it is beautifully told.

I find that the writing also as a sensuality (for lack of a better word – I don’t think it’s erotic, but it’s definitely lush with feels) that “Interview” lacked. There is darkness, but also a humour and poetry to the language that makes it very unique and sumptuous. The philosophical musings about immortality, religion, love and art were a bit nebulous to me when I was young; it made the re-read very fresh because I understood the motivations and struggles of the characters a lot more, adding a new depth to the story.

To me, Anne Rice remains a guilty pleasure kind of read, but if you have never read any of her books before I’d recommend “Vampire Lestat” as a good place to start!