Rating: 1/5

1.5

In coming back to these older, maligned Star Wars entries, I want to approach them in as open minded a manner as possible. Vonda N. McIntyre is a well respected sci-fi author, she's won awards and such, so even if her brand of storytelling doesn't quite match what Star Wars fans were looking for, maybe there'd be a good story or good ideas in there somewhere - it's happened before (cough, Children of the Jedi, cough).

Uh, no. This book sucks.

This book sucks and I'm just not really sure what McIntyre was trying to do. It's so scattered and ill conceived, it really feels like an editor took a hatchet to it and then no one did any work to fill in the gaps. Scenes pass where circumstances change mid sentence (When Han and Luke get to the space station, it's repeatedly described as deserted. Until the next sentence they're in the middle of a market, with no description in the interim.) Characters appear, or change thought and direction for no reason. Whole plot points appear and disappear randomly until you just kinda gotta accept that the whole thing is a contrivance, things are going to happen conveniently (Leia just hyperspace jumps to the exact tree her kids are hiding in, which like sure The Force, but god this sucks).

It's not like there's *no* redeeming qualities. The setting of Crsieh (? whatever) Station is cool (I think), some bizarre confluence of astral phenomena that's sorta badly described, but you can imagine some neat shit going on out there. The *idea* of a Empire cult stealing children to sell into slavery, culling out the force users for special purpose is a good one. The *idea* of the cult of Waru is.... well, it's not very good, but it could almost be interesting. It's all definitely more telling of a Sci-fi, Star Treky plot, and not one of the good ones.

But it's all let down when you get to the characters - you could sustain a lot of this nonsense if you had the adventurous feeling behind it, but McIntyre totally misses the pulp, instead letting all three main plotlines down desperately. Leia wakes up and finds her children have been kidnapped - her story is one about discovering the trail (until she just randomly finds them as mentioned above.) But her character in the meantime is naive, floundering, a fish out of water crying waif than just grates against what a strong character a nuanced over-responsible mother could be in this story. Han and Luke are worse - Han devolves into a twenty year old alcoholic, and Luke is an entirely emotionless, uncaring robot. Together they mostly bicker. It sucks.

Finally, there's a point of view from the kids - mainly from Jaina. It's pretty infamous, since McIntyre is writing about the adventures of 5 year olds, and chooses to write from the 5 year old's perspective. Why she chose kids so young is beyond me, since you could age them up just a tad and have it be less irritating throughout. But no - a third or more of the book is this bizarre toothless boarding school narrative, through the eyes of a five year old - even if it was written in the crappy style the rest of the book is, it'd be grating, but here it's interminable.

You would be correct to skip this.