Rating: 1/5

When I was last at Cambridge Public Library, I saw a gentleman reading this book, and I so desperately wanted to talk to him. Instead, I secretly took a picture of the only other person who reads Penguin Classics in public because yes, I am an introverted, socially awkward coward.

Recently, this article popped up on my phone: Flaubert Versus the World.

The article’s author teaches Madame Bovary at a London university, and his students found it boring, hated it, and hated the main character, Emma. They said, “that woman had everything” and found her completely unsympathetic.

So let’s talk…..

Madame Bovary was published in 1857, and it was set in France.

Emma Rouault grows up in a convent, and her mother dies. One day, she meets Charles Bovary, a doctor, who ends up marrying her, ripping her away from her entire network. Emma (now Madame Bovary) is miserable. Her sole companion, a greyhound named Djali runs away. 

Emma’s life is devoid of meaning. Her childrearing and domestic duties are outsourced to her staff. Without a vocation or community, Emma’s days are empty.

As if that isn’t bad enough, Emma’s mother-in-law hates her. Instead of kindness and compassion, her mother-in-law lambastes her spending rather than offering any meaningful advice or connection. The poor dear is alone all day, unable to even talk to her maid as socializing with the help wouldn’t be proper according to the rules of society. She doesn’t have email or the telephone to call friends. The only person who consistently shows up for her is Monsieur Lheureux, the draper, who wants to sell various goods.

In desperation, Emma attempts to fill the aching loneliness. She embraces religion, but the clergy can’t be bothered. The townspeople also don’t seem to be bursting with Christian charity or love. Yes, Emma engages in retail therapy (but let the person who has not ordered from Amazon cast the first stone), and she has various love affairs.

Chuckie…I mean Charles, her husband, says how much he loves her. But Chuckie either 1) is blind to her misery or 2) doesn’t know her at all. He couldn’t be bothered to have an honest conversation about what they could afford. He gripes about fate….puh leeze, Chuckles!

Emma certainly doesn’t “have everything.” She lacks a supportive network, a true friend, someone who sees her as she truly is, to be known.

That being said, Flaubert is awful, arrogant, and pompous. He startingly insisted that he could create Emma Bovary because he knew her from the inside out—“Madame Bovary is myself—drawn from life.”

Okay, Captain Cringe.

The book is slow, S-L-O-W, with far too many pointless descriptions. In addition to reeking of ignorant haughtiness, Flaubert decided to experiment with not using quotation marks when a character speaks. This did not enhance the text. And despite Flaubert’s boasts, he doesn’t write Emma convincingly.

He doesn’t mention the persistent dark shadow of loneliness following Emma, that she is lost in the world without a compass, nothing to illuminate her path forward. People don’t find Emma sympathetic because Flaubert didn’t write her well. Such a shame!

And now for the twist ending!

The 2010 Lydia Davis translation was recommended by James Mustich in 1,00 Books to Read Before You Die. Did I listen? No.

My version was translated by Geoffrey Wall.

Big deal. Who cares? Can’t you just drop a text into Google Translate?

Indulge me for a moment, and let’s look at one of the most famous lines in history from The Great Gatsby: “It was an extraordinary gift for hope, a romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and which is not likely I shall ever find again.”

But that wasn’t the original line Fitzgerald wrote: “It was an extraordinary aliveness to life, an alert vitality such as I have never found in any human person and which it is not likely I shall ever find again.”

The original isn’t as strong; it is completely forgettable. In part, it is because the famous line makes use of alliteration, “romantic readiness.” This lyrical line stirs the soul. Good translation requires skill beyond Google Translate—the soul is not a robot.

Hesitating to extend the benefit of the doubt to Flaubert, perhaps his prose is better in French, and his artistic brilliance is victim to a bad translation.

As is, this is a repulsive, boring work written by a bizarre, egotist who doesn’t live up to his own hype.

The Green Light at the End of the Dock (How much I spent):
Softcover Text (Penguin Classics version)- $11.28 from Blackwell's
Audiobook – 1 Audible Credit (Audible Premium Plus Annual – 24 Credits Membership Plan $229.50 or roughly $9.56 per credit)

2025 Reading Schedule
Jan	A Town Like Alice
Feb	Birdsong
Mar	Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Louis De Berniere
Apr	War and Peace
May	The Woman in White
Jun	Atonement
Jul	The Shadow of the Wind
Aug	Jude the Obscure
Sep	Ulysses
Oct	Vanity Fair
Nov	A Fine Balance
Dec	Germinal

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Insta My Bookstore at Pango