Rating: 5/5

I am in a complete state of amazed joy at this surprising little book. I read it cold, and I suggest you, gentle reader, do so as well. It is great fun, wise, sad, and satirically spot on in regards to the double-edged pleasures of enjoying the imaginary fantasies created by artists.

Gentle reader, have you ever had a weekend entirely to yourself with no obligations, so maybe after breakfast you settled down on the couch with a new book? Then, when next you lifted your eyes because of a nagging thirst and hunger, you found yourself startled by the darkness outside of your window, and seeking out the clock, you saw it was 4:00 am?????!!!! (or something like.) And then, you jump to your feet, or at least, attempt to jump, since it becomes painfully obvious bones and sinews have become locked into position after so many hours of sitting...

I am familiar with losing myself inside a good book of fiction, and when I was younger and much more book-obsessed, I preferred the world inside of a YA novel to that of my actual reality of schoolmates and classroom. The premise of 'The Deep Sea Diver's Syndrome' gave me an immediate feeling of sympathetic understanding.

The "Medium" David Sarella dreams regularly that he is a professional thief. In his dream, his beautiful partner Nadia gives him advice and assistance with burglaries and robberies, but David is the god creator of his dreams. Without his mental strength and imagination, the landscapes and scenes would fade away before he could accomplish his real task - the capturing and bagging up of "ectoplasm". For David, ectoplasm is usually buried inside an imaginary safe, disguised as jewels or gold in his dream. David brings out of his dream the now real and solidified ectoplasm after 'surfacing' into waking reality. He has the help of a special nurse, Marianne, assigned by the government to keep his body healthy while he lays sleeping and creating ectoplasm by dreaming.

No one knows what ectoplasm is, or how those with the talent of diving deep into their dreams do what they do to make ectoplasm. All that is known is those 'artists' with the Syndrome must have ongoing medical care because they are oblivious to reality when they deep dream. 

Dreams grips mediums with the strength of an addictive drug. The particular dreams of a medium usually are shaped by the mediums' favorite genre of reading material when they were children. Sarella's favorite novels were heist thrillers. He now LOVES his dream life as a kind of James Bond.

The ectoplasm which the mediums extract out of their dreams are considered fine art, sold to museums and private art collectors. The strange smooth white chunks are alive. They seem to emit an invisible aura for about 300 yards or so which gives people youth and feelings of relaxation and peace. Oddly, the strange auras have no beneficial effect on the medium artists. The act of creating the living "ectoplasm art" debilitates and 'eats' away at mediums physically, but otherwise, it is the living in the dream that is the reward the artists crave. 

While the buyers of the 'art' benefit much from the beauty and aura of the ectoplasmic creatures, the ectoplasm varies in the quality of its substance and in the strength of the auras it emits, depending on the 'talent' of the dreamer.  More important, the longer the medium dreams, his life appears to be shortened through a wasting away by involuntary and unconscious starvation. Also, perhaps, the ectoplasm is possibly using the flesh of the dreamer to be born. As time goes on, mediums produce poorer quality and smaller amounts of ectoplasm which results in weak and sickly 'art'.

Artists may certainly expend a lot more personal coin producing art than we know! I am enormously grateful.