Rating: 5/5

A powerful and unusual contrast of carnality and pastoralism. Not two key themes you might often find in your common or garden novel but this book is neither common nor domestic. A powerful description of the life and death of the mysterious Mustafa Sa'eed who despite being an outsider to the village he currently inhabits and seemingly little known in the area, has wielded a great and mysterious skill... women kill themselves for the love of him. 

Mustafa Sa'eed journeyed north to England as a scholar and returns south under the shadow of scandal. During his time in England he portrays himself as the physical embodiment of eastern exoticism and decks himself with the trappings and trinkets of popular romantic misconceptions surrounding the east. A collision of chilled Occident and heated Orient lead to the deaths of all his lovers, either at his own hand or through his actions and suggestions. He is unapologetic and unrepentant for the most part and seeks only to return home and start a family under the unquestioning empty Sudanese sky where he is not regarded as exotic or rare but simply as man amongst many others. His wanderlust was a disease he reasons and the deaths only a by-product of an illness contracted during the colonial regime. The descriptions of sex and death under the dreary skies of London, in bedsits and student digs stand in stark contrast to the rich descriptions of the ponderous Nile and the agricultural and riverine landscape dominating the Sudanese village to which Sa'eed returns.

This book is startling, powerful and quite brilliant in its writing style, technique and subject matter and in a way it surprised me because it was not what I expected. Whether you regard it simply as an excellent fictional novella, a partly biographical work (the author was a scholarship student who spent time in Europe and studied and lived in London and you cannot help but wonder how many opinions expressed or situations rendered are ones which he himself experienced although presumably not the murdering bit of the student tourist experience ) or a telling narrative of the corrupting influence of colonialism, you will be intrigued.