Rating: 4/5

Another re-read for the fun of it!

This story pulls the reader to the edge, injecting silliness, fear, and all-around revenge into a larger plot that will have children giggling and washing their faces in short order. What is a twit? Not so easy to explain, is it? Well, Dahl seeks to provide the reader with a slight understanding by offering up some of their hygienic deficiencies (especially among the men whose hairy faces are receptacles for anything that could land therein), persistent ugliness (which stems from thoughts of that nature), and utter disregard for anyone else. However, the greatest (worst?) trait of a twit would be their incessant need to seek revenge. Mr. and Mrs. Twit find themselves always trying to out-revenge one another, their hatred surely having been cemented into their wedding vows. One thing about which they agree wholeheartedly, though, is a love of Wednesday bird pies, and Mr. Twit has concocted a way to ensure his crust is always full of a variety of birds. Painting a super-sticky glue to the branches of his dead tree, Mr. Twit is able to trap many flying friends and eventually stuffs them into his rotting gullet. One day the Twits head out to handle an errand, at which time the local avian community teams up with some of the pet monkeys belonging to the Twits and the end result is the ultimate revenge. However, to outwit a Twit takes more than simple cunning, as the reader will soon learn. Perhaps of the great shorter stories of Dahl's that I have read since returning to him so many years later. Well crafted with all of the traditional Dahl wit and attempts at child-based humour. Worth a read, but perhaps not too late into the evening for the younger ones.

Dahl reminds me (loosely) of a children's Stephen King, in that he is so full of ideas that are seemingly independent of one another, yet have loose threads that connect, at least for the attentive reader. Dahl is able to dazzle the reader with his array of spooky adult characters (another usual trait for Dahl books in that adults are most often evil or oppressive to the child in the story) and their antics to bestow revenge or pain on others. Dahl weaves the story from the early exploration of the Twits to the ultimate battle between good and evil (in this case fauna versus Twit) and there is little hope that it will end peacefully. Children can attach themselves to the ever-evolving narrative and laugh at key moments throughout. A wordsmith and gifted storyteller for sure, Dahl is in a class all his own.

Kudos, Mr. Dahl for scaring us silly at times and making us laugh three pages later. I am sure Neo will love these books when he is a little older. If not, I will enjoy them for him!

Like/hate the review? An ever-growing collection of others appears at: 
http://pecheyponderings.wordpress.com/