Rating: 5/5

This is the sixth book in the Chronicles of Brother Cadfael, of the Benedictine Abbey of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in Shrewsbury, in the England of the twelfth century. Cadfael lived a full life before becoming a monk, having been to the Crusades; he has now been a monk for some sixteen or seventeen years, and is sincere about his faith, his obligations to the Benedictines, and his maintenance of the monastery herb gardens. However, his intellect is always piqued by mysteries, especially concerning young people. These are fun little mystery novels, and this one is a great introduction to the series. My first recorded reading of this book was in 2002, and the next in 2010.

In early December, 1139, the town of Worcester is sacked by forces of the Empress Maud, and refugees stream north to Shrewsbury. A week or so later, the sub-prior of the Benedictine monastery of Worcester comes seeking word of three people; seventeen year old Ermina Hugonin and her thirteen year old brother Yves Hugonin, orphaned nobles under the care of the Benedictines until their uncle, Laurence d'Angers, a Crusader knight just home from the wars, can take them; however, d’Angers is aligned with the Empress Maud (but arrived in England after the sack of Worcester), and cannot search for his niece and nephew himself. The two children were with Sister Hilaria, a pretty young nun at the Benedictine convent at Worcester. As the first snowstorms of winter sweep the countryside, Brother Cadfael goes to the Benedictine Priory at Bromfield near Ludlow to treat a monk who has been attacked and left for dead. Brother Elyas of Perhsore, who recently became a monk after the death of his wife, has lost his wits, and babbles about a party of refugees who might be the children and the nun. As Cadfael heads out on his mule (after notifying Hugh Beringar, the Deputy Sheriff of Shrewsbury, that he has word of the party), a tale spins out of searching in the snowdrifts, the discovery of a young woman’s body in the frozen ice of a stream (ravished and smothered, but with her attacker’s blood on her), young headstrong women running off with inappropriate suitors, a boy who knows how to act and be noble, a young man who claims to be a forester’s son but who appears to be a noble man of arms, and a bloodthirsty set of brigands taking advantage of the civil war to attack settlements and steal livestock and foodstuffs, leaving as few survivors to tell the tale as possible. 

This was a marvelous book, and one that I very much enjoyed reading, and I look forward with pleasure to the next book in the series. 

---------------------------------------------------------------

2nd recorded reading: May 2010

I had forgotten just how good this particular Brother Cadfael mystery is; I had read it in September, 2002, and remembered, as usual, very little of the book. But this is indeed one of the best ones, and is the one I would recommend to anyone who wished to read just one Brother Cadfael mystery.

In November of the Year of our Lord 1139, word comes to the Abbey of the sack of the town of Worcester. King Stephen is in possession of the Crown, but the Empress Maud holds the town of Gloucester, from whence those who attacked the town of Worcester came. Refugees from Worcester make their way to the Abbey; and on the last day of November word comes of three people who fled from the sack but who have not reappeared yet; the thirteen-year-old son and eighteen-year-old daughter of a deceased noble, who were under the care of the Benedictines of Worcester. They fled with the daughter’s tutor, one Sister Hilaria; and their noble uncle, Laurence d’Angers, cannot make search for them himself, because he is recently returned from the Crusades to his home town of Gloucester, and is thus considered an enemy of the Crown, not least because he is a supporter of the Empress Maud.

Thus matters stand until the fifth of December, with the snow laying deep across the countryside, when an urgent message comes to the Abbey at Shrewsbury, requesting Brother Cadfael’s aid; a monk has been brought half-dead to he priory of Bromfield, who had been beaten and left to die in the snow, and the Prior of Bromfield fears for the monk’s life. So Brother Cadfael makes his way forth into the snow to the priory of Bromfield; and for the rest of the book, it seems that every major character is going out into the snow for one purpose or another. Brother Cadfael hears of lawless men, who suddenly appear from somewhere to rape, kill, pillage, and burn at outlying settlements, and who apparently hope that the attention of King Stephen and the upholders of his law are concerned elsewhere; and it is Brother Cadfael who finds a young woman, wearing only her shift, dead and frozen into a stream. Whoever killed her put her into the stream before the last iron freeze, and her eyes gaze upward when Brother Cadfael looks down as he crosses over the stream.

Again, this is one of the best Brother Cadfael books (in my humble opinion), and is one that I regret having finished, even though I am now free to move to the next mystery in the series.
--------------------------------------------------------
1st recorded reading: September 2002