Rating: 5/5

Review for complete series

Sailor Moon is a fundamental series of manga. Most manga fans and readers will have read it or at the very least be familiar with the character and plot. I was one of those who did not grow up with Sailor Moon; I never really saw the anime episodes and by the time I started to read the manga the Sailor Moon series was long out of print. Nonetheless, I had an idea of what the series was about, the characters and of course the fact that it was famous and very popular. By now I have watched the first season and have read the series. Prior to reading it my expectations of this series were not too high – sure, there must be something about it that so many people would love it. But I also thought that a lot of its high praise must come from that air of nostalgia that Sailor Moon will always have. Despite my doubts, after having read it I feel that this manga truly deserves all the praise it receives! 

There are a few things that I did not like – but that holds true for most things. For one thing, Sailor Moon does, in no way, look or act like a 14-year old. I would have been much happier if she were just a few years older. Mamoru is a nice character but the poor guy is pretty much the only representative of males. All other male characters that appear are only around for a couple of chapters, villains, minor characters or women disguised as men. And then, although it is typical for magical girl manga, the name of their attacks. I do not mind them having hearts and whatnot all over their costumes – but all the spells with sugar heart rains and the like were too much for me. 

However!

Sailor Moon was so much more than what I expected of a magical girl series. Magical girl types of series often leave me with a lot of disbelief and hardly ever do more than just provide a bit of entertainment. I always thought of Sailor Moon to be just like that but the author delivered such beautiful and logical explanations to all the events happening. I loved the whole concept of the story and it let the characters be true guardians of the earth rather than teenagers in sparkly costumes. I am no big fan of science fiction but I loved how the author played with time and space. Because she managed to make Sailor Moon's role so much more believable for me, it was so much easier to route for her and feel with her through all the hardships. 

I loved the power of friendship in this work and the romance between Sailor Moon and Mamoru was beautiful. I watched the first season of the anime before reading the manga: the relationship between Sailor Moon and Mamoru was ridiculous but the manga version just made my heart feel warm. The beautiful artwork of the author helped, of course. But all scenes between Sailor Moon and Mamoru were so gentle and warm. I loved how their memories of their past lives slowly returned to them. 

The other thing is the art. The artwork is one of the most important things for me when reading a manga and Sailor Moons is just so astonishingly beautiful. Sailor Moon as a character was also very nice – she grows so much throughout the series and she is nowhere as annoying as she was in the anime adaption. It is also nice how the author goes into the other characters dreams and wishes and does not only focus on Sailor Moon – another thing that many magical girl manga do. 

The series delivers many lovely and also comical scenes which is good because it also has many (to me unexpected) dark scenes. I probably enjoyed the middle arcs the most. However, I was very interested in the final arc about Sailor Galaxia and was rather disappointed that it fell so short. I think there could have been a lot more about that arc and I would have liked to have learned more about Sailor Galaxia’s motives and origins as well as the purpose and system of the Cauldron and how it creates the stars and planets. 

All in all: nothing but the highest praise for Sailor Moon! I liked this series so much more than what I always what I always thought I would and I think it is never too late to become a fan!