Rating: 5/5

In The Midst of Death, a former colleague asks him how he is doing, asks him about drinking, suggests he doesn't have to “climb back inside the bottle” when things go south. And they do, and he does. In this book, a woman named Janice Corwin he interviews for a case calls him out, while they are drinking: “You know what we are, Matthew? We’re both a couple of drunks,” and he goes so far at this point to admit he is “in the drinking life.” If this were a book simply about crime, well, the alcoholism (not just boozing/hangover detective clichés) in these four books would be just a good background trait. And maybe somewhat romanticized. But in these books, and in this book in particular, the story is marked by the ex-cop (unlicensed) detective Matthew Scudder’s steady, marked descent into the bottle, inch by inch. Struggles--decisions not to drink in the morning, or when offered while working--then binges, then retreats. . . with less church, more bars, less coffee, more bourbon. The balance tips to decline. 

And as he says, I am still able to do my work, so I think I’m pretty much okay. Is my hand shaking? Okay, a little, but it’s not too bad. But a kid asks him for a match after he leaves a bar and Scudder thinks he is being tailed and the guy intends to scare him off the case, so Scudder beats him up, takes his knife and money. The next day Scudder realizes he has blacked out some of the evening before beating up the kid and he worries: Wait, maybe he just really did want a match, am I losing it?! We do think he is losing it. 

A Stab in the Dark is a superb novel about alcoholism/booze addiction which has a kind of typical detective novel title that fits the crime, but in this terrific book, the crime serves to help us understand the character, linking that crime to Scudder’s own need to expiate his own guilt. Nine years ago, Scudder was given a commendation for killing one punk and paralyzing another who had robbed and murdered a guy, but in the process of shooting these two kids he accidentally killed a nine year old girl and thereafter, his life falls apart.

Also nine years ago Scudder was working on a serial murder case with two other cops, wherein a guy, the Ice Pick Prowler, had killed 7 women. 8 had actually been killed, but the convicted murderer adamantly denied having killed the 8th woman, Barbara Ettinger. Nine years later, Barbara’s father hires Scudder to find his daughter’s killer because he—like Scudder—needs closure. Why Scudder? Because, as Ettinger points out to him, Scudder “is someone who cares about the truth.”

In the process of doing the investigation Scudder talks to two people who—like him—stopped living their lives over a terrible crime. For these two people, it happens to be this very case. Janice was a neighbor of Barbra Ettinger and pre-school teacher and things kind of just fell apart for Janice when her friend Barbara died. The same thing happens to one of Scudder’s former colleagues on the case; the serial killer just made him realize he couldn’t do this kind of work anymore. These two people help Scudder (begin to) see that he has given up as they have. He must face this truth, and he is not quite ready to, but it is both of them that lead him closer and closer to his truth. I was surprised and moved by the ending as it pertains to Scudder and both of these people. Nine years—can Scudder, can Scudder’s ex-colleague, can Janice—face the truth and recover their lives?

This book, a Stab in the Dark, features Dostoevsky-level guilt and alcoholism and complicated relationships as Scudder drinks with the (also) drunk Janice. It—and the next one, Eight Million Ways to Die--belongs on the shelf with every great novel of the destruction of lives through booze, including the short stories of Raymond Carver and Malcolm Lowry’s Under the Volcano.