Rating: 3/5

Many reviewers sneer at ‘Super-Cannes’ because they think the author J. G. Ballard repeated himself and said it better in his previous novels. Since I haven't read them, I enjoyed this one very much.

Super-Cannes is a literary Art novel. The plot is an imaginary, and dark, exploration about rewarding merit-based achievements with opportunities to unleash racism and class cruelty. I think this is a terribly flawed story; however, I keep see-sawing between three or four stars. I think 4 stars will be where I'll settle, but I wish I could select three and a half stars. The writing is stellar, even if the plot is far-fetched, and the storyline is a strong kick in the head. 

Our hero, a title which I hesitate to use for this morally challenged man, Paul Sinclair, a publisher of aviation journals, and his wife, Dr. Jane Sinclair, a pediatrician/scientist, move to a business park called Eden-Olympia (subtle, eh?), near Cannes in France. Eden-Olympia is a gated community of extremely well-educated professional workers, each primary (and I mean primary!) adult and sometimes a spouse are employed by multinational companies whose offices are throughout the park alongside luxurious houses for the workers, given as part of the free premiums to which invited business elites are entitled. These intellectually gifted elites have a work ethic which matches their business acumen - it is a common to find them hard at work 24/7, finally stopping only when their libidos demand attention. 

Paul is crippled, symbolically and in actual fact, having crashed his airplane. His flying wings have been taken away because the accident was determined to have been due to his negligence. His knees were severely injured as well. He can walk, but an infection has set in and Paul is in constant pain. He doesn't seem to be healing. He hangs out at the pool resting his legs or takes long walks, while Jane works at what she considers her dream job, doing the research she has always wanted. She is in her 20's and he is much much older. There are a lot of jokes regarding how Paul robbed the cradle. They are also newlyweds, having met in the hospital during Paul's recovery. Now they are here in Super-Cannes, so called because of the implicit power and money residing within their walls. She signs a 6-month contract, then another, as Paul begins to use his time to investigate a former friend's death. By amazing coincidence, they live in the same house their friend, Dr. David Greenwood, had lived in before he apparently went insane and went on a killing rampage, murdering 7 people. 

Paul begins to see and hear disquieting things which make him suspicious of the official report of his friend's murder spree, especially because the security men who worked on Greenwood’s case are definitely unsavory in their deportment. There are cameras everywhere, so there must be recordings, but they've never been seen, having disappeared. Then he finds bullet shells where he shouldn't have, and he catches people in lies. There is a definite coverup going on, but why? 

Then, when he comes home after wandering about and having talked to people and seeing some terrible policing incidents with his own eyes, he finds Jane stupefied with injected drugs and he sees she had sex with a neighbor's wife. Upon waking her, she is cheerful and happy, so he says and does nothing. Part of Paul's reticence to become upset is he has shameful secrets of his own, one being he loved beating up people in traditional hazing incidents when he was in the RAF and two, he is aware he became excited when prowling around a bad part of town where young girls were being prostituted by Russian gangsters,  which an Eden-Olympian psychiatrist, Dr. Wilder Penrose, is encouraging him to allow himself to repeat in more depth without embarrassment. Dr. Penrose believes high performing individuals should be permitted to do whatever it takes to relax from their labors, given their contributions to society. 

Paul is oddly complacent with the nefarious doings he uncovers. As he digs deeper into the hidden life of Eden-Olympia he seems to feel no need to stop it, much less become emotional over what clearly, to him, isn't his responsibility or problem. In fact, he kinda likes it.

This is my first J. G. Ballard book, and I liked it a lot despite the character exaggerations and the stretched landscape of reality the author indulged in. He wasn't writing a novel as much as he wrapped a story around a soap box disguised as a book to expound a viewpoint against fascism and how fascist thought becomes good to go despite the process of evil necessary to support it. It reminded me of social protest novels similar to some of Emile Zola's, Upton Sinclair's or John Steinbeck's, but Ballard tries too hard in this story to convince readers that human sadism is a general attribute of people who are successful or that hostile energies are what generally fuel the elite intelligencia. What Ballard posits is true of some rich smart educated elites, of course. 

I do not believe that most middle-class persons or upper-class persons would seek out sadism to relax, ordinarily. In my opinion, greedy self-indulgence at the expense of others is in reality quite common, but most people do not literally bathe in blood for the fun of it, right?

But on the other hand, what about happened in Rwanda, Yugoslavia, Uganda, The Congo, the Soviet Union, Communist China and Nazi Germany? About what is happening in Myanmar, Syria, and Iraq? Religion or political cultism, cultural prejudices, extreme childhood cruelty and psychopathic leaders have convinced entire nations to indulge themselves or at minimum, feel entitled, to be sadistic just because you legally and socially can. I think it is obvious societies will enjoy bloodletting, torture and murder under certain circumstances.

Still, I couldn't entirely buy into this particular cult of all top Western executives and scientists overwhelmingly running wild after a few sessions of permissive philosophy therapy. However, Wall Street certainly is populated by folks who feel their every passing fancy should be indulged because they clearly think themselves gods - as shown by actual emails and recorded phone calls - but even most of them shiver at such immoral and irreversible acts such as murder or torture (I think, right? maybe) - but as we all know, for some, rape is a normalized crime, it should be noted.

Does Ballard actually believe elitism could really be this easily directed into utterly depraved pathological behavior? Does he think everyone possesses and would willingly submit to a dark side of their nature which is this destructive to others, if given philosophical and religious cause to act? Hmmmm.