Rating: 4/5

2024 Reread: 

A rare case of me lowering my rating of a Stephen King book after rereading. I still quite love this book—I think it shows a mastery of tone and atmosphere—but it’s a bit plodding, a little long in the tooth, and I just can’t get behind King’s characterizations of Mattie and Kyra. Jesus H. 

This book was an important milestone in King’s career, the moment when he began to be taken more seriously as a, well, serious writer, and that reaction was mostly warranted. Though one can’t shake the feeling of King’s mid-life crisis hanging over every page. This was written as he turned 50, after all. This is a good book, not a great one, that explores themes King would later explore more successfully in Lisey’s Story and Duma Key. A solid 4. 

2017 Review:

I cheated in my Stephen King chronological reread series. Desperation was up next, but... I really dislike that book, okay? I wanted to get to a King novel I love before the year’s end, so here we are.

This was my third reread of Bag of Bones; this time it hit me deeper than ever before. Now that I’m familiar with Kong’s entire oeuvre, connections big and small (Thad Beaumont gets a shoutout, there’s a scene with Ralph Roberts and Norris Ridgewick, names like Polly Chalmers and Bannerman are mentioned) stood out, deepening my enjoyment of this novel. 

This is King’s grief story. Yeah, his early ‘80s works deal in grief, too, but this 1998 tome is steeped in the blues. Four years after his wife’s death, author Mike Noonan moves from Derry to their summer home in TR-90. Dealing with writer’s block and haunted by ghosts both physical and metaphorical, it is a period of intense mourning. This has been a year of mourning, for me, so this particular narrative really hit me hard. 

A gorgeous, spacious look at romance and small town life and mourning and loss, this is a King classic. If it isn’t in my top five, it’s certainly in my top ten. This is when, I think, King went to a whole ‘nother level in his writing. The move to Scribner did him a world of good. Equal parts moving and terrifying, I cannot recommend this one enough.