Rating: 4/5

4 ☆ How many American corporate chiefs in the twentieth century had asked seven employees to perpetrate a jailbreak?
Founder and Chairman of the Board of Electronic Data Systems ("EDS"), Ross Perot did after two of his executives were arrested and jailed in Tehran, Iran on December 28, 1978. Paul Chiapparone and Bill Gaylord were innocent of breaking local laws. Many eventually realized that they were being held as commercial hostages as no charges had been filed against them and yet their bail had been set at unprecedented amounts of $12+ million. From EDS' perspective, the Iranian government under Reza Shah was in arrears of $4 million to the Texas-based firm. 

  
    But the big mistake has been doing business in Iran in the first place. With hindsight [Perot] could see that. At the time ... oil-rich, stable, Western-oriented Iran presented excellent opportunities. He had not perceived the strains beneath the surface, he knew nothing about the Ayatollah Khomeini, and he had not foreseen that one day there would be a President naive enough to try to impose American beliefs and standards on a Middle Eastern country.
  

It would be a gross understatement to say that Iran was experiencing turmoil in 1978. For nearly a year, civic protests blocked the streets and power strikes meant cold buildings. By September 1978, the The US Ambassador Sullivan in Iran had quietly observed that the US-backed Shah was "doomed." EDS personnel were asking daily whether and when to pull the plug. By December 9th, EDS had evacuated 130+ employee families from Tehran, leaving behind only a skeletal crew, who would have likely been prevented from departing anyway. High-level government officials who had been appointed by the Shah were being arrested for corruption. Magistrate H. Dadgar turned his attentions to EDS managers Paul and Bill on a related inquiry and then to their shock imprisoned them. 

Despite multiple efforts to leverage federal US government contacts, nothing succeeded in freeing the two EDS executives. In their desperation, the EDS folks resorted to illicit strategies and "Operation Hotfoot" (aka Help Our Two Friends Out of Tehran) was born and spearheaded by a retired Green Beret Colonel. 

Ken Follett had written a few espionage thrillers before commencing with On Wings of Eagles. This was a real account of the efforts to free Paul and Bill and to smuggle them home to the safety of the US. Although true, I wouldn't say that this was unbiased as the retelling was very favorably cast towards Perot and his people. At times when Follett focused upon Perot, it felt like a campaign biography (and this was published nearly a decade before Perot ran for POTUS and lost). 

Clearly, this nonfiction book wasn't penned by an investigative journalist with a duty to objectivity. With that caveat in mind and once I had time to devote to it, On Wings of Eagles became exciting reading especially by the story's midpoint. I enjoyed learning a bit more about Iran as Paul and Bill's adventure was set against a dramatic backdrop of a country before and after a revolution. The danger to the EDS folks had been real and immediate. Khomeini, the exiled cleric, had returned to Iran on February 1, 1979, and proclaimed to his excited followers - 

  
    "I beg God to cut off the hands of all evil foreigners and all their helpers."
  

On Wings of Eagles read like a thriller. Its vintage was apparent in the gender attitudes among the Americans. Although events transpired forty-plus years ago, I believe that the tale still offers food for thought to businesses considering expansion into emerging markets.