Rating: 5/5

These hours of solitude and meditation are the only time of the day when I am completely myself, without distraction or hindrance, and when I can truly say that I am what nature intended me to be. (Second Walk)

For, although I am perhaps the only person in the world to whom destiny has decreed that he should live in this way, I cannot believe that I am the only person to have such a natural inclination for it, although I have so far not come across it in anyone else. (Fifth Walk)
__________
All the judgements of men are henceforth of no significance to me . . . (Seventh Walk)

I am a hundred times happier on my own than I could ever be living with them . . . and whatever they may do, my contemporaries will never mean anything to me. (First Walk)
__________
Rousseau's Reveries comprise Nine complete Walks, and an unfinished Tenth: each being a short essay loosely focused around a particular topic but with frequent digressions.

Digressions are not the only point of comparison with Montaigne; the catalyst of composition, the light yet profound style: the translator picks up on these similarities in his introduction:

  Montaigne's playfulness here, evoking the movement of his thoughts and his own wanderings, points to a third link between his Essays and Rousseau’s Reveries: they are both texts written ‘on the go’. In his chapter ‘On Three Kinds of Social Intercourse’, he describes how, in his library, ’sometimes my mind wanders off, at others I walk to and fro, noting down and dictating these whims of mine’; and in his chapter ‘On Some Lines of Virgil’, Montaigne describes how sometimes he thinks best while he is on the move:
But what displeases me about my soul is that she usually gives birth quite unexpectedly, when I am least on the lookout for them, to her profoundest, her maddest ravings [rêveries] which please me most. Then they quickly vanish away because, then and there, I have nothing to jot them down on; it happens when I am on my horse or at table or in bed—especially on my horse, the seat of my widest musings.
Perhaps the last and potentially most far-reaching thing that Montaigne’s Essays and Rousseau’s Reveries have in common is that both texts attempt to portray the twists and turns of each writer’s mind. Like Montaigne before him, Rousseau forges has identity through a process of spontaneous mental combustion, through the accumulation of thoughts and memories: like the Essays, the Reveries paint the portrait of a thinking man as he thinks.

Although, tying into the sense of isolation bred by the distaste for society and love of solitude (a topic with which, as I did with Leopardi, I found a strong resonance), Rousseau does point out a divergence between the two:

  My task is the same as that of Montaigne, but my aim is the exact opposite of his: for he wrote his essays entirely for others, whearas I am writing my reveries entirely for myself.

An excellent, if unfortunately concise, work by Rousseau; for me, the Reveries did indeed recall Montaigne, as well as Leopardi with Rousseau's musings on the vanities of society.

Lots to take away from such a short work. Highly recommended. 
__________
These pages may be considered as an appendix to my Confessions, but that is not the title I give them . . .

Thrown as a child into the maelstrom of the world, I learned from an early age that I was not made to live in it and that in it I would never reach the state for which my heart longed.

It is from this time that I can date my complete renunciation of the wold and that great fondness for solitude that has never left me since. The work that I was undertaking could only be accomplished in absolute isolation; it called for the kind of long and undisturbed meditations that the tumult of society does not allow. That forced me for a time to adopt a different way of life, which I was subsequently so glad to have done that, having since then interrupted it only against my will and for short periods of time; I returned to it most readily and limited myself to it quite easily as soon as I could . . . 

The conclusion I can draw from all these reflections is that I have never really been suited to civil society, where there is nothing but irritation, obligation, and duty, and that my independent nature always made me incapable of the constraints required of anyone who wants to live with them.

I became a solitary or, as they call it, unsociable and misanthropic, because the fiercest solitude seems to me preferable to the society of the wicked, which thrives only on treachery and hatred.

It is in one’s youth that one should study wisdom; in one’s old age one should practice it.

I have seen many men who philosophised much more learnedly than I, but their philosophy was, as it were, external to them. Wanting to be more learned than anyone else, they studied the universe to find out how it was to be arranged, in the same way as they might have studied some machine the they happened to see, that is, out of pure curiosity. They studied human nature in order to be able to speak learnedly about it, but not in order to know themselves; they worked in order to instruct others, but not in pursuit of their own inner enlightenment . . . I have always believed that before instructing others, one has to first know enough for oneself.

Their philosophy is for others; I need one for myself.

But what I feared most in the world, given the state of mind in which I felt myself to be, was endangering the eternal fate of my should for the sake of enjoying worldly riches, the value of which has never seemed to me to be very great.

I need to remind myself of my former decisions; the care, the attention, and the sincerity of heart with which I took them them come back to mind and restore my complete confidence. Thus I reject all new ideas as if they were harmful errors which have only a false appearance of truth and which are the only fit to disturb my peace of mind.

Among the small number of books that I still sometimes read, Plutarch is the author whom I enjoy most and find most useful.

Very often what does good to one person does harm to another, and private interest is almost always ion conflict with with public interest.
__________
 consider these two months to be the happiest time in my life, so happy in fact that it would have been enough for me to have lived like that for the whole of my life, without ever feeling in my soul the desire to live in any other state.

. . . and finally go off to bed, happy with the day that had passed and wishing only for the next day to be similar.

I have noticed, however, in the ups and downs of a long life, that it is not the memory of the periods of the sweetest joys and keenest pleasures that draws me and touches me the most. These brief moments of madness and passion, however intense they may be, are, precisely because of their very intensity, only ever scattered points along the line of our life. They are too rare and too fleeting to constitute a proper state of being, and the happiness that my heart longs for is not made up of short-lived moments, but of a simple and lasting state, which has nothing intense about it in itself, but which is all the more charming because it lasts, so much so that it finally offers the height of happiness.

I recovered my serenity, tranquility, peace, and even my happiness, since every day of my life brings me the pleasure of remembering the previous day’s happiness, and I desire nothing more for the next day.

But most men, being constantly stirred by passion, know little of this state, and, having only ever experienced it imperfectly and briefly, they have only a vague and confused idea of it, which gives them no sense of its charm.
__________
Everything for me is merely false and deceptive appearance . . .