Rating: 4/5

I almost quit reading this book. It starts out slowly, almost woodenly, and I couldn’t make a connection with the characters. However, because it was mentioned in another book as one of the best books on the Spanish Civil War and because it is by Andre Malraux, I kept reading a little bit more to see if something would finally click. When it did, it came in a rush and I was hardly able to put the book down.

It’s not really a narrative. There is a “plot”: the waging of the Spanish Civil War told from the side of the Republicans. But although characters appear and disappear, converge and go their own ways, have parts in many different sections, the book is almost a series of vignettes. You can almost pick it up anywhere and follow the story. It’s a story about men in war rather than a war story.

I became fascinated by the details Malraux includes, especially the small pieces of nature that make the book more realistic and poignant. One character carries a piece of wheat grass with him while waiting in line to be executed. Another, flat on the ground waiting to throw his bomb at a tank, notices the height of the grass in front of him and the ants crawling around and on it. Pigeons, startled by a close landing shell, rise into the sky in a bunch and then immediately come back to earth and pick up where they left off. A cat watches people hurrying through the streets. A character nearly trips over a purebred dog left loose in the city. Characters carry small branches and sticks with them, just to carry something. Pine cones and needles come raining down on destroyed tanks when they hit the trees. Thousands of sheep patter straight through the city of Madrid. Glasses rattle and lift and fall as shells strike the city, but the men drinking from them seem unmoved. As a line of “rebels” is moved up by threes to be shot, one man seems not able to understand how he needs to stand in relation to his executioners; he turns with his back towards them, when turned around, turns himself sideways. People in the line waiting execution actually step forward to help the fascists line him up correctly.
 
One paragraph almost overwhelmed me sensorily; the rain patters down, rifles shoot, a machine gun rattles occasionally, people walk or run through the streets, airplanes drone above, the characters move through it talking. You are almost overwhelmed by the sound so compactly described.

You know what happens. It’s not a case of having to finish 500 pages to know that the government will lose to the fascists, but the journey seems personal, almost as if you were there. Without actually telling, Malraux shows the problems the revolutionaries face through short conversations: lack of coordination, inexperienced soldiers (one, practicing bomb throwing, freezes after his bomb is lit and can’t throw it), anarchists who want their philosophy to be followed, communists who are thoroughly organized and the mainstay of the fighting troops but want another philosophy, socialists who don’t know what they want except to win the war; conflicted Catholics who want the Church but not the current clergy, peasants who just want the land and to be left alone. It’s incredible that this corps of mixed intentions managed to fight as well as it did.

It was almost overwhelming but I couldn’t put it down. Malraux doesn’t so much as espouse a philosophy or a view of the war; he immerses you in it. He shatters you, he astonishes you, he makes you cry with frustration and sigh with resignation. He makes you FEEL.