Rating: 5/5

Whenever I'm not sure what I feel like reading next, I go for a Stephen King book. I seem to like all of his books, including the ones others hate intensely or find boring! I've had a copy of this one for a while - I was quite thrilled to find a hardcover edition in a charity shop some months ago. I'm not sure how much it was, I got a stack of books for $3, and this was the one I was most excited about. 

Stephen King excels at writing about grief, and this was no exception. Mike Noonan's wife dies suddenly. He's a grief-stricken, middle-aged writer who can no longer write. The writers block that is more than writers block. And then there's his lakeside retreat, Sara Laughs -- he's dreaming about it, finds himself drawn back there, and is soon caught up in the lives of young widow Mattie Devore and her three-year-old daughter Kyra. This references the book Rebecca by Daphne du Maurier frequently, a book I haven't read yet, but intend to soon. I'm sure once I have read it there will be many nods to that story that I will appreciate. 
 Even without being familiar with it, I loved this book. Mike Noonan is a character that you can't help but feel compassion for. He's grieving for his wife, grieving for his inability to write and tries his best to help Mattie out when he realises she is facing an unfair custody battle that she is likely to lose as she has no financial resources to fight with. Her father-in-law basically intends to buy her child, one way or another, and Mike is unwilling to sit by and let it happen. Especially since the ghosts in his house tell him to save her.

I think this is a ghost story, and it's a chilling one at times, but perhaps the scariest part is the all too real horror of unkind people who can often do what they want because they have a lot of money. Mike has less money, but enough that maybe he can help. He quickly became a favourite Stephen King character for me - I could have happily read hundreds of additional pages about him!

I liked the ending. It was quite brutal, especially when we finally find out what happened to Sara Laughs and her son. And Mattie's death! It wasn't unexpected, but the way it happened was. Like Mike, I was too focused on the house and the ghosts, not the living people with guns. Of course I had wanted them to live happily ever after or something along those lines, both offered a second chance at love after being widowed so young, but I also knew that was unlikely as this didn't feel like that kind of book.