Rating: 5/5

Another volume that centers around Rini (like Sailor Moon, Vol. 6), this one is about her in her normal form, and as Super Sailor Chibi-Moon, but is far too late in the *Sailor Moon* series for any Black Lady appearances.
 Also, quite a bit of this volume is made up of wonderful short stories.
---------------
 Chibi-Usa is quite enamored with Helios, and keeps having dreams about him. She knows that means something, but isn't sure what, yet.
 The Dead Moon circus has come to town, and is taking over. Everything you see seems to have something to do with DMC nowadays, and the Inner Senshi just want it to end.
 Mamoru is sick, and is refusing to let Bunny visit him. But, Helios is the key to the explanation, and lets Bunny and Rini know why. 
 Mina is entering a talent contest that is all one big DMC scam. Good thing she knows before entering, right? Think again! She wins, and they want to make her a part of the group. But, the Inner Scouts come to save her.
-----------------
-----------------
 On to the short stories.....
 In the first one, *Lita's Melancholy*, Amy keeps pushing the Inner Scouts to study. And, they do. But, Lita keeps spending all her nights on making food, instead of doing more studying, so her grades don't improve much.
 I noticed an error on this story. She's introduced as an 8th grader, and later, she is called a 9th grader by a boy in the story.
------
 The second short story is *Amy's First Love*--better known as *Ami-Chan no Hatsukoi*--which inspired the BSSM SuperS mini-movie of the same name, in which Amy is afraid of love letters and of losing in exam scores to Mercurious who keeps getting perfect scores, just as she is. 
 With Melvin's help, the Inner Scouts get to actually meet Mercurious, who turns out to be a normal geek-boy. When Amy overhears Bunny saying they met him, she asks what he's like, and Lita convinces Amy that he's just like a famous singer.
 After that, he again scores perfectly, and Amy feels like it will never end.
------
 In the final short story, Mina just wants to go to an all-girl school with Raye. One day, she gets that wish fulfilled, but nothing goes as planned. Mina keeps messing up, and Raye keeps having to apologize to the "sisters" for her mistakes.
 Mina ends up freezing a spirit from a well, and the spirit becomes a part of Raye. Raye starts flirting with every girl in sight, but Mina sees it, and knows it is not Raye, so she defeats her. Then, every girl in the school loves Mina, but Mina tells Raye she no longer wants any part of an all-girls school ever again.