Rating: 2/5

It's the age-old story: Boy summons demon to serve his friends an impressive collation; demon appears as a monstrous camel and terrifies boy; boy complains and demon-camel vomits up a demon-spaniel; demon-spaniel transforms into a comely young woman who - if she dresses up nice - can pass for a pageboy; boy falls in love with demon-pageboy-woman; demon-pageboy-woman something something something your mother's dead, or is she?; demon-pageboy-woman-camel-spaniel-thing disappears; boy finds out mother isn't as dead as she is supposed to be.

Talk about cliche!

Were it not for Cazotte's rather frightening personal story, perhaps this novel would have disappeared without a trace. Just like the demon-pageboy-woman-camel-spaniel-thing.

Bored with being over-privileged and entitled, Cazotte sat down one warm-trousered afternoon and wrote this exciting story of a Sylph that was bored with being over-privileged and entitled, and sought out to make a mess of the life of an over-privileged and entitled Spaniard. It takes the Sylph six months to accomplish this misery, rather than taking ten minutes to use some Sylph powers to turn him into a bubbling saucer of jam.

Cazotte having accomplished this literary cul de sac (although there is a novel called The Monk that is apparently a direct ripoff, albeit in English, not French, of same), Cazotte wandered into Paris one day to find the Terrors well under way, was promptly arrested for being over-privileged and entitled, and found himself sentenced to death by the popular method of abstracting his head from his torso. However, his daughter sent an urgent email to La Révolution, and he was released.

Phew!

But then they arrested him again and, without any further ado,they promptly cured him of having an intact spinal column.

Sad.

For him.

Maybe if his mother had sent an email. 

In fact, this novel of his would have better been off titled Mère sait meilleur, and surely he should have seen that essential truth in his own life, too.

FINIS