Rating: 5/5

RATING BREAKDOWN
Characters: 5⭐️
Setting: 5⭐️
Plot: 5⭐️
Themes: 5⭐️
Emotional Impact: 4⭐️
Personal Enjoyment: 5⭐️
Total Rounded Average: 5⭐️

Reading Frankenstein was like finding the original source code for so many things that I love today. It's romantic prose, gothic themes, a science fiction plot, and moral complexity are foundational to all my favorite stories. Frankenstein is a brilliant young scientist, raised in the Romantic era. As such, he is taken by the combined compulsion of ambition and idealism, and ultimately creates a being...out of corpses. It is as gripping a plot today as it must have been when it was first conceived. As I read, I kept reminding myself that this story was written by hand by an 18-year-old girl. My gratitude, respect, and awe for Mary Shelley are enormous.

Thematically, you could analyze and discuss Frankenstein for years, as many have. What I love most is that it gives no answers. Nothing is explicitly concluded. It all must be deduced and pondered by the reader: romanticism vs. enlightenment, ambition vs. contentment, masculine vs. feminine, the god complex, classism, vanity, otherness, agency and accountability, bias, grief, purpose, absolution, guilt. I could go on. It's all in here. The more I ponder it, the more I find. It's no wonder there are so many derivative works and adaptations in other media. It's a playground for creatives who want to explore these concepts.

Because much occurs off-page, the emotional impact of disgust, or pity, or horror doesn't hit as dramatically, but with time and imagination, it goes to the deepest places humans can. As for the characters, the epistemological writing style gives great insights into Victor, Waltman, and the creature, and you sympathize with each.

Frankenstein is a rare piece of art, a stunning achievement for its time, and worthy of its classic status today. Its lasting power and impact on multiple genres and characters in an array of media forms is a testament to its complicated, nuanced, and true depiction of the spectrum of morality and the longings of the human heart.