Rating: 5/5

Dear Open Road Media:

 As a reader I know I cannot possibly discover and read all the fantastic books out there. If I allowed that thought to bog me down, I would be one depressed lady. That said, you have introduced me to my newest obsession - Miss Silver - and I cannot believe I have lived 30 years without her.

 What do I love about Miss Silver? First, she's a quiet character. Grey Mask doesn't revolve around her but the other characters in the story. She appears, almost inconspicuously, at the proper times to give aid. She is insightful and intelligent, humble but confident.

 Wentworth's storytelling is fun and intriguing, and for the first time in a long while, I was really sad to near the end of a book. When I discovered there were more Miss Silver books, I was thrilled.

 I love mysteries. I love a good series. To discover a fresh series, particularly a vintage one, with over 30 books... well, it's a singular pleasure. Thanks for making such great content available.

 Sincerely,

 The Picky Girl

So...what's all the fuss about? I requested Grey Mask from NetGalley and fell hopelessly in love. Grey Mask is the start of this series, written by Wentworth in 1928. Charles Moray leaves home after being jilted by Margaret Langton on the eve of their wedding and returns four years later to find his home open and a strange meeting taking place. Watching through a childhood hideout, he sees a man in a grey mask talking to several different people - calling each by a number. When Charles hears them discussing "removing" a girl if a "certificate" is found, he is shocked. He is even more shocked when he recognizes one of the agents - his former fiancee.

When he reads about Margot Standing, whose millionaire father dies leaving her inheritance in the balance because of a missing marriage certificate, he puts two and two together and approaches Miss Silver, a private investigator with a high success rate in missing jewelry. He is skeptical until Miss Silver astutely guesses he will not go to the police because of his former love.

This book is so fantastic, and I really urge you to pick it up for your e-reader, or see if your library has a copy. You will not be disappointed.