Rating: 5/5

I think friendships are the result of certain needs that can be completely hidden from both people, sometimes hidden forever.

This review is a bit tricky because I don’t want to give anything away. Carol, by the sublime Patricia Highsmith did not disappoint. 

The story centres around a young woman called Therese, who is a theatre set designer but currently working at a store in the crazy world of the toy department at Christmas time. Something I would have liked I reckon – hard work, but imagine the buzz! Anyway, Therese spends her day working hard, mostly confused, suffering under the humourless conduct of the supercilious supervisors – then one day, the beautiful Carol comes in to buy a doll. It sounds like a small event doesn’t it? BUT – Therese is walloped into orbit by this stylish, mature woman. She is totally captivated by her style, presence, eyes, smell, clothes (everything!!!), she must contact her. She does this by sending her a Christmas card. 

This is when the drama starts. That’s all I need to say about the storyline.

This suffocatingly, dark offering from Highsmith is engrossing. I deliberately didn’t read anything about this story before picking it up (Highsmith was enough) and if you haven’t read this, I would gently suggest you do the same. So, what are we dealing with here? Is it all about obsession? Well there is certainly that – Therese’s fixation with Carol is obvious. Is it love or is it some sort of psychopathic preoccupation? The reader doesn’t know – we are left guessing, wondering. This is a very uneasy read. Does one want the best for Carol and Therese? Not really, even though they’re not disagreeable characters – we still don’t really know what they’re about, what do they want from this relationship? There’s the rub.

My word, I found the last 60 or 70 pages totally engrossing. Towards the end, I even put the book down a few times to do something trivial like rearrange my bedside table, or play with my dog’s ears, or brush my teeth for the second time. I am being totally truthful here – I just did not want it to end.

Well, end it did. It wasn’t disappointing. Hopefully I’ve said enough but not too much.

5 Stars

Footnote: This is the second book in a row (The other being Terms of Endearment) where a Pet Goat features. What are the chances of that happening?