Rating: 3/5

I feel rather sad, not giving this a 5 star. A part of me almost felt a 3 star was stretching it too but at the same time I felt a certain inexplicable sadness. It was as if a certain nagging in my head said that giving this such a low score is almost blasphemy but at the same time my heart is not willing to. 

As a Sri Lankan the content in this heavy. The story is immersed in the 1983 riots. The start of a strong Civil War that follow decades afterwards. I have already mentioned this in length in my previous review of the author’s thus I will not go far too much into it. The version I saw and lived through was definitely different from the one that Arjie went through. I lived through the last decade or more of the war and I can’t say it was the same as the beginning. By the time it had already reached its climax. There was no longer correct or wrong side. Both sides were receiving heavy blows. The actual reason for the beginning of the war was long lost, both sides had forgotten the trigger of the war. One of the worst burning was mentioned in the book itself. The burning down of the Jaffna Library. The immense knowledge lost due to it, the cultural icon of Jaffna lost along with it. To this day many weep for it. At the same time I remember few houses down mine, a family weeping for the loss of their child who was coming back from a school game, unfortunately bombed, a son lost forever. The justice that anyone was fighting for, was long lost. There were days that my family spent, not knowing even if I would make it back alive from school. Now thinking back, I cannot even imagine how I survived. Maybe it was due to my young age, maybe we were already used to it. I was born in this war and I grew up in this war. We saw what it did to everyone, irrespective of being a Tamil or Sinhalese. In the end it only took away precious lives and for what reason?

The plot is centered amongst this. The book itself is nostalgic, the places mentioned are places I pass by regularly (with the only change is the school names but a very huge hint was given to as what the schools are referring to), the roads I have passed countless times. A small walk in the past. I could almost smell the coconut oil on ammachchi’s hair but no my own grandmother didn’t use it. I think she leaned more to the western yet Sri Lankan type. Truthfully speaking I do not want to dwell or speak too much on the heavy topic of the story and yet I have said more than I should. Even thinking back brings sorrow so why did I not give this book a higher rating? After all it really did struck a strong chord with me? Maybe it was due to the melancholic feelings that were left in me after turning that last page? Maybe it was my inability to actually connect to Arjie. Whatever it was it just left me feeling like a husk not the overbearing excitement I naturally have after the end of novels. So with that heavy thought I will conclude this rather heavy burden of a review.