Rating: 3/5

For 2022, I decided to go back in time and reread all the Prequels Era novels published between 1999 and 2005, plus a smidgen of other novels (like Survivor's Quest and the Dark Nest trilogy) released during that time frame. This shakes out to 21 novels, four eBook novellas, and at least thirteen short stories.

This week’s focus: Episode One: The Phantom Menace novelization by Terry Brooks.

SOME HISTORY:

In 1977, Terry Brooks made his publishing debut with The Sword of Shannara, and since then has written over 30 novels set in the Four Lands. (That’s a lot of elves!) A fantasy author may be a strange choice to write a Star Wars novelization, but Star Wars has always been much more of an fantastical adventure story than outright science fiction—and in his memoir, Brooks described writing the Episode I novelization as an extremely happy and fulfilling experience for him. STAR WARS: Episode I -- The Phantom Menace made it to number one on the New York Times bestseller list for four straight weeks--from the week of May 23 to the week of June 13, 1999--and was on the NYT list for eleven weeks.

MY RECOLLECTION OF THE BOOK:

First, I have to admit that I have confused Terry Brooks with Terry Goodkind my entire life! (Both write fantasy, both had television shows made of their major book series, but Goodkind died in 2020 and did not write the Episode I novelization.) I remember little of the novelization itself, except that there were four different covers available; I think that I had the green cover with Obi-Wan on the front and Qui-Gon on the back.

A BRIEF SUMMARY:

Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice, young Obi-Wan Kenobi, are charged with the protection of Queen Amidala of Naboo as she seeks to end the siege of her planet by the Trade Federation. This quest brings the Jedi and one of the Queen's young handmaidens to Tatooine, to the shop where the slave boy Anakin Skywalker dreams of finding freedom for himself and his beloved mother…

THE CHARACTERS:

The novelization of The Phantom Menace hews fairly closely to the film—not surprising, since novelizations used to come out before the movie release, to whet people’s appetites and get them interesting in seeing those scenes brought to life. (Spoilers be damned!) However, there are several scenes which don’t appear in the film. Not just deleted scenes that appear in the DVD or Blu-ray releases (and there are a number of deleted scenes in the novelization), these are original scenes written by Brooks. 

In talking to Lucas, Brooks decided that he wanted to focus on Anakin’s character; so rather than opening over Naboo with the Trade Federation blockade in progress, the story begins on Tatooine. We see Anakin lose a pod race to Sebulba; we see what Anakin’s daily life on Tatooine is like, and his hopes and dreams; and we also see Anakin encountering a wounded Tusken Raider on his way back from a Jawa sandcrawler. I thought that these were interesting additions to the story: you could probably argue that we don’t need to spend more time with Anakin beyond his introduction in Watto’s shop, but I liked getting to see another pod race and Anakin’s day-to-day life. His mother wants him to succeed, but she doesn’t want him to risk his life pod racing. And there’s this inherent kindness in Anakin—of course he helps people he’s never met, because we see him help a (normally hostile) Tusken. I felt like Brooks did a good job fleshing out Anakin’s character beyond what we saw in the film.

I also liked what Brooks did with the characters of Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi. There’s not much that’s not revealed in the film, but we do get the sense that Qui-Gon is a maverick within the Jedi Order. He doesn’t always follow the rest of the Jedi, and that’s a point of contention between him and Obi-Wan. He’s always picking up strays, trying to help people, and Obi-Wan thinks that it’s diverting his attention from more important things. We also see how hurt Obi-Wan is by Qui-Gon’s intention to take Anakin as his apprentice; Obi-Wan is excited about his Master’s confidence that he can pass the Trials and become a Knight in his own right, but he also feels like he’s being replaced by Anakin. By the end, Obi-Wan is fulfilling his Master’s word by agreeing to train Anakin, but it won’t be the same relationship that Anakin would have had with Qui-Gon—there’s still this initial tension, even at the beginning of Obi-Wan’s acquaintance with Anakin.

In the novelization, I got more of a sense of how completely blindsided Chancellor Valorum was by Amidala’s call for a no confidence vote in his leadership. We meet him when she arrives on Coruscant, and he seems kind and willing to listen…but Palpatine’s right there, telling her how corrupt the Senate is, how the Chancellor is indebted to other interests and will never agree to help her. You can see how she’s been prodded into that exact moment—Amidala is so frustrated that the Senate won’t address the injustices on Naboo that she plays right into Palpatine’s hands.

And compared to the film, Brooks did a much better job of concealing the true identity of Darth Sidious. I found his identity super obvious in the film, because it’s hard to hide Ian McDiarmid’s face and voice and demeanor—if the fact that the Senator’s name was Palpatine didn’t tip you off to the fact that he’s the evil Sith Lord, the fact that they look and sound similar probably would. But Brooks separates the two so that you don’t really see a connection between Palpatine and Sidious. Sidious is obviously getting the Trade Federation to do his dirty work for him, but you can’t draw that immediate connection between Palpatine and Sidious that you could in the film.

Finally, I thought the novelization was well-paced. There’s both action and slow parts, but it keeps you reading and never bogs down in the slow bits. I think the short length also helps here: it’s only 24 chapters (and shorter chapters at that), so the story rarely dragged for me.

ISSUES:

But I have some (major) issues with The Phantom Menace, and Jar Jar Binks is one of my least favorite characters in the Star Wars universe. Did the novelization make me like Jar Jar any more? No. Jar Jar on screen comes off as a useless buffoon, and Jar Jar in the novelization isn’t any better. His dialect is written out (may I never again see the word “meesa”), which I found difficult to get through. Jar Jar is optimistic, but he's an idiot, and it’s so frustrating to read. (I think Ahmed Best did exactly what he was directed to do, yet I don’t agree with that direction. It’s one thing to have a comic relief character, and another to have a character that’s so silly and foolish that he affects the overall feel of the film. There’s political schemes, there’s battles…and then there’s Jar Jar, flailing his way through everything.)

And while I like all the added Anakin scenes, I’m not crazy about Lucas’s decision to make Anakin so young. I’m sure he did it to show how he was vibrant and full of promise—you wouldn’t see him and immediately go “yep, that’s Darth Vader”--but since he’s a nine year old, we have some awkward scenes. He meets Padme for the first time, and in the novelization he tells her that he’s going to marry her. (Please no.) Then during the Battle of Naboo, he inadvertently destroys the Trade Federation ship and it feels like a Jar Jar scene. He randomly pushes buttons until he saves everyone, and I wish that rather than being a blunt instrument guided by the Force, that Anakin had used his skills rather than pure, stupid luck.

I wish that Brooks hadn’t chosen to give us no scenes from Padme’s point of view, though. While it preserves the mystery of Queen Amidala’s identity until Padme reveals herself, we don’t really get anything from her perspective until after that revelation. I think that her viewpoint would have been a nice addition to the story—what did she think about the reality of life beyond the Republic?--but instead we don’t get much with her, and I think that’s a real shame.

And it still bothers me that Qui-Gon doesn’t try harder to free Shmi. I know that they don’t have the funds and Watto is non-persuadable, but I felt like Qui-Gon gave up too easily in the film. (Perhaps it wouldn’t occur to Jedi that Anakin’s mother is just as important as her son, since they’re taken from their birth family as babies, but I have issues with the fact that the Naboo group leave a woman in slavery and no one returns to check on her for ten years!) At least E.K. Johnston’s Queen's Shadow had Padme trying to free Shmi and other slaves after she stepped down from the throne, but that’s still two years later—girl, you left this woman in slavery for two years??

Finally, I also had two issues with Brooks’s writing style. First, I didn’t feel like the action scenes were descriptive enough. They weren’t as exciting or detailed as what we saw in the film, and I was surprised that Brooks never described the colors of their blades during all these lightsaber battles. The Battle of Naboo also felt more pedestrian than I was expecting—the film definitely has the advantage here.

And second, I found that the limited third person POVs began to slip a bit into head hopping towards the end of the book. Maybe Brooks was aiming for an omniscient third person narrative? But so much of the book was limited to one person’s perspective for each scene (Anakin, or Qui-Gon, or the Neimodians) that the head-hopping scenes felt jarring. During that final lightsaber fight, it felt like we would jump from Qui-Gon’s head to Obi-Wan to Darth Maul, and I did find that jarring at times. It wasn’t so egregious that I stopped reading, but it might be a little confusing for readers—it’s just nicer and cleaner to keep each scene tightly focused on one character’s point-of-view.

IN CONCLUSION:

I rather enjoyed revisiting the novelization of Episode I: The Phantom Menace. The high points for me were the characterizations and the beginning scenes with Anakin, while the low points were mostly things in the movie that annoyed me. (And that's not Brooks's fault--I suppose that no one can make Jar Jar a palatable character to me.)

Next up: I read Rogue Planet during my NJO reread in 2021 (the review is here), so instead I’ll be jumping to 2001 and James Luceno’s ebook short story: Saboteur.

My YouTube review: https://youtu.be/rB3IBewPdyo