Rating: 4/5

A classic paranormal ghost story, showing how the creepiness of including kids in such settings can be lead to the marvelous extreme.

It reminded me of Lisey´s Story, both proof of what not just great author, but loving husband King is. As he can´t get tired to repeat the importance of the support and help by his wife, that he writes to impress her, that we maybe won´t have seen all these unbelievable novels without the woman inspiring the master to give the best he can and of course the infamous Carrie in the trashbin tale. It´s better than Lisey´s story too, because it has more dynamic action, unexpected plot twists, and is one of King´s more underappreciated works, possibly because it´s less action and meta, but more about the exploration of the protagonist´s development, thoughts, and feelings, his mental state taking the place of the main protagonist, antagonist, and premise.

These novels are completely different than the impersonal, just horror or fantasy works, King seems to use another approach towards creating these pieces than his usual mantra of letting the characters tell the story. His subconsciousness must do something to reduce the thrill and real, physical violence, to come closer to the Love(pun intended)craftian, subtle, psycho terror horror that is much more frightening than the expected, known types of horror one is used too. It´s far more tricky to read, for some readers definitively not as enjoyable, and therefore far less present in the horror genre that prefers to live up to Hollywood standards and stereotypes.

Dark philosophizing about what might happen after the spouse, lover, lifelong partner over decades, or even a child, dies is something nobody wants to think about, but King goes the way, gives amazing introspections that haunt millions of real, poor people and expands the horror to having to deal with bursts of extreme violence and paranormal activity. That´s especially frightening if one is not sure if it´s just a reaction to the stress and sadness, serious mental illness or, worst and most difficult to detect and handle without one´s exorcist of trust, real manifestations of whatever other dimensions, parallel universes, or quantum foam may have prepared for meat sacks.

Playing with the option of going bonkers, as King likes to do it with his different alter egos, is something possibly, quite counterintuitively, healthy for everyone, as it could show many of the blind spots and subjective errors one has accumulated over one´s life. At least better than needing real creepy nightmares to come to the realization. 

Reality and what lies behind it is one of the great topics and science will show who is right, but just thinking about the possible implications is truly no good evening hobby. Hardly one of King´s novels scared me so much (I was still young and not that internally dead as nowadays) and it led my fantasy to the logical question and the rational option of why not going to visit some haunted places. I still didn´t do it, not sure if I should, it´s ridiculous because I am doing as if I am that hyper rational, but visiting or living in such places might get even too tricky for me. I mean, honestly, who buys a freaking, old, cursed spooky castle to live in? Possibly with the bedroom in the former torture chamber, no thanks.

Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: 
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...