Rating: 5/5

Love and despair walk hand in hand, intertwined like lovers in the darkest corners of our souls.
 The Vampire Lestat ~~~  Anne Rice

I've decided to revisit my past by diving ~~ once more ~~ into 
  The Vampire Chronicles

When 
   Anne Rice
 died, I was incredibly sad. I first read 
   Anne Rice
 at 13 ~~ soon I devoured everything of hers that she had written. Rice shaped me not only as a reader, but as a person. She unlocked an entirely new world for me as I traveled with Lestat and Amadeo. Rice put into words how I secretly felt. 

I read the 
  Vampire Chronicles
 in order ~~ 
  Lives of the Mayfair Witches
 too. Interspersed among these reads, I read Rice’s stand alone novels. The best of these was 
   Cry to Heaven
, now a lesser known work of Rice’s. In fact, it may be Rice’s best work.

Later, when she turned her back on horror and made her highly publicized return to Catholicism, I tried to read Rice’s 
  The Songs of the Seraphim
 series, but they were terrible. The magic was gone. The writing had become preachy. And just like that she abandoned Christianity and returned horror. I read 
   Prince Lestat
 but sadly, Rice was simply repeating herself. Then, Rice began to harass her critics, encouraging her fans to publicly attack those who poorly reviewed her books. Her fans terrorized her detractors. Lastly, she began to focus more and more on promoting her son's work as she slowly withdrew from the world. I had outgrown Anne Rice. Despite all this, I feel like a part of my youth had been taken from me with her passing.

And now, back to 
   The Vampire Lestat

Lestat

 Anne Rice’s second book in 
  The Vampire Chronicles
 is an exhilarating read. Here we get the story of Lestat ~~ Louis’ maker ~~ his life before vampirism, how he was made, and what has to become of him since.

Lestat is electric and impulsive. He awakes after decades of being asleep deep underground, and he awakes with a damning thirst, not just for blood but for fame. Lestat quickly becomes a famous rockstar, calling all Vampires to him through his music and in doing so, breaking the oldest rule of the Vampire coven ~~ never reveal yourself to mortals ...

Louis

 The Vampire Lestat is both a prequel and a sequel to Rice's original story  Interview with the Vampire. A sequel because it is framed by a sequence of events in contemporary time, and a prequel because it recounts the history of the Vampire Lestat, the sire of the protagonist Louis. After waking from centuries-sleep in 1980’s New Orleans, Lestat discovers the Louis' book and goes about setting the story straight, recounting his mortal life as a young French aristocrat, his transformation into a vampire, and his ongoing quest to find the answers behind his new condition. Stretching from the French Revolution to Egyptian myth to the modern-day world, his journey is one that only an immortal could take, and I was lucky enough to be taken along for the ride.

Lestat is Rice’s most popular creation, and it’s easy enough to see why: he is handsome, charismatic, merciful, deep-thinking and tormented ~~ in other words a truly three-dimensional character and possibly the most relatable member of the undead in the huge vampiric canon of books. His moral crisis on becoming a vampire is especially intriguing, with his reluctance to destroy innocent mortals.

Armand

 Anne Rice’s language is gorgeous, rich and poetic; her writing is full of sublime passages and descriptions. Her rich detail and extensive knowledge of history sets her vampires in an utterly realistic and mysterious world. Concepts such as the conversation, the Savage Garden and the wolf killer echo through the novel, adding resonance and extra meaning to the unfolding story where the smallest detail can hold the greatest importance.

Marius

All in all,  The Vampire Lestat is an immensely rich and rewarding read at times scary, beautiful, intriguing, and exceptionally clever.  Anne Rice created a new breed of vampires that are both similar and extremely different from those of traditional folklore. 

All in all, an immensely rich and rewarding read at times scary, beautiful, intriguing, and exceptionally clever. Rice has created a new breed of vampires that are both similar and extremely different from those of traditional folklore. 

Rice manages to make a humanized vampire ~~ not an easy task ~~ and on top of that provides some real depth of emotion and philosophy to Vampiric lore that few authors can accomplish.

Lestat