Rating: 3/5

Some works of popular science strike a chord with the reading public and become great successes, going through multiple editions and leaving fond memories in the minds of readers. I first read Gods, Graves, and Scholars years ago, and remembered liking it enough that I bought a much-thumbed paperback copy for $1 when I saw it on a cart outside a used bookstore. Books of popular history tend to be long on stories and anecdotes, and short on critical analysis, but they have served their purpose if they encourage readers to delve deeper into the subjects to gain a better understanding and a broader perspective.

This book was first published in 1949, and C.W. Ceram is a pseudonym for Kurt Wilhelm Marek (Ceram is Marek spelled backwards, with the K becoming a C). Marek had reasons for cloaking his identity: during World War II he had been a member of a branch of the Wehrmacht and Waffen-SS responsible for disseminating Nazi propaganda. Marek is known to have written justifications for the German invasion of Norway and stories praising the Luftwaffe, and probably contributed a number of other pieces that cannot now be directly attributed to him.

Based on his recent past when he wrote this book, it was odd to come across sentences such as “the records of Sennacherib bring to mind the typically modern picture of a dictator shouting vast lies at vast audiences, civilian or military, confident in the knowledge that they will be swallowed whole.” Perhaps he was truly remorseful for the part he had played, or perhaps he was just covering his tracks.

There is no real unity to the book, other than broad nostrums like “As we get to know more about the history of mankind, the time comes when we begin to feel the faint breath of the eternal wafted to us across the great gap of the years.” For the most part it is stories of daring archaeologists and their amazing discoveries, a sort of Indiana Jones of its time.

The book is divided into five parts: Part 1 covers Pompeii, Troy, Mycenae, and Crete, but makes no mention of Etruscans, Romans, or Carthaginians; part 2 looks at Egypt; Part III Sumeria, Babylonia, and Assyria; part 4 the Aztecs, Mayas, and Toltecs, and Part 5, which is only six pages long and titled Books that Cannot yet be Written, contains thumbnail summaries of civilizations of the Andes, Central America, China, and the Mississippi Valley.

Ceram writes engagingly, with the enthusiasm of a journalist, which is what he was, and he creates lively stories around well known events such as Carter’s discovery of Tutankhamen's tomb, Champollion’s deciphering of the Rosetta Stone, and Schliemann’s amazingly successful career finding and plundering artifacts from Troy and Mycenae. 

He has a very Eurocentric view of history. It would be easy to attribute this to his Nazi past, but in fact cultural sensitivity was not really a thing anywhere in Europe or America at the time he was writing, and a modern reader can find cringe-inducing statements in almost any book of this period, things to the effect that it was the white man’s sacred duty to bring art, civilization, enlightenment, and (Christian) religion to the benighted savages of the world. I would hope that we are now more attuned to the contributions of other civilizations, but in another century readers may yet roll their eyes when they read the histories written in our time.

This is not one of the books I would give to a young person to try to interest them in science or history, but even I have to admit it has some engaging, fast paced, well written stories, and I am not surprised that it is still in print and widely available. It is an entertaining read, but nevertheless there are more modern introductions to archaeology, which take a more inclusive view of other peoples, such as Sarah Parcak’s Archaeology from Space: How the Future Shapes Our Past.