Rating: 5/5

4.5

Queer adolescence meets the beginnings of a civil war in this exquisite book, interweaving the story of Sri Lanka's civil war with the self-realization of a teenager beginning to grow comfortable with his sexuality. These two unlikeliest of themes fuse together in such a brilliant fashion that the resultant novel is an absolute stunner! Queer novels from the Indian subcontinent are so rare, and one so effortlessly accomplished that also deals with another issue close to my heart - the Sri Lankan war, is doubly so. 

As a Tamil, I was consumed with obsessively seeking out any developments of the Sri Lankan civil war with faint hope and increasing dread, and I still remember the unsurpassable gloom that marked the final days of the war. They were some of the darkest days etched in the collective Tamil memory. An air of utter despair pervaded every nook and corner. I remember watching one Channel 4 documentary which I've never recovered from. It was the truth that the mainstream Indian media never bothered to report. Genocide in the land of Buddha. 

It is precisely the beginnings of this war in 80s that Funny Boy masterfully renders on the page, from the viewpoint of an adolescent. The sense of foreboding; the dread; the panic; the blind hopes that minor violences wouldn't escalate into anything worse; the sinister majority gaining an upper hand; the slow, steady, and insidious rise of racial tensions blowing into a raging pandemonium, a guiltless bloodbath, state-sponsored ethnic cleansing. All this tension is packed skillfully in these pages, and balancing this unbearable suspense and the approaching shadow of war is the love story that is no less chaotic in the effect it has on our protagonist's inner life and his self-image. Brought up to not digress from the traditional notions of masculinity, he loathes the idea of being attracted to men. Thankfully, he grows comfortable in his own skin and gains some sense and inner harmony - precisely the very things that are gradually lost in his nation in the spirit of greed. 

His voice rings false in certain sections where the opinions seem too perspicacious to issue forth from an adolescent. Also his school days don't seem to be as fully realized as they could have been. There was some potential for longer sections there, especially with Soyza, and I was a bit disappointed with this under-exploration. The Tamil family described is a part of a very miniscule minority, cushioned by their wealth and equipped to move to another country. Though I'm clear that this is their story, I was left wondering how the ordinary people tackled this sudden war. 

From what little I knew before starting this book, I expected Funny Boy to be nothing more than a queer bildungsroman, a cosy family story about this funny boy's family members learning to accept him and reconcile with his sexuality. But - 

this unexpected dimension of civil war, 

the skillful fusion of two themes that are very close to my heart, 

the story gushing forth in a wild forceful torrent through the lucid, unobtrusive writing, 

the delicate realization of sexuality juxtaposed with an inevitable war, 

the sheer compulsion this story radiated -

 all this guaranteed that this book would be one of my most memorable reads in the recent times. That might also be why I finished this in a single day.

Also, it turns out that this is the 500th book I've read, according to Goodreads.