Rating: 5/5

Much better than Telepathist, the one other book by the same author I have read, also much longer at around 650 pages. The best description of "Stand on Zanzibar" I can think of is a novel about corporate drama that later turns into globe-trotting espionage, that feels like it's taking place in the same universe as Anthony Burgess' A Clockwork Orange except (for the most part) told from the jetsetting upper class' viewpoint instead of the lower classes'.

Both "A Clockwork Orange" and "Stand on Zanzibar" take place in overcrowded and dysfunctional futuristic societies. A key theme in both novels is also how utopian social engineering schemes always have some undesired side-effect: They either make the problems they're created to solve worse; add new problems nobody in-story predicted; or their practical implementation turn out to be thoroughly morally horrifying to the vast majority of readers. In "A Clockwork Orange" the utopian projects consist of psychotherapies meant to turn criminals into productive citizens whereas in "Stand on Zanzibar" it's things like eugenics legislation, human cloning and putting artificial intelligences in charge of important business decisions. Both novels are written in fictional future slang dialects that at first are confusing to the reader, but make more and more sense as the reader figures out what the slang terms mean. It helps that several of the chapters are excerpts from in-story newspapers, advertisements and sociology textbooks - a technique that Brunner uses instead of traditional science-fiction infodumping, one I find much more entertaining.

The bulk of the plot revolves around an American businessman being spied on by his roommate, with both protagonists being involved in schemes to respectively secure public contracts for a new breakaway nation in West Africa and lure the secrets for human cloning plus the creation of designer babies from another young nation this time one in South East Asia. In the second half the novel turns into a futuristic version of a globetrotting spy thriller, where Brunner has put an impressive level of work into creating convincing globalised creole hybrid cultures. The proliferation of regional secessionist movements all over the planet with some of them succeeding is one of many areas where "Stand on Zanzibar" has been quite successful in predicting the future - just look at Abkhazia, the Donetsk and Lugansk People's Republics, Rojava, South Ossetia, South Sudan, Transnistria etc right now. Another accurate prediction Brunner makes in "Zanzibar" is China overtaking Russia's place as the United States' main economic and geopolitical competitor..

In true hardboiled film noir/spy thriller fashion the plot gets convoluted and twisty as all hell, right down to ending in a way I won't spoil except that it turns out to be extremely unsatisfying for almost every single character. What impressed me most of all was how "Stand on Zanzibar" turns out to be quite gripping and easy to read as the reader adjusts to its universe, despite how confusing a reading experience it is at first. The second half makes me suspect that had Brunner become an author of mainstream spy thrillers, he would have been as popular as Ian Fleming, Frederick Forsythe, John Le Carré and other popular names in that genre. However, I am grateful that he instead wrote something that is not just one of the most prescient dystopian science-fiction novels of the era but also one of the most entertaining.

Many thanks to Justin Isis for recommendation, his own science-fiction short story collection Welcome to the Arms Race is highly recommended as well for a modern take on New Wave SF.