Rating: 5/5

** The Stephen King Goodreads Discussion Group is doing a re-read of his works from the beginning to the end. It’s been a long time since I have really immersed myself in Uncle Stevie’s world, but a rate of a book a month, I am all in. My goal is to read and review each one with as much honesty and reflection that I can give. ** 

Background – “Storm of the Century” was an ABC television miniseries written by Stephen King in 1999. Unlike other television or movie adaptations of his work, it was not based on an already published novel. Rather, it was an original screenplay written by King and directly produced for television. He described the screenplay as a "novel for television". 

However, the screenplay was published as a mass-market book by Pocket Books in February 1999 prior to its television broadcast. Length-wise - my oversized paperback lists it as 376 pages (and unfortunately it is not currently available electronically on my Kindle).

Plotline – The residents of Little Tall Island, a small island town off the coast of Maine, are facing the storm of the century. When it hits with a fury, the island is completely cutoff from the mainland, leaving the islanders to fend for themselves.

Along with the storm comes an even bigger enemy, in the form of a mysterious stranger calling himself André Linoge. As the storm begins, Linoge appears and kills Martha Clarendon, an elderly resident, by striking her with a black cane with a silver wolf’s head. No motive is apparent. 

To make things stranger Linoge willingly allows himself to be taken in custody. Then he starts to share with others their deepest, darkest secrets. His only other communication is to repeat the following sentence - "Give me what I want, and I'll go away."

Over the next two days, the island residents will face the most terrifying combination of physical and emotional challenge they will ever face. Survival will not be likely…

Thoughts and Reflections – First of all, I have not watched the television mini-series that was produced from this screenplay, so I don’t how well it turned out and what changes were made to the final version. My comments will be solely based on the screenplay itself.

There were several good things that I really liked about how King presented this story. It definitely reminded me a lot of his previous novel “Needful things” where an evil stranger comes to a small town and awakens the bad side of the citizens to the point where they attack each other and pretty much destroy the town. There were similar themes in this one.

King successfully combined characters, plot, and setting into a well-delivered visual horror story. Even with a large cast of islanders, their families, and children he kept the storytelling tight, moving back and forth between two scenes at a time to build tension and momentum in his plotting. That strategy worked well for me layered the story telling one step at a time, building the conflict higher and higher in continuous fashion. 

King just knows how to deliver on the formula of combining small town and horror. It’s his bread and butter and he is a master of it. Also, he avoided a cliché ending and delivered a mesmerizing climax that made me contemplate the decisions we make and the negative influence that group-think can force on individuals. Fear can really have a strong impact on people’s decision-making. 

Other Notes – The book includes an introduction by King, who describes the creation of the story as it came to him in 1996, his initial debate of whether it worked best as a novel or a screenplay, and his writing of the miniseries script. 

King has referred to this miniseries as one of his personal favorites of all the television productions related to his works.

Little Tall Island was also the setting of King's previous novel “Dolores Claiborne”.

Overall – This was surprisingly turned out to be much more enjoyable than I expected. It was an easy read that easily kept my attention and interest. I was leaning towards a four-star rating, but because I found the ending was powerful, authentic, and memorable, I am giving it a five-star rating.