Rating: 2/5

I have a thing about Hatshepsut. She was the first 'great woman' of known history, and that's a freaking big deal. Moreover, her reign was peaceful, prosperous, and well administered. Her greatest achievements include building of monuments, many of which still stand. Unfortunately, later pharaohs, possibly Thutmose III or Amenhotep I, have tried to detract from her achievements. And failed, as far as I am concerned. Being a pharaoh for a woman thousands of years ago is in itself a big achievement that still so many countries around the world are unable to achieve. 

In light of my intense admiration for Hatshepsut, I found Gedge's depiction of her rather offensive. Gedge's Hatshepsut is rather dumb. Vain and arrogant, she may be. That's acceptable, and possibly even expected. But Hatshepsut makes stupid decisions, one after the other, from handing over her army to someone she 'knows' is going to bring her down to never taking any action against Thutmose III. If Hatshepsut 'knows' that he is going to arrange a coup, why would she do nothing to prevent it? Hatshepsut's constant war of words with Thutmose was tiresome and cringe-inducing. What kind of pharaoh listens to open threats and doesn't do anything? In view of her 'niceness' (or dumbness, if you prefer), Hatshepsut's constant repetitions about how she is Egypt and God and blah blah is rather sadly hilarious. Gedge could not have created a more sad-sounding pharaoh if she had tried. A criminal endeavour, if you ask me! 

The other characters were mildly more interesting than Hatshepsut. I found Senmut's character arc the most intriguing, but he too lost his appeal by the middle of the book. 

For some reason Gedge delights in making ancient Egypt depressing. I have read a few books now by this author and she invariably ends up bringing in depressive characters weeping and moaning about their fate about which they already 'know'. Gedge's habit of her characters knowing the future is tiresome, and takes away from any depth that the story might otherwise have. There is no historical evidence that Hatshepsut roamed about being depressed all over the place, so there was absolutely no need for the author to make this decision. 

On the other hand, Gedge's research is pretty detailed and ancient Egypt really comes to life. The bringing of myrrh trees from Punt and the broken obelisk are wonderful examples of inserting interesting historical titbits into the narrative. I enjoyed these inputs and it was interesting to feel how Egyptians lived. 

In the end, Hatshepsut probably definitely faced discrimination but having established herself as a successful ruler for a couple of decades, I don't really see her as someone who would simply give in and not take steps to protect herself. No woman ruler, then or now, can afford to be so complacent!