Rating: 4/5

The next book on my journey to reading all of SK's books in order was Bag of Bones, another first time read and I thought it was pretty amazing. I don't think this is a stand out SK book and it's not one you hear people mentioning very often but it's worth the read. 

The main reason I wanted to read his books in order was because of all the sneaky Easter eggs SK manages to slip into his books, this one was no exception. We have a mention of Derry and someone is reading a book by Bill Denbrough, if you have read it you'll know who this is. Thad Beaumount is also mentioned, who appears in The Dark Half and Needful Things. We even have our main character Mike having a little chat with the main character in Insomnia Ralph, very cute. 

For me this book is a tale of two halves, half of this book was knock out of the park incredible and half was just a solid thriller. So what didn't I love about this book, well the custody battle plot line took over at one point and there was just no need for it, I don't know how Mike was concentrating on court proceeding while his house was haunted but there you go. I found the relationship between Mike and Mattie uncomfortable at times and I didn't need to hear about Mike's wet dreams, thank you very much. 

Having said that there was so much right about this book, for one the descriptions and exploration around grief were outstanding. The first section of this book is just Mike trying to live his life after losing his wife, it doesn't begin until years after he's widowed which I thought was really special too. He struggles with moving on, with his writing block and just his overall love for life and it's heartbreakingly beautiful. You can really feel Mike's love for his wife throughout this book. 

When it does get down to the nitty gritty it gets really creepy, it's a book I didn't want to read with just a spotlight because I found it pretty scary. There are some horrific descriptions in this book, so as always with SK check the triggers before you read this one (there's a lot). The characters in this books, even the ones with small parts, all have their own personality and there's no mistaking anyone for anyone else because of it. 

It's not one of my favourite SK books and I think this one would hit harder when I am a little closer to Mikes age but it's a book I really enjoyed I can always count on the King for a good time.