Rating: 3/5

Okay, so I admit...I am totally addicted to short-read Christmas stories with happy endings. I picked up this pocket paperback and another one (Santa Cruise, I think...) last year around the Holidays with every intention on reading them. However, I never got around to them, but this year I remembered I had them and wanted to read at least one. It took me about 2 days to read this one and I loved it (i started it two weeks ago but hadn't been reading every day.)

This is my 3rd Mary Higgins Clark book. Didn't even realize I was becoming a fan until I found myself continuing to reach for her books. The first one I read was "Two Little Girls in Blue" and the second was "Silent Night" another Christmas book I found at a thrift store last year and read it one sitting.

This is the story about a few characters, and the first is a guy named Lenny who is a crook. He happens to be at a church, stealing, the same night as an 18 year old aspiring violinist is giving up her baby to the church. She had given birth that day in a hotel/motel and decided to give the baby up because she only had her grandfather and had no means to support a child. So she leaves the baby in a stroller with warm clothes, some diapers, and food in front of the rectory. She then goes to make a phone call to tell the church a baby has been left, but before she makes it a silent alarm is sounded inside the church from Lenny and she hears sirens and assumes the baby had been found. When Lenny is leaving to make a quick getaway with a priceless chalice and money he stole, he finds stroller and grabs it to make a quick getaway without being detected as he heard the sirens as well, and he has no idea there is a baby inside. Although common sense tells a person to look, what did he THINK was inside? 

So he goes to his aunts house where he is staying and says the baby is his and that the mother had abandoned the baby and went to California. His aunt buys the story and immediately falls in love with the tiny baby girl.

Fast forward 7 years and the story flips a little to new characters. The little abandoned girl was given the name of Star or "Stellina" and she is being taken care of by her 'great aunt' which Lenny's aunt. Lenny isn't around much, as he skips around to different places running "errands" for people for work. Star attends A Home Base program which is an after school program for kids who don't have someone to watch them after school, and Star's aunt is very sick as well. However, the Home Base Program is about to be cut because the women (nuns) who run it can't keep their doors open any longer due to regulations and laws. Luckily though, a very kind woman named Kate inherits her sister Bettie's home and she wants to turn it into a new Home Base for the kids with Bessie's blessing. But a second will is found of her sisters and she finds out that just a few days after she told Kate of her plans to give her everything, she apparently has changed her mind. This is where 2 other characters come in- Alvirah and Willy. Apparently these 2 characters are repeat characters of MHC (Don't remember them from other books but they have been in previous titles) and Alvirah is somewhat of a sleuth. Her and her husband won the lottery and live in a very nice apartment overlooking Central Park, but they are both still very modest people despite their good fortune. Willy helps out at the Home Base Program (his sister is one of the women who runs it) by doing repairs, and Alvriah writes for the Globe. Like I said she is a bit of a sleuth and she is friends with Kate, so when she finds out about this mysterious "second will" that is signed only days after the first one is finalized, she smells a skunk. Turns out that two tenants who were staying with Betty (Kate's sister) had someone dress up as Betty and sign a fake will, with 2 very impressionable but kind witnesses there to say it was "legit" and little did they know that the real Betty was down in the parlor watching TV, enjoying her last few days before she passed away. So the second will is found to be a phony and the first one still stands- Alvirah finds all of this out and the kids will have a good Home Base program. Also during the story, Sondra the 18 year old young mother who gave up her baby returns to NY and is sick to her stomach with worry about what happened to her baby because she finds out nobody at the church found the baby, but rather the sirens were sounding that night because of the burglary. Alivrah seeks Sondra out after Sondra has been hanging around the Church (St. Clements) where she left the child, and Alvirah finds out that Stellina is the child and reunites the mother and daughter. Also, the infamous chalice stolen from the church that night by Lenny is found with Stellina because he forgot to get rid of it and fabricated a story of how it was Stellina's mothers.

So, in the end...Sondra and her daughter are reunited and she comes clean about the night she left her, Lenny is arrested, Kate gets to stay in her home, and she gets to turn it into the Home Base Program for the children. The only things that bothered me about this book were that I found that the ending was rushed for one. We spend so much time reading about the will and all the clues Alvirah is following, and the end feels like it was written off too fast. I hate that feeling like I invest so much into a book and the detail and the end is cut too short, like a rip off. I also still don't understand how Sondra gave birth in a motel or hotel room by herself without anyone knowing. Then when Lenny takes Star, his buddy makes a fake birth certificate, but they never mention a social security number. So how does Star's great aunt enroll her in school or ever bring her to the doctor? I imagine she was issued one with the fake birth certificate, but it just seems to convenient. I dunno. Also, the note attached to Star was always kept with Lenny so he could prove he never kidnapped her so I wonder if he is ever found guilty of that. The book does mention that he had taken on a big job with an undercover cop so I guess I can deduct that when that blew up in his face that is why he was arrested. It does bother me that he pretending to pull a gun and tried to pass Star off as a hostage in the end scene when he was being closed in on. Poor Star! Lenny seemed like he legitimately liked the little girl but he was willing to use her as a pawn at any moment. Dirt bag!

But alls well ends well, right? It was a cute little Christmas book and I am curious to read more about Alivrah and Willy. I believe they are featured in the other Christmas book I bought from MHC as well.