Rating: 1/5

I've come to the conclusion that part 2 of The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana, or, Aphorisms of love, is the only part I think worth reading. I can't think of a better word than "worth," so for now I will stick with it. 
The Kama Sutra is a collection of teachings about love, ranging from congress, to attraction, to conquering, and maintaining relationships. These topics are taught in a manner that I think don't engender any true love and are extremely outdated. Teachings of the Kama Sutra include finding another wife if the first turns out to be infertile, whereas if the husband turns out to be infertile, nothing is said on that topic. The love that I've come to known does not constitute leaving a partner due to a biological predicament. The book also goes on to emphasize a woman's conduct to be centered around the husband and obey all of his orders. She gives up her dignity and potential for this. A man is encouraged to give his wife jewels and congress, which does not take away from his dignity or potential.
I understand that my western and modern perspective gets in the way of my review, but one thing that I heeded was that in marriages with multiple wives, there is a hierarchy ranging from the "favorite" to the least liked-as mentioned in the book. When you love your children or your friends, and I mean really love them, I don't think hierarchies are relevant to that love. 
I do appreciate the mentions of same sex love-making and oral congress with mutilated men, but these are extremely short. Nevertheless for a religious text, I'm glad it does not look negatively on it. 
Now I do think this to be a product of its time that I do not think should or can be applied to our modern westernized world. I say that for all parts of the Kama Sutra except the second part, which one can take notes on. It is made up of different types of love-making positions, rituals, and actions like kissing, biting, and embracing. This being said, one could take notes from this but I did not find anything revolutionary. Of course, you should read every book to form your own opinion, but if you seek to expand your knowledge and expertise in love making, I suggest other resources, and definitely do not pay heed to all of the teachings.