Rating: 4/5

Senghor, the first president of Sénegal, was also the best-known Francophone poet of Africa. This complete collection of his poetry contains the six books he published as well as two groups of earlier poems which were published later; it also contains translations of all the poems and an introduction by Melvin Dixon, and a lexicon in English and French of the African or unusual words in the poems. There are no introductions or notes to the individual books or poems.

This is modern poetry, with which I am not all that familiar -- very allusive and symbolic; however, with the context given in the introduction about when and where they were written, I could follow the basic ideas of most of the poems well enough to appreciate the imagery. It would have been helpful in some cases to have had some identification of the people to/about whom the poems were written. While I read the poems in French, I looked through the translations and they seem to be accurate and to reflect the spirit of the poetry, although not always the sounds, which are so important for this style of poem.

The poems in the first book, Chants d'Ombre, were mostly written during Senghor's student years in Paris, during the 1930s, and published in 1945. These poems deal with Senghor's divided consciousness, as an African studying essentially European culture in Europe. The second book, Hosties noires, written largely in a German POW camp, was published in 1948 and deals with the experiences of the Sénegalese soldiers in the French army during World War II. The third book, Ethiopiques, was published in 1956; this has some of the most difficult poems, although others are obviously love poetry -- he married his second wife in 1957. The fourth book, Nocturnes, published in 1961, is mostly love poems; the first part was originally a separate collection addressed to his first wife, while the later ones are to his second wife. There follows the first of the two groups of early poems, then the fifth and sixth books, Lettres d'Hivernage and élégies majeures published in 1972, from the period in which he was President of Sénegal. The book ends with another group of early poems.

Senghor is known for his theory of "négritude", which is evidenced in many of these poems, and had a major influence on later African literature (English as well as French), both directly and by way of reaction (e.g. Soyinka). For this reason, as well as for the beauty of the poetry itself, it is well worth reading. I may be becoming a convert to modern poetry!