Rating: 3/5

The Tommy &amp; Tuppence Detective Agency
A review of the Grapevine India Kindle eBook (March 29, 2022) of the original William Collins &amp; Sons hardcover edition (June 7, 1929).

This is a further catchup on the early Agatha Christies that I had missed along the way. The Tommy and Tuppence books are light fare with the highlight being the banter between the leads. The cases themselves are usually easily solved, although some derring-do may be required. Partners in Crime is in the "novel in short stories" format, but I didn't do separate ratings as we are in solid 3-star territory throughout. Nothing outstanding, but nothing disappointing either.

Tommy and Tuppence Beresford (now married) are sent in undercover by Carter, their chief in the British Secret Service, whom we first encountered in The Secret Adversary (Tommy &amp; Tuppence #1 - 1922). A detective agency had been operating as a front for a criminal conspiracy and has now been taken over by the Service. T&amp;T's job is to intercept any secret communications received and to pass them along to the authorities. As their cover they actually accept real clients and solve cases along the way.

As part of the banter, T&amp;T are inspired in each case by characters from the early age of detective fiction with either principle taking on the persona of that lead sleuth and adopting their methods for that chapter. So it is a series of mini-homages to classic crime fiction, of which some of the writers and characters are now forgotten a century or more later.

Among the call-outs are Valentine Williams' Clubfoot aka Dr. Adolph Grundt, Sapper's Bulldog Drummond, Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes, Baroness Emmuska Orczy's Lady Molly Of Scotland Yard and The Old Man in the Corner: Twelve Mysteries, A.E.W. Mason's Inspector Hanaud, Freeman Wills Crofts's Inspector French, Anthony Berkeley's Roger Sheringham, H.C. Bailey's Reginald Fortune and Agatha Christie's own Hercule Poirot.

I'd Like To Report a Crime! + Trivia and Links
The quirky thing about this Kindle edition is that they "stole" the cover image 😯!

Cover illustration by Matt Taylor for Penguin for the 2011 edition of John le Carré's "Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy" and some subsequent printings. Image sourced from We and the Color.

The cover of John le Carré's "Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy" (Penguin 2011). Image sourced from Goodreads.

Cover image for the DVD collection of the Partners in Crime TV series. Image sourced from IMDb.
Nine of the stories in this book were adapted for the TV series Partners in Crime (1983-84). Only 10 episodes were made, the first episode was based on the 1st Tommy and Tuppence novel The Secret Adversary (1922).