Rating: 4/5

I do love to listen to Elizabeth Strout on audio. The narrator has a knack of converting the author’s style to a voice production. I made the mistake of assuming the narrator of the author’s debut was Kimberly Farr; this was not the case. Stephanie Robert’s did a wonderful job, equally fitting the tone. I will always listen to this author’s books on audio, I enjoy them so much, and my busy life suits the platform.

As a debut, I think this book is fabulous though I didn’t love this title as much as the handful of others I have read. I’m not sure if it was the long-used trope of older men taking advantage of young girls, barely women. It’s abhorrent and seems to be everywhere. As I’ve often said, this is not the book’s issue it is mine, but of course effects my experience. The intertwining of the mother and daughter sharing this same experience is the reason for this subject matter, thus creating this main theme. 

This book is about a mother and daughter, and their lack. It’s very sad seeing the disconnect, and the amount of time it takes for realisations to take place, particularly from the mother’s point of view. There is a push pull element of love and hate, which highlights the issue they cannot just ‘be’ with each other, there’s always angst and an unwillingness to let go. 

Equally heartbreaking and quite tragic is the mother’s complete lack of self-worth, which she internalises so extremely this is dangerous for her wellbeing, over decades. Her mind does not stop. This is reflected almost comically at her workplace where the cast of characters come to play heavily as her work is her life in a way, not as a source of enjoyment, but a necessary evil that gives her a routine. As is the enamourment of her superior, an older man, who lacks personality and looks. Another dead end. 

The women at work form a pivotal aspect of this story, indirectly teaching the mother life lessons, while also getting to know the daughter. I love to love characters, and Fat Bev was one of these, imparting bits of gold here and there. The author has the uncanny ability to talk about the banalities of life contrasting devastating down falls, failures and just simply life stuff. Familial disappointments, community gossip, lunchroom chat, young sex and love, one’s ability to use their bowels satisfactorily, keeping up with the Joneses. The list could go on. She does the preceding in a way that forms a good novel. I don’t think there’s an author quite like it!

I listened to the audio version via the Indyreads platform and the State Library of NSW at 1.25 speed.