Rating: 4/5

Lovely book to read during hot weather.
December 1139--the civil war may have flared hot in November with the fighting in and around Worcester, but here in December winter is starting to set in with a vengeance. The story opens with the sub-prior from Worcester's Abbey visiting Shrewsbury in search of Ermina and Yves Hugonin, two siblings of a well-connected family who had been in that Abbey's care. They went missing during the period of chaos, supposedly headed for safety in Shrewsbury, accompanied by the young nun who was tutor to 17 year old Ermina. Alas, they had not made it to Shrewsbury after all. Are they lost? Did any harm befall them? A lot of questions, with very few answers at this point.
Brother Cadfael gets involved, in a very roundabout way, when the prior at Blomfield Abbey (near Ludlow) seeks his medical expertise for the care of Brother Elyas, who had been attacked and left for dead. It comes out that Ermina, 13 year old Yves, and Sister Hilaria had safely made it as far a Blomfield and Brother Elyas was added to their party to escort them on to Shrewsbury. Now, the good brother is near death and the other three are missing.
What follows is a complicated dance of people found, lost, found again--it would almost be a farce, if the stakes weren't so high. A large, well-organized group of outlaws is pillaging the area; burning, looting and killing with impunity. Of course, just what was needed! As if heavy snow and bitter cold weren't enough to complicate matters...
There is a murder to solve as well as missing people to be found. The two cases go hand in hand. The outlaws are prime suspects in the death of the young woman, but are they guilty of that particular crime?
There's a wonderful fight between between the outlaws and the local forces, complete with the daring rescue of an important hostage as our dramatic finale. By the time the reader gets to the end all the story threads are tied in a nice bow: mysteries are solved, the lost are found. 
As always, Cadfael is wise and wonderful. It was so nice to see under-sheriff Hugh Beringer in a major role in this one. The politics of the day weave their way through the story, adding difficulties to the search. All in all, a worthy entry in the series.