Rating: 4/5

Calvino's ecological allegories in the form of magical urban tales, takes a snippet of a story belonging to a season, and binds them into shape together to form the cycle of the seasons. Since all twenty of these very short stories feature the same character - Marcovaldo, you might just as well be reading a novella. Marcovaldo lives through the stories as the double of the writer, observing, reflecting and comparing in a perfectly detached way. He is a humble and romantic blue-collar worker lost in the big city, which perverts rhythms and obfuscates cycles. He is trapped in the unreality of this modern city and longs for nature, and nature rewards him in surprising ways. Mushrooms sprout out of the cement in 'Mushrooms in the City, the sky suddenly opens wide in 'Park-Bench Vacation', the moon shines brighter than the neon signs in 'The Moon and GNAC.' to name but a few. 

Economic fragility and the shift from rural to urban life are the threads that tie each story together, with his strength being able to take the most mundane situations and put a fantastical spin on them. Not many others writers could pull off Calvino's intent. He has the style as well as the substance. What I admire with Marcovaldo is Calvino simply following his instincts as a storyteller and achieves a durable balance between the heritage of 20th-century Italian neorealism and a fabulous vision of reality. He truly believes reality is fabulous, but also likes to believe fables are true, put these two together, and it results in some wonderful and dreamlike episodes where he shines in a clever and witty way. There is also a cartoon element to these, with Calvino himself saying he borrowed some of the techniques from a comic strip.

Up until now I have found Calvino a bit of a mixed bag, loved 'Invisible Cities', but didn't care much for 'If on a Winter's Night a Traveler', with a few others in-between. Marcovaldo sits somewhere near the top of the middleground. It's better than I expected, but always carried with it a few niggles. Still, a decent read, and one that would especially suit the Calvino enthusiast. 3.5/5