Rating: 4/5

I have an embarrassing confession to make: When Karen sent me this book I thought she was trying to tell me I was rude. I got a little sad because I try not to be rude, but maybe I am rude sometimes. My good friend Kim told me it was probably because I stuck my hand in Karen’s crème brulée when we were having dinner in New York City this past March. Apparently I was miffed she got the last one. I don’t remember doing that, but at the time I was pretty tipsy from the aquavit so it might have happened. In any event, I do remember that Karen was kind enough to share with me so I got to try some anyway, and it was yummy. But for the record, it is probably not very nice to stick one’s hand in another person’s crème brulée no matter how much alcohol is involved.

Then I thought maybe the book was one of those old-timey pamphlets. You know the ones that talk about Victorian etiquette and the proper way to use a tea cosy and stuff. Some of those types of books instruct young ladies how to politely write a response to a letter from a young gentleman, and they are quite amusing. I dashed off a PM to Karen to thank her.

Well, after that I opened the book to a random page and realized how very wrong I was. Yes, it is written in the style of a Victorian etiquette book, but the information it contains is far, far more valuable. Valuable and timeless. Let’s just say I could have used this book while I was growing into adulthood. It gives helpful information on how a girl should/should not behave in certain places and how she should/should not act around certain people. In fact, this book doesn’t have to be limited to girls. I think young boys would also benefit from the wisdom contained therein. 

For instance, did you know that in a pantry you should not ‘jerk all your boyfriends off into a pitcher of lemonade, even if you happen to prefer this drink with fresh cum in it.’? Well, shit. No wonder my fourteenth birthday party wasn’t the success it might have been.

Advice at the table:

Do not slide an asparagus in and out of your mouth while looking languidly at the young man you wish to seduce.

In retrospect, of course you should not do that. First of all, asparagus, while tasty, is not a sexy vegetable. Second, it makes your pee stink.

While in class:

If you are asked what planet Uranus is next to, do not reply with ‘Mycuntus.'

If the addition problem that you are given produces the number 69, do not roll about laughing like a little idiot.

(Oops.)

While visiting:

If you are sitting on the corner of a chair do not move back and forth too much. You will get distracted.

If you see a trace of bright red on a young man’s moustache, do not ask him in front of everybody: ‘So Mme X…has her period?’ An uncomfortable silence would follow.

(True.)

If you are told that you are a ‘real tomboy,’ do not show your cunt to prove the contrary.

I could quote so much more, but you get the idea. Plus, I don’t want to give too much away. This book is filled with delicious dirty words and I tried to choose some of the milder bits of wisdom to cite in my review. So, if that sort of thing offends you, you might want to stick with Emily Post.

Karen, thank you again for such a hilarious and informative read. I will refer to it often and enthusiastically.