Rating: 1/5

It is very hard for me to give a 1 star or 5 star review. It is simply a combination of either the book is perfect (rare) or the book has no redeeming features (rarer still). And I want to preface this review that from everything I can find, Goonan is a heck of an author and excellent at what she does. But for those people who read "critically acclaimed" or "modern day classic" and think that they will instantly love the book, I'm here to tell you I thought the same thing until I read and finished it. 

What's worse is that I consider myself fairly knowledgeable about sci-fi and so it hurts double to actually type some of this out. I just don't get it. There I said it. Verity goes on this journey to the Queen City, Cincinnati to save her foster brother, Blaze and her dog, Cairo. When she gets there to this enlivened city she encounters an immense situation of people where many are infected with a nanotech plague. 

The quest starts off reasonably enough (and actually the journey there is much more interesting than once she gets to Cincinnati) but somewhere between all of the bees, jazz references and the inane flashbacks, we get a story that feels very much in the past even though it supposed to represent the future. Furthermore, Verity has to eventually save the city that she has come to and I'm not entirely sure that it is a city that wants to be saved. 

Also, the book has a horrible habit of being unfocused. I get there needs to be some exploration of the city, but it's almost a scenario (until the end anyway) of oh wait, Blaze, right yeah I need to do something about that. It even had a chapter near the end nevertheless where they are attending a baseball game that really has no sense to the actual plot. Maybe the baseball game was supposed to be an allegory to something else, I'm not sure but by then I was so frustrated I just got through it. 

Kathleen Ann Goonan is an accomplished author, that's for certain but perhaps the way she wrote this landmark book is not going to be for everybody. It hurts to be so critical but when it takes me double the time to get through it and actually drags me down personally, then I have to let others know. Take care.