Rating: 4/5

Another re-read on my journey of reading all Stephen Kings books in publication order, as soon as I started this book it felt like yesterday I last read it even though it was years ago. TAK. This is a SK book that manages to stay with me. 

I am reminded why I am on this journey reading Desperation because there are so many Easter Eggs in this book including, The Dark Tower, The Tommyknockers and Rose Madder. The fact that this book has a mirror book The Regulators is really fun and I can't wait to read it. As far as I am aware the Regulators and Desperation are the same story told on different paths on the beam (The Dark Tower), like a parallel universe. 

Jonny is such an unlikeable character but his has a redemption story which I thought was really well done, you go from thinking Jonny is a bit of an ass to hoping he makes it. TAK. As villains go the cop is really well done, he's a complete mad man and brutal. There is a lot of body horror in this book and plenty of moments to make the reader squirm, because the cop is so unpredictable it's quickly apparent that everyone is expendable. Even people who you think are main characters never feel safe, there is no safety net. 

David is such an interesting characters too, I think the flashbacks he has give him real depth and personality. The reason that this book doesn't get full marks from me is for a few reasons but the main one is the lack of character depth for everyone other than David and Jonny. TAK. Steve and Cynthia didn't need to be in this book at all, they didn't bring anything extra to it, just a waste of page. Cynthia is actually from Rose Madder too and her character made no sense, she immediately jumps into Steve's care even thought she doesn't know him and if you have read Rose Madder you'll know how flawed that is. 

I am really looking forward to the difference in The Regulators and I am interested in how SK writes differently as Richard Bachman, I think I am expected less detail and a little more freedom when it comes to Bachman. TAK.