Rating: 5/5

I have become a fan of Patricia Highsmith's suspense books in the past year or so, but never read this book, The Price of Salt, which I knew to be a lesbian romance. It was, after Strangers on a Train, Highsmith's second novel, but since it was the fifties, she had to publish it (1952) under a pseudonym, Claire Morgan, but several years later she (finally!) published it as Carol, under her own name, and then Todd Haynes eventually made it into a film. Haynes fully understands the brutally repressive fifties for gltq folks, as you can see in this film and his earlier film, Far From Heaven.

The Price of Salt/Carol is indeed a romance, but it is understated, and seething with gestures and facial expressions that point to a volcano of emotions. Therese, 19, is dating a guy she likes, but isn't really into; she's temp-working in the doll section of a Manhattan department store. She's pretty passive, but one day Carol, 32, walks in and it is sort of love (or lust) at first sight. Carol also has men in her life, including a husband, and a daughter, Wendy, and we learn, as her husband learned, that she had a relationship with her current bff, Abby.

Therese agrees to drive to California with Carol, who is a little domineering for the passive Therese--she's evasive, and a little abrasive; Carol is at times a little condescending to the younger Therese--so they are actual human beings, not romantic fantasy figures, but they are still pretty crazy about each other. Carol's husband, with the help of Therese's jilted boyfriend, Phil, (these enraged straight males, rebuffed not because an affair with guys, but with women, omg!), hires a detective to follow them and tape conversations in motel rooms. 

At issue is custody of Wendy, and in the early fifties this was not even possible for a woman seen as so decadent as to love another woman (though if you can't say "gay" today in Florida, even at Disney World, how much progress are we actually making here?!). But to cut to the chase (the book's chase, not the actual straight male rage-at-sexual-rejection chase), one aspect of the fame of this book is that it has a "relatively happy" ending, a first for a lesbian novel read widely in this country.

I was led to this book by a very good comics bio of Highsmith, Flung Into Space, about how The Price of Salt was written, in part based on Highsmith's own relationship with a woman who lost custody of her daughter based on a trial involving tape-recorded hotel trysts.

I loved this book, written with subtlety and with complex characters. At the moment, it is my favorite Highsmith book, tacking back and forth from anguish to delight, but I will probably be ultimately faithful to The Talented Mr. Ripley as my #1. I don't really know why it is that Highsmith, a lesbian, who wrote more than 20 books, only wrote one "lesbian" novel, but I am glad she wrote this one. The mysteries have plenty of homo-erotic undercurrents, but never anything referencing main characters' sex lives (though there is no explicit sex in Carol, either, as this was 1952).