Rating: 5/5

This book is definitely a Madeleine de Proust for me. Owned first by my grandma, who used to have Boxers (one I remember in particular), I "borrowed" (never gave it back to her) it out of boredom one day. I was pretty young and although this book is not a puzzle to decipher, it was quite hard on my pea brain from time to time. 

However I instantly liked it. First of all, it has a dog in it. That is an insanely good selling point for me. Second, it depicts the friendship between a man and a dog and I LOVE these stories. I still religiously watch Turner &amp; Hooch once a year and am a babbling mess when watching Hachi. I don't think I'm alone in this, but animals in piece of fiction can be a very stressful moment. Are they gonna die? What will happen to them? 

It's kinda what happened to me with this book, although it is clearly not set in an universe where the animal could be in danger. It's quite peaceful (almost boring shall I say) to be honest. The kind of book you read at the beach during your hard-earned yearly vacations. It's a rather small book plus, every time I read it, it takes me an afternoon at most. 

As I mentioned in my first paragraph, my grandma used to have the kind of dog they talk about in this piece of work. I was extremely attached to it and it was the most gentle giant I ever knew. I think that's why I got attached to Néron, the dog in the book, so fast. It kind of gave me nostalgia and I couldn't stop reading it. Growing up with dogs is a different experience in my opinion, and any media speaking of that reminds me of it. I was smiling or laughing throughout the whole book, sometimes reminiscing on my own time with pets.

I won't go into spoilers, but whenever I reread Un chien de saison, I do feel a pang in my heart at the end. I know what happen, I know it, yet I still get happy-sad. I guess this is one of those books that will never get old for me.

I don't know if I would recommend it. I don't think it's that good (as I've said, it's very peaceful borderline boring), and the characters are overall bland. But it's a book I cherish nonetheless.