Rating: 4/5

Good grief. What a difference 18 months or so makes. I read The Big Sleep and i enjoyed it up to a point but found it a souffle overly egged on the 'witty and offbeat images' ingredient but this one, Playback, I absolutely loved. There is still the wit, the clever descriptions, the tension and mystery but it simply flowed for me more and perhaps i found Marlowe more attractive as a character. He seemed more human and if Chandler sometime strayed into dangerous territory in the prose stakes he inserted his tongue so firmly in his cheek that no-one, not even I, could miss the fun he was having at his own expense.

Then she leaned back and gave me the look. 'I've got friends who could cut you down so small you'd need a step-ladder to put your shoes on.'
'Somebody did a lot of hard work on that one,'I said. 'But hard work's no substitute for talent.'

The story is a contorted and confused one. Marlowe is given a job by an arrogant lawyer to follow a woman but he is not told why or for how long. His tailing of her involves his getting caught up in all sorts of shady and dislikeable characters. A corpse reported which then disappears, a suicide which remains unexplained, a woman who seems to change colours and manner with the wind and assorted larger than life hiss boo villains or incompetents make up a quick and enticing story. 

We see Marlowe encountering respect from unexpected quarters, advice and assistance from the habitually overlooked and we see him showing sympathy and a tenderness which is also unexpected.

'Yeah' he sighed. 'You work twenty hours a day to buy a home together and by the time you have, fifteen other guys have been smooching your girl.'
'Not this one,' I said. 'She's just teasing you. She glows everytime she looks at you.'
I went out and left them smiling at each other.

That little excerpt summed up why I preferred this book to the previous one. In The Big Sleep I encountered a brash heavy, a slick talking cynic,; in this one I met a man who I actually genuinely found I was rooting for.

I wolfed it down. I loved every page and the poignancy of the last chapter is really surprising. Hard-bitten private detective or not, in the last few chapters of the book Chandler lets us see this man's soul and his yearning. It is believable, he is decent and by the end I found myself punching the air in delight.

Just to show the change; here is the other review.
http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/...

With thanks to Steve who finally gave me the perfect idiot guide as to how to do this simple action !!