Rating: 4/5

Perhaps there's a reason why Lautréamont's celebrity never reached the heights achieved by his contemporary Athur Rimbaud. Les Chants are uneven and sometimes of suspect quality: this is especially seen in the second section of Canto II, where, after giving a typically Ducassian, abandon-all-hope warning diatribe, Ducasse devotes a few pages to the horrors of... writer's block. These are the "poison-filled pages" I've been warned about? A horrific description of Lautréamont's stalled creative process? Later in Canto III a lay is devoted to the supreme evils of... mathematics. And it's about as interesting as a high school Algebra class. Hoo boy.

On the other hand, there are times when Ducasse makes good on his promise of debauchery and some truly disturbing prose is presented. Ducasse has the most success here with his Sade-like depictions of sexual perversion, rape and body horror. To witness the cool nonchalance with which Maldoror cuts a bloody grin from ear to ear on his own face, just to see himself smile, is a revelatory moment.

Ducasse also finds success on a technical level. His successful elimination of an established narrative perspective anticipates Joyce's by 50 years. A simple look at the title of the work reveals how twisted his web is: the book is in praise of Maldoror, a fictional demon, and is supposedly written by a man named Lautréamont, who is never mentioned in the work itself. The name-game web is further complicated upon learning that the real author's birth name is Isidore Ducasse- or "I.D.".

Les Chants also anticipate a very 20th century phenomena among novelists: the obsessive and morbid cataloging of arcane myths and old prophecies from various sources. The same subjects that fascinated Ducasse (Biblical accounts of demons, gothic poetry, existential ruminations on birth and death) would inspire H.P. Lovecraft, Dylan Thomas, Jorge Luis Borges, William S. Burroughs and Philip K. Dick a century later.

Les Chants de Maldoror, despite its warts, is a highly entertaining and nourishing work.