Rating: 3/5

I went into The Crystal Star expecting disaster. Many consider this to be the worst Star Wars book written. So I was pleasantly suprised with how much fun I had with it. Its far from a master piece, but I had a good time. 

I can see where the flaws come in. I think Han's characterization ignores a lot of development, placing him much closer to who he was in A New Hope than who he was when we last saw him in Planet of Twilight. That being said, I think Vonda nailed the spirit of that version of the character. His interactions with Luke at the beginning just made me smile so much, their banter bringing me back to the magic of the original trilogy. I really liked Luke's characterization in the first half of the book, his quiet uneasiness as he approaches the mysteries of the Crystal star and a new kind of power in creish station. A master who is wise, yet jaded from what he's seen. However he still has a light hearted humor to him. I loved the scenes where he waits up for Han in the living room, igniting his lightsaber and scolding Han the way a parent would turn on the lamp and scold a child. This makes some of Vonda's choices with Luke in the second half of the book baffling??? He has a ton of childish outbursts which come out of nowhere, and later he almost falls for the temptation of Waru. This was just a weird choice feeling like temptation of power like this is something he has dealt with an overcome twice before.

Overall I really liked Luke and Han's story uncovering the mysteries of Creish Station. The plot of the twins getting kidnapped and Leia finding them was good too, but could drag at times. I like getting to spend a little more time with an older version of the twins and seeing them more. The whole "rouge darkside user trying to rebuild the emporer" was already done in Children of the Jedi, but i feel like it was done much better here with Hethrir than it was Irek.

The final thing I really enjoyed about this book was the picture Vonda McIntyre painted with her description of The Crystal Star, the anomaly of a white dwarf star crystallizing as it gets pulled into a black hole. I could really picture it and gave the setting quite an atmosphere. 

Over all far from a masterpiece, but no where close to the abomination people describe it as. A fun, but maybe innessential read.