Rating: 4/5

The Scarecrow Walks at Midnight is the first Goosebumps book I've read since putting the series down in the late 1990s. I never planned to reread this series, and going into this book I was a bit skeptical. These were horror books written for children decades ago. Would they still hold up today? Would they still be enjoyable to read as an adult? After reading this one, I'm thrilled to say that I absolutely loved it. 

Midway through this one, I was loving it so much that I went to a used book store and bought twelve more of the original Goosebumps series, which has sixty-two books. I'm not sure if I'll reacquire and reread all sixty-two of them (I no longer have my large collection of Goosebumps books from when I was a kid...sad face), but it's an enticing concept. I've heard that some of them are absolutely terrible, but it's definitely an interesting idea that I could reread all sixty-two of them and rank them from best to worst. Is that something you, the reader of this review, would be interested to see? I might just do it anyway... 

Ok, so...The Scarecrow Walks at Midnight. This book follows two siblings, Jodie and Mark, as they leave the big city for their annual month-long summer stay at their grandparent's farm. But things aren't as Jodie remembers. Her grandparents look worn down, and they're acting strangely. And their longtime farmhand Stanley is acting even stranger, ominously repeating that "the scarecrow walks at midnight", without ever explaining what he means. Can Jodie and Mark figure out what's going on? Do the scarecrows really come alive? 

I enjoyed this one a lot. I love the setting of a scenic, isolated rural farm where anything can happen and help is far away; it's the perfect setting for a scary story, and this story definitely has its scary moments. The characters were mostly good, and the story flowed well and kept me heavily invested. I was genuinely excited to read more of this book each time I picked it up, which is more than I can say for a lot of books I've read in the past year or so. 

The writing wasn't Nobel Prize material by any means, but what do you expect? Not only was this series written for children, but the entire sixty-two-book series was written between July 1992 and December 1997. That's roughly five and a half years. If you do the math, that means Stine had to pump out one of these books every month, for five and a half years straight! And he claimed in a Reddit AMA to have written them all himself! It's impressive, but given that fact I don't expect them to be perfect. 

Going back to the possibility that I reread all of them and rank them. If I'm going to do that, I need to use a ranking system other than stars, simply because there are so many. If you ranked fifteen of the Goosebumps books 3.5 stars, how can you order them? They have an identical rating. So, I will use the CAWPILE rating system, which arrives at a pretty exact number out of 10, and then translates into a star rating. When ranking them at the end, I'll use the rating out of 10 to do so. Here's the CAWPILE rating for this book (each category is out of 10) 

Characters: 7.0
Atmosphere / Setting: 8.8
Writing Style: 7.5
Plot: 7.8
Intrigue: 8.5
Logic / Relationships: 8.0
Enjoyment: 8.5 

= 56.1 total
÷ 7 categories = 8.01 out of 10
= 4 stars