Rating: 4/5

https://msarki.tumblr.com/post/151577...

Hammerklavier offers so many excellent autobiographical sketches, so human, so very touching and real. Yasmina Reza covers an enormous amount of ground in these short pieces. She is a deeply feeling and thoughtful person. Unpretentious, and humble to a fault. Her writing is honest and interesting. She has a great personality that comes bursting out on the page. She is clever and funny and pointedly wicked at times. 

  What vain displays of beauty, of "masterpieces", could possibly rejuvenate us? We, whom no one will ever want again, ever desire again; we, whose only prospect is a cold bed and oblivion.___Yasmina Reza from Farewell to Catalogues   

It happens that a leisurely stroll through the Huron National Forest on a warm summer day provides, after some coaxing from me, enough impulse for my wife to want to remove her clothes and bask naked in the wonderful canopy of northern pines and white oak. There is something comforting and desirous at play in this complete forest. It not only makes her feel beautiful but also lends its energy to a life that is seen as slipping away ever so gradually. There is a sadness in the forest as well as great zest and vibrancy for new adventures. Neither one of us is equipped with the courage to take many chances. We dream and plan our indulgent escapes that never materialize. But in the mapping out of all our differences and what makes us most interesting to each other, we learn so much about ourselves, our love for each other, and what our animal natures could have become. Our minds have at times been willing; our bodies still refuse to go. Our marriage; a confused adultery of condoned behavior unrealized.

  ...this mystery was attractive as long as I was still becoming.___Yasmina Reza from Farewell to Catalogues

  Of late there have been far too many deaths happening for my wife and her friends, and way too many people in her family. On one hand she feels grateful for having known all of them and on the other she realizes the possibility of hardly anyone left to attend her own funeral on that fateful day. Neither my wife nor I cultivate many new relationships. We never reconnect with acquaintances and rarely keep in touch with old friends and relatives. The people closest to us have, for the most part, already died. And it won't be long in the scheme of things that our own demise will be inevitable. Time is certainly felt passing us by. I write as if my life depended on it. My wife peers into the mirror honestly and is sometimes horrified at her own perceived aging. I prove to her otherwise with new photographs and video that I capture her naked in. I have shared these images with few others we know in this life. But as Reza says above, there will be a time very soon where we will both stop "becoming" and the attraction will be already entirely spent just as was a debt forgiven. The end of life is not pretty, and lately we both have been reading perhaps too much about it, looking for signs for when the good road might desperately devolve into rough riding.

  ...man is better at dreaming than living.___Yasmina Reza from Farewell to Catalogues  

Reza is too smart and unappreciated. She should be already recognized for her cleverness and brilliant gift for writing. Instead we almost daily have presented to us, on our plates as force-fed gruel, the disgusting and pretentious drivel of our so-called new and experimental writers. What has happened to serious literary culture and good taste? Most poetry and fiction of these contemporary days is horrendous, but is justified by the blessings of the new literati. It is rotten and it stinks.

I have not yet read the plays Yasmina Reza is best known for. I have also not yet seen the film that Roman Polanski adapted from one of her earlier works. But I have read her novels and this memoir I am reviewing here, all remarkable for their good humor and honesty in the face of so many hard knocks and sad trouble on the page. She is a woman I would definitely want to know and have a relationship with. I might even meet her for tea.