Rating: 5/5

The Vampire Lestat is the perfect sequel (and counterpoint) to Interview with the Vampire.

It tonally gives you Lestat's take on how he is what he is and what he does. It gives reason to the frustration Louis and Claudia express during Interview. That Lestat is entrusted with a vamp secret that if it got out (i.e., Akasha and Endil)) as well as them literally getting out -- could cause a whole lotta chaos. It makes Lestat that much more interesting. And learning the depth of his power. To me, it gave me a lot more respect for Lestat, which I surmise the Incomparable Anne Rice was going for. 

Right away you get the emotional vibes and nuances that to me Rice was so good at. You see it in Lestat's early mortal life, as well as how he reacts with Nicolas and then later (as a vamp his mum). The love he has for both Nicolas and his mom really come alive. It makes his losses of these characters in his life that much more poignant.

I also liked that it fleshed out the origins of the Theaters of the Vampires as well as the vamps themselves. Great, unique mythology creation. Great world-building. Lestat gives such life to other main characters the Lestat had met along the way, including Armand. Made them, to me, so much richer. And because he seemed to have this sort of indiscernible vulnerability to Lestat and Gabrielle, it made his verbal dances with them so much more interesting. 

A topic addressed in this book is one I have on occasion I have had with my wife -- the Dark Gift -- carrying with it both a "gift" and possibly a cost of immortality. Yeah, I suppose it would get incredibly boring at some point. And it might overcome the drive to exist. 

As usual, Lestat contains great imagery. Very unique story-telling structure that I found engaging because it wasn't the sort of constant progression of one event after another throughout. I know this description isn't doing the structure of Lestat much justice. But it's like the way she wrote and narrated Interview, only more amped up. 

I read an online article recently where the Incomparable Anne Rice wanted these books to be literature. Not horror or adventure, but literature. I think she succeeds. If we make it 100 or 200 more years, I think these books will be studied in high schools and colleges. 

It really is literature before its time. But that's just my opinion. I know some of the series isn't as popular. I haven't gotten to them all yet. No matter what, I am looking forward to at least finishing this series.