Rating: 5/5

SPOILER ALERT! SPOILER ALERT! SPOILER ALERT! ***
^ don't say I didn't warn you:
SPOILER ALERT!

This book is SO FREAKING AMAZING. I'm a poet myself, and if you're a literary type, you can appreciate the beautiful language that sort of blooms in your head as you digest it, swallow its lyrical cadence like a series of pills that make you loopy with dreams.

As for those of you who don't get the ending, I don't see how you don't get it. Diana DIES. Hellloo. Most of the book is, quite literally, the "life before her eyes". The life of "adult Diana" is not actual. She is imagining what would happen IF she told Michael Patrick to kill her friend and not her, but that doesn't actually happen. While reading, the title clicked like a camera shutter in my head and I just, got it. Plus, she's in the hospital at the end? and her parents think that "maybe" she can hear them? Sometimes titles do wonders.

I loved the way the author portrayed the potential guilt weaved into the decision making that goes on simultaneously. then, at the end, Diana's "daughter" Emma disappears. She invents Emma from a cross with the name of one of the "unborn" on it that she actually saw earlier with Maureen. She invents the idea of her daughter going to the Catholic School because she actually passed that school on her way to school. Mr. McCleud gives her extra credit for going to see Paul McFee's lecture and she has a major crush on him, so she invents the idea of him being her future husband. I loved how there were so many recurring, splendid images splattered throughout the text. 

I do agree, however, that the poetic prose is quite unique. I haven't read many books, even those by poets, that read quite like this. There's this one poet by the name of Richard Tillinghast who also writes essays, and most of his "prosy" work is not nearly as poetic as his, well, poetry. However, given the circumstances young Diana and her best friend Maureen find themselves in, it is perfectly appropriate. Imagined lives in our heads take on a dreamlike, surreal quality, and that is inherent in any thought process involving imagined images. I must say that the movie turns it into a horror-thriller, which I wouldn't have done. I mean, really, they show the blood and gore scenes around five or six times throughout the movie: SO not necessary. House of Sand and Fog may be a fantastic movie, but it doesn't translate well when its surreal horror is transferred to a screen adaptation of a book about a teenage girl and her hopes and wishes, no matter what may be going on on the periphery of her thinking. (I must add that I don't mean to make this a review of the movie, but its existence may impact the view others have on it and so I would just advise: PLEASE read the book before even thinking about touching the movie).
 
 As for the reviewer who called it "young adult", I doubt that most young adults would be able to appreciate the poetic stance the writer takes. the writing is just so tremendously beautiful, but in the wrong eyes its ambition may take on a different quality. you know? anyway, I don't mean to be pretentious, but I really believe that this book is necessary to understand how the lines between poetry and prose can be blurred in a gorgeous way. At this point, it's seriously my FAVORITE. I could go on and on.