Rating: 5/5

The Corrections by Jonathan Franzen is a masterpiece. My first read of this author, I will read all of his books, you can tell how good a writer is when you automatically create a new shelf on GR.

We have the Lamberts – Enid and Albert, an elderly couple, living in a mid-western conservative town in the US. The house is big and unruly, they raised their three kids there back in the day. Albert is suffering from a progressive disease, perhaps dementia and/or Parkinson’s. Enid has her hands full; Albert has his big blue chair and his basement (laboratory), their exchanges are sad, funny, impossible and cruel. 

Then there’s the three kids:

Gary: Married to Caroline, they have three kids living in Philly. He’s an anally retentive sort, kind of depressed and seems to be completely dominated by his wife. He’s also a miser, too careful, too particular for me. He seems depressed, is unhappily married and not really likeable.

Chip: A hopeless type, but likeable enough. He finds it hard to keep hold of a woman. His inability to maintain any sort of responsibility and his lack of means are a problem. He sees himself as a playwright of sorts. Unreliable, spontaneous but an okay kind of guy.

Denise: The youngest of the three, has been married, but is now single – she’s had relationships with both sexes and is an obscenely talented chef. I loved Denise; I wish I had met her back in my early twenties. But methinks, I would have been intimidated by her, she’s not without her issues and faults though – but what a fascinating lady! Sexy too.

This author writes like no other – his characters are so layered, we start off with the two parents and we progress through each of their kids nice and sloooow-like. We shoot backwards and forwards in time, schooldays, boyfriends, girlfriends, arguments, mates, injuries, good things, bad things, jobs, affairs – oh man, everything. Everything we, ourselves, experience in life. The things that make us what we are. I don’t think I’ve known any characters in any book I’ve read – well maybe apart from the likes of Trajan, Hadrian and Nero – as well as I now know the Lamberts. 

Franzen frequently takes us on unexpected tangents with this cast, and I would think “why is he taking us here?”. Well perhaps there is no reason why – apart from building the character, so we know who they are. I know the Lamberts - I am intimate with them. Surely, that’s what character pieces are all about?

The narrative moves us steadily to a Christmas Day gathering in the family home, a Christmas which Enid believes will be their last one together due to Alfred’s ill-health. If you read this, you will be very aware – Christmas Day will be a torrid affair. It doesn’t disappoint. Poor, poor Enid – this elderly lady had her hands so full of Albert. I saw bits of this with my father looking after my mother when she had dementia – poor Dad was at his wits end, and he wasn’t well either. You will all find something to relate to in this book, to be sure.

Even though each character, particularly Gary (in my view) act awfully sometimes. Such as the way Gary speaks to his poor Mother at Christmas time. Even though it’s uncomfortable to watch, the reader will know WHY he acts like that. The reader is fully informed of each character’s make up – we know why, we understand, we have empathy. Oh my, this was such a riveting read, I was hooked from page one and the story about Arthur’s Blue Chair.

Loved it, love the author and the Lamberts.

5 Stars

.