Rating: 4/5

In the year of the fabulous Paris World's Fair, of 1867, when the glamorous city is crowded, with thrill seeking foreign and domestic visitors, Nana Coupeau, a prostitute, makes her unlikely debut also, on stage, in "The Blonde Venus", a spectacular but mediocre operetta. That she can't dance, sing or act, and has a horrible voice, doesn't matter, what is important, Nana is quite beautiful and has charisma, Monsieur Bordenave, the nervous owner of the shabby Opera House,"Varietes", isn't worried he tells his friends on Opening Night ( they almost believe him). And Bordenave was right, Nana becomes the symbol of the decadent, French Second Empire, of Napoleon the Third, her half naked, stunning performances, just standing there, in front of the curious, enthusiastic, enthralled audiences, becomes the sensation of the city, overnight the unknown, poor woman, reaches the pinnacle of success, at 15, countless affluent, adoring, some very famous suitors, throw money at her feet, taking advantage to enrich herself, bed hopping with hundreds of men and women (no exaggeration), strangely but maybe not, Nana despises them. Spending money recklessly and there are many others around, who do the same, sex seems to be all that anyone does, in this society, as written by Emile Zola, a fierce critic of the regime, corruption, scandals, thievery, anything goes. Ultimately the new star, meets Count Muffat, a honorable, married, but unhappy man, who set's her up in a huge mansion, full of luxuries, expensive jewelry, furniture , clothing, food, servants, only the best for his unfaithful love. Still Nana, (who's hair is blonde on one page and red on another , what gives Zola?), gets bored easily, while spending money faster, than it comes in. Men are always lurking about, everywhere in the premises, slaves to strong emotions, they can't control, or understand, the helplessly infatuated Count, is powerless to stop the debauchery, he is too much in love and can only hope, for a short time with his mistress. Zoe her good friend and servant, runs the house, taking care of Nana's every need, Satin an old schoolmate, and fellow traveler, in their former profession, moves in, and they begin a lesbian affair, which the very jealous Count , doesn't mind a bit... These two tarts, the word is continuously used in the book, by the author, seem to be the happiest together, not caring for the rest of the world, just enjoying being in the same company, hours pass quickly and quietly ... Sex rains down like a torrent, striking everyone, drowning them in lust, corrupting and finally destroying... I liked it.