Rating: 3/5

The final outstanding category in my book bingo for the year was to read the first book by a favourite author. Looking over the books I have logged on my Goodreads account, Pullman was up there. I don’t have one favourite author but loved the 'Northern Lights' trilogy. Having read 'The Ruby in the Smoke' frequently when I was growing up, I thought it was high time to revisit that feeling of youthfulness!

I think this book, the start of a four-part series (reviews to be following soon), are an ideal read for a young adult, even pre-teenager. We have a strong, female heroine with the likes of Sally, and a likeable supporting cast. Set in Victorian London, we follow a mystery that involves Sally, the unexpected death of her father, and a precious ruby. When Sally first starts out, she is dramatically isolated, but quickly makes friends. Jim, Fred and Trembler are wonderful friends to her and show readers that companions can be supportive and never expecting something in return.

With all good mysteries we have a positive protagonist and then the evil villain. In this case, Mrs Holland is chilling, creepy and quite evil. She is determined and unstoppable; totally immoral, she is the antithesis to Sally in strength and loyalties. I found Mrs Holland rather chilling and, coupled with the recurrent motif of opium, this could make a rather dark novel for younger readers. Pullman goes into a lot of detail of the effects of this narcotic and yes, it can be used as a deterrent to drugs, it is all rather dark and like a nightmare. Opium and the opium dens are a key part to the progression of the plot, so this is something to consider if offering this book to a younger reader.

Whilst I really enjoy reading Pullman’s writing, this is not an example of his strongest fiction- perhaps because it is the first novel he published? I remember having this feeling when I read this series many years ago: deducing that other books in the series were more enjoyable and a lot less dark. True, the plot does move at a pace and there is plenty of intrigue in the mystery. However, aside from getting to know the key characters, this was not the most exciting.

I am pleased to be able to revisit a series from my childhood. I am looking forward to reading the rest of the books although, it is probably for the last time. If you are looking for a well-written, creepy Victorian mystery with a range of characters to suit all tastes however, then I think that maybe this book will suit your needs.