Rating: 5/5

Professor Johnston often said that if you didn’t know history, you didn’t know anything. You were a leaf that didn’t know it was part of a tree.
…
The purpose of history is to explain the present—to say why the world around us is the way it is. History tells us what is important in our world, and how it came to be. It tells us what is to be ignored, or discarded. That is true power—profound power. The power to define a whole society.
…
Marek wondered what it must be like to live your entire life in this world. To live and love, constantly on the edge, with disease and starvation and death and killing. To be alive in this world.
Remember InGen? The blandly named and not entirely above board corporation that secretly cloned dinosaurs in  Jurassic Park? Well, get ready for ITC, the blandly named and not entirely above board corporation that secretly built the world’s first quantum computer. Their CEO Robert Donager may be a world-class jerk, but at least he funds archeological digs around the world, including a dig in France at the site of a medieval battle. But when the students working the dig find a message from their missing professor—a message written over 600 years earlier—the students finally learn ITC’s secret: ITC has used their quantum computer to build a time machine. And now the students will have to put all of their knowledge of medieval France to the ultimate test as they travel back in time to April 7, 1357, to try to rescue the professor.

Timeline has a great blend of science and history. You’ll learn a fair amount about quantum physics and the theory of the multiverse (though that’s become much more widely discussed in popular culture over the last 25 years since this book was written). And you’ll learn a good bit about life in medieval France. The book regularly calls out common misconceptions, the differences between life for the rich and the poor, and seems to paint an accurate, detailed picture of how different—and more casually violent—daily life was then. And once the characters go back to medieval France, the story is almost non-stop action. The students are dropped into a valley on the brink of battle. They are constantly being separated and brought back together in different combinations as they swept into the events. There are castles and monasteries, damsels in distress and in disguise, tournaments and secret passages, sword fights and, you know, time machines. It is, above all, a really fun book. Highly recommended.