Rating: 3/5

*Would have rated a 3.5, but the strength of the main character was far too vulnerable, which weakened the storyline for me.*

OMG, as I started reading and got to page 4, I was completely ticked off. At age six, the rage of Gabrielle's mother and the child abuse this poor kid had to endure at such an innocent and tender age made me furious. By the end of Chapter 2 I was ready to slap some freaking good sense in Gabriella's father John Harrison and force him to not remain complicit as he witnessed the devastating and deadly child abuse his wife inflicted mercilessly onto his daughter. Eloise Harrison's outright cruelty left numerous bruises on Gabriella's fragile little body and her severe beatings broke some of Gabby's ribs which Eloise could give a flying flip about.

Her father abandoned them and her mother quickly abandoned Gabriella by leaving her at a convent. Gabriella feels alone but believes she has found a place of safety at the convent, even though her guard is still up. She has a lot of adjusting to do because although she feels she's in a better place than she was at home, she is socially awkward and she is like that little bird that does not want to leave the safe haven of her new nest.

She went on to become a Postulant (Sister Bernie) and didn't want to leave the convent. She is quite gifted at writing. However, her innocent world is turned upside down when she meets a young priest, Father Joe. He leads her into a forbidden love affair which eventually led to him committing suicide leaving her pregnant, shamed and forced to leave the confines of the convent forever.

With nowhere to go she finally finds a boardinghouse to stay in, but only a couple of months into her newly found freedom there, she gets into a relationship with a con-artist named Steve who uses her, robs from her and finally beats her so badly to the point of death. She suffers so many severe injuries that it was a miracle that she lived. Her doctor Peter, who is 12 years her senior, takes a liking to Gabriella and after her couple of months of release from the hospital, they get into a relationship.

Now, while I was intrigued by the storyline, I disliked how Gabriella's character was woven into crazy relationships so quickly behind each other due to her naivete, only to leave her gullible and easily hurt once again. I liked the fact that she found her strength from the disappointments in her life but I didn't like how her character was woven into this beautiful wounded bird that kept looking like she lacked common sense and intellect, while falling for someone so quickly who said they were so intrigued by her beauty and gentle spirit. UGH! C'mon now Danielle Steel! And now here comes hot-tailed Dr. Peter traveling to San Francisco, to be with his true love Gabby. Geez, Louise!

Oh, and one last thing, both of Gabriella's parents BTW were total weak "anal" passages and the authorities caught up with that no account, lying weasel Steve, locked his butt up for attempted murder and was tried for all of the other previous crimes he committed while he was on the run from state to state!