Rating: 3/5

"The opinions of others whether you agree with them or not are something you have to learn to tolerate"
Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan, two Jedi knights (well, one is a Master, the other his Padawan, but who's counting?), are surreptitiously sent to Naboo to negotiate a treaty to put an end to the blockade the Trade Federation has on the planet. But negotiations are short when the Neimoidians try to kill them and now the Jedi try to get Queen Amidala, ruler of Naboo, to Coruscant, to spur the Republic into action.
NOTE: Based on unabridged audiobook and novel.

I Liked:
Terry Brooks was given an huge task: put the first Star Wars movie for over 15 years into novel form. The previous authors had pretty much taken the screenplay and frilled it out a bit for novel form. But Brooks bucks that. He includes three distinct scenes that are never seen in the movie and were never filmed. One is how Anakin destroys his pod in the first unseen race. This is fundamental to showing Anakin's skill and how the Force is with him in the Boonta Race (which he wins). The second is a scene where Anakin shows compassion on a Tusken Raider. That scene is really poignant especially in light of Attack of the Clones. Instead of hearing how compassionate Anakin is, we get to see it. And the third is a nice summary of the demise of the Sith Order and the rise of the Rule of Two (okay, now we have Jedi Vs. Sith and Path of Destruction, but you have to realize in 1999, we had neither).
Besides these two specific scenes, Brooks takes time to slow things down from the hectic editing of the movie and explain the things that don't quite make sense. Why does Qui-Gon bring the clumsy Jar Jar into Mos Espa? Why does Obi-Wan throw Jar Jar into the droid hold? These are only two of the myriad of minor questions you might have if you just watched The Phantom Menace.
I also liked the insight into characters like Obi-Wan Kenobi (who was irritated by his master's constantly bringing along people for no reason), Qui-Gon (who rebelled because he felt the Force), Jar Jar (who really wasn't as stupid as the movie portrayed him), and Anakin (we get to see some of his dreams, which eerily reminds us of Clones).
Brooks has a nice writing style, easy to understand, nice to listen to, good pacing, and nice descriptions. I had just finished reading Cloak of Deception, which in my review, I noted that it tended to overdescribe, and I was glad that Brooks didn't do that. Also, Brooks was pretty adept at transcribing the podracing scenes and the action scenes.

I Didn't Like:
It's hard, I'll admit, to review a novelization of a movie. It has to stay true to the movie, and yet add something more, else why read the book and not watch the movie? Unfortunately, other than a few unique scenes, there really is very little reason to pick up this novel.
Firstly, I still didn't like how Anakin comes off as being a young adult and no where near the 9 that he is in the movie and in the book. I know part of this problem is in fact the movie, but Brooks doesn't help by having Anakin have way too many romantic thoughts about Padme--way more than a typical 9 year old should have.
Another thing that REALLY bugged me was how Brooks never bothers to write from Padme's point of view. I know this might have blown the secret, but still, Padme/Amidala is a HUGE part of the movie, the main reason for it, from one point of view, and we can't have a single scene written from her? This might not sound like a problem until Brooks has to force Anakin and Jar Jar into the Senate Hall (?!) so that they can hear the big speech she gives the Senate. What the...??? Just put Amidala there! Stop treating her like a one-shot love interest and make her a character!
A problem I had with Obi-Wan, actually with many characters, is how racist they appear. Obi-Wan says he doesn't want Jar Jar to tag along because he was a "foolish looking creature". So if Jar Jar was a sexy Twi'Lek it would be okay? Also, I grew embarrassed reading about Panaka's "dark skin" that was mentioned whenever he was in a scene. Why is this necessary? Why didn't anyone comment about Obi-Wan's "white skin"? Also, Padme stereotypes Neimoidians as all being cowards, and I absolutely loathe all-species stereotypes.
The repetition was unnerving. You could make a drinking game out of how often we read about Qui-Gon being "leonine" or someone being "chagrined" (that last one made me want to double face palm).
By far, the biggest problem with this book is how emotionless it comes across. I know that sounds odd, but although we learn more about characters, I still felt an emotional distance from everyone, as if the novel had merely been transcribed from the script (and in more than one place, it was very nearly). When you read a novelization of a movie, you want to learn more information from it, to grow close to the characters, understand what is going on in their heads, feel their feelings. I don't feel that Brooks ever tore down that barrier and truly brought me closer to any of the characters.

Dialogue/Sexual Situations/Violence:
None.
Twi'Lek slave girls.
A few characters die. There is a large battle at the end and several smaller skirmishes.

Overall:
If I had to compare this to the movie, I would definitely say it is better. There is better flow, more clarification, and less wooden acting (and bad scripts). However, it still has its problems: namely never letting Padme speak for herself or letting us emotionally attach to the characters. If you haven't seen the movie, read this book. If you have seen the movie, then I would skip.