Picked this up to read while waiting for my flu vaccination at a walk in clinic. Really it was more of a sit in clinic as I got through fifty pages before the pharmacist dealt with me.

I vaguely remember it being on TV once and that P.D.James was in the House of Lords just like Ruth Rendell perhaps they talked shop together? But maybe not, since they sat for opposing parties.

The title of the book is a phrase repeated three times at least during the book. I noticed that Ruth Rendell did the same in the two Wexford novels of hers that I have read. Perhaps this is the custom in thrillers? In which case in the future that will have titles like "he braked abruptly", "she slammed the door", and of course "his shirt was stained with the remains of sandwiches past".

This novel read to me as though it was her first or second thriller, I frequently had the sense that James was a reader and familiar with this genre and was consciously writing with knowledge of its tropes, strengths and weaknesses, in fact she was an experienced novelist by the time this one left her typewriter. The interesting overlaps between her biography (as read on wikipeadia) and that of her hero in this book; Cordelia Gray are perhaps a sign of developing self confidence rather than an urge to write herself out. Cordelia herself I thought was most believable as an heroic version of the author rather than as a realistic portrayal of a 22 year old woman with shorthand experience, a Marxist father, and a patchy education partially administered by nuns. 

The story is I am sorry to say silly, in terms of the drives and motivations, my sense is that James had a strong visualisation of a couple of scenes and the  mild spoiler coming so look away if you don't want to know it central mystery - a murder hidden as a suicide  it's over now you can return to reading it you like  maybe the characters too and cobbled or bodged together a plot to link all these pieces into a book, if I was being generous I might say that sub-consciously the guilty parties wanted to be caught and punished which is why they do such silly things, but I warn you that is a very generous reading.

As a period piece it is more interesting with a familiar culture clash between generations and conversations between an Agnostic Anglican and an Atheist Methodist which might engage you if you could be described as one of those things.

There are some enjoyable smiling raising meta fictional asides in the beginning and the end - the bits I found fun are below in the updates.

James' life reminded me of Penelope Fitzgerald's. But Fitzgerald came from a family with a strong Liberal tradition, James was a born again Conservative and that I feel is the difference between the books of these two women. That's my theory for the day anyway.