Rating: 4/5

I can’t believe 10 months have gone by since I read the previous installment of the Felse Investigations. Ironically, my review of Mourning Raga (Felse Investigations #9 ) indicates I read while battling a cold, and I’m also down with a cold as I finish The Knocker on Death’s Door. The reality is becoming clear; Peters writing is a satisfying escape from physical ailment. 

The Knocker on Death’s Door (Felse Investigations #10) features our beloved George Felse and an intriguing crime in the fictional Midland village of Mottisham that Peters unrolls with her usual skill. I truly enjoyed the characters of Dinah, Dave, Hugh, Alix, and Robert, as well as additional companionship with the professional yet compassionate CID Felse. Complementing these characters with paced plotting, Peters has a wonderful way of crafting her narrative. As I read, I highlighted several passages that struck me as indicative of her voice. I’ve had to bypass those that give away anything. These sections can give a perspective reader a sampling of Peters style. Or, perhaps if you are already a Peters admirer, these passages will pleasantly refresh your acquaintance.

“The flat was small, hesitant in style, confused in taste, as if she had composed it in hurried five-minute frenzies between the office and whatever her social life consisted of, and forgotten it all the rest of the time. Quite of bit of money had gone into it, but not much effort or thought, and it must surely have been coming to pieces in sheer discouragement long before [XXX] had got {themselves] murdered in some obscure cause in a far-distant village. Yet there were signs that this woman could have been a house-proud wife and mother if she had ever given herself the chance.” Loc 781 The Knocker on Death’s Door (Felse Investigations #10), Ellis Peters, 1970

“Withdrawn, the village moved about stealthily in circles, eyes slanted always towards the profaned place of death, feet always directed assiduously somewhere else.” Loc 989 781 The Knocker on Death’s Door (Felse Investigations #10), Ellis Peters, 1970

“Opportunity dazzled him, suddenly turning the tragedies of Mottisham bright side out.” Loc 1438 The Knocker on Death’s Door (Felse Investigations #10), Ellis Peters, 1970

“So the end of his journey was incredibly like the beginning. He had made a loop in space-time, and arrived at the very point of his departure.” Loc 2262 The Knocker on Death’s Door (Felse Investigations #10), Ellis Peters, 1970

“Sometimes the mind connects too quickly, the body’s energy is used up in a convulsion of awareness. She seemed to hear her own mental processes at work, like listening to a tape recordingof herself, but with an inward ear.” Loc 2546 The Knocker on Death’s Door (Felse Investigations #10), Ellis Peters, 1970

I confess to some discomfort with the ending. While the particulars of the crime are detailed, the story arcs of our principles are unresolved. I enjoyed these characters and wanted to walk them a bit farther into their lives after the traumatic events. Though Peters hints at their future trajectories, these broad strokes don’t present for us *how* they arrive at new stages in their journey. I find myself hoping that crime returns to Mottisham and we can visit with them again. I’m so pleased with this series and already looking forward to the next one!

There's more!
Death to the LandLords (Felse #11), Peters, 1972
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...