Rating: 5/5

Stand on Zanzibar, 1969 Hugo Award winner, is among the greatest and most fascinating science fiction novels ever written. While it has a few memorable characters, and a couple different interesting and tangentially related plots, neither of these things is what makes it stand above so many other SciFi genre novels. What sets this brilliant, dystopian novel apart and above are two things — its unique structure, which allowed for superior world building, and the enduring relevance of its themes more than a half century after its publication. 

Brunner modeled the structure of his novel after the style of the monumental USA Trilogy, by Lost Generation author John Dos Passos. This is a collage style — breaking up the main plots with frequent diversion chapters that imitated advertising, news bulletins, chapters from outsider, radical books, as well as interludes with minor characters and their situations that, while not being connected to the main plots, give major insights into how this dystopian near future world functions. He labeled these various diversions with the chapter titles of Context, Continuity, Scanalyzer, and Tracking With Closeups. This allowed Brunner to most effectively map out his near future world that is breaking under the burden of massive overpopulation, and has resorted to eugenics laws that limit the number of children, who can legally have children, and try to eliminate disadvantageous genes. 

Brunner wrote Stand On Zanzibar in 1968, and set it in the then near future of 2010. While, of course, it is nothing like a one to one prophetic vision, it is impressive just how many things he got right, and how relevant the issues he addressed still are. He extrapolated out emerging issue from his time, like the absolute dominance of televised media in shaping and controlling our culture with frightening accuracy, and while he failed to get the exact technologies, like cell phones and internet, just right, what he came up with was close. One of his major themes is emerging dominance of AI technology in our lives, which also seems eerily prescient. Even in social issues he was fairly accurate, writing of a culture where homosexuality and polyamory had become socially acceptable. And of course, for a novel hinging on the stresses of overpopulation, he got his numbers pretty close, describing a world of over seven billion.

Beyond the already mentioned attributes, Stand On Zanzibar shines in other respects. Brunner created a unique lingo for his near future that works well in shaping the feel of his world while avoiding being as difficult to track as other similar cases such as that in A Clockwork Orange. Brown nose, pale ass, shiggy, codder, mucker, and many other terms give Brunner’s world a unique sound that quickly becomes easily decipherable. His two major protagonists, rising young executive Norman Niblock House, and cool synthesist and secret spy Donald Hogan are interesting and memorable, and easily pull readers into the separate plot lines that they play out. In addition, side character Chad C. Mulligan is a particular stand out. A former professor, and famed writer of radical Anarchists Sociology books, we first encounter him through the collage interlude readings from his popular books, and he later joins the plot, meeting our major protagonists and participates in their stories. 

Stand On Zanzibar is a must read if you are a science fiction fan. Also, because of its unique, collage like structure, its greatest impact is delivered from listening to it on audiobook.