Rating: 5/5

Please allow me to preface this review. 

I love to read. I’ve been escaping by burying my nose in books for as long as I can remember and this particular book has taken me back to where it all began. Reading this book again after nearly 28 years has vividly reminded me of those early days when a 600 page book was such a huge part of my life, and the newest Stephen King hardcover was the BEST Christmas present ever! I say all of this to make clear that I’m probably unable to separate my sentimental attachment to this book from the critical aspects of reviewing it, and since I found myself equally enamored this time around, it gets all five stars from me. As a kid and a teenager, I devoured King’s entire library in the 80s/early 90s, a true Constant Reader during that time. Though I eventually branched out to other authors and genres, for me Stephen King and those magnificent books will always hold a special place in this reader’s heart. 

Enough gushing. Let’s talk Tommyknockers. 

First, I must respectfully disagree with others who feel that this is King’s attempt at sci-fi. This, to me, is pure horror suspense. I understand the comparison, what with that gigantic, most-likely-from-outer-space thing buried in the earth... but to me that’s where the similarity ends. I would argue that this story is much more about the slow build-up of suspense. The at first curious, then frightening, then horrifying things that are happening around town and how they’re all related to that buried thing. The way that people in town are suddenly feeling a little more connected with one another, undergoing bizarre changes, coming up with brilliant and terrifying new technology. It’s all about the Becoming. And it’s super creepy!

I was unaware until recently that this book had gotten such widely varying reviews and that so many people were disappointed by it. That really surprised me because every time I picked it up I ended up completely absorbed. Granted, the writing in Tommyknockers is much edgier and less polished than I remember his later works being, which could have turned some readers off. Personally, I found it bracing - downright comical at times. 

And then there’s Jim Gardener. A.K.A. Gard. He’s absolutely my favorite character in this book from his first page, which brings me to what I’ve said before but bears repeating: what King does best is his characters. Throughout this book we see Gard at his best, worst and everything in between. He’s at times deplorable, at times exceedingly passionate, snide, funny, melancholy, and at all times indisputably genuine. It’s easy to underestimate him but I knew what was in store for him and it was not an easy path. I don’t want to spoil anything so I’ll just leave this here as warning for the Tommyknockers…

  You got no fear of the underdog
That's why you will not survive

Spoon
The Underdog

Thanks to my friends in the Eclectic Club for another super fun group read!