Rating: 4/5

It is almost impossible to explore any idea without starting from some basic preconception. The idea here is same-sex relationships and the common preconception is that if the societal hurdles imposed on such ‘forbidden love affairs’- forbidden at the time this novel was written- were removed, all would be bright and rosy between the lovers. What Patricia Highsmith masterfully demonstrates with clear-eyed insight is that “human relationships are gravel, ever shifting under our feet; they are not concrete, as we are forever trying to believe.”  Yes, despite what romantics wish to believe, things never fail to turn dark from time to time, right when you thought those lovers would live happily ever after.

This is the book that the 2015 film “Carol” was based upon, the success of which revived the interest in the lesbian cult classic that Highsmith published under the pseudonym Claire Morgan in 1952. It was only in 1990 that it was reissued as “Carol” under the real name of its author. Apart from the ‘career-suicide’ this book presented in 1952, it was also so personal to Highsmith that “it was difficult for her to take ownership of it for many years.”

On the face of it, the plot is pretty basic: 20-year-old Girl meets older Woman, Girl is attracted to Woman’s sophistication (and mother-ness), Woman is attracted to Girl’s vulnerability (and daughter-ness). Sex, subtly and elegantly, enters the picture. They give in to desire. They take off on the quintessential road-trip to freedom and self-knowledge in the American heartland. All hell breaks loose because society isn’t at all tolerant of such relationships, especially when one of the parties is a respectable wife and mother. There’s a price to be paid for all the ‘fun’: “the price of salt.” There always is…

I had only a vague recollection of the movie as a heart-wrenching, beautiful love story. It is that, of course, but it’s much more in its exploration of Love between two human beings, irrespective of their sex, or social status, or age difference, or whatever else categorizes us. Love and Attraction: the identities, the roles we assume in order to conquer and connect, to fit in the patterns of those we fall for. Highsmith is doing a marvellous job at describing those patterns and the dynamics between all of her characters, female or male. She unflinchingly depicts homosexual passions as well as universal power plays. The readers of the 1950s may have been too shocked or tantalized to see it but we, the readers of the 2020s, level-headed and urbane, should pay more attention to her carefully chosen words and scenes. 

There’s plenty of suspense in this book but it’s of a different kind from that in her crime novels. I think it’s equally fascinating to not be able to predict which way the story will go in the end. Highsmith’s protagonists are fully realized characters who can go either way with their choices as long as they stay true to themselves. They are reluctant to conform to stereotypes, be they the conservatism of the society they live in, or the romantic notions of the fans of the genre. That was what ultimately made this a satisfying read for me on every one of its many levels.