Rating: 4/5

This book wasn't at all what I was expecting. I thought it would be a relatively light book to read with the promise of intelligent, talking dogs sitting around a campfire telling stories of Man who no longer ruled Earth and was only a myth to them. But what I soon discovered was, this book was a heavy, mind-boggling, thought-provoking look at the twin societies of Man and Beast, chronicling the step by step downfall of the former and the rise of the latter. 

This was a highly imaginative collection of eight interconnected stories linked by introductions to a larger one, and including an epilogue the author added twenty years after these stories were originally published separately in the science fiction magazine "Astounding," during the 1940's. These stories were extremely sad, but it was a sadness that was good, something that came from dreams dissolving into wisps of hope that the dreams might materialize again in a different form and be realized. What the heck does that mean? It means I felt empathy for the humans in this book who strove and strove, but failed, and were the architects of their own demise, not from greed or violence as you might expect. No, it was from visions of a better future achieved by tampering with their own progress and with that of other species. In other words, the way to hell is paved with good intentions. That's one of the things that made this book unique. There weren't a bunch of evil people racing around, plotting to rule and ruin the world. They only wanted the world to be a better place, according to what that meant to them. As the book put it, "Man was running a race, if not with himself, then with some imagined follower who pressed close upon his heels, breathing on his back. Man was engaged in a mad scramble for power and knowledge, but nowhere is there any hint of what he meant to do with it once he had attained it."

These stories centered on the men of the Webster family whose actions or inactions caused a domino effect that wiped out the society of Mankind on Earth. In its place, dogs that a Webster altered to enable them to talk came to inherit Man's place on Earth, developing a very different society than he. But if you think that canine society involved nothing but eating and playing and scratching at fleas, you'd be wrong. But like any society built on ideals, it had its problems that soon led to others and to a crisis man never faced in his own society. 

The author wrote these stories as a reaction to the horrors of WW2 and to the fear instilled by the atomic age. But it might as well have been written in modern times in reaction to man's use and misuse of technology with its beneficial and damaging effects on society. I'd call this story a cautionary tale without any preaching. This is a slow-paced story that, while not action-packed, is packed full of cerebral musings on society and the individual coping with its disintegration, causing him anxiety, loneliness, aimlessness, and disconnection. Still, despite the heavy subject matter, this book's inventiveness entertained me and the writing was excellent, even poetic in some parts:

"A rocker squeaked and the sound was one with the time-stained room. One with the wind along the eaves and the mumble of the chimney’s throat. Fire, thought Jenkins. It’s been a long time since we’ve had a fire. Men used to like a fire. They used to like to sit in front of it and look into it and build pictures in the flames. And dream—"

Yet all wasn't wonderful with this book. One problem I had was that the characters were only representative and lacked dimension, if not feelings, acting as mere chess pieces in the sociological "what if" game the author invented. The only character with any depth was the loyal, though sometimes disobedient robot, Jenkins, who bore witness to everything for tens of thousands of years. He may have been made of metal, but he had the heart and soul of man inside him, representing Man's continuance even after he was gone. 

As a side note, there were only two women in this book in two blink and you miss them moments. This truly is a story about Man. How different the story and its outcome might have been had more women been in key roles. 

Speaking of the outcome, Simak was reluctant to write the epilogue included in this book. Originally, it was only to be part of a memorial collection in honor of his deceased editor and friend, but he was persuaded to include it as the final word for his book. And having read the epilogue, I can see why Simak felt as he did about it. But I have to say, unlike the original ending without it, it was an ending I'll never forget, one that twisted my heart and left me wanting to give one of the characters a great big hug. I'll definitely be reading more of this author in the future for his imaginative thought provoking work that also entertains.