Rating: 4/5

An ubiquitous small town in the remote Arizona desert , a pleasant area of the late 1960's such a wonderful place is the setting as startled but curious , often bored people in Piedmont where nothing ever happens it does tonight, they look up in the dark sky something is falling, drifting slowly... down just north of the hamlet. Finding a capsule obviously from outer space..However what should they do, give it to the local doctor the silly man opens the object and promptly expires, as will the rest...the fifty others all except a two- month -old baby and a sixty-nine- year-old man, the whole town succumbs why? When finally discovered , two satellite retrievers don 't come back, Vandenberg Air Force base (the Cape Canaveral of the west coast) sends jets to look around , safely thousands of feet high above the troubles...not good, bodies scattered over the little town and the hungry vultures are having a feast. A SECRET OPERATION Project Wildfire named by the government brings in scientists to test those lucky two and investigate the case, so many gadgets so little time the massive machines give the untrained a huge headache. Must keep the virus from spreading through the country killing millions if not all and tell the citizens nothing they would panic cause riots and looting, butchering each other, everyone for themselves but maybe not...Should they nuke the place...Better hurry this thing is contagious. The stressed four scientists Drs. Jeremy Stone bacteriology, Charles Burton pathology, Mark Hall surgeon and Peter Leavitt microbiologist the victims, the pressure of working and feeling the tension in a hidden government facility more like 1984 than 1969 when this book was published, up to these able four men to save the world... find a cure... now ...how's that for an assignment, volunteering can get rough and you think you have problems? o in the endless number of gifts by the great I really need not say name, Dr. Michael...
Crichton, his books show us he was a master of excitement, the king of high tech thrillers giving pleasure to readers and a little bit of knowledge too, this couldn't hurt we all require facts to make the right decisions. An appropriate novel for the days of the pandemic, who could have guessed that fifty years later the book becomes sadly relevant, the writer knew a plague sooner or later inevitably would cause a global catastrophe...