Rating: 1/5

On some level, it hurts me to write this review. I first discovered Irving’s books in high school and fell for them hard. The obsession quieted down after a few years, but seeing his name was enough to give me nostalgia. A Son of the Circus has been in my to-read pile for literal years, and if I hadn’t procrastinated so much, maybe I would have been kinder in this review. Maybe I would have found some enjoyment in it. 

Unfortunately, this book was an absolute slog, to say the least. 

The actual plot is fairly simple – the issue is that, all too often, the plot is buried in flashbacks (or flashbacks within flashbacks) or tangents that traverse several pages or even chapters. By the time the story comes back around, it’s easy to forget what has actually happened in the present timeline. Sure, these flashbacks and tangents may be rich in detail (Irving’s eye for that sort of thing, for making environments come alive, is on full display here), but the detail overwhelms, rather than enhances the story, as you’re forced to wade through pages and pages of filler to find one detail that has a modicum of relevance to the actual plot. Perhaps most frustratingly of all, after over 600 pages, the plot just… peters off. The climax of the book passes by in the blink of an eye – the event that the book has, apparently, been leading up to has such a weak payoff that you could be forgiven for thinking that you’d missed a few crucial pages. 

The plot isn’t the only issue. What I found more egregious, especially as I made it towards the mid-point of the book and realized I still had over three hundred pages left to go, was the repetition. Certain phrases and expressions are utterly overused – it seemed like “Dr. Daruwalla cried” appeared every other page, and the more that was used (along with descriptors such as exclaimed or shouted), the more Dr. Daruwalla came off as completely hysterical and overdramatic, rather than the intelligent, wise man he’s supposed to be. Additionally, characters are referred to by descriptors over and over again – Martin Mills is referred to as “the scholastic”, and Dr. Daruawalla is interchangeably referred to as “the screenwriter” or “the doctor” far too many times, as if Irving is afraid that we will forget what these characters do if we aren’t reminded every other page. 

On a related note, the characters are also difficult to keep track of, because in addition to their descriptors, almost all of them have at least two names, and there’s no rhyme or reason as to which name they’re referred to at any given time. On a single page, Irving may switch between John D., Inspector Dhar, or simply Dhar, multiple times. Perhaps this was supposed to be a comment on the different roles we all play in our lives, but it’s done so haphazardly that it isn’t very effective. 

Also, if you’re looking forward to reading this book solely for the circus element – don’t bother. Considering the title, the circus features surprisingly little in the book, and when it is discussed, Dr. Daruwalla’s love of the circus doesn’t come off as convincing – he elevates some of the performers to almost divine figures, but I never really got a sense of why. 

However, while all of the above certainly contributed to my low rating of this book, there’s one factor that, on its own, would have convinced me to give A Son of the Circus a single star rating. 

This book is nearly thirty years old, and I want to give Irving the benefit of the doubt, but I would also pay him all of my savings to never write about trans and/or gender-diverse people again. Their treatment in this book is simply abhorrent. They are used for shock value; you’re repeatedly bludgeoned with the fact that they’re freakish, disgusting and worthy of mockery. They’re constantly reduced to nothing more than their sexual organs/practices and the ‘bizarre’ nature of those organs/practices. At one point, the term “it” is used in reference to one trans character, and I came very close to flicking the book out the nearest window. Not to mention that the trope of having the trans character being the villain/antagonist is tired and completely unnecessary. Even in 1994, I imagine that it was getting old. 

In conclusion, I’m tired. The last few of Irving’s books that I’ve read have been merely disappointing. This one left a bad taste in my mouth, one that even my fond memories of The Hotel New Hampshire and A Prayer for Owen Meany can’t erase. To quote a line from the book (which, like everything else, was overused as soon as it was introduced), it’s “time to slip away” from reading any more of Irving’s work.