Rating: 5/5

In Mortimer J. Adler’s How to Read a Book: The Classic Guide to Intelligent Reading, you learn about the various levels of reading and how to achieve them – from elementary reading, through systematic skimming and inspectional reading, to speed reading, you learn how to pigeonhole a book, X-ray it, extract the author's message, criticize. In short, ‘all books are NOT equal, and some books are not more equal than others’ to misquote a popular saying. Therefore, they are not meant to be read in the same way! 

For Yours Truly all reading is enjoyable—well okay, except math textbooks—some being more enjoyable than others. Also, some reading is more relaxing than others, i.e., it is of the lighter fare, does not require so many ‘grey cells.’ For moi, these are the Agatha Christie mysteries, because I do not expect to solve them, and I do not even attempt this impossible feat. I am quite sure there is some obscure British pastry, idiom, custom or unique cultural phenomenon I am sure never to have heard of—which I will learn at the end of the novel—that is the basis of Miss Marple’s knowledge, so why sweat it?! Just kick back and enjoy! 

Anyway, I do! This is also why I do not review these books… Why write up review after review saying, “She tricked me again?!” This would become tedious for the best of friends. Just because I enjoy learning these quaint new things, still I cannot share them, or I would spoil the story for others. 

However, here I have come across an AC I can share because she has introduced me to a plethora of new mystery writers! One of my all-time favorite things when I read is an author who shares his/her competition! THAT—to me—shows true comradery, esprit de corps and a generous nature willing to share the limelight with those who could threaten one’s livelihood. Obviously, Ms. Christie is not worried about such petty stuff.

So here are some of the other mystery writers of her era: Edgar Wallace, author of The Daughters Of The Night and The Black Abbot +, Valentine Williams author of Okewood brothers books, A.E.W. Mason, author of At The Villa Rose, and The Four Feathers +, Clinton H. Stagg of Thornley Colton, Anthony Berkeley, creator of Roger Sheringham, Freeman Wills Crofts, author of the Inspector French mysteries and H. C. McNeile, author of the Bulldog Drummond books. 

In Partners in Crime Tommy and Tuppence solve their crimes while attempting to imitate the techniques of the great sleuths listed above. Of course, they also aped the great Hercule and Sherlock, with Hastings and Dr. Watson playing sidekick, but I didn’t feel necessary to include them above being fairly sure readers are familiar already. I apologize if I have missed any others. There were so many, and I may have been so caught up in the story a reference escaped me. Still, I think the above list could keep any reader of mysteries, however serious, busy for at least a year, trying to get through them. Best wishes!

Great book! Thanks a million AC, for this book and all your others! GREAT ending too!