Rating: 4/5

UPDATED, December 3, 2015: Just saw Carol, the Todd Haynes film adaptation starring Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara. Gorgeous looking, and very faithful to the book. The cinematographer captures the era beautifully, and Haynes plays a lot with windows and reflections in an effective way. Therese's profession has been changed from budding set designer to budding photographer, which works well for a visual medium. The two leads are terrific, and Mara particularly makes you understand this character who tends to be a passive watcher. I preferred Far From Heaven, but the tone was much different. This movie isn't a big blockbuster, of course, but rather a handsome arthouse flick.  

Published in 1952 under the pen name Claire Morgan, this book by the author of the Ripley novels and Strangers On A Train chronicles the love between 19-year-old set designer Therese and the wealthier, older and more worldly suburban mom Carol. 

The lesbian plot might feel slightly tame today, and Therese comes across as overly passive (Highsmith addresses this in the afterward). But the novel, Highsmith's second, is well-structured, sensitively written (at times it's almost claustrophobic in its details) and an intriguing portrait of 50s repression and conformity.

Furthermore, the book's said to have influenced Nabokov's own tale about forbidden love, Lolita, and the Oscar-winning women-on-the-run film Thelma &amp; Louise.

For years The Price Of Salt was relegated to the suspense and thriller shelf. But now, rightly so, it's being recognized for its literary merit. A couple of scenes sizzle: in the women's first meeting, Therese, who's working part-time in a department store before Xmas, helps out Carol, who's looking for a doll, and the two obviously share a connection; and there's a terrifically catty scene later on between Therese and Carol's nosy (and possibly also lesbian) friend Abby.

Director Todd Haynes, who brought 50s-style hidden homosexuality so evocatively to the screen in Far From Heaven, is directing a forthcoming adaptation of the book (called Carol), with Cate Blanchett (see production pic above) and Rooney Mara in the leads. Can't wait.