Rating: 4/5

A mixed view of Raymond Chandler's last completed Philip Marlowe novel "Playback," his writing seemed tired...done before , lacking the usual sharp, dazzling words which made him the best in the genre. However there was only one master, a second magnitude star is way above the norm, forget the plot just digest the dialogue, Mr. Chandler was noted for, ravishing the reader with his overflowing stream of endless eloquent by-play as the action percolates in the murky background...yes the light is no more, still the brightness continues on the sheet. The plot is the usual complicated murder mystery, unwrapping the guilty with an assortment of odd, rather weird suspects who you would keep below the horizon the minimum distance from your vicinity. Marlowe gets a strange assignment from a Los Angeles lawyer follow a beauty Betty Mayfield one of many names she uses , around the southern California wealthy town of Esmeralda ( La Jolla) the kind of place were the rich raise their noses at the unfortunate middle class, in actuality a neighborhood in San Diego. The private eye is never sure what is going on, why he is here, to pass the time enjoys dalliances with two lovely women, they hate then change their minds then hate again. Nevertheless spending 
time relaxing with others in a luxurious hotel even in the off season has its pleasantries but for Mr. Marlowe constantly waiting nervously as the next shoe drops and does often, the atmosphere increasing in thickness you can smell carnage coming... murder or suicide who can tell? The victims remain dead no matter which way they fall, Philip has to stay alert not to tumble in boisterous action. That's the premise and the interesting part for the curious reader absorbed in the cloudy story we all know how the narrative will come out the amusement is the way it arrives a quick movement then a slow fade out just like life. Raymond Chandler was writing his 8th Philip Marlowe book when his hand stopped , Poodle Springs (Palm Springs) don't you love those aliases? An admirer of his Robert B. Parker a fine author himself, Perchance to Dream a would be sequel to the classic The Big Sleep ... not as good obviously still it will entertain people,
 a pretty diverting homage I liked , need to conclude the last novel, have to do this to finish my odyssey .... a pleasure indeed.