Rating: 4/5

***SPOILERS*** The story starts out exciting and mysterious, a fat businessman stumbles upon some mysterious mummified corpses that have been hung up in various places in Paris. A goat's head is placed on top of the bundles. At the same time, two unknown people with different goals are presented, it eventually turns out that they both are going to Adèle, one to talk to her, the other to kill her. It's amazing how many people who hates Adèle and wants to kill her at this point. She is lured out of the house several times to stand in special places and wait for something to fall on her head. One case is a recreation of the train accident at Gare Montparnasse in 1895. Adèle dryly comments that someone thinks she's a fool.

2/3 into the story, on 21 June 1912, Adèle is put into a trance and lured to the Monceau Park pyramid. This is the last time she is conscious in six years. What happens inside the pyramid is quite confusing, and the first time I read it I didn't understand anything. A number of people who have nothing to do with Adèle Blanc-Sec, neither before nor after, enter furiously from different sides and then get shot by each other. Some of them are from previous Tardi albums, but what happens is really completely detached from everything. It is a veritable bloodbath, Adèle also dies in the end, but is saved and with the help of Mouginot and her mummy, she is placed in a life-giving bath. But Mouginot is also killed, and it all ends in December 1913 with Dieuleveult saying he will turn off the machine that keeps Adèle alive. Then suddenly it is August 1914, World War I is underway, and we have no idea what happened to Adèle.

Tardi plays with the medium, but I remember finding Adèle's passivity frustrating when I first read it. Tardi is aware of it himself, with comments such as "that day nothing happened" or "this story takes a long time to get going". It gets pretty wild eventually. It's enjoyable how the mummy comes to life and steps in to support Adèle on several occasions.