Rating: 5/5

This book is special to me. Friends on GR who follow my reviews will know that most often I read translations of modern foreign novels. I’m a geographer so I like to learn about life and places in other countries. Of course, as a big reader, as a young person I had read many translations of classics - Dostoevsky, Jules Verne, etc. - but this book that I first read about 25 years ago, long before I started writing reviews, showed me the value of contemporary translations. In addition, translations are usually excellent books because they were often award-winning in their home countries. This book won France’s highest literary award, the Prix Goncourt, for 1968. 

So this is a great story. The title is apt because it is about an older couple in France, during and after the German occupation in World War II. They live in the Jura Province, in east central France, right on the Swiss border. They live in a small town but happen to have a large patch of land that they farm. 

It’s a second marriage for him after his first wife died young. He has two sons, one by each wife. The older son is fortyish and lives in town and has become a collaborator with the Germans. He’s a food wholesaler and makes big money supplying the German occupiers. The younger son by his current wife is 20-ish and has left home supposedly to join the anti-Nazi resistance fighters. Most of the time they don’t know where he is or even if he’s alive. 

He’s 70 and she’s 56. They’re both crotchety (he reminds me of Ove in the novel with that name) and they bicker constantly, but they have a deep love and respect for each other. There’s the old expression “work like a dog.” I’ve never seen a dog work but it seems apt. Early in the book there’s a story where an acquaintance gives them permission to gather firewood on a lot three miles away uphill. He drives the old man’s 4-wheel cart up there on his truck. The next day the couple walks three mils up the hill with their cutting tools. At his age, he gets winded easily; she younger, but has a hernia. The spend all day cutting and bundling wood and they push the cart BY HAND over ruts and through mud a mile to the road and push it miles along the town streets back home. 

The old man is in love with hard work. He worked 12 hours a day all his life as a baker but retired when the war began issuing rationing coupons for “gray bread” mixed with sawdust. The bread disgusts him. Now he works twelve-hour days chopping wood for their stove and weeding and hoeing their large plot of land. He could sell off some land and improve his life but he’s a skinflint and he won’t do it. He won’t spend the money to adapt his wood-fired stoves to burn the coal issued by rationing. After the war, a visitor is shocked to see they have no electricity and no running water – they still have an outdoor well they pump by hand.

The old man has no interest in politics. His wife tells him war news she hears from neighbors. He just wants to be left alone to his drudgery. But politics intrudes on his life in a vicious way, which is really the core of this story. The husband and wife enter a mine field when they talk about their two sons. The old baker is a-political and doesn’t really care about the two sons taking different sides. 

But he’s deeply disappointed in both of his sons. The rich German collaborator visits them infrequently even though he lives in town and he doesn’t help them out. In fact, he wants his father’s land to build a garage for his delivery trucks. The old man will never agree to that. His younger son can do no wrong by his mother. The few times they see him, he doesn’t seem to be involved in the fighting; instead he’s hanging out as a poet and artist. The old man sees no point in this foolishness. Things come to a head when they worry that the older son might actually turn the younger son over to the authorities. 

All in all, an excellent read. It gives you a great feel for life in rural France under the Nazi occupation and how it affected people’s lives. It’s a beautiful picture of love between an aging quarrelsome couple. And it’s about a life of hard work and drudgery leading to disappointment in the end. Melancholy, but, In this case, c’est la vie. I’m giving in a “5’ and adding it to my favorites. 

The author (1923-2010) wrote more than a dozen novels. He must have been very popular in France because two of his books were made into movies and a half-dozen were adapted for French television series. Yet on GR most of his books have only 10 or 15 ratings and none more than 80, whether they are in English or French. I think his work (this book, anyway), deserves greater recognition. 

Top photo of French cottage from workaway.info
Second photo from vrbo.com
Hitler visits the Eiffel Tower from alamy.com
The author from alchetron.com