Rating: 1/5

I recently learned from Ivan Illich that all texts up to about the late 1100s were simply strings of letters with no spaces between words. The reason for this was because texts were very auditory technologies, meaning that to read them you had to read them aloud, hear the words form, and then make sense of them that way. Before spaces between words, you couldn't have the bourgeois timewasters that we so often encounter in modern English, such as silent letters, spellings retained from other languages, etc. Written languages were more descriptive of the sound than of the etymology, but now we've shifted.

So when certain moderns re-learn that texts used to be laid out in a grid of letters, they see them as crossword puzzles. Then, in a stroke of low IQ, they assume that the original authors intended them to be read as crosswords, though crosswords never existed and they most definitely didn't think of that. This is the exact same leap of logic used by "ancient astronaut" theorists who conveniently extrapolate the sci-fi films of their day into the art of the ancients, with equally unimpressive results.

Unfortunately for us readers, what the author explains in the first chapter sounds plausible enough, but once you realize that like all charlatans he made a lot more predictions than just the one or two which came true, you realize he was sending these absurd "prediction" letters to every corner of the globe, yet only publishing the results of the 'accurate' ones.

And to be honest, I'm baffled that they could honestly think these were predictions, just by the simple fact of certain words (without any vowels) or numbers (letters doubled as numbers, so technically there's numbers all over the OT) being near each other, whether right to left, left to right, diagonal, up to down, down to up, whatever. And what counts as "near to each other?" And why add in the ability to skip several letters to find the next one? That part, which holds the whole tissue-titanic afloat, feels the most like cheating.

This book is sad proof of a few things. First off, investigative journalists are probably the stupidest smart people I've ever run across (Lee Strobel is the first to come to my mind). They're used to hearing tall tales and being duped by world governments, so their credulity is legendary at this point. Then take into account the fact that they're experts in literally nothing, not in language, not in science, not in thinking, not in philosophy, not in theology, not in mathematics, and you have the ultimate idiot who is uniquely qualified in how unqualified he is to write this book. 

The unfortunate thing about universal literacy is that it has allowed dangerously stupid people to think they have the power and knowledge that they lack; because they can write a book and even get it published, they think they're onto something. Back to the way texts were originally composed and compiled, there used to be many guardrails in place to help prevent books like this. First off, instead of doing boring time-wasters like crossword puzzles, people had real work to do in the premodern world. Life was hard, and time off was spent in genuine play or genuine rest, not in mere distractions and time-wasters like we find on our phones or in our newspapers. Secondly, they only read worthwhile things, ancient things, important things, not every Dick, Joe, and Harry's hair-brained conspiracy theory. Thirdly, reading and writing were communal acts, which meant that even if someone got a stupid idea, it would have to pass through a lot more people (and a lot of peer pressure, especially from orthodoxy and authority) before it would ever see the light of day. So let this book be a lesson in what not to do, and nothing more. Good riddance.