Rating: 5/5

"'Compared to the dullest human being actually walking about on the face of the earth and casting his shadow there,' Hardy supposedly said, 'the most brilliantly drawn character in a novel is but a bag of bones.' I understood because that was what I felt like in those interminable, dissembling days: a bag of bones." 

4.5 ⭐'s

  Initial Thoughts 

Its been a long time since I've read a Stephen King book. I think the last one was Billy Summers when that was released. A fine book and something different, but not quite up there with his horror classics. You know what I'm talking about. The likes of Pet Semetary, Salem's Lot and The Stand. 

But going so long without dipping in to King has left me thirsty. The man is perhaps the greatest storyteller in modern literature. Sometimes you do forget exactly how good he is and why he's so many people's favourite author. Well it's time for me to get reacquainted with him with a book I've never read before. Which is crazy as it's a Bram Stoker, Locus and World British Fantasy award winner for best novel. But I've heard a lot of bad reports on this one being slow and overwritten. Well time to find out for myself, which is always the best way in life.

I know Fairy Tale was released last month. But I was in the mood for horror in the build up to Halloween. No fantasy in the Edmunds household. So without further ado, let's dig out that beast of a book...Bag of Bones.

  The Story 

Yes this is a horror story and we kick off in Derry, Maine (home of It and Insomnia), where popular author Michael Noonan suffers the awful tragedy of loosing his wife, Jo, to a brain aneurysm. Struggling with grief and coming to terms with the loss, he is plagued by writer's block and his life appears to be stuck in limbo.

Racked by surreal and disturbing dreams he eventually submits to the notion that he must return to their summer home of 'Sara Laughs' in the backwoods of TR-90 that is right next door to everyone's favourite town of Castle Rock. Once there events only continue to get spookier and what at first appears to be the perfect place for Michael to grieve turns out to be the home of a dark secret. And he can't shake that feeling that he isn't alone. You weren't expecting things to go smoothly though we're you? this is a Stephen King book after all.

But as with all of his books there is a lot more than just horror and there is two storylines at work. Shortly after arriving Michael stumbles into the lives of Mattie Devore, a recently widowed mother, and her three year old daughter Kyra. He soon finds himself the only person in the small community that is willing to support the pair against mad billionaire grandfather, Max Devore, who is dead set on getting custody of young Kyra. It really is win at all costs for both parties and Michael finds himself firmly in the middle.

  The Writing 

There's a good reason why this book has won numerous awards, it's very well written. There's a few out there that believe King's writing has matured gradually over his career as he has started to shift away from horror more and more. Although I wouldn't call it literary fiction Bag of Bones could certainly be called a more literary approach when compared to his early works. If you completely removed the horror element you'd still have a compelling piece of fiction that explores a number of themes.

One of those key themes in Bag of Bones is grief and how it severely impacts us. As we know from books like Pet Semetary, King is an absolute master of “real-life horror” and writes this even better than the supernatural stuff.

I've heard a number of folk criticise this book for being slow. But it is a slow burn and one hundred percent meant to be that way. Its as much a mystery as it is a horror and King takes a subtle approach to building this one. I can definitely see why it might turn a few off, admittedly the tension did drop at points. But it certainly gives you time to ponder and think about what's going down rather than having things spelled out to you in rapid succession. It's very similar to Peter Straub's amazing Ghost Story in the way it takes its time in the first half and then really ramps it up in the last quarter.

There's a lot to enjoy here with the way King depicts a small, insular community with its own unique atmosphere and dynamics. We've seen him do it time and again. An absolute master at work.

His vivid descriptions of Maine are a treat and I loved how he incorporated the changing weather to impact on the tone of the narrative. Plus the actual scenes of horror had me gripping the pages with white knuckles, unable to put the book down. Even when my daughter is repeatedly punching me in the arm demanding her dinner. Or supper, depends how long I've been in the reading zone for. Disclaimer: no children were harmed in the production of this review.

  "
What comes in when daylight leaves is a kind of certainty: that beneath the skin there is a secret, some mystery both black and bright. You feel this mystery in every breath, you see it in every shadow, you expect to plunge into it at every turn of a step. It is here; you slip across it on a kind of breathless curve like a skater turning for home. " 

  The Characters 

This is one of the few books that Stephen King chose to write in first-person with the main character of Mike Noonan driving things. He certainly makes for an entertaining guide and was a pretty likeable character, despite coming across a bit snobby at times.

Again it was another author and you couldn't help but feel this was a reflection of King himself. He certainly feels very real and alive, ready to step off the page, which is a hallmark of King's characters. His reflections on the writing process were fascinating and very intimate. A highlight of the novel for sure along with the portrayal of his paralysing grief. Now and again his brooding did slow the pace of the novel down to a grinding halt however.

Despite this not being the best set of characters from the Kingmeister, they were all realistic and we'll fleshed out. Kyra was certainly my favourite and reminded me a bit of my own daughter when she was that age. Too clever for her own good! She really did give Mike's character purpose and their relationship was heartwarming.

King did such an amazing job with the location you could argue that was a character in itself. He painstakingly adds detail and backstory creating a real history and shared psychology that helps make the story such an immersive experience.

Also, there's a number of Easter eggs that the author throws for his Constant Readers that include some returning characters from previous stories. I won't say who they are but keep your eyes peeled.

  Final Thoughts

Overall Bag of Bones is an excellent book. Although it's not amongst his very best, it does showcases King's strengths as an author and is certainly not amongst his worst. It would be in my consideration for his top twenty, let's put it that way.

I thought the ending in this one definitely jumped it up a few marks. The two separate storylines intersect fantastically. King gets criticised for not being able to end a novel but this one was terrific. The final revelation is truly horrific, amongst the most shocking scenes he's written, and the overall atmosphere in those final pages is awesome.

Ok, I'll admit it is a little long-winded but this is a book worth reading, and I would definitely recommend it to those who love a good slow burn ghost story.

Thanks for reading...cheers!

  "Now Sara Laughs is only a dark hulk down below, and I realize I don't want to go down there, anyway. I am a man who has trained his mind to misbehave, and I can imagine too many things waiting for me inside."