Rating: 5/5

There is a crowded shelf, among my overflowing bookcases, dedicated solely to books I’m getting around to reading. However much I read, this shelf is always crammed. Most of the books are new, given as gifts on Christmas or my birthday. These are big hardcover titles with tight bindings, handsome dust-jackets, and $35 cover prices. I’m excited to read them, but I hew to a loose first-in, first-out policy, meaning I have to wade through older purchases before I can tackle them (which is part of the reason my literary velocity is always lagging). 

The other books on my to-read shelf are older, purchased used for a few pennies (plus shipping and handling). Most are histories and biographies, though I have included several vegetable-books, classics that I should read to better myself, as soon as I can muster the proper will (among them a selection of short stories by Henry James, a poor translation of The Hunchback at Notre Dame, and The House of the Seven Gables). 

Also on this shelf are those unconquerable volumes that I will probably never attempt again. These are purchases, written by guys with names like Pynchon, that mock my ambitions with their mere existence (in a fit of rage, I once threw Mason &amp; Dixon into the trash; my mom retrieved it and managed to get a refund at Barnes &amp; Noble). I keep them on the shelf mainly as a form of self-flagellation (though sometimes, when I’m drunk, I can talk myself into giving Infinite Jest another go). 

For the longest time, the odd-book on this shelf was Jonathan Franzen’s The Corrections. I asked for it one distant Christmas, and upon receiving it, promptly forgot the reasons for having wanted it in the first place. I’m sure, at the time, I thought it’d give my ego a little boost; however, this was ten years ago, and I was also discovering alcohol, which gives the same ego boost with much less effort. 

In the years since, I’ve picked up The Corrections now and then, and pondered the vague description on the back cover. The story of a Midwestern family gathering for one last Christmas? The vibe this gave off, a Lifetime movie mixed with a little East Coast condescension, did not exactly excite my blood. 

Then Jonathan Franzen went ahead and wrote another book that people started talking about. I wanted to read it for vanity’s sake, so that I could join this conversation, but the thought of having two unread Franzen novels on my shelf was more than I could bear. So, finally, at long last, I read The Corrections. 

It was a good choice. 

The beginning, however, was not promising. The Corrections opens in the Midwestern town of St. Jude, in the home of the aged Enid and Alfred Lambert. At first blush, they embody all the hallmarks of repressed middle-Americans, at least as viewed by someone who has only seen middle America out an airplane’s window (I know that Franzen was born in St. Louis, but he’s all New York now). Enid is the busybody housewife; Alfred is the lazy husband sitting in his chair. Franzen, never one to be subtle about his metaphors, warns us that alarm bells of anxiety are ringing. Frankly, it took me three attempts to get through the introductory section.

But I kept on, haunted by the specter of another unread book. 

I got past the introduction, but still struggled. Part of the problem, I think, is that Franzen is too good and too clever of a writer. There are paragraphs of such sustained wit and singularity that I got exhausted reading them; I just couldn’t stop thinking how hard it must have been for Franzen to come up with this stuff. He really is a dazzling writer, and he does an admirable job sustaining that level throughout, even if he sometimes gets carried away (a description of the weather that includes a “shopping-center sky” may play well in Salman Rushdie’s salon, but not in Omaha). 

For instance, a description of Alfred’s workshop/lab:

The gray dust of evil spells and the cobwebs of enchantment thickly cloaked the old electric arc furnace, and the jars of exotic rhodium and sinister cadmium and stalwart bismuth, and the hand-printed labels browned by the vapors from a glass-stoppered bottle of aqua regia, and the quad-ruled notebook in which the latest entry in Alfred’s hand dated from a time, fifteen years ago, before the betrayals had begun. Something as daily and friendly as a pencil still occupied the random spot on the workbench where Alfred had laid it in a different decade; the passage of so many years imbued the pencil with a kind of enmity…

As promised by the book cover (and a cover never lies!), a final family Christmas does figure into the plot of The Corrections. But there’s not really a plot, per se. The Christmas gathering is more of a destination, a convenient place where all the plot threads terminate. There is no real climax or resolution, because this is a story of lives, and the only climax to life is death. 

The lives in question belong to the Lamberts: the aforementioned Enid and Alfred; oldest child Gary; middle child Chip; and youngest child Denise. Each of these characters gets his or her own discrete time on the stage, in the spotlight. These segments are further split between present-day action, which moves the story towards Christmas, and an extended flashback that fleshes out their early lives and interactions, and helps explain how each person came to be where they are. 

This is a novel that rests on its characters, and the characters are marvelous. They begin, each of them, as archetypes: Alfred, the distant, demanding patriarch/tyrant, now suffering from Parkinson’s; Enid, the put-upon, long-suffering housewife; Gary, the type-A high-financier; Chip, the douche-bag left-wing academic; and Denise, the daddy-pleasing daughter. As the story progresses, the characters don’t exactly shed their status as archetypes, but they achieve great depth. We learn about Enid’s faded opportunities and Gary’s depression and Denise’s tangled motivations. 

The Lamberts are not what you would call likeable people. (Of course, likability is a bit overrated. I mean, it’s not exactly a difficult trait for a novelist to achieve. After all, even a stone sociopath like Hannibal Lecter can be made likeable). Franzen generously imbues each of his characters with lower traits and baser instincts: shallowness, selfishness, narrow-mindedness, infidelity, greed, and casual cruelty. They are not evil people; none of them twirls a mustache, wears a monocle, and attempts to fly a bomb-laden blimp into the Super Bowl. Rather, their unlikeable traits are what makes them realistic human beings, full of hypocrisies, contradictions, and self-serving rationalizations. 

The un-likeability of the characters is probably the most persistent (non-professional) criticism I’ve seen about The Corrections. And to be honest, there were times I almost gave up on the Lamberts. Franzen really pushes you to the edge of what you are willing to accept in a protagonist. Likeability is one thing, hatefulness is another, and there are moments (the way Gary treats Enid, the way Denise breaks up a marriage) that blur the line between dislike and hate. 

The important thing, though, is that even though his characters come close to hatefulness, Franzen never hates them. A novelist is like the god of a made-up world, and he or she can choose to be an Old Testament or New Testament god. The Old Testament god/novelist oversees his creations, but doesn’t truly care about their fates. Hell, he or she will sacrifice those creations at a whim. The New Testament god/novelist has not only created his or her characters, but actively loves those creations, even when they err or stray from the path. I was often tempted to give up on the Lamberts, but I never did, because in the end, I sympathized with them, and saw in them things I see in myself. This wouldn’t be possible unless Franzen cared about them as well. 

None of this is to say the book is perfect; far from it. A lot of different things annoyed me, from the occasional pretentiousness of the prose, to the sometimes grating, DeLillo-like dialogue, where characters take turns talking past each other. As a work of satire, the novel is scattershot, with Franzen taking a shotgun approach to pop culture. There are riffs on liberal academia, corporations, high-finance, the internet and pharmacology. The sheer number of targets eventually takes away from the story’s core. For example, I could have done without an extended scene aboard a cruise ship, where a doctor lectures Enid on a drug called “Mexican A.” Finally, there is the matter of Franzen’s none-too-subtle, on-the-nose metaphors. Alfred, for instance, as part of his deteriorating condition, has hallucinations in which he is beset by marching feces. Eventually, I would have figured out that the feces-visions had to do with Alfred’s anal retentive nature, and his lack of sexual progression. However, I didn't have to figure it out, because Franzen literally comes out and says Alfred’s visions are symbolic of his anal retentiveness. I guess you can say a lot of things about The Corrections, but “impenetrable” is not one of them. 

These things don’t matter, or more precisely, any shortcomings are swamped by Franzen’s brilliance. His depiction of Alfred’s disease is particularly devastating. It was far more effective than my 30th birthday at terrifying me with the ravages of age. The Corrections also does a masterful job of capturing the era of the late 90s (it was published in 2001), while also proving scarily prescient about the then-future (by which I mean today). I don’t know really how to explain it; at times, The Corrections is simply breathtaking.

I try to never give up on a book I’ve purchased. Sometimes that means slogging my way through Moby Dick, and then finding artful ways to say I was bored. Other times it means discovering for myself what the rest of the reading world learned a decade ago.