Rating: 4/5

The Tommyknockers is a book that often gets a bad rap, but I think it deserves more praise than it receives. It's not flawless but is still a remarkable novel.

'Insanity is refusing to go down certain paths of speculation even though the logic is there . . . like a token for the turnstile.'

It is a gripping and terrifying story of how an ancient alien force that lies hidden in the woods takes over a small town in Maine and awakens its latent abilities and changes them into something else. The book is full of suspense, horror, humour and emotion, as we follow the fates of the townspeople, especially the two main characters: Bobbi Anderson, a writer of Westerns who stumbles upon the spaceship and becomes consumed with excavating it; and Jim Gardener, her old friend and lover, who is an alcoholic poet with a metal plate in his head that protects him from the alien influence.

'In that brief movement he could see how it would look coming out of the ground – he could see its shadow rippling slowly over the ground as it came up and out, could hear the unearthly wailing of its hull scraping over the bones of bedrock, could sense everyone in Haven looking this way as it rose into the sky, hot and glittering, a monstrous silver coin slowly heeling over to the horizontal for the first time in millennia, floating soundlessly in the sky, floating free . .'

This was such a rich novel, blending so many different stories into one huge captivating story. For me, Book Two: Tales of Haven was a standout of the book, which I couldn't help but compare with Needful Things in the way that it linked multiple stories and showed the real consequences of Bobbi's discovery in the woods.
For me Gardener was the star of the book, he made me chuckle, gasp and feel a few very moving moments. He was a nuanced and imperfect character, struggling with alcoholism and alien influence, but also showing courage and loyalty. I loved his sarcastic remarks and his bond with Bobbi. A fantastic anti-hero if there ever was one. Hee also provided a great background of paranoia and scepticism which then added to the tense and uncertain nature of events.

"It sounds like a bad ethnic joke. Imagine yourself driving along an American thruway – I-95 or I-70, maybe – and coming up on a sign that says PLEASE CLOSE ALL WINDOWS, TURN OFF ALL VENTILATION ACCESSORIES, AND DRIVE AS FAST AS YOUR CAR WILL GO FOR THE NEXT TWENTY MILES."

The book explores themes of addiction, creativity, identity and power, as well as the risks of technology and nuclear war. The book also pays homage to many classic works of science fiction and horror, such as The War of the Worlds, The Thing and The Twilight Zone.

'It looked like the surface of a harsh, dead world. The gray earth was dry and cold; cracks gaped like dead reptilian mouths. They went zigzagging away in every direction. Overhead was a sky blacker than jewelers’ velvet, and a billion stars screamed down – they were brighter than the stars anyone on the surface of the earth had ever seen, because the place Hilly was looking at with the wide, horrified eye of his imagination was almost or totally airless.'

The Tommyknockers is a splendid and inventive work of fiction that will keep you engrossed and horrified until the end.