Rating: 4/5

Here come the prequels!

  JEDI AND SITH MEET AGAIN!

During the Original Trilogy of Star Wars, we find out a detail here and another there, about what happened to the Republic and the rise of the Empire.

Of course, those little details, matter not much, since after all, good ol’ Georgie wrote what he wanted in the prequels, not matter if they were contradictory with the previous released information in the original trilogy. 

For thousand years, peace had prevailed in the galaxy and the Republic was protected by the Jedi Order…

…but the Sith hadn’t dissapeared as people think and a masterplan was about to be applied with the goals of turning the Republic into an Empire and the destruction of the Jedi Order…

…and everything began in the little planet of Naboo and a commercial blockade…

…along with a small detour to the planet of Tatooine.

Sooo, from here on, I will do some specific comments and explain differences between the movie and book, so if you haven’t watch the film, be warned of keeping reading on…

Qui Gon-Jin rules! He’s the best Jedi ever. Period. 

However, I think that the whole trouble of being stranded in Tatooine could be managed better (but of course, we wouldn’t have Star Wars, so maybe it wasn’t shortsight, but things that should happen in benefit of the story), since they need a spare part to fix their Nubian cruiser and the Republic money wasn’t good in Tatooine…

…but hey! The Nubian ship is almost peachy-keen shape but the hyperdrive system, so…

…why not sell the dang Nubian ship, and buying some less fancy cruiser instead, even it was smart to change of vehicle to avoid being followed, they only needed a cruiser big enough for two Jedis, a queen, her cohorts, a security captain and the pilots…

…and they could avoid requiring the help of certain kid that years later would become kinda some little trouble to the Jedi Order.

Moreover, while Qui Gon-Jin couldn’t do his Mind Trick on Watto, it seemed that Watto did something to Qui Gon-Jin since Watto told him that nobody else had that kind of Nubian spare parts and he believed him, since he didn’t try with any other store, hey! Who knows? Maybe there was some other business alien with that kind of spare parts and even accepting Republic money, but of course, why distrust someone so trustworthy like good ol’ Watto?! Geez!

It’s curious that the Senate is dealing with a trouble of a commercial blockade at Naboo, and their “brilliant impartial” solution is deposing the current Supreme Chancellor and naming a new one that he’s from Naboo! 

And it’s absurd that when Naboo is facing an invasion, it’s sent only two Jedis, aaaaah!...
…but when everything was solved and there is a party with music and food, the whole dang Jedi Council travel there! Geez!

  SO WHAT’S DIFFERENT HERE ANYWAY?

The story didn’t began on the book on Naboo, but you have two chapters introducing little Anakin and his life as slave at Tatooine, the construction of C-3PO, including a revealing incident where he tries to heal a wounder Tusken Raider and he ponders about what he could do if somebody would hurt his mother. Also, it’s told the previous Pod Racing where Anakin “saved most of Watto’s pod”.
There is an aditional scene showing the natural kindness of Anakin, when he invited Qui-Gon Jin and Padme, some food in a street tent, even when the very Anakin isn’t able to buy some for him.

Padme has a last name, Naberrie, which is contradictory of the way that she’s referred in Episode II.

Anakin tells Padme that he’ll marry her in the future, and while Padme didn’t take it seriously since he’s just a kid, he tells her that he won’t be a boy forever.

Obi-Wan Kenobi relationship was quite damaged for a while in the narrative when Qui-Gon Jin insisted of teaching Anakin and all that that involved.

Darth Maul has a lot more dialogue in the novel than in the movie.

There is a detailed account about what happened with the Sith Order and how Darth Bane changed all with his Rule of Two.

Yoda was against of teaching Anakin (and most likely Mace Windu was against too) but the rest of the Jedi Council voted in favor.