Rating: 2/5

I remember this being a topic of conversation back in the late ‘90s (yes I’m old shut up). I also remember it ranking pretty low on the list of oddly-specific-christian-things-that-not-every-christian-believes. By that I mean that there are certain tenets of Christianity that a significant proportion of believers do not actually believe in, such as demonic possession, creation vs evolution, Noah’s Ark being history rather myth, Hell being a literal place rather than a metaphor, et cetera. The Bible Code probably is at the bottom of that list because right from the start it was met by many with disbelief at best and ridicule at worst.

And for good reason. Ultimately, the Bible Code is just a demonstration of the human tendency to see patterns of meaning that are either non-existent or wholly self-inserted. The practice of exhaustively rearranging a block of text and then reading it in whatever order, at whatever interval, or in whatever direction you want until it produces something coherent does not a strong case for divine inspiration make. If you torture a text long enough it will give you the information you want to hear, even if it is of little use. Much like the joke about a solar-powered flashlight, it begs the question what use anyone has for a prophecy that only reveals itself after the fact. Even believers in the Code must admit that a sequel of the book telling us that 9/11 was also predicted by the Code rings rather hollow when the buildings have already come down.

For despite Drosnin’s repeated attempts to the contrary he never accomplishes to predict anything other than the past. Things that have already happened are accurately shown to be contained in the Code, yet his attempts at anticipating future catastrophic events using fall flat, as shown by the lack of massive earthquakes, nuclear holocausts, and World War 3 in either the year 2000, 2006, or 2011 have shown us by now. Still, you’ve got to appreciate his handwaving of sloppy references to quantum physics to try and give an air of both scientific credulity as well as mathematical uncertainty to these predictions. Really, the final decade of the 20th century was a strange time to be alive.

So, call it a book that is fascinating for all the wrong reasons. Still, it was a fun read while it lasted, hence the two stars.