Rating: 5/5

It's no secret that *Bishoujo Senshi Sailor Moon* is my favorite anime, and that Black Lady is one of my absolute favorite villains. That being said, you can easily tell that I loved this volume.
--------------
 This volume is about when The Moon Kingdom is under attack by the members of Black Moon, who reside on planet Nemesis. 
 It starts with Neo-Queen Serenity having been kidnapped by Prince Diamond. He was so "taken" with her and her powers, both of which he wanted, that he had to have her for his own. But, things do not goes as he desires, since she absolutely refuses to reciprocate his feelings, and instead feels nothing but hatred towards Diamond and his plans.
 Serenity feels even worse, when she learns that Diamond has imprisoned her fellow scouts--Mars, Mercury, and Jupiter--in a cell of darkness that she seemingly cannot penetrate to release them. 
 In a moment of weakness of desperation--I am not sure which--Sapphire opens up to Serenity, and asks for her help, only to quickly turn on her and wish her dead. But, this does help her to rescue the imprisoned Inner Scouts as she transforms into Sailor Moon and has them transform as well.
-----------
 Darien is also sent to help Serenity out, but when he arrives, it is already too late to help his daughter. Small Lady has already become a part of the Black Moon Family--the beautiful yet deadly, Black Lady, Queen of Nemesis.
 Small Lady had arrived on Nemesis feeling left-out and unloved, and Wiseman preyed on these feelings, using her sadness to convince her that he--and only he--and the Black Moon Family care about her, and that no-one else does. Once she accepted that as fact, she grew into a woman and became evil. (But, I'm not complaining. I love this character!)
 Through most of this volume, we are shown the Inner Scouts trying to defeat Black Lady, Dark Endymion, and the Black Moon Family of Nemesis. At times, it is quite dragged-out, but I still enjoyed it. Anything that shows more of Black Lady is a plus in my book.
 This volume ends with the Silver Imperium Crystal of the future (30th Century) and the Silver Imperium Crystal of the present (mid-90s) being together in Black Lady's hands, but then being stolen by Prince Diamond. We are told that having the 2 Silver Imperium Crystals together will cause the total destruction of the entire world to occur, but do not get a chance to see it in this volume. It ends with the 2 crystals laying side-by-side.