Rating: 3/5

A book that brings scarecrows to life and its called "The Superstition Book"!! A silly name for some imagination but it adds a great mystery to the book. Out characters as in are a brother sister duo. I find Mike,the brother almost like me, lazy and a fantastic gamer and TV addict. The book takes us to the villages and the Shires of Europe and the great climate there and all the tress and the farm/barn life cheered me up to read the book. The house and the barn seems like a great vacation trip for the "City Kids" as Sticks calls them. I love the dark and the mystery setting of track book that hooks the reader from the beginning. The beginning is very joyful, exciting and comforting all those pancakes, chicken, fishing, sunny days it seems like a good village life. I even like the solemn and changed grandparents of our duo. Stanley is a unique and a great character Stine has created and the owner of the Superstitions book. It would be great if we would have got to see some passages inside the book which can bring scarecrows and other things(as we see at the end) to life. I think they overdid the scarecrow thing. The book is full of scarecrows from the beginning to the end. Just full of it and try don't look or behave so scary that you would freak out, not at all. I mean you could be surprised and confused but "Freaked" is not the word I would ever use. And even the grandparents and heavily built Stanley and his son are scared of scarecrows is a thing that I can't believe, they are just made of some hay and straw. What gives the book a nice background is the great and calm village life. I especially like the arrival at the farm, the changed grandparents and the observation of the kids, the fishing scene, the "Scarecrow walks at Night "dialogue" , Stanley's and Sticks behaviour. The ending was not very great and the book gets much dull after 70℅. 
Anyways, its a quick read and very short, easy to understand and will keep you at you edge. If you are reading goosebumps you should surely pick pick this one up. 
The idea of the Superstitious book just rocks.
Note:- I think this is the same book book from which a note must have slipped out in Mr.Woods/ Slappys waist pocket when hr comes alive. (In Night of the living dummy)