Rating: 4/5

The sixth novel by Michael Crichton but the first published (in 1969) under his own name and the first in which he bent science fiction and suspense together in ways that would propel Crichton to the top of the bestseller lists and into cinemas for the next thirty years, The Andromeda Strain didn't retain many surprises for me, but in its own delightful way, reminded me of a science and technology museum exhibit and the docent giving me a tour: "And here we have a pioneering thriller of technology run amok, where mankind's hubris unleashes terror from a top secret laboratory which only white men can stop. Some of you may recall this theme in Jurassic Park." 

Oooh! Aaah!

Divided into four sections representing four days--Contact, Piedmont, Wildfire and Spread--the conceit of the novel is to document a scientific clusterfuck classified top secret. Outside the town of Piedmont, Arizona (pop. 48), an Army lieutenant and private have been dispatched to recover a crashed Air Force satellite. Observing no movement in the town, the men roll into Piedmont and report to Mission Control at Vandenberg Air Force Base lots of bodies in the streets. When Mission Control loses contact with the unit, a reconnaissance jet is dispatched to Piedmont and confirms the dead bodies but at least one civilian who seems to still be alive. Project Wildfire is put on alert.

Dr. Jeremy Stone, a thirty-six year old professor of bacteriology at Stanford and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, is retrieved by MPs from a dinner party he's hosting with his wife. The other members of the Wildfire team are: Dr. Peter Leavitt, a clinical microbiologist experienced in the treatment of infectious disease. Dr. Charles Burton, a professor of pathology at Baylor College of Medicine known as "The Stumbler" for his clumsiness. A Yale anthropologist is in the hospital for an appendectomy and unable to respond, so the last man on the team is Dr. Mark Hall, a surgeon and compromise candidate chosen by virtue of being a single man who fits something called the Odd Man Hypothesis.

An MP hands Dr. Stone a report on Project Scoop, brainchild of the Army Medical Corps tasked with sending satellites into near space to hunt for organisms that might exist there. Any scientific benefits of this project conceal the true aim of Project Scoop: to recover organisms which might be developed into biological weapons. Seventeen orbital satellites weighing thirty-seven pounds have been built and six launched. Scoops I-VI either burned up in the atmosphere or were retrieved with only standard earth organisms. Scoop VII, believed to have been launched February 5, 1967, leaves stable orbit after two and a half days and mysteriously crashes in northeastern Arizona.

Stone and Burton are dispatched to Piedmont by helicopter pilot who has orders, upon Stone and Burton's unlikely demise, to return to Wildfire installation in Nevada where his craft is to be incinerated in midair, with the pilot. Stone and Burton note that the corpses in the street died suddenly, clutching their chests. The victims didn't seem to be in pain. Recovering the Scoop satellite in the clinic of the town doctor, Burton performs a field autopsy on the physician and finds the victim's liquid blood has coagulated into solid. More interesting, they find two survivors: a one-year male infant crying in his crib, and a sixty-seven-year old drunk who collapses in the street. 

Meanwhile, Leavitt escorts Hall into the Wildfire installation, a zero contaminant facility buried underneath a functioning U.S. Department of Agriculture station in Nevada. Each of the levels is more sterile than the last and requires extensive decontamination before the visitor is admitted to Level V, where the satellite and the two survivors have been moved. In the event of a containment breach, an atomic device will automatically destroy the facility in t-minus three minutes. Hall is given the only key to cancel the self-destruct sequence and learns the psychology behind the Odd Man Hypothesis, which holds that bachelors are less likely to chicken out and abort the self-destruct if worse comes to worst.

* Helpful tip: When a scientist in a Michael Crichton novel assures you that some awesome new technology is perfectly safe, you don't walk, you run. 

The flaws in The Andromeda Strain are numerous and easy to spot if you choose to dwell on them. In the days before integrated workplaces, the name characters are uniformly white and male. Worse, they're driven by archetype. Stone, the 36-year-old Nobel prize winning protagonist (Crichton was 27 years old at the time of the novel's publication) is a Gary Stu, a leader in his field who commands respect and adoration, keeps a steady hand at the wheel and was likely considered a bore by everyone except the author and his mother. The sterile work environment of the book doesn't inject any life into the characters either. For most of the story, I was rooting for the bacteria.

The reasons I enjoyed the novel were manifold. The conceit that extraterrestrials will visit earth in spaceships is turned on its head by Crichton with the eerie possibility that first contact could take place with a plague brought back by astronauts. This concept remains as potent today as it must have been in 1969 and is dealt with cerebrally, with the Wildfire scientists considering they may be destroying a highly advanced form of alien life in their petri dishes. A science dunce, I enjoyed Crichton detailing the various biological responses the human body undertakes to combat pathogens and how we co-exist with bacteria, 97% of which has evolved to pose no health risk to humans. 

Crichton's dry, methodical take on the material (there's no room for flirting or even witty banter in the Wildfire installation) lends the book a sense of reality. This makes is more suspenseful and at times, terrifying. I find my inherent paranoia toward military research programs, the hubris of brilliant minds and the violence of scientific discovery to be well bred in Crichton's work. His high concept plots--involving space plagues, dinosaurs, time travel--are effective because I can imagine them being hatched in an undisclosed location where proper security protocols have been overlooked by the lowest bidder. Whoops. The Andromeda Strain is the book that started it all.