Rating: 3/5

I've shared this before and am never hesitant to cop to it: I grew up with an outsized fear of germ warfare. By my youth, the nuclear scare was winding down and just about over so I never feared death by atomic fire from above. But I did fear death from biological agent. Anthrax. Weaponized smallpox. Germ warfare. And I read The Andromeda Strain when I was young, possibly too young. I was in third grade when Jurassic Park hit theaters which led me to Crichton by way of my parents, who checked out dog-eared copies of JP, Eaters of the Dead, and the rest from our public library. I'd usually get the copies to myself for reading on family road trips after they'd finished with them. So I've read more than a few of his titles (and seen their TV/movie adaptations) but over time I've lost a lot of the details. All I remembered about The Andromeda Strain on this second reading was that there were guys in big, bulky biohazard suits. I knew it was about germs, but forgot all about the extraterrestrial origin angle. Germs... FROM SPACE! Spooky!

Crichton occupies an interesting space in sci-fi: too technical to qualify as strictly pulp reading, not technical enough to qualify as hard sci-fi. "Techno-thriller" is the term you'll see bandied about. He gets the germ of the science topic set up (har har!) and then explores the thrilling human dramas that might take place within the general confines of that premise. He's very good at that, the thrills part, the gripping sense of "what happens next?" And the opening of The Andromeda Strain is quite effective as a thriller, given how it's framed not as a wild and extreme "what-if" scenario but rather as a dramatization of real events, comprised of interviews, military files, and fleshed-out details of what may or must have happened, after the fact of some catastrophe.

When the plot is moving fast, this is indeed thrilling. But when the action slows the faults become harder to ignore. All the characters sound alike, wooden and monotone. The minutiae of technical details pulled from classified files and woven into a traditional narrative become dry and easy to gloss over. There is no doubt that Crichton can write effectively, driving readers forward with feelings of suspense and curiosity. But he does not always write consistently, and at the times he runs out of steam his books begin to falter. What's more, in this title he has a tendency to undercut his own suspense with spoilers and commentary about things the characters missed or forgot to take into account.

3 stars out of 5. It passes the time sufficiently well but doesn't have much staying power.