Rating: 5/5

This book has even a deeper impact on me after the chaos with this year election. I hope we will get through this.

We was the last novel I was yet to read from the Holly Books of Dystopia, which also include 1984, Brave New World, Handmaid Tale and Fahrenheit 451. We is also the inspiration for 1984 and it is one of the first dystopias ever written. Even though it came out in1924, it is still amazing how actual it feels. Not only in terms of subject and themes, but also in terms of writing style. Some satire novels age quite badly, especially if the writing is anchored firmly in the times it was written. It is hard to explain but I felt it with several novels, but not in this case. Ok, maybe during some of the mathematical rants of the main character. 

“in paradise, were given a choice: happiness without freedom, or freedom without happiness. There was no third alternative...”

I copied the blurb below because I have problems with my memory of the book ” In a glass-enclosed city of absolute straight lines, ruled over by the all-powerful 'Benefactor', the citizens of the totalitarian society of OneState live out lives devoid of passion and creativity - until D-503, a mathematician who dreams in numbers, makes a discovery: he has an individual soul.”

 “Now I no longer live in our clear, rational world; I live in the ancient nightmare world, the world of square roots of minus one.”

The novel is written as a journal of the narrator addressed to the future inhabitants of Earth. In it, he tries to explains the brilliance of the OneState policies but, instead, he realizes that something is very wrong with him. He realizes that he is slowly becoming an individual. 

“And everyone must lose his mind, everyone must! The sooner the better! It is essential — I know it.”

“You're afraid of it because it's stronger than you, you hate it because you're afraid of it, you love it because you can't master it. You can only love something that refuses to be mastered.”

He is in a constant struggle with his revelations about feelings, desires, love etc.

“And happiness...Well, after all, desires torment us, don't they? And, clearly, happiness is when there are no more desires, not one...What a mistake, what ridiculous prejudice it's been to have marked happiness always with a plus sign. Absolute happiness should, of course, carry a minus sign — the divine minus.”

“Here I saw, with my own eyes, that laughter was the most terrible weapon: you can kill anything with laughter - even murder itself.”

I loved the writing, so poetic and fervent. There are many dystopian novels but in this case the writing made the novel something special. There are so many quotations that I could add to this review and that has to be a proof of the beautiful prose.