Rating: 2/5

“It was the air, really—the clear brightness of the air that in the evenings now held the first chilliness of autumn, and brought with it that subtle undercurrent of old longings and new chances which autumn often brings.”
― Elizabeth Strout, Amy and Isabelle

I should have liked this but didn't.

So this is Historical Fiction though the exact time it takes place is not specified. And it is about a mother/daughter relationship. And it takes place in small town Maine. I see many of my GR pals have read this. I wasn't a major fan.

So this book had been on my radar. Yet I did not like it nearly as much as many other reviewers. I didn't hate it. I think it is a perfect example of a book I'd give three stars to. It was just OK for me.

It was a pretty grim story overall. I had thought I would love this and though I loved certain aspects of it..Isabelle learning to read the classics for one..I didn't really get into it all that much. 

The mother and daughter have a very complicated relationship and the book is wound with sadness. 
I think I liked Isabelle more than Amy although Amy get s into a situation that does inspire empathy.

It is a great example of a book that looks like one's type of book on paper, but when actually read is not.

I found I had to force myself to go on. Like I said, Isabelle's desire to learn to read the classics was my favorite part. I almost felt tenderness toward her. And I was rooting for her!

Amy? I don't know. I felt for her but just never clicked with the story although it is powerful and quite grim.

I had read a book shortly before this that dealt with SOME..not all..but some..of the issues surrounding Amy. It was called "The Ice Cream Girls" by Dorothy Koomson and was quite long. I loved that book but I think going right from that to this may have dampened my enthusiasm a bit since there were some elements that were the same.

So to summarize..not a favorite. It was a pretty bleak story and there isn't any getting around that it was a bit of a let down for me. I am glad to see others who adored this. I would just say it was a decent read but not the book for me.