It will not be original on my part to assert that reading Maldoror in an attempt to understand what is happening is an exercise in futility, and a disservice to a text which, undoubtedly, stood at the vanguard of a moment of rupture in literature. It is in how Lautréamont uses language that lies the true pleasure of engagement with this work. Multiplicity and evasion (and I mean this in the best sense) pervades Les Chants de Maldoror. The text is a living, breathing, pulsating tentacled monster, consisting of discrete patches of cladistically nonconforming tissue: slime, skin, fur, scales. It grows in size and changes in form, as volatile as the fabled creatures it describes, in constant metamorphosis; as if the dynamic flux and flow of the natural life that inhabits many pages of the book bleed into its very binding. In the second canto, Lautréamont describes the 'carnal embrace' of Maldoror (the character) with a female shark amidst a bloody shipwreck in third-person, and as the union between human and shark becomes literal, transforming into an oozing mass in the water, so dissolves the boundary between author and protagonist, the narration mutating to first-person. These utterly gothic crumblings of human subjectivity and corporeality, the shattering of fixed identities, as well as transfiguration into different animals with rebellious abandon and passionate longing abound in the book. Nothing is safe from such liquidating assaults: Neither the reader, writer, narrator or hero. Every form is fluid. Maldoror blends prose poem, roman noir and confession at the same time as it breaks through their conventions. It takes up narrative stability in one section and throws it out of the window in the next. It pulls on the —rather fashionable— revolting romanticism of Baudelaire and Musset to the point of tearing it apart and birthing something new. The language is so anarchic, so liberated, so constantly blurring the line between metaphor and reality as to become infinite. There is no closure, there is only the chase, among the forests in one moment, among the stars the next, of the tentacled monster. There is only surrendering your subjectivity, your corporeality, your very truth and identity, becoming one with the monster as tenderly as does Maldoror with a female shark.