Rating: 3/5

3.5

The second installment of Anne Rice’s Vampire Chronicles switches perspective. The story is now being narrated by the one and only Lestat de Lioncourt. He is outraged by Louis’ tale and feels the need to defend himself. He decides to write a book detailing his long life as a vampire.

Lestat runs away with his lover when he is a young man. The two men run away to France where they drink wine and cry over the beauty of music and art. They’re of course madly in love and enjoy nothing more than the company of one another. One night Lestat is kidnapped and turned into a vampire by Magnus. However, Magnus does not stick around to show him the ways of the world. Instead Magnus kills himself with help from Lestat and leaves Lestat a fortune. Lestat, not wanting to upset his loved ones decides to flee and leave them completely. But he uses his new-found wealth to shower them with gifts from afar. 

Later on down the line, Lestat’s beloved mother Gabrielle comes to him in Paris tells him that she is dying. He decides to give her the dark gift so that they can spend all of eternity together. He has what I would call an unnatural attachment to his mother. Norman Bates, anyone? At one point I was wondering if the two were going to have sex and I’m still not wholly convinced that they didn’t. I’m not sure how becoming a vampire affects your relation but I’m pretty sure she is still his mother and it’s weird. 

After Armand meets Lestat he shows him how they were made. He tells him the tale of Those Who Must Be Kept. These are the two alpha-dogs; the two original vampires. While they do not need to be approached, they do need to be respected and protected. Armand tells Lestat to leave them alone while he runs out on an errand, and Lestat of course does not.

Here’s the thing. Lestat is a shithead. He is so self-absorbed he can’t be bothered with thoughts of how his actions may impact others. He’s like a teenage girl. He’s emotional, quick to anger and feels entitled to everything. He thinks he is above everyone he encounters. He views himself as untouchable. He has all the arrogance of new money. 

Listening to Lestat explain his side of the story about what transpired between Louis and him was quite comical. I don’t believe his side of the story at all. Lestat is more likely to try to convince you of his innocence while scoffing in his head at how pathetically gullible you are. Whereas Louis, I do believe. He was a whiny little bitch, but he would have no reason to lie. 

Listening to how the vampires were made and meeting great characters like Armand and Marius was fantastic. Even though Lestat is a repulsive character his tales are much more intriguing than Louis’ ever was. This one leaves you with quite the cliffhanger ending and I was glad I didn’t have to wait to begin the next. Once again- Simon Vance narrates and absolutely rocks the audio version!