Rating: 3/5

So with Chibiusa with the group and Sailor Mercury and Sailor Mars kidnapped, Sailor Moon has to find a way to stop the bad guys and rescue her friends. But she also has doubts if Chibiusa is her ally or not. Not to mention that it doesn't help the fact that Chibiusa is very close to Usagi's Mamoru and of course, Usagi gets jealous. But then we find out a few secrets about Chibiusa and we discover she is from the Thirteenth Century. She is also the daughter of King Endymion and Neo Queen Serenity who are the future Tuxedo Mask and Sailor Moon.

This volume okay. The villains aren't that interesting (but at least they're not as nearly predictable as the villains from the previous arc). But then the leader of the villains has a thing for our heroine. (Cuz, duh, she's a Mary Sue.) But I will say that I'm impressed that Usagi is not as much of a crybaby as she once was in the beginning. Good for her. 

One of the interesting things about this volume is  Chibiusa comes from the future and goes into the past (Sailor Moon's current time) to save her parents. That was very clever and done pretty well in this volume. Her fear is understood because after all she did steal the Silver Crystal and caused her mother to leave the palace looking for her. But she also befriends another guardian, Sailor Pluto, who has a solitary responsibility of guarding a gate. 

There is a bit of drama that several readers might roll their eyes to but some things are understandable like when Mamoru announces that he would protect Chibiusa but then Usagi gets angry and says that he chose Chibiusa over her. Now looking at this one might say that she's jealous and while that's true to some point but that's not the main reason why she's angry. She got angry because she wanted both Mamoru and herself to protect Chibiusa and not for Mamoru to hold the responsibility all by himself. Not to mention Mamoru has his own problems concerning his power which he thinks that he has no abilities because he doesn't seem to have any powers. 

Some parts good. Some parts okay. All in all, this volume was alright.