Rating: 1/5

I think if I had a shelf called "yech" I would list this book on it. I mean, really? I got sick of hearing it. I got sick of the sickos running this "multi-national business park" called Eden Olympia. What kind of a future were they creating? There were no kids in the book except the shadow kids we hear about being used for sex. There were so many films of crimes, both of sex and just beating the life out of "Arabs" and "immigrants" that it felt like a sick version of the Nixon White House and the Watergate scandal. Sorry for insulting Nixon and his White House; they were nothing compared to Eden Olympia. But there are some parallels with taping and filming and with the official sanctioned government thugs. In Eden Olympia the author calls these bands of executive thugs out for some fun 'the bowling team' because they wear matching leather jackets. Evidently beating people up really cleanses the psyche, releases tension and keeps them safe from viruses. 
David Greenwood was a British doctor working at Eden Olympia. One of those sainted types; loved by everyone, working so hard, giving his all to both the population in Eden Olympia and the poor immigrant orphanage outside Eden Olympia. One day he goes nuts and shoots a bunch of people. What a crazy aberration! Enter Dr. Jane Sinclair, hired to replace Dr. Greenwood, and her, at loose ends recovering from an injury, pilot husband Paul. They are moved into Dr. Greenwood's former home. Dr. Jane goes to work (she does? she is a paediatrician and there are no kids in Eden Olympia. She doesn't even get to volunteer at the orphanage were Dr. Greenwood worked, as all those "nubile thirteen year old girls" have gone elsewhere) and Paul lounges around the pool wondering about Dr. David Greenwood and his motivations for the murders.
I never hear of anyone ever actually doing any work although there is plenty of talk about the terribly long hours and the need for recreation to satisfy the beast within. No one in Eden Olympia wants to play games with balls. Noooo, here they want to let loose the raging beast. It is all OK because the Doctor in charge of mental health in Eden Olympia prescribes these activities as therapy. In the meantime, Dr. Jane is spending time with her prurient neighbors and her husband is channeling Dr. David Greenwood. 
Read it if you want, I don't recommend it.
The author does have a way with words. I was trying to read the book and ignore him at the same time, but he did amuse me sometimes. 
"It could be racist, or some mad animal rights thing. Fanatical Greens always veer off-course, and end up trying to save the smallpox virus. On the other hand--"
"Everyone works hard--it proves nothing. People are impressionable, they snatch powerful emotions out of the air. The one thing Eden Olympia doesn't need is its own Green movement. Why doesn't anyone want to save the planet's concrete?"
"I guess it can look after itself."
"Can it?" Penrose turned to stare at me, as if I had conveyed a unique insight.'