Rating: 4/5

This was Elizabeth Strout's debut novel, and it's remarkable to see how assured her voice already is. Her trademark ability to document the trials and tribulations of ordinary people is in full flight here, marking her out as a singular talent, long before she went on to win a Pulitzer.

This story focuses on Isabelle, a single mother in the small American town of Shirley Falls, and her sixteen-year-old daughter Amy. Isabelle is self-conscious and lonely, isolating herself from her co-workers at the drab office where she works. Amy is awkward and shy but she is starting to become aware of her own sexuality. We realise early on that their relationship is fraught - something major has occurred in the recent past which has had a profound effect on both of them. And now Amy has been offered a summer job at the same office as her mother, so they will spend every waking minute together. The weeks that follow will change their lives forever.

The thing I like most about Elizabeth Strout's writing is the way she examines the everyday obstacles that we all encounter. All of the people in this novel have some private burden to carry, an overwhelming regret or longing that keeps them awake at night. They lean on one another for comfort and support but there are things they can't even admit to those they hold dearest. Their way of overcoming this secret torment is to battle on, one day at a time, and hope that things will eventually get better: 
  "But what could you do? Only keep going. People kept going: they had been doing it for thousands of years. You took the kindness offered, letting it seep as far in as it could go, and the remaining dark crevices you carried around with you, knowing that over time they might change into something bearable."

It's quite a familiar story, yet Strout tells it with such grace and compassion. In her perceptive, unshowy style she explores the anxieties of motherhood and the dizzying possibilities of adolescence. It may be Strout's first novel, but Amy &amp; Isabelle announces a writer of rare emotional intelligence and extraordinary insight.