Rating: 5/5

That obscure object of desire - the Venus in and out of furs

Turning surreal , ludicrous, hyperbolic opulence, sexual obsession, corruption, violence, death, sordid rottenness and squalor into an exuberant and burlesque fest of decadence that after a slow start propulses forth breathlessly, faut le faire. Émile Zola managed brilliantly, with roaring success, with Nana, the ninth novel in his Rougon-Macquart cycle (9th in the order of publication, 17th novel in the reading order Zola recommended).

By opening Zola’s Nana, the guileless reader does not simply commit to one of those sprawling, 19th century novels with a dazzling number of characters but plunges into a kaleidoscopic evocation of life in Paris between 1867 and 1870 painted with meticulous detail, leaving one baffled and spinning in a maelstrom of questions that one risks to get lost in for months. 

For instance, what inspired Zola to write an epic vaudeville pivoting around this woman, this monstruous Nana, ushering in the fall of the Second Empire (1852-1870)? In his own words: 

Well! My intention was simple. I sought to imbue my words with humanity; I had the ambition, undoubtedly too great, of wanting to stand up for a girl, the first one who came along, as there are perhaps several thousand in Paris, and this to protest against the Marion Delormes, the Ladies of the Camellias, the Marcos, the Musettes, all that sentimentality, all that glorification of vice, which I find dangerous for morals and disastrous for the imaginations of our poor girls. I place morality here; others place it elsewhere.

Simple? All good and well, but such stance only torments me with more questions, wondering about the nature of the morality Zola brings to the fore here.

Nana definitely doesn’t romanticize prostitution, nor is it a simple story in which the prostitute finds redemption for her sins through love. Zola exposes a society that is rotten to the core, hypocrite, bigot, where nothing is sacred, where no family tie can protect one and in which money and sex are rivalling with each other to be the most wrecking and immoral force, where human beings all are or inexorably become vile and even beastly (Nana’s defilement of the count Muffat a chilling example). 

All of a sudden, in the good-natured child, the woman stood revealed, a disturbing woman with all the impulsive madness of her sex, opening the gates of the unknown world of desire. Nana was still smiling, but with the deadly smile of a man-eater.

Eating men with the same appetite as her daily box of chocolates, Zola pictures Nana’s development from a second-rate actress into an erotic goddess with mythical proportions, the courtesan queen of Paris, the world at her feet, men of all ranks and classes lusting for her divine curves, her long blonde hair, her perfect face, all willingly fooled believing in Nana’s exclusive affection.
Nana is a complex character, cruel, brutal, sentimental and loving too, generous, child-like, capricious and wasteful, as well as the subject of violence, abuse and exploitation herself.

It has been more than half a lifetime ago that I read Émile Zola - Thérèse Raquin, in the last year of the secondary school - but the imprint of the bleakness, the drabness, the horror of the morgue, the emotional numbness, the feelings of guilt stayed with me. Nana in many respects echoed and rekindled those impressions. It struck me how Zola bathes the diverse tableaux vivant in a different colour palette - the ochres, browns and dirty greens of Thérèse Raquin having turned into bright and brilliant colours, with silver and gold on top. Shrill and gaudy, they reinforce the vulgarity of life he depicts, the lack of good taste, the extravagance, the kitch.

Like Annie Ernaux vowed to use her pen to avenge her people, Nana will use her body to debase and ruin those who have built their wealth and social status on parasitising on the poverty, squalor and misery of the working class, sullied by abuse, domestic violence and alcoholism – but her revenge will be an unconscious one (and she will not get a Nobel prize for it), as her destructive force comes with auto-destruction – a fate that is reminiscent of the one of Valérie Marneffe’s in Balzac’s La Cousine Bette, a generation earlier.

She alone was left standing, amid the accumulated riches of her mansion, while a host of men lay stricken at her feet. Like those monsters of ancient times whose fearful domains were covered with skeletons, she rested her feet on human skulls and was surrounded by catastrophes…The fly that had come from the dung heap of the slums, carrying the ferment of social decay, had poisoned all these men simply by alighting on them. It was fitting and just. She had avenged the beggars and outcasts of her world. And while, as it were, her sex rose in a halo of glory and blazed down on her prostate victims like a rising sun shining down on a field of carnage, she remained as unconscious of her actions as a splendid animal, ignorant of the havoc she had wreaked, and as good-natured as ever.

Not for the faint at heart or when you are looking for something cosy, but well-worth reading nonetheless. 
(**** ½)