Rating: 4/5

Reading this on a train journey where I was travelling to meet up with a friend and was very excited about seeing him could have meant that this book would rather have been like 'musac' going on in the background and ought not to have made any real impression but it did. It was a really clever concept of one man who dies of a heart attack at 43 but then keeps reliving the decades leading up to that moment. And each 're-life' is informed by what he has been and done in all his previous incarnations.

In different lives he seeks to correct or change, remould and remodel who he is and how he works and Grimwood cleverly captures the frustrations and confusions, the anachronistic bombshells or blurted non-sequiturs which must arise. Each time he returns to himself after his 'death' he is older and thus he is not repeating the same life over and over again. Opportunities missed, meetings passed mean that necessarily there is a newness to the life he leads even in amidst the same-old-same-old.

After a while, there is the added frisson of a romance that spans the lives as Jeff encounters another person undergoing the same horror/excitement, (and it is sometimes a joy and sometimes deathly; the groundhog day stuggle writ large) and then the two of them together encounter a third who, instead of seeking ways in which he can improve the lot of the world, uses his re-life for murder and mayhem.

I rally loved the book and the tension and sadness inherent in the plot. There was humour, there is challenge but over-riding it all there is a sense that we cannot remake ourselves differently to how we are, we cannot scale an impossibly high wall just by virtue of having a lot of runs at it. We are who we are and all we can do is begin to find a way to be that person more happily, more honestly, more real-ly.

The denoument was surprisingly undramatic and unresolved but,in the context of the weirdness and unnerving experience that the two main protagonists had had and that we the readers had shared with them over countless lives, it rang true. 

A clever concept, well executed, or at least, I thought so.