Rating: 1/5

I DID IT. I AM FREE FROM MY MISTAKE.
Gosh, I hate it when I can't decide whether a book is good or bad. LIKE THIS ONE. The story is kinda interesting (I sure do want to know the ending) and there are some positive things to the characters building, namely that none of the women were overly mean to each other, and didn't degrade each other. But that only small pro is not enough to weight against all the cons.
1. I read this book because I was told it was feminist. I saw very little feminism (or very unconvincing preaching). In fact, nearly 2/3 of the book was Kassandra's mental wrecking about which God to worship. There is so much spiritual dependence, that's not even well written, that makes the book completely irrelevant to me. 
2. I discussed with a friend and she had the best way to describe my beef with this book: the characters are like cardboard cut-outs. The author raised them up when she needs some grand declaration made, and then they fell down again, lifeless. Her characters seem to fit into archetypes: evil patriarchal men, naive brain-washed women, strong independent women... Even if she TRIED to break the characters from the molds, she didn't do it convincingly and all it did was to make the characters incoherent. For instance, Paris was described as 'not unkindly' but then threatened to rearrange his sister's teeth with his fist. Hector was at first regarded as the typical patriarchal man with not much in his brain except fighting, and not close to Kassandra and even beat her up, but after somehow became the only one with any kindness to her, and was even promoted to 'a good man' shortly before his death. Andromache couldn't make up her mind whether she wanted to be submissive or willful... And Khryse. Don't get me started on Khryse. If Kassandra changed her mind about whether or not he was a good man one more time, I might have tore this book apart. All those discrepancies annoyed me a lot, especially when the story itself is already so badly written.
3. At least 1/3 of the 600 pages were useless. How could anyone write a war and make it boring? In the middle half of the book, during all the siege of Troy, nothing much happened. Maybe it was the way things were, with a siege that long, but STILL. Make your filler interesting or just get to the point!! I might have hated this book less if it'd ended sooner.
Tl;dr: I felt obliged to finish this book, but I hated every second of it.