Rating: 4/5

Spend a semester in the 1980’s at a remote New Hampshire liberal arts college where rules are nonexistent. 

There’re the drama students that are vaguely gay, the unhinged fine arts students, the pretentious writers and poets. Everyone’s on drugs, depressed and yearning; for escape, for release, for connection, for more drugs. But majors change as fast as relationships and identity is fluid or perhaps nonexistent, boundaries not even worth considering. 

Alternating perspectives establish these characters as having no real character. Sure they make decisions, often the poorest ones, but can we trust them? When events are recounted by another in not quite the same way?

‘I wasn't acting on passion. I was simply acting.’

This novel has cemented my obsession with the BEELU (Bret Easton Ellis Literary Universe) which in many ways reminds me of JD Salinger’s world of the Glass family; both in the weaving of characters and the metafiction element of the author’s presence amongst his characters. This kind of writing just really tickles my freaking fancy. 

There are cameos galore: Clay post-Less Than Zero and not coping, Patrick Bateman’s compulsive liar brother Sean. Alternate reality Judy Poovey.

AND—
—as a Donna Tartt stan I can’t not mention the weird group of classics students ‘probably roaming the countryside sacrificing farmers and performing pagan rituals’ (this was published five years before the Secret History btw) ??. What I wouldn’t give to go back in time and spend a weekend at Bennington College... but only if I could take a taser or something

‘A great numb feeling washes over me as I let go of the past and look forward to the future. Pretend to be a vampire. I don't really need to pretend, because it's who I am, an emotional vampire. I've just come to expect it. Vampires are real. That I was born this way. That I feed off of other people's real emotions. Search for this night's prey. Who will it be?’

I see why Easton Ellis is controversial, why he is not for everyone. But he is so for me. I’d heard so much about how dark and twisted he was, and sure. But why would I want to read about the disillusionment and cruelty of the elite in a form that shies away from the horror? He commits fully, moreover his work is fucking funny. Like I was laughing out loud. And I think the reactions truly cement his satire skills because this feels blown up, dramatised, but in no way inauthentic. 

Detached and hollow, but is the absence of something nothing? Or something else altogether?