Rating: 2/5

This one’s about time travel.

Now, as a reader of comic books, this phrase has a chilling effect on my brain, because time travel stories are usually (but not always) the last refuge of the unimaginative or gassed out writer, but this book has been sitting on my shelf for a while and heck, because Stephen King wasn’t available, even Dean Koontz has some nice things to say about it on a cover blurb.

The story unfolds like so: Henpecked, depressed dude dies in the middle of a phone call with his wife, he wakes up in his college dorm in 1963, he lives his life differently, dies again at the exact same date and time and wakes up circa 1963. He lives off money betting on sporting event outcomes he remembers and plays the stock market on his inside knowledge of companies that did well over his previous lifetime (IBM, Apple, etc.).

Because this last paragraph is the paraphrased back cover description we are coming up on Spoilertown. Take the exit ramp to the bypass now!

During one of his replays he meets a woman who also experiences the same phenomena and during their multiple lifetimes together they try to not only figure this stuff out but search for others who “replay” as well.

And they find one, but he’s a crazed serial killer who thinks his ability is a gift from aliens and he’s paying them back with human blood. Because I’m on the shallow side, I was thinking, damn, now these two are going to be chased down and forced to outwit a lunatic for the rest of their replayed lives. Woo Hoo!!!

Um, no. It was not to be.

It was back to hitting the familiar historical notes and taking a turn at amateur philosophizing and mixed metaphors and trying to lead a different life this time around.

If you’ve read Stephen King’s time travel book, 11/22/1963, you might recognize a few minor plot points - taking a run at stopping the Kennedy assassination, using sports betting as a way to make ends meet – something King did infinitely better. This book predates King’s by about 15 years.

Grimwood toys with some interesting concepts along the way, but never really gets to the “why”? Which is something I don't ordinarily complain about, I don't have to be spoon-fed everything. Here it just feels like a cheat - like going to your favorite restaurant in anticipation of a grand meal only to find that it was closed by the Board of Health.

Although, there’s some good story telling here and there, the book is weighed down with awkward dialogue, a chunky prose style and a nagging feeling that the author had a thesaurus handy – writing sentences that run smoothly until a jarring word choice makes the reader feel like they’ve just been smacked in the back of the head.

The ending is worthy of a throat punch.

If you loved the movie Groundhog Day (time-looping FTW!) or thought that 11/22/1963 was the bee’s knees, you may give a moment’s pause before you pick this tome up.

A really strong two and a half stars rounded down.