Rating: 3/5

3.5 overall. More of a minor effort, in a way, but fans will find it of genuine interest.

This is the second of five entries for the vintage-style sleuths Tommy &amp; Tuppence. I previously read #3 - 'N or M?' - and found it immensely enjoyable, mainly because it sticks more closely to the format of an actual novel: 
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

'Partners in Crime', however, is a looser animal. It's set up as a string of related short stories held together by a plausible premise that is nevertheless just an excuse for the existence of the stories. T&amp;T (now married, in the aftermath of 'The Secret Adversary') are called on to head a detective agency. In the shadow of their purported larger concern, they take on the regular duties of regular detectives dealing with revolving-door clients. 

On her part, Agatha Christie takes this opportunity to not only be tongue-in-cheek but to also sort-of parade her self-education; that is, the knowledge she gathered for her craft through extensive reading of previous / contemporary mystery writers. (At the outset of their own adventures, T&amp;T discuss which 'style' they should use to solve each case.) 

I mentioned in my earlier review that T&amp;T are not unlike Dashiell Hammett's Nick and Nora Charles (with less alcohol intake) and that's still true here. ~ except here it might be more noticeable that Hammett comes combined with Noel Coward-ish panache:
  "Do you know what I've been thinking, Tommy?"
"It's impossible to say," replied her husband. "You think of so many things, and you think of them all at once." 

"If you must be Sherlock Holmes," she observed, "I'll get you a nice little syringe and a bottle of labelled cocaine, but for God's sake leave that violin alone." 

"I don't know how much of the case you remember," continued Tommy quietly.
"All of it," said Tuppence, "but don't let me cramp your style."
While it's refreshing to observe Lady A's use of a more flamboyant humor than she normally allows herself, what may be even more pleasurable is the fact that T&amp;T share a pronounced fondness, one that has no real bottom. They may, of course, occasionally bristle but skirmishes are evanescent and without real teeth. They're a delightful couple.

AC fans may view these unified stories rather like an exercise book, as they watch the author take up and then throw off motifs that would appear in later works with a certain frequency. If, as a group, the stories seem to vary in quality - part of the reason for that may be that Christie's novels are generally more engaging than her short stories (since novels allow mysteries to 'breathe' more beneficially). 

But I do have a favorite: Chapter 7 ('The Case of the Missing Lady') is an unexpected and particularly clever treat, as it shows T&amp;T's tireless efforts, for once, being hilariously rendered moot. Runner-ups would be Chapter 12 ('The House of Lurking Death') for its shock value, and Chapter 13 ('The Unbreakable Alibi') for its effectiveness as a brain-teaser.