Rating: 4/5

City, a fix -up of nine short stories from the wonderful golden age magazines becomes a classic science-fiction novel, the fun is the main character Jenkins...a robot, yes and why not ? Since these immortal machines ( no offense Jenkins) can span literally 12,000 years, you see the bonus , longer narratives and the plot where humans believe they're the boss but is this true. Others in cast are primary the Bruce Webster family ostensibly owners of the robot. Seemingly ordinary scenes between the two feel like a butler and an employer, naturally after a time they become much closer almost friends. Oh the dogs are given operations and the first and best Nathaniel that Bruce Webster made for amusement which become a new breed a talking intelligent animal. The black Scottish terrier is always a delight in words never dry , but quite entertaining as the canine chases squirrels around the yard until they flee up a tree, writer Clifford Simak cherished pet Scottie in real life .They're not the last creatures given speech soon it seems normal for any. The wolves join the action though they try to keep their jaws closed. Unsuccessfully must be admitted some can't help being a wolf. The cities became empty when bored people want, need elbow room to breathe fresh air and relax in the quiet country. This in fact not be their final destination with a perpetual wanderlust never satisfied. And the Solar System vast amount of planets, moons, asteroids and the Americans belief in finding paradise . Maybe the strange could be human mutants might stay around town, however the millions of the constantly busy ants in their hills have no desire to leave. The insects forever crawling over the soil looking for food will tired those who watch. Still poor l0yal Jenkins the almost homo sapiens without people he ( a well -deserved title) in an empty house has to keep everything tidy in a world that isn't. To be honest never achieves his goal of peaceful harmony , the cards could not stack that way. Blue Earth is beautiful but inhabitants are the opposite of gentle. The story is of course not really about dogs and robots or animals however but a plea for people to stop harming each other and kindly live for the joy of living. Vicious wars come and go but inhabitants of our good old planet, sometimes, should remain PEACEFUL.