Rating: 2/5

I’d like to start this by saying that I’m proud, as a normal man past retirement age, that I’ve never had to pay for my pleasure – meaning, of course, reading John Grisham novels. (What else COULD I mean?) They’re readily available in whatever swapping point because almost no one holds onto them for a second read, they just pass them on, and I do the same. Of course, the problem with reading a book for free is that sometimes you get what you pay for.

John Grisham is most famous for his legal thrillers, so how thrilling was this one? The set-up: a widow is suing a tobacco company for liability over the death of her husband. Widow vs. big tobacco – gee, I wonder who’ll win? (This reminds me of those books where China, Russia, Arab terrorists, drug cartels, aliens and whoever else team up in World War III against the USA – who do you think will win?) So, this part isn’t much in doubt, let alone thrilling. The tobacco companies have hired a high-priced expert on jury-selection – our obvious bad guy, because we KNOW he won’t play fair, so we have our villain. He (and the claimants) have fairly complete dossiers on everyone in the jury pool, but there’s one who’s a mystery to all and we learn that he’s been in other jury pools for “big tobacco” liability trials in other cities – well, this must be the “good guy”, of course, and the second “of course” is that he’s seated at the last moment. (Otherwise, there’s no book.) Not only that but there’s a mysterious woman making phone calls to our jury-selection expert, tipping him off on things which will happen during the trial – and “amazingly”, she’s right! If you can’t see at this point where it’s all headed, it’s because you have your “Johns” mixed up – but this is “Grisham”, not “LeCarré”, so there are no characters floating around with dubious loyalties or for sale to the highest bidder – John Grisham doesn’t play that way, he’s always almost straightforward, never looking for the literary “sleight of hand.” 

What follows is one cat-and-mouse game between our expert and the “mysterious” woman, who doesn’t stay all that mysterious for long, and another between our “mysterious” juror and the other members of the jury, as well as machinations by the expert to tilt the jury in his clients’ favor. It’s fun, I’ll admit, but not particularly thrilling unless you’re wondering if “big tobacco” will triumph over the poor widow. (I didn’t.) The motive of the juror and woman, and the connection between them, wasn’t particularly mysterious, either. What WAS a mystery for me is how someone can continuously move from town to town, changing his name and continuously not only be called for jury duty but always for the same type of case – how did he manage that? As well as how easy it was to manipulate juries, plant incriminating evidence, and just screw around with the whole process – but it’s fiction and as is often the case, it’s best that you don’t think too much, just go with it.

I never enter into a John Grisham book with particularly high expectations; for me, he tends to be a steady 2- or 3-star read, rarely dull but rarely spectacular; this is my personal taste, nothing more. There are others, of course, who devour his books and they have every right to their opinion, too. I read the GR reviews of this book and some consider this their favorite and others consider it his worst, so there you are: a hung jury.