Rating: 4/5

I'd never read THE CORRECTIONS before and let me assure you, I am well aware of how cool it is these days to bash Jonathan Franzen, but after meeting him at a reading in Ann Arbor, I decided it was finally time to sit down with his Big Boy and give it a thorough read. In person, Franzen is a kind and funny, if somewhat shy, guy. And for someone who has put up with as much criticism as he's received (some of which is certainly well-deserved), he's remarkably down-to-earth and "normal." All that said, sure—he was doing a public reading and on his best behavior no doubt, but still—let's focus on his fiction for a bit. 

THE CORRECTIONS was quite an astounding bit of work. The multi-layered storyline of a Midwestern family scattered across the country making their miserable way through a brand new 21st century perfectly captured what it felt like for a subset of select Americans at that time. True, much of Franzen's characters' concerns may not be universally relatable, but to me, that doesn't distract from the quality of his writing and his clear penchant for telling an engaging, witty, and devastating story of grief, loss, and family turmoil. 

That said, Franzen can indeed be a bit wordy; some of his sentences are a little highfalutin for their intended purpose and his word choices occasionally make you feel as if one of his aims for this book was to bump thesaurus sales, but if an author keeps you reading despite looking over at a dictionary once in a while, I'd say they still did their job. 

In all, I'm not looking to make some grand statement here about how we must all rethink our collective "Franzen hate" and slap him on the cover of TIME once again, but a writer's most important work (for me, at least) will always be what they put on the page within their books. Is Franzen a brilliant writer? I believe so. Does he still deserve readership? Absolutely. Will his books connect with everyone in this new era of American modernity? Probably not. But for those who enjoy reading about a tangled web of unhappy people, struggling to make the best of a world that is all their own alongside insightful musings of a bygone America, then THE CORRECTIONS is well worth a read.