Rating: 4/5

The First Fictional Modern Professional Female Detective
Review of the Sphere Books paperback edition (1974 orig/1986 reprint) of the Faber &amp; Faber hardcover original (1972)

Perhaps someone in the comments will be able to come up with an example to refute my lede, but I definitely remember reading P.D. James' first Cordelia Gray book back in the day and thinking that she didn't have any contemporary rivals. There had of course been amateurs such as Agatha Christie's Miss Marple and Tuppence and also some pulp examples such as Erle Stanley Gardner's Bertha Cool from back in the Golden Age. But I think all the Burkholders, Millhones, Plums, Scarpettas, Warshawskis, etc. came well after 1972. I picking out the more prominent series characters here and there may be individual examples that I'm not aware of.

James however did not make Cordelia Gray a series character and instead returned to her regular Scotland Yard CID Commander Adam Dalgliesh, aside from a 10-years-later one-off Cordelia Gray sequel The Skull Beneath The Skin (1982). Possibly the limited resources of a private detective did not trigger James' imagination much further and she felt she had taken enough of a first step to allow others to follow.

Even in An Unsuitable Job..., the shadow of Dalgliesh hovers throughout the book before he makes an actual cameo appearance towards the end. Cordelia Gray has inherited the Pryde Detective Agency from her deceased partner Bernie Pryde, who had previously worked under Dalgliesh when the latter was a Detective Superintendent in the CID. Dalgliesh had been instrumental in having Pryde dismissed from the force. Pryde would regularly quote the 'Super' about investigative procedures and these lessons come back to Gray's mind throughout as she investigates an apparent suicide as her first solo case.

Gray definitely proves more than competent in her deductions and finds herself a possible murder target in a rather convoluted resolution. There is a rather bizarre coverup after that though. It becomes apparent that Dalgliesh can see through that, but he allows it to pass as 'justice having been done'. 

I enjoyed this re-read of the first Cordelia Gray and the added conspiracy element of Adam Dalgliesh participating in the proceedings.

Front cover of the original Faber &amp; Faber hardcover edition (1972). Image sourced from Wikipedia. 

Actor Helen Baxendale as Cordelia Gray in the TV-series "An Unsuitable Job for a Woman" (1987-89). Image sourced from Pinterest.

Trivia and Links
An Unsuitable Job for a Woman was adapted as a theatrical film in 1982 which starred actor Pippa Guard as Cordelia Gray. You can watch the entire film on YouTube here.

An Unsuitable Job for a Woman was also adapted for a same-titled short-run TV series (1987-89) starring Helen Baxendale as Cordelia Gray and where the first episode "Sacrifice" was based on the original novel and the following 3 episodes were original scripts.