Rating: 3/5

Maybe I would have liked this book more had I been able to read it rather than having listened to the audiobook version read by Nadia May. Nadia May is the English actress Wanda McCaddon. Lucie Aubrac, the author of this autobiographical memoir, was French. Listening, I was hammered by sounds that felt as un-French as could be! The narration of the book jarred me. In addition, Nadia May reads fast, way too fast. Such a rapid tempo is OK only when the events being related are suspenseful, and they are at some points. However, the rapid speed should not have been maintained throughout the entire book. The valuable and informative, fact heavy introduction by Margaret Collins Weitz should have been read slower. Also, the preface and beginning chapters when who is who is made clear to readers. The way this book is read stresses the listener. Well, that is what it did to me. The rapid speed was to my liking o-n-l-y in the most suspenseful portions and Nadia May’s English inflection never felt right! Go ahead, read the book, but don’t listen to it read by Nadia May, at least not if you are at all sensitive to the tone of the French language!

OK, what is the memoir about? The author, Lucie Aubrac (1912-2007), tells her own story in diary format. Please observe though that she in fact did not keep a diary during the period the book concerns, that would have been impossible as an active member of the French Resistance! The memoir covers nine months of her life, from the conception of her second child to its birth, so from May 29, 1943, to February 12, 1944. Lucie was Roman Catholic and thirty-one years of age. Her husband, Raymond, was Jewish. She was a teacher at a French lycée, he an engineer. Both were active in the French Resistance. Lucie and her husband helped to establish Liberation-sud—a resistance group working from within Vichy, France, its aim being to fight Nazi occupation through sabotage and propaganda. Living in Lyon, their activities brought them in direct conflict with the Gestapo head, Klaus Barbie, the so-called "Butcher of Lyon". After the war, he came to be convicted of Crimes against Humanity, as pointed out in the book’s epilog. The memoir covers only nine months in Lucie Aubrac’s life and it focuses on how she and fellow resisters got her husband and fifteen others out of the clutches of the Gestapo. Her plan was so audacious and so bold that one cannot help but be somewhat amused. Speaking of humor, the book does contain lines that will make you smile. 

Here is the plan:  A French legal clause allows those who are engaged, to marry, if one is soon to die. Raymond was in prison sentenced to die for his participation in the Resistance. She was already married to him and pregnant with their to-be second child. Of course, none of those in the Resistance ever used their real names. She claimed she was engaged to the prisoner (actually her husband) and did not want the awaited child to be born out of wedlock. With this as the ploy, the escape of Raymond and fifteen other prisoners was arranged! 

The beginning chapters are confusing, and this is not just due to the audiobook’s rapid narration. Information is not clearly presented. Throughout the book aliases are used and the information presented is jumbled. 

The book focuses on Lucie’s clever feats. In my view, there is too little about her husband’s role and important work in the Resistance. 

Lucie points out that her work in the Resistance was characterized by the incessant need to wait and wait and wait some more. This never ending need to wait is reflected in the telling—for good and for bad. It is perhaps accurate but makes the telling long and drawn out! 

I do like that we see Lucie as a whole human being; we do not see her only as an active member of the Resistance. We see her womanly side--a woman deeply in love with her husband and devoted to the wellbeing of her young son. We see her as a dedicated teacher. We see her outspoken manner, her spunk, her spark, as well as her dauntless courage.

A brief afterword tells what happens to the others involved.

I try to separate my reaction to the written contents of a book and how it is narrated. Perhaps I did not succeed here. I might have given this book four rather than three stars had I read rather than listened to it. Maybe.....just maybe.