Rating: 4/5

***NO SPOILERS***

A ruminative story about loneliness, missed opportunities, envy, yearning, and hope set in a small New England town, Amy and Isabelle focuses on the complex relationship between an unassuming mother and her reticent teenage daughter. Amy is the obedient, respectful daughter until her fortysomething substitute math teacher begins molesting her regularly. When Isabelle finds out, mother and daughter find their relationship suddenly strained and tense. Seemingly for the first time, Amy feels deep resentment, even hatred, toward her mother, and surprisingly, Isabelle realizes she feels similarly toward Amy. 

Author Elizabeth Strout divided the narrative into two sections, with one focusing on Isabelle and the other on Amy. Although this kind of split organization is often not only unnecessary but also shortchanging, fortunately in this book it works, allowing both characters to be properly fleshed out. Amy and Isabelle are multi-dimensional, with complicated feelings (mainly their vulnerabilities and respective disappointments) coloring everyday goings-on. 

What doesn’t work so well is Isabelle’s story. It has less spark than Amy’s. Where Amy’s is scandalous and bold, Isabelle’s is limp and depressed. Each character’s story mainly unfolds in the settings they spend the most time in. For Isabelle this is a secretarial job in a mill. For Amy this is in the local high school and all that concerns the school. There’s not much of interest to say about a workaday secretarial job. A high school, though...it has life and natural drama. Strout did try to infuse drama into Isabelle’s work setting via a cast of co-workers who sit around and gossip, but the gossip is inane and the co-workers uninteresting. Meanwhile, back in Amy’s world the story is taking a shocking turn. 

Amy and Isabelle is filled with heartbreak. This is something Strout did well; she made this book very much a feeling book. Best of all, she concluded it with a quiet kind of happily ever after: a conclusion promising hope and huge possibility. It ends on just the right note.