Rating: 3/5

Here's the thing about me and Stephen King: no matter how problematic and/or angry-making I find some of his work to be, the man knows how to tell a good story. 

I had read Bag of Bones before, when it was first published, but all I really remembered about it was that I found it an enjoyable enough story, but not one that was excellent enough to be particularly memorable. And, indeed, I found myself remembering very little of the story while rereading it this time around. Which, on the one hand, the kind of thing I hope for with a reread so that it, again (and hopefully) has the power to surprise me again. 

There are good things about Bag of Bones. It is a real page-turner of a ghost story, one that gathers momentum page by page to a huge and appropriately dramatic climax. This is important because the quality of King's endings does vary greatly from novel to novel. The narrative arc of Bag of Bones is a very smooth and appropriate one, where 'appropriate' references the gradual raising of the story's stakes from beginning to end. As well, this is one of King's many stories with a writer as a protagonist and few other writers I've read can express the exalted joys, the abysmal lows and strange, superstition filled territories of that state. 

But there are bad things, too. 

From my original reading, I did remember that the ghostly part of the story somehow revolved around a black woman (Sara Tidwell) who was murdered and whose child was murdered and the whole thing later hushed up by the largely white town. It was, in fact, the one thing I did remember about the story and I remember not feeling completely sanguine or satisfied about it during my initial reading, though I didn't have a strong recollection of why.

Reading it this time, I think part of the problem is that I didn't have the knowledge or the vocabulary to put to the why, just that vague sense of I don't like this. I'm not sure I have the knowledge now to fully flesh out that feeling, but even on a second read, it's definitely still there. 

My initial and most immediate reaction was to the race issues involved here. King frequently writes about small town Maine and the small-town (white) folks that live there with a lot of small town (white) attitudes. He also writes a lot about Magical Negroes. A friend and I were just talking about this (in reference to a different King book) and I said to her, "It's just the price of admission with King." And…though I'm not thrilled about that, it's still just true. 

So the fact that the underpinnings of this story is about egregious and heinous crimes that were carried out against a tiny black community by the denizens of this unincorporated township—through the direct action of a small few, and the cover up and subsequent shunning and/or harassment and/or passivity of all the rest—all written by a middle-aged, relatively small-town white dude is already enough to get my hackles up. In the course of the story, Sara Tidwell is repeatedly gang raped, forced to watch as her only child is drowned, then is strangled herself (while still being raped). Her remains and those of her murdered son are moved around, buried, unburied and then reburied, not even allowed to rest. Though everyone knows who is responsible for her and her son's disappearance (and presumed death), no justice is served and, when the Tidwell family won't lie down and accept this state of affairs, the township turns against them, to the point that someone leaves an animal trap in the woods which eventually kills another of the Tidwell children. The Tidwells and the other members of their small community, under this duress, leave the township. 

And while, on the one hand, I don't think that King, in text or without, condones what happens to Sara Tidwell, her son or the rest of the Tidwells, at the same time, the story is set up so that Sara's revenant and vengeful spirit is the ultimate villain of the piece, a monster that has to be vanquished by the (white) (male) (middle-aged) hero of the piece, largely to save the life of a beautiful, blue-eyed, blonde haired little girl. 

That…doesn't really sit well. It's a very gristly lump to digest, imo. 

But, thinking about it longer and further, I feel like my issues are actually bigger and deeper than that. Upon more thought, the closest comparison I could come was, ironically enough, a story written by one of King's sons, Joe Hill. In my review of Hill's Heart Shaped Box, I wrote: "Though I feel that the story is really theirs, both women are presented as secondary characters and, more importantly, victims." I feel as though the same problem of point of view and who, exactly 'owns' this story presents itself in Bag of Bones. 

Sara Tidwell is inarguably a victim here. Mattie Devore, love interest of the protagonist, Mike Noonan, and girl in a fridge, is unquestionably victimized in the course of the story, first by Max Devore, who attempts to literally buy her daughter, then attempts to use the law to steal her daughter and finally, tries to kill her daughter. Devore uses his money and influence to get the town to turn against Mattie, to get her fired from her job and, eventually, he pays to have her killed. As a result, Mattie's daughter, Kyra, loses her only remaining parent; though only three years old, she is equally victimized by Devore. 

Reaching a little further, you could argue that the town mothers (including Noonan's wife, Jo) are victimized by the men who raped and murdered Sara Tidwell and murdered her son; Sara's revenge against them spans generations, culling the family lines of those men who wronged her—and robbing those women whose worst sin was marrying into those families of their children. In Jo Noonan's case, there's an open question of whether Sara's interference even deprived her of her life. 

So there's a lot in the fabric of the story that could be said—about patriarchy, about misogyny, about abuses of power, and about race. And, to be fair, I do think that King attempt to address some of these things. 

But I don't think King's own collection of privileges puts him in the right place to truly or adequately address them and the fact that he lenses the entire story through the viewpoint of an avatar much like himself—a wealthy, white, middle-class man—means that the horrible abuses against all these women are second fiddle to that avatar's man pain and his quest to extricate himself from those same sins of the father (or great-grand-uncle, as it were). 

So, though Mike is a likeable enough character, his happy ending isn't as satisfying as it might otherwise be, coming, as it does, at the expense of all these wronged, victimized and otherwise unavenged women. Sara Tidwell is a supernatural monster whose bones (and those of her son) are destroyed by lye, denied both her revenge and a respectful or peaceful burial. The last scions of the families that did this to her escape. Mattie Devore has the momentary triumph of knowing her custody of Kyra is secured, but she dies frightened and in pain, half her face blown away simply because of a dead rich man's sour grapes; Devore has already killed himself is out of the picture before the hit against Mattie is even enacted. Kyra is orphaned and traumatized by both the living and the dead. Though no specific number is called out, at least four other mothers lost children to the terrible revenge set in motion when Sara Tidwell was murdered as she was. So putting a smiling face on the relatively happy life that Mike will go on to live over these piles of bones is both a little macabre and an almost brilliant (if unintentional) illustration of why all these things still happen and still matter. 

At the end of it all, Bag of Bones isn't a bad story so much as one that fails to grasp what it reaches for and that feeds into the same –isms it tries to discuss and depict. It could be better. I wish it were better. But it is just more bones than flesh.