Rating: 3/5

At last we will reveal ourselves to the Jedi. At last we will have our revenge. 

  A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away....
 
 

Episode I
The Phantom Menace 

I will start out by saying that I saw this movie in theatres when I was a kid, and it will always be a part of me. The Podracing, the lightsaber battles, the large scale ground war between the Gungans/Naboo and the Trade Federation droid army, Anakin leaving his mother behind and promising to return one day and free her. When Darth Maul stared down Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi Wan Kenobi and activated both blades on his lightsaber, changing Star Wars forever in the epic Duel of the Fates lightsaber battle. It is an unforgettable movie. I watched it again last year for the first time since initially seeing it in theatres in 1999. I didn't even know this, but critics have long hated the movie, and it received poor feedback in its time. I was nervous to watch it again, given this. What if the critics were right? What if this movie I have cherished all my life was just a dumpster fire, and like many movies beloved by children doesn't hold up when rewatched as an adult? So I rewatched it. 

And I loved it. I rewatched all three of the movies that make up George Lucas' prequel trilogy, and loved them all, though Revenge of the Sith is noticeably the best of the three, I think. For the movie novelization of Episode I, George Lucas made a peculiar choice, apparently handpicking fantasy author Terry Brooks for the job. According to an interview with Brooks in the back of the book, when Brooks brought up his writing science fiction to Lucas, Lucas replied: 

"Don't worry, I don't make science fiction movies." 

He views Star Wars as adventure storytelling more than science fiction. So I guess it sort of makes sense to pick a fantasy author? Of course, by the very definition of science fiction Star Wars very much is science fiction. So Lucas is wrong about that. He does make science fiction movies. But hey...they're great adventure stories too. 

I thought Brooks did an admirable job with the novelization of the movie. He added in some scenes that weren't in the movie, though most of them didn't really add much to the story, I thought. One scene, however, involving Anakin and a Tusken Raider, was fantastic and very authentically written; I consider it among the best things I've read in any Star Wars literature to date. Brooks should isolate that part out of the book and allow it to be included in a Star Wars short story collection so more people can enjoy it, because it was great. 

Largely though, I found this retelling to be simply "serviceable", and to me it came across as a bit wooden. I didn't really care about any of the characters for the most part, with the exception of the part where Anakin says goodbye to his mother on Tatooine; Brooks retold that superbly, and it actually made me cry because it was such a powerful and engrossing retelling. Disappointingly, the two best scenes in the movie, the Boonta Eve Podrace and the Duel of the Fates lightsaber battle between Darth Maul and Qui-Gon Jinn/Obi Wan, came across as underwhelming interpretations to me. 

Interestingly, however, this book showed me how ridiculous some aspects of the movie were. I mean, George Lucas has said in the past that Star Wars is geared towards children. So why does this movie have the outrageously complicated and mature plot that it has? What kid knows what a f--king trade route is? Or what the taxation of trade routes is? What kid knows what a blockade is? I'm an adult and I'm not sure I fully know what that is. 

Throw in incredibly boring scenes of debate happening in the Galactic Senate, the nomination and voting for a new Supreme Chancellor, the proposal of the formation of a commission to go to Naboo and investigate the claims of a Trade Federation invasion? Are you kidding me Lucas? I love you dearly for Star Wars, and always will, but saying this plot was geared toward children simply makes no sense. 

The book highlights other holes in the movie's logic as well. Like the scene at the Jedi Temple when Mace Windu says something like (paraphrasing here): 

"What? There's no way the Sith could have returned. That's crazy talk. We (the members of the Jedi Council) would have sensed it." 

But then, at the end of the book, when he is at the funeral of Qui-Gon Jinn, he is f--king standing like ten feet away from Senator Palpatine, who is really a Sith Lord. 

So they couldn't come back without you sensing it, but you can't "sense" it when it's standing ten feet away from you? Lolol. 

In closing, I will say that I will always love Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace. I loved it as a kid, and I still love it today. It is a big part of my childhood, and I'll always be thankful to George Lucas for it. Terry Brooks has penned a serviceable and, at times, superior novelization of the film here, but some things he added in, like the extra dialogue where Anakin fawns obsessively over Padmé, made Anakin seem like an overly-persistent creep, and I actually preferred the minimal and more wholesome dialogue of the movie. In essence, he actually makes the story worse in some parts, so know what you're getting into. If you're a huge fan of the film, this might be worth checking out. I am, and all I can say is that for me it was a bit of a mixed bag. 

P.S. Yes, Jar Jar Binks is annoying as hell, even in the novelization... 

I actually think he was more annoying in the novelization...

Heesa bombad.