Rating: 5/5

**4.5-stars rounded up**

Stephen King's Desperation follows a bizarre cast of characters who come together to fight an ancient evil force.

That would be my single-sentence synopsis if someone were to ask me what this book is about.

If you have ever read a Stephen King novel, however, you realize the actual answer is way more complicated than that.

I first read Desperation around 2001. I had just finished my time in undergrad and was excited to have time to read just for fun. 

What I remember from that initial time through is that although I enjoyed the premise, I didn't really get it. If I had been rating books at that time, I probably would have settled on 3.5-stars.

Now, close to 20-years later, this is pretty damn close to a perfect read for me!!! 

What changed?

I'm not really sure. This time through I became invested very quickly. The characters were a huge part of the enjoyment factor for me. 

King is a master of developing every aspect of a character's personality and their backstory. You never wonder what the motivation is.

In my very humble opinion, no one does character development quite like the King. But a lot of it had to do with just settling into another one of his stories. 

He has a very distinct style that is hella nostalgic for me; it feels like home.

Desperation also has one of my all-time favorite tropes: a mix-matched group of characters, placed into extraordinary circumstances, who band together, no matter their differences, to fight against the forces of evil.

Good versus Evil. I'm here for it every damn time.

This novel is extremely graphic with gore and violence on page. Some of the scenes made my toes curl and my stomach lurch. The use of creepy crawlers to instill fear was expertly-crafted. 

If this is not your thing, you'll most likely want to give a hard pass to this one. Otherwise, if you are a seasoned King, or Horror reader, get ready to jump into a bloody, brilliant good time! 

My one slight critique is that the final showdown felt a little rushed, hence the 4.5-star rating, as opposed to a full 5. 

This book has a nice, long build-up, and I could definitely have read some more substance at the end. It was great, but I still wanted more!

Overall, I am beyond happy that I took the plunge and reread this 706-page beast of modern Horror. I am currently rereading The Regulators and digging the many connections I missed the first time around. 

I would definitely recommend reading these two back-to-back for maximum enjoyment!