Rating: 5/5

”She didn’t look like a tramp and she didn’t look like a crook. Which meant only that she could be both with more success than if she had.”(p.754)

Remember Philip Marlowe, the P.I. who’s never at a loss for a cool and hardboiled remark like the one above? Well, you won’t really get him in Playback because in Raymond Chandler’s final completed novel the moments of wisecracking are few and far between but that’s okay by me because I quite like the darker and more pensive tone of Chandler’s later novels.

In Playback, Marlowe is hired by a lawyer to shadow a young woman named Eleanor King, a.k.a. Betty Mayfield, although he does not know why he has to tail her. Betty is soon molested by a young man who seems to have something on her, and a little while later, she gets in touch with Marlowe, who has disclosed his mission to her, because when waking up in the middle of the night, she found the dead body of that young man in her room. Seemingly accepting her request to help her get rid of the body, Marlowe enters her hotel room only to find that there is no trace of a corpse, but still the young man remains missing, and a little later his car is found in the desert. Still, Marlowe has a hunch that Betty did not kill this man, but how can he help her unless she tells him why she seems to be on the run and what the young man has found out about her?

Unlike in all the other Marlowe novels, the plot in Playback is quite simplistic and the story tends to dawdle along in a slight ripple rather than in the typical Chandleresque meanders, and yet I have enjoyed every single page of it. This is probably because the character of Marlowe, a man who is generally disillusioned with society as such but who still holds his principles high and does not want to entirely give up on the idea of humankind, makes for a much more complex and interesting narrative voice than a downright cynic would:

“‘How can such a hard man be so gentle?’ she asked wonderingly.

‘If I wasn’t hard, I wouldn’t be alive. If I couldn’t ever be gentle, I wouldn’t deserve to be alive.’” (p.861) 

There are inner rifts and insoluble mysteries within every single one of us, and why should it not be so with a fictitious private investigator? Although Marlowe does not age as quickly as his creator and his readers, we can still discover that the character is growing more melancholy and more tired with every new novel and that he is constantly questioning the role he is playing in his life:

”’[…] It isn’t money I want. It’s some sort of understanding of what the hell I’m doing and why. […]’” (p.839) 

While this sentence refers to Marlowe’s answer to Betty Mayfield’s offer of money, money, money instead of filling him in on her past and letting him know why she will not fully confide in him, we may easily see it as an expression of man’s desire to make sense of his life and to make himself a secluded homestead in the midst of the randomness, contingencies and pointlessness of existence as such. Marlowe’s, and probably also Chandler’s preoccupation with more existential questions – Chandler wrote this novel in 1958, four years after his wife Cissy’s death, which left him devastated and drove him into depression – is mirrored in my personal highlight of the novel, a conversation between Marlowe and a decrepit old man in a luxury hotel. This man, Henry Clarendon IV, although deaf, surprises Marlowe with his lip-reading skills and delivers quite a long monologue about the bleak incongruities of life, in which there is one passage that is so full of insight that it deserves to be quoted here:

”’[…] How strange it is that man’s finest aspirations, dirty little animal that he is, his finest actions also, his great and unselfish heroism, his constant daily courage in a harsh world – how strange that these things should be so much finer than his fate on this earth. That has to be somehow made reasonable. Don’t tell me that honor is merely a chemical reaction or that a man who deliberately gives his life for another is merely following a behavior pattern. […]’” (p.830) 

In a way, this is the mindset that makes Marlowe such a lovable and admirable character – despite the many setbacks he has experienced and despite his readiness to take for granted the absence of a higher sense in existence, Marlowe has his code of ethics and his determination to play fair, not so much for fairness’s sake as for his own. Luckily, Chandler felt more merciful towards Philip Marlowe than life did towards him in that at the end of Playback he allowed his hero quite a promising outlook on his future, relieving him from solitude and granting him someone to share his secluded homestead with, as though he might have suspected that this would be his last novel to complete.

And so, if not for Chandler, then for Marlowe eventually “[t]he air was full of music.”

Note: Page references are made with regard to the respective volume of the Library of America.