Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars

short review for busy readers: the only one of prolific French sci-fi/horror author Serge Brussolo's novels to be translated into English. As always, highly imaginative and with Brussolo's reoccurring motif of "the diver" and the secrets found in the depths. Fantastically written and translated, more on the horror side with the focus on large ideas, not plot. Not as fantastic as the other ones of his I've read, but still quite good. 

in detail:
Ectoplasm sculptures with the ability to spread calmness, peace and happiness as well as cure diseases and depression are all the rage. Smaller ones for home display are sold at auctions and larger ones set up in public places for the entire populace to enjoy. 

Problem is, the 'artists' who create these sculptures do so under the most dangerous of conditions. 

Namely - they dive deeply into dreams so real, ones that cater to their most passionate desires and childhood memories, that the artists get hooked...and physically destroy themselves the longer they dive, calcifying their brains into porcelain.

The ectoplasm is a by-product of the dreams. The grander the dream, the grander the ectoplasm sculpture and the more it's worth. 

David is just such an artist. But he's ageing and he is no longer able to bring back anything with market value. They're all too tiny, too weak. And yet, he can't let go of his high action, James Bond lifestyle in the depths, nor the perfect Bond girl, young and supple Nadia, who he wants more than anything. 

It seems that Brussolo is using this scenario to comment on how artists are treated by the general public in a capitalistic society. Produce what we want and can sell -- you'll be famous. Age or have difficulties -- we'll dump you...even if you can't dump your art that's killing you slowly as you plumb your subconscious again and again. 

Brussolo has a phenomenal gift to create vivid, fantastical landscapes you feel you're walking around in yourself. Ones that you remember years later, even if the characters and plot have become swimmy. The translation is phenomenal as well, with all the descriptions, thoughts and dialogues rendered into natural, flowing English. 

It's a joy to read. 

This is my third Brussolo and I don't think it's as good as the other two I've read. It certainly doesn't have the plot focus the other two do. But it's Brussolo, which means it may not be perfect, but it's very, very good for what it is.