Rating: 5/5

Where to start when talking about Stand on Zanzibar? Maybe the meaning of the title:
  "And to close on, the Dept of Small Consolations Some troubledome just figured out that if you allow for every codder and shiggy and appleofmyeye a space one foot by two you could stand us all on the six hundred forty square mile surface on the island of Zanzibar ToDAY third MAY twenty-TEN come aGAIN!"
By the end of the book, several months later, poor Zanzibar can no longer hold all of humanity and some of our number would be forced into knee deep hypothetical water.

To me the overriding theme of this excellent book was the consequences to human society when its numbers expand unchecked.

The time: The future year of 2010 (well, the past now, but in the sixties 2010 WAS the future). The place: our little green and blue marble. Humanity's numbers have swelled putting a heavy strain on Earth's resources and space. Most of the advanced countries of the world have instituted eugenics boards to manage population numbers and try to weed out unwanted genetic deficiencies (such as color blindness which drives the decisions one set of characters make). Naturally these conditions cause strain on society, and we see this strain played out across a wide variety of characters that we get occasional glimpses of between the main action.

Initially I found this book somewhat difficult to access. Brunner tells the story in a very interesting way, using short chapters of various types to both tell the main story which follows the major actions of the book (these chapters are called "continuity") and chapters that flesh-out the wider world. Some follow specific characters ("tracking with closeups"), some are informational chapters that exposit on a given topic ("context"), and some that provide brief snips of events going on around the world ("the happening world"). This was at first jarring to me, but once the main action ("continuity") picked up, all the other pieces beautifully fell into place and really enhanced my experience. Instead of getting a rather narrow look into this fascinating world through the main protagonists we get a cross section of the wider world. This method further fleshed out the world Brunner has conjured up and shows the reader how the main action is having a ripple affect across the world.

This story is, at its root, a cautionary tale about how we humans just can't get out of our own way in spite (and sometimes just to spite) ourselves. I almost feel like the character Chad Mulligan, highly regarded, if abrasive, sociologist, stood in for Brunner as he bemoans and derides what human society has devolved into (Don't worry, it doesn't come across as preachy; he serves as an accessible character for a reader not of the book's time and place). Humanity, as far a Brunner/Mulligan is concerned, excels in the arts of crass consumerism and killing. Humans are dumb animals, even more so in large numbers. Considering the picture of the then future Brunner paints it is hard to disagree. International conflict, strained natural resources, brinksmanship that places national interests above that of humanity, living conditions in society that strain the psyche of its inhabitants. Fortunately this message wasn't pounded into the me on every page (cough::AtlasShrugged::cough) but seeped into my awareness through the small peeks Brunner allows us into his world. It was clearly there, but let me approach and understand it on my own terms instead going all Alien facehugger on me.

Once I got into the groove of the writing style and world (plus the future slang Brunner threw at me; see the quoted passage above) I was completely immersed in his world. He kept the main action flowing along nicely, taking some unexpected turns that delighted me, and really evolved the continuity characters quite well, having them grow and naturally react to what circumstances thrust upon them. I will no doubt be rereading this book to pick up on all the things in the beginning I probably missed the first time through. Heck, I might even try reading it by chapter type, that could make for an interesting experience. In any event I think this is a very worthwhile book if because it does raise some interesting ideas and encourages the reader to examine our present time for the sort of madness we see crop up in Brunners's 2010.

Or maybe the book was all just a set up for a joke whose punch-line was the second to last section. In which case: Christ, what an imagination John Brunner's got!