Rating: 3/5

Hold your horses, everyone, the twenty-something nostalgia has set in. I’m noticing a couple of good, classic books for youngsters working their way back under my fictional radar in the last few months. I read  Ruby in the Smoke when I was about twelve or thirteen, probably lured by the promise of Victorians, intrigue and lady-heroes who are good at accountancy. (I was that kind of child. My private games tended to involve a pencil and paper and the question “How would I run this as a self-supporting enterprise?”) When lately it occurred to me that a story idea I’ve been playing with very much harks back to this, I thought I’d pick up a second-hand copy and see if I liked it as much as I remembered.

This is a book for my hypothetical future daughter, for a start. Sally Lockhart is a fabulous heroine. She’s independent and can look out for herself, but she's not particularly streetwise or rebellious or ‘spunky', and that’s okay. She’s got business acumen and staying power but she believes the best of people and makes a quiet virtue of treating them well. She’s not got weird-coloured hair or special skills, she’s neither exceptionally well-provided for nor rags-and-scraps poor, she’s not a chosen one in any way. She doesn’t sound like a YA heroine, or at least not the ones I’ve read. She sounds, in my head, a bit like younger me. Naturally I think she’s marvellous and I want my hypothetical future daughter to understand that good book-keeping and cheerfully volunteering to help with things are also character traits that can go with being a hero. Also that if you are going to smoke things, there is a clever way to do it and there is a not-clever way to do it.

The main villain is genuinely creepy, and gets through dim-witted sidekicks at an alarming rate. She made a better villain before her reasons were explained – why are they so often so disappointing? Is it just that when we know a villain’s reasons for acting, they cease to be part of that ominous dark cloud of mystery in our imaginations? – but if I were Philip Pullman, I would have saved the final reveal (in the cab) for a different book. Or at least strung it out a bit. It was a little anticlimactic. Another thirty pages to build it up into something I cared about a little more, and this might have got bumped up another star.

I just like anonymous notes and questing and housebreaking in search of mysterious papers and Baker Street Irregulars and people dropping dead in solicitors’ offices. I like sixteen year olds who know how to clean a pistol and also to negotiate contracts. I like scruffy photographers who wouldn’t get away with being such a low-key sort-of-vaguely love interest if this had been written in 2013, not 1987. I like pirates and Victorian-melodrama-shadowy-villainous-foreigners. This book did not knock me for six. But I enjoyed the hell out of it, and after some of the other stuff I’ve been reading of late, it is nice to dive straight back into the middle of my comfort zone and romp around for a bit.