Rating: 2/5

The Tommyknockers isn't Stephen King's strongest.

I more or less expect 3 things from a classic Stephen King book:

- Impactful characters (main &amp; side, good &amp; evil)
- A small town/community setting (Americana but critical of jingoism)
- Threats both supernatural and human

The Tommyknockers does have these essential elements, but only gets them to the 50-yard line despite the book's length. It's within these 3 areas that I feel the book ultimately doesn’t come together.

The Characters:
I dislike Gard very, very much. I consider him King's most insufferable character.

He is written with multiple in-text protections to make him seem "not that bad". Oh, he shot his wife? Well, he gave Bobbi her only orgasm. Oh, he's not respected by his peers? Well, he gives the best reading of the poetry conference. Oh, he drank too much at the party? Well, he could still spit facts about nuclear power.

For every flaw King wrote into Gard, he wrote in a narrative safety net for him. Maybe so the character could live with himself? Maybe so King, who was going through his own struggle with addiction while writing this book, could live with himself? But this framing is dishonest and prevents Gard from experiencing any character arc.

Bobbi was a pick-me girl. No more, no less.

Personally, I think Ev Hillman should've been the main character. For much of the book, he was driving the story anyway. Although he lived outside of Haven, his close connection to the town - being where his daughter and her family lived - made his investigation of it compelling, plus as an outsider, he had an in-text reason for his degree of separation from the alien energy. He was an old man doing his best against the supernatural to help his family. I was very invested in his storyline.

The Setting:
The Tommyknockers briefly came to life for me in its second segment, Book II: Tales of Haven. Here, the town of Haven is properly introduced, along with some of its notable locals - several more interesting than Gard or Bobbi.

I do think it was a mistake to establish the setting mid-book, however. While I did enjoy learning of Haven's formation and town history, as well as the roles its various residents played in it, you really don't spend much time in the town proper. With most of the action happening on Bobbi's land in the wooded outskirts, Haven really is just an aside.

Readers have closer connections to fictional towns like Castle Rock and Derry because those locations are central to their books' plots, almost characters themselves. Haven has the King charm, but not the King soul.

The Threat:
The book is about digging up a UFO that makes the townspeople act strangely the more it is uncovered. There is some intrigue in what this thing is and how it works, but the story lacks momentum. Just a lot of people making gadgets and gizmos, waiting around, getting drunk, and digging.

I do think the alien-hivemind aspect was a fascinating concept, with the same energy that changed their minds transmuting Haven's residents' bodies until they were rather alien. But everyone was so nonchalant about losing teeth - they all just shrugged it off, like, "It happens", even before they were fully indoctrinated. It made something pretty unsettling into something mundane.

The human threats don't amount to much and reflect little about humanity's darker nature. All are harpish, demanding (and therefore wicked...) women. I thought they were all queens. 

Patricia McCardle, the poet conference coordinator who *gasps* dares to judge Gard for shooting his wife - Queen. Read that poet to filth.

Anne Anderson, Bobbi's overbearing sister who thinks she's a fuckup (I agree!) and *gasps* dares to judge Gard for shooting his wife - Queen. We stan a petty bitch.

Georgina Leandro, reporter John Leandro's henpecking mother - Queen. Showed up for no reason and showed out.

In Conclusion:
Eh.