Rating: 5/5

“How does Father Christmas make a profit?” 
That’s what my then five-year-old once asked. My husband suggested that all the “other” Father Christmases are just helpers who pay the “real” Father Christmas to pretend to be him (a franchise model). 
 
Calvino’s final Marcovaldo story, Santa’s Children, reminded me of our family anecdote. The story starts as satire of the commercialism of Christmas, dips into poignant social-realism, returns to satire, and ends poetically. Read it from the link at the end of this review.

The first sentence segues from festive feel-good to harsh economics:
“No period of the year is more gentle and good, for the world of industry and commerce, than Christmas and the weeks preceding it.”

Marcovaldo is a lowly employee in the shipping department of a big corporation in a town where all the top companies are buying from a second company to give to a third, and so on, all striving to see:
“Who can present the most conspicuous and original gift in the most attractive way.”
Personal delivery by Santa is the answer most of them land on that year.

Image: Too many Santas (Source)

“Nothing is more beautiful than the sensation of material goods flowing on all sides and, with it, the goodwill each feels toward the others.”
Trickle-down economics? Not much reaches Marcovaldo or his children, but they’re not bitter.

His young sons are inured to the sight of Father Christmas (there are so many), but know the religious message of the season:
“We have to find a poor child and give him presents.”

Their understanding of “poor”, coupled with generosity, is heartwarming and echoes the parable of the widow’s mite, but Calvino eschews sentimentality with a darkly comic twist. He then takes a final turn, and ends thus:

Coda

 “The city seemed smaller, collected in a luminous vessel, buried in the dark heart of a forest among the age-old trunks of the chestnut trees and an endless cloak of snow. Somewhere in the darkness the howl of the wolf was heard; the hares had a hole buried in the snow, in the warm red earth under a layer of chestnut burrs. 
 A jack-hare came out, white, onto the snow; he twitched his ears, ran beneath the moon, but he was white and couldn’t be seen, as if he weren’t there. Only his little paws left a light print on the snow, like little clover leaves. Nor could the wolf be seen, for he was black and stayed in the black darkness of the forest. Only if he opened his mouth, his teeth were visible, white and sharp. 
 There was a line where the forest, all black, ended and the snow began, all white. The hare ran on this side, and the wolf on that. 
 The wolf saw the hare’s prints on the snow and followed them, always keeping in the black, so as not to be seen. At the point where the prints ended there should be the hare, and the wolf came out of the black, opened wide his red maw and his sharp teeth, and bit the wind. 
The hare was a bit farther on, invisible; he scratched one ear with his paw and escaped, hopping away. 
 Is he here? There? Is he a bit farther on? 
 Only the expanse of snow could be seen, white as this page.”

More Calvino

•	He’s perhaps best known for his post-modern If on a Winter's Night a Traveller, which I reviewed HERE.

•	And for the slightly mystical Invisible Cities, which I reviewed HERE.

•	This is the first Marcovaldo story I’ve read, and it has a relatively conventional narrative structure, but still with a degree of something other, as does Calvino’s short story collection Difficult Loves, which I reviewed HERE.

Short Story Club

I read this with The Short Story Club. 

You can read this story HERE.

You can join the group here.