Rating: 3/5

Things you can count on in a Follett book:

A strong male protagonist who everyone else is determined to make fail.

A strong female protagonist who acts in ways women of their time period just do not act, and doesn't give a damn about what others think of her. 

One of the above parties either rises from their low station or falls from their high station. 

A nasty villain who does nothing, but bad and surrounds himself with powerful people who he manipulates to get what he wants and to cover his bad deeds. He is rewarded handsomely for his bad deeds. 

A meddling relative or in-law of the male protagonist who aligns herself with the villain to destroy him. 

A gay couple who are in the closet about their secret. Most everyone knows of their secret, and don't care about their preference, but use it against them to manipulate and control their decisions to suit the villains. 

A few illegitimate children or two that are spawned from true love, but whose parents can't be together because of the plotting of the villainous relatives. 

Men who pretend to be gentlemen, but go whoring around at night and look down upon the women they use for their gratification. 

Too much description of the scenes described above. 

In his writing Follett tends to repeat character descriptions that he already described in previous chapters. Usually this is done from the point of view of different characters throughout the novel. Either way, it gets annoying. I don't need to be reminded that so and so is from such and such town and has freckled arms four or five times. 

Follett definitely does his historical research. His descriptions of the era he writes about are so vivid and a main reason why his books are so engrossing. 

All in all I like Ken Follett and have read many of his books. Even though they follow the same plot pattern described above, I will continue to read them. However, I don't think any of the ones I read from now on will come as close to being as well written as Pillars. Maybe this is because that was my first Follett novel?