The book claims to give an account of the history of archaeology. In fact, it is more a collection of anecdotes about a handful of archaeologists, mostly from France, Germany, and the UK. Ceram tends to accept the firsthand accounts of these European archaeologists without any critique, and systematically ignores the experiences of the people who actually live in the regions being excavated. I'm not qualified to give an opinion on the archaeological validity of the text, but here is a critical review by Pál Kelemen, an actual archaeologist.

Throughout, I had a feeling that the author seemed to be somewhat racist, but I chalked it up to the fact that the book was originally written in the '40s, and that's just how Europeans were at the time. Well it turns out Ceram wasn't just "1940s-racist"; he was "wrote-the-book-under-a-pseudonym-because-his-old-job-was-writing-propaganda-for-Hitler-racist" (look him up!).

His Nazi-like approach to the study of different cultures is evident throughout. He clearly has an idea that certain cultures are superior to others. For example, he says of Mesopotamia:
"Before [the Sumerians'] arrival the land had been settled by [...] Semitic tribes. But the Sumerians brought with them a superior culture, some of its basic elements already developed to their final form, which they imposed upon the barbaric Semites."
Leading in to the section on Central America, he describes the continent as "more barbaric and in many respects more terrible and incomprehensible than any of the ancient worlds we have hitherto learned to know." When describing our relationship to history, he says
"All of us live within our heritage of five thousand years of history. Were this not so, we would be no different from the ahistorical Australian bushman."

Non-Europeans are never given any voice in Ceram's account. When excavations in Egypt are performed by Egyptians, they are called "grave-robbers;" when done by Europeans they are "archaeologists." When Austen Henry Layard was digging in Mesopotamia, "the Arabs who daily saw [his] delight in chipped alabaster slabs, stained carvings, and scored bricks thought him stark, raving mad." John Lloyd Stephens, when watching Indians work on excavating Maya artifacts "searched their faces for signs of the creative power that alone could account for such masterpieces in stone." However, "the faces of the Indian workers seemed completely apathetic and empty to Stephens."

I did give the book two stars, because I think there are some good sides to the book. An ongoing theme is people finding out that what once was thought to be mythical (e.g. Troy) in fact existed in real life. Ceram does a good job describing the wonder that the archaeologists of the time must have felt. Similarly, I think he portrays the deciphering of ancient scripts (hieroglyphics, cuneiform) as the exciting activity that it must have been.

Nonetheless, I think the main value in this book is as a primary source: it allows you to see firsthand how one racist white guy describes other racist white guys with admiration.