Rating: 3/5

This volume is excellent for studying the small volume of works by Lautreamont/Ducasse (who I shall henceforth refer to as L/D; the shifting displacement of identity is central to these works).

In a sense these works are at the heights of literature, dissolving in their very creation or unfolding. As well, they seem to have consumed their writer to the point of his non-existence. Having left no memoir (as he says in the Poésies), all that is left of him, all that remains, are these two short works. For L/D, creation is intimately bound up with destruction; this makes him a writer par excellence.

Destruction, that is, not only of biography, but of tradition, form, and language itself. The Surrealists adored L/D for his writing's ability to obscure and dissolve reality and reason, law and humanity. Le Chants destroys any sense of continuity, of sequential time, of all previous narrative forms. Through these destructions the space is opened for the creation of the work that we may read, that opens with the strange statement of the Noli me legere, which exists as an expiriment in writing which opens us up to the experience of the vacuous void that is at the heart of writing. L/D's destructions attempt to claw us back to the origins of all writing.

A similar though different attempt is made through the later Poésies. Here the destruction of Romanticism and language is saught as a way out, a way forward, towards the infinite. Writing is here viewed as an infinite motion. L/D distorts and destroys tradition through his plagiarism, though harnessing it to "correct" these writings, in order to say something different. He taps into the into the infinitely shifting motions of language, the vacuous depths of iterability.

It would seem that L/D's destructions are always aimed at a further creation, reaching towards an infinite outside. How we are to understand the radical shift between the two works cannot be definitively said, however. Was the shift premeditated, a mere act or ruse? Did something occur that caused L/D to transform his life and views? A disillusionment? We can never know for certain, for with L/D there is never any certainty. Death encircles all his writings. Lautreamont died writing Les Chants, disappeared to allow it to come forth. Ducasse died writing the Poésies, leaving them ever but a fragment, ever unfinished. In a sense the work itself has yet to even begin.

All is shrouded in question. Death exudes from these pages. They open onto the unique space that is at the heart of writing; a space that is nowhere amd nothing at all. The void of creatiin at the heart of destruction.
They must be read, thought through again, creating yet another shift. These works are the (un)working of difference.