Rating: 5/5

‘All men, deep down, are just big soft doggies. The problem is it’s so deep down they tend to forget it’. 

One of the best things I have read in years - De Swarte is a master of the macabre. A fantastic translation from the original French novel published in 1998 and winner of the French literary award, the Prix Charles Brisset. 

It is an unemotional, pragmatic first-person account of lunacy and homicide, detailing the exploits in a journal written by taxidermist Geoffrey Lefayen, the newly appointed lighthouse keeper of Cordouan lighthouse in France. As Patrick McGrath states in the foreword of the book, it is extremely ironic that such a beastly character is awarded such a profession, when Geoffrey himself is ‘no keeper of light, but of a great darkness’. With undertones similar to that of The Shining, it is a tribute and warning of the danger of isolation and solitude and the wickedness found in the pit of the human soul if one searches and nurtures it for long enough. 

Geoffrey's opening statement about his knives being saved from ‘retirement’ sets the tone from the off. His job on the side of taxidermy only adds to the bleak nature of the narrative, in which there is no differentiation in worth or status to him in stuffing a pigeon or a couple of humans. He transfers the same methodological routines he applies to animals in his taxidermy to that of the human being. He is playful with their fate (and continues after death), with seemingly no remorse or compassion; more fascination and revelry at his power over their haplessness. 

His deathly business is effortless. He is matter-of-fact about his intentions, to the degree that when an engineer is said to be arriving at the lighthouse in the next few days, he states bluntly: ‘I felt quite serene when I heard the engineer from Lighthouses and Beacons was coming, because I know I’m going to kill him’. It is an eerie declaration, particularly when he announces shortly after that: ‘I am no longer setting boundaries for myself’. When in fact it is a lady called Lise who arrives instead of the intended male, who herself is unhinged and erratic, we see a slightly more considerate side to the narrator, who becomes completely infatuated with her. He ponders: ‘How has Lise changed my life? Well, she could throw a stick in twenty-foot-high waves and I wouldn’t hesitate for a moment’. Their destructive and volatile relationship only heightens the madness of the novel, leading to its chaotic and anarchic end. 

An ode to the brutal and macabre. Would highly recommend reading this masterpiece.