Rating: 4/5

Have you ever felt that one of your dreams is more substantial than your everyday reality?

I have a recurring school examination nightmare so regularly that it feels more memory than dream, so Serge Brussolo's The Deep Sea Diver's Syndrome - a tale of dreams and dreamworlds that blur the line between sleep and reality - resonated with me. It helped of course that it's a damned fun novel, a quick and entertaining read with a story that rapidly sucks you into to Brusselo's world.

Protagonist David Sarella is a medium, a person who can descend into his own dreams and bring objects back from them. These objects manifest themselves as living blobs of ectoplasm (AKA - to me anyway - 'ghost snot') that pour forth from the dreamers nose and mouth like strange smoke, forming strange sculptural shapes that are coveted by museums and collectors. Everyone who views these objects sees something slightly different, and the effect of viewing them is entrancing.

These shapes are sold on the art market for huge prices, and their amorphous, alluring nature has made them the only art anyone is interested in - traditional painting, sculpture, etc. are now worthless, seen as completely passe.

For David and other medium-dreamers, entering the dream world is akin to visiting the bottom of the ocean, and the deeper they go, the greater the risks and rewards. Descending into the dream world is no easy thing. To get the best work mediums like David must sleep for days, even weeks, with medical help on hand to keep them alive. Even worse, the dream worlds each dreamer enters are shockingly real, populated with people David cares about, people who seem to suffer when he is away from his dreams for too long.

The more a medium dreams, the more likely he will succumb to the Deep Sea Diver's Syndrome - a desire to spend more and more time in his dreams, until he burns out his ability to dream at all, or dies alone and dehydrated while on a weeks-long dive. David's dream world is one where he is the leader of a heist crew who pull of daring raids on jewellery stores, safes and museums and where he lives a glamorous life of crime and nail-biting police chases. His real life, where his dream sculptures are unappreciated and his daily life is dull, simply can't compare.

Anyway, I don't do the elegance of Brusselo's world justice here, but suffice to say it's a beautifully realized scenario that he uses to tell a very entertaining story, of an almost burned-out man whose line between reality and dreams is becoming very thin. Brusselo tells a damn fine story, and with a knack for deft description and poetic language that makes him a pleasure to read. If The Deep Sea Diver's Syndrome is any indication, then he has an interesting style and would be difficult to assign a genre to - this novel is a little magical realist and a little Scifi, but to my mind not conclusively either.

Some reviewers have pointed out the Sarella's life is an allegory for the life of a novelist like Brusselo - he spends his time pulling objects from his imagination to give to the masses, who consume them without appreciating the labour that has gone into them. This didn't occur to me during my read-through, but I love it and it fits the novel well.

Overall, this book gets a strong recommendation from me. I stayed up late with the The Deep Sea Diver's Syndrome, and I can see why Brusselo has the reputation he does in the Francophone world, where his work has been wildly successful.

Four acclaimed sculptures made from congealed ghost-snot out of five.