Rating: 5/5

In a couple of brilliant first chapters, Zola describes the role of theatre, a musical comedy of Olympic mythological subjects where the eighteen-year-old Nana, unable to sing and act, exhibits her attractive anatomy with cleavage and nudes in transparency. Then he takes us to the girl's house (who has had a son since she was sixteen), where the fans stand in line as in a medical consultation, along with the creditors. Nana must complement what she earns in the theatre and her wealthy lovers with urgent exits to practice prostitution and get rid of the most pressing debts. The banker Steiner and the count Muffat, both older, more than compete, share "lovers-maintainers'" work, although Nana does not stop sleeping with others for fun. 
One of these lovers of pleasure, the comedian Fontan, falls in love to the point that he leaves his two rich people and his house and settles in a modest neighborhood to live on what he has obtained by selling all his luxurious belongings. Fontan lives on her and beats her quite often. Still, she complies not only to reject other propositions of more handsome and tender gallants but has to begin implementing street prostitution and, on one occasion, is about to be stopped by the police. 
When Fontan becomes infatuated with another actress and leaves her alone, Naná returns with Count Muffat, promising to be only for him in exchange for being kept in a luxurious villa and for him to return to the theatre, which is soon frustrated. In her mansion, Nana does not deprive herself of anything, including effeminate relations with her friend Satin (who justifies Muffat by saying something very chic and that he does not have to suppose undesirable competition). Besides, other fun-lovers, such as the adolescent Zizi and his brother Philip, often appear in his houses. Unfortunately, they seemed to blame him for his relationships with his younger brother, and he ended up joining the list of impertinence. 
As before banker Steiner, Nana's life is deteriorating the monetary funds of Muffat, who also has a wife in anger and revenge for his infidelity by going with lovers and multiplying their expenses. Without mercy, Nana asks him more and more, and every time he cares less, he surprises her with others in his bedroom. Finally, in a reasonably hasty finale (provoked perhaps by the writing in typical episodes of the time) in which it moves away for the courtesan and her lover, Nana moves away from the almost ruined Muffat and goes on a trip. Upon returning to France, he finds that his aunt has neglected his three-year-old son, and he has taken smallpox and died. She becomes infected with this disease and soon dies, taken care of in a hotel by one of her old scene rivals and unable to receive the visit of Muffat. 
Zola's mechanistic dye scientism explains Nana as the product of poisoning the people's health and their destructive work before the upper classes as a kind of blind vengeance of mocked good sense.