Rating: 5/5

Maybe I’m psychotic too but I really sympathised with Rousseau and the difficulties plaguing this marvellously intelligent man. Reading the Reveries it is so hard to believe that his “walks” were written over 200 years ago. Some may dismiss him as mad but for me I really think he was overly sensitive and suffered for a good part of his life from a persecution complex. He was also melodramatic, i.e.: “Everything is finished for me on this earth.”
This doesn’t prevent him from writing beautifully. (In some instances it seems to fuel his writing). His contemporaries may have made his life hell (by his accounts) - they are forgotten and Rousseau lives on for his interesting philosophy and his clear readable and expressive style of writing.
Yes, he might be considered by many to be vain and self obsessed but his words still ring true. Take for instance:
“Shall I allow myself to be tossed eternally to and fro by the sophistries of the eloquent, when I am not even sure that the opinions they preach and press so ardently on others are really their own?” Touche!
And this:
“Everything is in constant flux on this earth. Nothing keeps the same unchanging shape, and our affections, being attached to things outside us, necessarily change and pass away as they do. Always out ahead of us or lagging behind, they recall a past which is gone or anticipate a future which may never come into being; there is nothing solid there for the heart to attach itself to. Thus our earthly joys are almost without exception the creatures of a moment;” Beautifully expressed. I can go on and on. Here is another gem: 
“There are very few of our automatic reactions whose cause we cannot discover in our hearts, if we are really capable of looking for it.” Written in the 1770s? It’s hard to believe.
This is a challenging book but well worth being a 1001. I’ll finish with one of my favourite passages with Rousseau writing about his enemies. It is also an eloquent note on perception.
“As for me, let them see me if they can, so much the better; but this is beyond them, instead of me they will never see anyone but the Jean-Jacques they have created and fashioned for themselves so that they can hate me to their heart’s content. I should be wrong then to be upset by the image they have of me; I ought to take no real interest in it, since it is not me that they are seeing.” Highly recommended.