Rating: 4/5

A collection of short stories within a story. Tommy and Tuppence impersonate Mr Blunt who runs an international detective agency which is a front for Russian spies. The two detectives undertake a series of investigations which parodies the styles of well-known detective writers of that era. 

A Fairy in the Flat/A Pot of Tea introduces Tommy and Tuppence at the International Detective Agency. There first case is an amusing one about a missing girl which Tuppence solves. 

The Affair of the Pink Pearl – This first real case is over missing pearls. A bit of a soapy tale. 

The Adventure of the Sinister Stranger is an espionage story where the Russians suspect something amiss. Thanks to a silver cigarette case Tommy lives to investigate another day. 

Finessing the King Is a two part story where a woman is murdered and the clues lead to her lover or do they? Her husband appears innocent. The ending is a bit gruesome. 

The Case of the Missing Lady is amusing and goes over where a Norwegians explorer fiancée has disappeared too. Her obese aunt is very vague about her whereabouts. T&amp;T find her with a twist. 

The Man in the Mist is about Gilda Glen a Star who T&amp;T are to meet. On a misty night on there way to the rendezvous they encounter a policeman on a misty night. Murder occurs and it points to an unlikely suspect or does it?

The Crackler – A comical story about counterfeit one pound notes. A gambler and apparently rich American. The crosses and the door fail but Tommy has something up his sleeve. 

The Sunningdale Mystery tells the story of a man stabbed to death on a golf course. T&amp;T over lunch go over the details during lunch and come up with the answer which exonerates the suspected woman. 

The House of Lurking Death is about Lois Hargreaves and who is trying to kill her. Recently inheriting a fortune and suspecting her cousin after several members of the family are poisoned by arsenic tainted chocolates. Things take a grim turn with fig paste. Always follow the money motive. 

The Unbreakable Alibi is an amusing story about how someone can be in two places at the same time.

The Clergyman's Daughter/The Red House is about a poor woman who inherits a house with strange apparent supernatural events and which someone wants to buy. Buried treasure is involved. 

The Ambassador's Boots a tale of switched bags and smuggling. 

The Man Who Was No. 16 ties everything up and is a parody of Christie's own The Big Four. I liked where they found Tommy and the book ends with the happy news of a visit from the stork.