Rating: 4/5

This is a fun set of Tommy &amp; Tuppence short stories.

Once it gets going, our duo decides to pick different fictional detectives to imitate the styles of for each case. It was fun researching who some of the references were for and who was the author of the stories.

A Fairy in the Flat
This one isn't really a mystery or a short story. It's just the opening setup that tells you how Tommy and Tuppence take over a detective agency under false names to help the government suss out spies.

A Pot of Tea
This shows Tuppence's ability to think outside of the box.
With no real clients to speak of, Mrs. Tommy comes up with an ingenious idea that helps the International Detective Agency drum up some clients, while simultaneously helping her friend get the man of her dreams.

Not a true mystery, but still fun!

The Affair of the Pink Pearl
I'm going to be honest, I wasn't crazy about this story when I read it a few years back, and I still didn't find it all that impressive this time around.

Sorry. 
There were some missing jewels in a home that had a few houseguests. There was the socialist no one liked, a potential klepto houseguest, her maid, and a surly daughter who didn't want anyone investigating.
The mystery was ish and the best part is just all the banter between T &amp; T.

The Adventure of the Sinister Stranger
Tommy decides that this time around he and Tuppence will be Valentine Williams' famous (at the time, at least) Okewood Brothers.

After receiving a blue letter that looks like it might be from the spies, a sinister stranger asks them for help. Is he a bad guy or is he just another client?
The ending is one of those that you can kind of see coming from a mile away, but it was still an ok addition to the collection.

Finessing the King/The Gentleman Dressed in Newspaper
Although this story was called Finessing the King when originally published in The Sketch magazine in 1924, the story is sometimes split into 2 parts in certain editions of Partners in Crime, and the second half of the story is called The Gentleman Dressed in Newspaper.

In this one, Tommy and Tuppence decide to act like Isabel Ostrander's fictional detectives McCarty and Riordan.

Tuppence wants to dance and convinces Tommy to go to a costume party. A couple sits next to them in a booth (he is dressed in newspaper), and a few minutes later they hear her cry out, him laugh, and then he leaves. They get curious when she doesn't appear and go check it out.
Stabbed through the heart, she dies in Tuppence's arms after whispering Bingo did it. 
But did Bingo do it?

The Case of the Missing Lady
The solution to this mystery was funny!
An explorer returns after 2 years to find his fiancée missing. Or at least, she's not where he thought she would be and he can't seem to track her down.
He doesn't like her aunt because she's fat, and he has an aversion to chubby women, so he thinks the woman is lying to him for some unknown reason about the whereabouts of her niece. Now, he doesn't want to call the police because he knows it will embarrass his lady love if she's just somewhere vacationing with friends.
Hence, Tommy &amp; Tuppence. 

 

They go through a whole thing to find her, and eventually end up thinking she's been kidnapped by a cult-y evil scientist type. They stage a rescue and everything only to find out that the place she's at is actually a secret "health spa" for women who are trying to lose weight. Yes, it's iffy. But the man running it isn't holding her against her will or experimenting on her. She'd just gained quite a bit of weight while her fiancé was out of the country and was trying to drop it before he saw her again. 

At the end of the story, Tommy imitates Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes, calling Tuppence Watson and saying, "And you will oblige me by not placing this case upon your records. It has no distinctive features.
This one was my favorite just for the laughs.

Blindman's Buff
Tommy &amp; Tuppence have been found out!
Tommy has been impersonating a crooked private investigator who was working for nefarious people that British intelligence wanted to keep an eye on. Mr. Carter (Tommy &amp; Tuppence's boss) has informed them to be on the lookout for anyone suspicious because rumor has it that their cover has been blown and they may need to get out of there.

As with a lot of these short stories, T &amp; T try on the styles of different literary detectives for each story. In this one, Tommy decides he'll be Clinton H. Stagg's blind detective, Thornley Colton. 
He's hamming it up for Tuppence when things go wrong.

The Man in the Mist
Tommy &amp; Tuppence solve the mystery of an airhead actress.

In this one, Tommy is dressed as G.K. Chesterton's Father Brown. 
Not one of my favorites, but still a decent short.

 The Crackler
A very cute Tommy &amp; Tuppence mystery!
First published in the magazine The Sketch in 1924.
Inspector Marriot sets the duo on the trail of someone or a gang of someones who are passing fake money. And since bills crackle, Tommy hilariously decides to refer to the unknown leader as The Crackler.
Really, Tommy?

Tuppence and Mr. Tuppence get sucked into the world of high-stakes gambling and have quite a fun adventure before they uncover the ringleader of the forgers.
This was one of my favorites, mostly due to the interactions of the adorable married detectives.

 The Sunningdale Mystery
In this short story, Tommy emulates Baroness Orczy's nameless armchair detective in The Old Man in the Corner.
Another book to add to my TBR.

  

So, Tommy &amp; Tuppence are out to lunch when he pulls out a newspaper clipping of a murder and has her play the part of a reporter (Polly Burton) from the Orczy novel. They decide to try to solve the case with their wits alone.
And they do!
But how to convince the police of their findings?

 The House of Lurking Death
A proper mystery!
A lot of these Tommy &amp; Tuppence shorts are kind of silly. I mean, one of the fun things about this collection is that it's just these two doing goofy stuff, flirt-fussing at each other, and still managing to solve a case or three.

 

However, this is a twisty poisoning case worthy of Poirot or Marple.
Or A.E.W. Mason's Inspector Hanaud? Because that's who the Beresfords attempt to copy this time around. Hanaud is played by Tommy, of course. And Tuppence acts as his assistant, Ricardo, who is (traditionally) left in the dark till the last minute.

The Unbreakable Alibi
A mystery without a crime.
A well-off (but not very bright) young man comes in to get a bit of help winning a bet and hopefully the girl of his dreams.

 

A smart and sassy Australian woman bets Montgomery Jones that he can't prove that she wasn't in TWO places at the same time.
And while at first glance it does indeed seem that this lovely young lady has superpowers, the Beresfords aren't ones to be easily fooled.

 The Clergyman's Daughter / The Red House
Tommy and Tuppence investigate a haunted house!

A clergyman's daughter comes to the detective agency because she and her invalid mother inherited a house that may be haunted. They've been trying to let the house to boarders, but the odd, seemingly supernatural disturbances have driven everyone away.
Meanwhile, there's a man from the paranormal society who wants to buy the house from her. BUT! She has her doubts that he's what he claims to be.

 The Ambassador's Boots
A US ambassador's bag was given to the wrong man and then returned by the other man's valet.
Nothing was missing, and it seemed to be an honest mistake.
But something doesn't sit right with the ambassador, and he asks Tommy &amp; Tuppence to look into it for him.

 

This one is cute but not one of my favorites as it gets a bit convoluted by the end of things.
Sherlock Holmes is mentioned in this story, which is cool because at the time this was written, Doyle was still writing about Holmes and Watson.

 The Man Who Was No. 16
This is the last case for the Beresfords' fake detective agency!
Well, the cases they solve are real enough, but they are actually there as spies. The real Theodore Blunt of The Blunt Detective Agency is rotting away in prison while Tommy impersonates him in the hopes of finding out information useful to British intelligence.

This time around, Christie goes completely meta, and Tommy and Tuppence decide to imitate the famous detective Hercule Poirot.
That was probably my favorite thing about the whole story, if I'm going to be honest. Christie has been tipping her hat to all of the other famous writers of her day in the other shorts, and I like that she ended this by tooting her own horn a bit.

This one sees Tuppence get kidnapped by the elusive No.16 while Tommy, Albert, and the police are in a desperate race against time to try to find her.
But of course, it ends with the capture of the agent, Tuppence home safely, and the announcement of her pregnancy. And that is when they decide to retire from all the excitement.
For now, at least.

Highly recommended for fans of Tommy and Tuppence.