Rating: 5/5

It’s weird to think that a popular best-selling novel from 1969 can still have an impact today, but Michael Crichton’s “The Andromeda Strain” is still a rather frightening, fascinating, and fun read, fifty years later.

Crichton was never a stellar wordsmith. He was a much better thinker than he was a writer, but his gift was in taking the latest in socio-political, scientific thinking and shaping an entertaining story around an idea. Oftentimes, these ideas opened the door for conversations on a national scale: genetic engineering (“Jurassic Park”), sexual harassment (“Disclosure”), time travel (“Sphere”, “Timeline”), climate change (“State of Fear”).

Granted, Crichton was not without controversy. His novel “State of Fear” was criticized by many climatologists for its stance on global warming. Crichton took the approach that much of the climate change debate was a global conspiracy by overzealous and militant environmentalists. To what end? I have no idea, as “State of Fear’ was my least favorite Crichton novel, and I don’t recall much about it. It was, however, George W. Bush’s favorite Crichton novel and, sadly, helped to shape his climate change policy. I’m sure if Donald Trump could actually read, this would also be a favorite of his, as it bolsters his ridiculous argument that climate change is a “hoax”.

Despite a few hiccups like that, I still have a fond place in my heart for Crichton. I eagerly awaited every new Crichton novel, and I was saddened by his untimely death in 2008.

Daniel H. Wilson recently wrote and published “The Andromeda Evolution”, a sequel to Crichton’s 1969 novel. It is receiving good buzz, but I hadn’t read ‘The Andromeda Strain” in over 20 years, at least, so I wanted to go back and re-read it.

I’m not a scientist, so I can’t vouch for Crichton’s knowledge in virology, epidemiology, and biology, but I’m pretty sure that the science in his book still holds up. Keep in mind, too, that the book is purposely dated. It extrapolates a first contact scenario involving an alien bacteria and how American scientists would deal with it, given the scientific knowledge of its time. 

The story starts with a satellite falling out of orbit and crashing in a very small town in Arizona. When Army scientists arrive in town to collect it, they are shocked to see everyone in town dead. Within minutes, the Army men succumb to whatever killed the townspeople.

A group of hand-picked scientists are quickly rounded up around the country and taken to a state-of-the-art facility in the middle of the Nevada desert. Their job: determine what killed the entire town and how to stop it in case it spreads.

The only clues that these scientists have to work with are the satellite itself and the only two survivors of the town: an old man and an infant.

Crichton’s novel is an edge-of-the-seat knuckle-biter involving a medical mystery and an eventual race against time, but it’s also a subtle examination of the limits of scientific thinking due to human prejudices, irrational fears, and a tendency to disregard out-of-the-box ideas. Sadly, very little of that has changed in fifty years.