Rating: 4/5

It was embarrassing as something of a Raymond Chandler fan to discover in Half Price Books that there was a novel of his I hadn't read ! I snatched it up like gold. Playback was not done as a movie - his only novel not gobbled up by Hollywood. Apparently a producer or studio bought the rights long ago, but the project didn't get off the ground. Who else has a record like that - 6 out of 7 novels put on the silver screen ? Ian Fleming. J. K. Dowling. I'm sure there are others. As I look back over his works, I'd have to say this may have been my least favorite, although that's probably akin to Swifties giving one Taylor Swift video "only" 3.5 million hits, instead of the usual number. 

Playback, written in 1958, was the 7th and last novel that Chandler completed. (By the way, if you haven't read Poodle Springs, the unfinished Chandler novel that Robert B. Parker completed, it's very worthwhile.). Here Marlowe is hired by an anonymous lawyer to trail a woman who's arriving at the Los Angeles train station and report in frequently on her whereabouts. Marlowe is immensely frustrated that the employer won't provide much in the way of background information to him about why she is on the run and from whom, etc., so of course he blows his own cover and introduces himself to her. Getting information from her about her embarrassing past is like pulling teeth, and it all comes out ever so slowly throughout the course of the book. Aren't most of the Marlowe escapades like that ? Of course his work takes him into seedy neighborhoods and brings him into close physical contact with characters who don't want him nosing around. Yeah, close as in Marlowe getting his ass kicked once or twice again.. It wouldn't be Marlowe if he didn't take a beating to deliver the goods. 

Pulp fiction, out of which these stories grew, obviously taken to new heights of quality by the master Raymond Chandler, has a hefty tradition of tawdry plots, loose women and sex. I don't think Chandler depended much on those qualities for drawing interest to his work, once he got going. Perhaps it was changing mores in 1958 or maybe Chandler was just feeling frisky and uninhibited, but it seems to me that Marlowe has women falling all over him in Playback, and he is more willing to accommodate them than I remember him being before.

If you're a Chandler fan, you don't just read it, you savor every sentence:

"She was quite a doll. She wore a white belted raincoat, no hat, a well-cherished head of platinum hair, booties to match the raincoat, a folding plastic umbrella, a pair of blue-gray eyes that looked at me as if I had said a dirty word. I helped her off with the raincoat. She smelled very nice. She had a pair of legs - so far as I could determine - that were not painful to look at. She wore night sheer stockings. I stared at them rather intently, especially when she crossed her legs and held out a cigarette to be lighted."

And later, again with the same woman, who by the way is not the woman he's tailing, a conversation he gets into when her boss sees him talking to his secretary:

"'You making a pass at my secretary?' he asked me in a voice that was anything but limpid.

'Nope. We were just exchanging pleasantries.'

I sat down in the customer's chair and looked at him with something approaching politeness.

'She looked pretty mad to me.' He squatted in his executive vice-president type chair and made his face tough. (Readers need to understand that the thing Marlowe hates most is wealth and associated officiousness.)

'She's booked up for three weeks,' I said. 'I couldn't wait that long.'

'Just watch your step, Marlowe. Lay off. She's private property. She wouldn't give you the time of day. Besides being a lovely piece of female humanity, she's as smart as a whip.'

'You mean she can type and take dictation as well?'

'As well as what?' He reddened suddenly. 'I've taken enough lip from you. Just watch your step. Very carefully. I have enough influence around this town to hang a red light on you.'" 

If snappy conversation like this doesn't amuse you, you probably won't get into Raymond Chandler - it's the best among many things he has going. He also loves to stretch the limits with similes. "One of the women had enough ice on her to cool the Mojave Desert and enough makeup to paint a steam yacht."

Another of his strengths is reveling in descriptions of places and characters. That may be one reason why his works were put on the movie screen - producers could "see" the scenes very easily when reading Chandler. 

In Playback, as in a number of the novels, Marlowe is allowed to do some existential musing during his casework:

"It isn't money I want. It's some sort of understanding of what the hell I'm doing and why."

I honestly believe that the fascination with Chandler's novels and Hollywood's love affair with his work comes from the character he created in Philip Marlowe. 

There are a few unique features of Playback, compared with the other Marlowe novels. To me the title was an enigma. I've seen it explained by others, but not well enough to seem worthy of a title. Most of the action takes place outside L. A. The town is called Esmeralda. The clues to its location made me suspect Chandler was speaking of La Jolla back in the day. Finally, Chandler brings back a character from another of his novels. As far as I know, that is unique to Playback.