Rating: 3/5

The world has been changed vastly by nanotechology, which can reshape cities and people alike and, like any computer program, can have a lot of bugs in it. Verity lives in a small community that has tried to keep apart from technology and the plagues it's caused... despite that she herself may be infected. But when violence strikes her home and her best friend is killed, forbidden technology is able to preserve him... and, possibly, allow her to find a way to revive him. But that requires a trip to one of the Enlivened cities.

I read this book once, long long ago, and recently got an ebook version so I figured I'd give it another try. I remembered not being too into the book, for whatever reason, but not exactly why. When I started it for the second time, I was really enjoying it... at first. Then, I ran into what I suspect are the same issues that hurt my enjoyment the first time.
 
I suppose the biggest problem, for me, was that (after the promising beginning section) it's a story in which identities themselves are fluid, and certain characters are forced into new ones or start acting out somebody else's life, and often for reasons that, in-universe, are subtle or sudden, so it's a bit frustrating when characters suddenly abandon whatever they were doing and start acting in weird ways or relive a memory. Combine that with characters who refuse to explain what's going on and it can be more than a little frustrating, like the book is just constantly teasing answers and then withdrawing, which might be fine if the plotline itself was particularly strong, but it just sort of meanders from place to place until it's finally time to reveal what's been going on. And by that time I've been teased so much that I didn't care as much anymore. 

I didn't find it as off-putting as I think I did the first time, but it did put a downer on what I thought was a pretty entertaining start. Overall, I liked it (probably in the 2.75 star range but of course Goodreads still only thinks in whole numbers), and there's enough promise that I think I might try and track down one of the sequels to see if it's closer to what I'm into or if, now that one of the central mysteries is resolved, it becomes more about the story of the characters.