Rating: 2/5

Colonial magistrate writes a pleasant little demonology prior to his decapitation in the French Revolution.

The preface says it all: The author seems to think that a man, whose head is turned with love, deserves much pity. But that when a pretty woman is in love with him, caresses him, besieges him and determines to seduce him, it is all over with him—it is the Devil. (ix)  Nevertheless, the preface concludes that “the Devil is very malign, and not always as ugly as they say he is” (x).

The narrator is complimented by an instructor of the mystic arts for his admitted “ignorance” (2) which is placed in preferable relation to “the fancied knowledge of your companions” (3). The narrator, like Faust, has a “thirst for knowledge”: “already has my fancy been roaming towards that exalted sphere” (3). In working out an arrangement, narrator advises that “his decisions agreed more with my desires than my principles” (4), a good example of akrasia (as opposed to akolasia). In deciding to proceed with demon summoning rituals by himself as a novice, in part out of braggadocio, the narrator “summoned all the resolution I was master of, and held counsel with myself” (7), indicating that the first act of summoning demons is internal, a summoning of something forbidden in the mind, something alien with which the subject must consult.

As in Marlowe, the summoner here enjoins the demon to produce “a variety of delicacies—the fruits and confectionary were of the rarest sorts” (11)—sorcery as global market participation, the fructus of colonialism.

Part of the fruits here are the metamorphoses of the summoned demon itself, which begins as a fugly “odious phantom” (that asks “Che-vuoi”) with a “camel’s head” and “ears immeasurably long” (8), who is ordered to transmute into “a form more agreeable”—first a dog (10) (white, though, rather than black as in Goethe) and then a person, a male page (11), but then a female one, “a divinity in disguise” (13). When she sings at narrator’s command, he could “almost forget than the voice and form, which thus transported me, was of my own creation” (15), indicating that a certain amount of perceived alterity is a condition of possibility for his desire. 

His friends caution him against a reckless haste in sortilege: “you are young, void of reflection, eager in the extreme, and follow your pleasures too precipitately” (17), which is plenty marlovian. The voidness affects his relation with the infernal servant, who objects “was I the vilest courtesan, you would show some regard to the decency due” (20). He reconsiders, and permits her to avoid the “fear of ridicule” (25), which is a bizarre interest to protect for a creature from the nether realm.

The demonic servant attaches to the narrator, she says, because “unappalled by the appearance of that hideous phantasm, your courage, your intrepidity charmed me” (26); she claims that “to obtain happiness, I must unite myself with a mortal, and take human form” (id.). 

Nice determinist doctrine: “No such thing as hazard in the world; everything has been, and ever will be, a series of necessary combinations” (37).

Shadow of Aretino in narrator’s keeping “the company of courtesans” (40); one, he contends, “discovered a partiality toward me” (id.). We know from Aretino that he is taken by theater of the professional, though he is too dumb or invested to see it. The courtesan, acting jealous of the demonic servant, attacks her—at which point narrator swears “I will die, after having sacrificed that vile [courtesan] upon your tomb” (51).

Demon claims to be the “slave to the invocations of the necromancers” (55). A “simple estate of a woman” or spirit (55)? Narrator falls for all of it because he is “born with prejudices that blind you” (61). She objects to meeting his parents because then “I shall receive you from your mother, rather than from your own free will” (62), which is an objection that runs against the grain of the earlier determinism.

Narrator for his part however “had rather die a thousand deaths than forget the obedience” due his mother (65), and claims to be “under the dominion of a tyrannic passion” (id.). He is “in need of extraordinary succours to regulate our conduct” (id.). So, either way, he is to be dominated—though one form of authority is considered legitimate.

“Can you expect a woman to be so constantly mistress of herself as never to be guilty of inconsistency? I am a woman by choice, [narrator], but still I am a woman, and subject to all the weaknesses of one” (70)—dumb.

Demonology and screwing succubi is construed as “the irregularity of my life” (79), whereas the gambling and whoring and whatnot is just fine. 

I read this because it is mentioned in Perez-Reverte. A worthwhile diversion as adjunct to that purpose.