Rating: 2/5

Here we are, it's P.D. James's fifth novel, and one would hope to see writerly progress being made. More substantial plots, more fully fleshed characters. I want James to expand beyond the stale, misanthropic souls who people her books (Dalgliesh excepted). I feel a little iconoclastic saying this, because James is one of the more revered mystery writers. "...even minor P.D. James characters are fully realized, given a pedigree, a school background and an attitude toward life," says the New York Times (in a 1997 review of a different book). Yes, they are given those things, but that hardly makes them fully realized. In fact, in P.D. James a Cambridge student who punts on the River Cam usually just becomes shorthand for a snide, blasé snob. "She writes like an angel," the London Times informs us. If so, she's a very negative and ungenerous angel. Take this description of Miss Sparshott, a temporary typist at Cordelia Gray's detective agency, who is so temporary that she is gone after 13 pages:

She was an unprepossessing woman with lips permanently taut as if to prevent the protruding teeth from springing from her mouth, a receding chin with one coarse hair which grew as quickly as it was plucked, and fair hair set in still corrugated waves. That chin and mouth seemed to Cordelia the living refutation that all men are born equal and she tried from time to time to like and sympathize with Miss Sparshott, with a life lived in bedsitting rooms, measured in the five-penny pieces fed to the gas stove and circumscribed by fell seams and hand hemming.

Ouch! Is it really necessary to be so zealously mean, especially to a character given such brief exposure? Does this vivid description tell us more about Miss Sparshott, or about P.D. James, whose books are full of pitiful women like this? 

Aside from the misanthropy, the mystery is too slight. A suicide that Cordelia suspects is a murder; a young man dressed in women's lingerie and lipstick; some suspicious blood types. The plot only begins to get moderately interesting when Cordelia is tossed down a well on p. 202, and the first character who seems like a real human doesn't appear until Commander Dalgliesh in the last few pages.