Rating: 4/5

Whoah, where to begin?

When I started reading this book, I thought it was going to turn into a "Video games make people violent" and shame those who play them. But it doesn't go that way. In fact, I dare say it goes the opposite direction.

The story follows three teenage boys: Eric (sorry, don't have E with accent aigu on this keyboard), Thierry, and Andreas. They skip out on a class excursion during a trip to England in order to find this particular game shop and encounter the shop owner who, upon seeing an emblem that Andreas wears, grows enraged and gives them an unlabelled game. He tells them to play it for Andreas' sake. This game is not a game like Modern Warfare or Europa Universalis; it's far more technologically advanced, if it's even technology at all. I'm struggling to balance between description and spoiler so I'm going to leave it at that.

This book handles themes of peer pressure, racism, war, and terrorism in ~1993 France. The Yugoslav wars are happening and video games are picking up in popularity. It stays true to its environment and topic and it is clear that the author has an extensive understanding of the gaming scene from this time, including the shifts in tech and various titles and genres (I don't say that to be condescending: he references real games and real advancements, and the way he talks about it suggests he does/did enjoy video games himself).

This book doesn't shy away from things either. I often had to research events it was referring to (in fact, I had to research just to find the approximate date of setting) and it brings up real battles from real wars and addresses them (ie, Guernica). I struggled at points to continue reading and needed to take a break, and some things hit a little close to home in our current world. 

And the ending. Whoah. Obviously, I am not going to get into details but that ending alone is... I'm still reeling at its implications. 

This is a good one. Real good. 

Just one note for French-learners: this book is probably around C1/2 in level. Lots of slang, specialized vocabulary, and more complex sentence structures. If you're at B1 or lower, you will probably struggle with this one. Definitely come back to it but perhaps check out "Virus L.I.V. 3 ou la mort des livres" before this one. It is easy to get lost otherwise with this book.