Rating: 5/5

One of my favourite authors is John Grisham. His books are one of the reasons that I decided to study Law for my degree. Even though his portrayal of the law and the job that comes with it is slightly exaggerated and intense, I believe there is truth behind his novels. He is an American lawyer specialising in Criminal law. This is evident within his novels as he is best known for his legal thrillers. I have read the majority of his books and out of all of them, The Street Lawyer has by far been my favourite read. 

The Street Lawyer is a story of a wealthy, successful lawyer in Washington DC, Michael Brock. One day at work within his law firm, Drake and Sweeney, they are challenged by a homeless old man who walks into the office armed. The old man is shot by the police and Michael, in shock by this, investigates and soon realises that his law firm had made the old man homeless. With his marriage breaking up in his personal life and the trouble surrounding him in his professional career, he decides he can no longer work for the law firm. He meets Mordecai Green, who runs a law firm which helps the homeless, and decides to join him. Michael goes against his law firm and steals evidence from them which proves that the company evicted the old man and other tenants. Michael leaves his wife and begins work in a shelter for the homeless. His company realise that he knows the truth and do everything possible to try and stop him from revealing their dark secrets, resulting in his arrest. The book then builds on the case where Mordecai Green defends him.

The book is gripping in the sense that you don't know what the company are going to do next. They are so desperate to keep their secrets hidden and it is scary to read how far they are prepared to go to stop Michael, their ex co-worker and friend. The most appealing aspect of the book to me is not just the law system and the corruptions which surround it, but also the storyline regarding the homeless. In reality, a growing number of people in big cities are homeless. Some lose their jobs and cannot afford to live; some leave their home or are forced to leave their home to avoid domestic violence and abuse. Whatever the reason, the sad truth is that the local governments have shelters but they are usually crowded. Charities run hostels and soup kitchens where they offer hot food but even they are crowded and, sadly, some end up on the streets and survive by begging. Young people tend to find seeing someone on the streets somewhat amusing and I think the reason for this is that they are not educated behind the reasons of what can put a person in this position. The systems to provide shelter are long winded by paperwork and old-fashioned traditions, leaving the homeless helpless and lost. Unfortunately, this happens more than we, as society, like to acknowledge and it is easy to forget. So I like this book because it broadens your mind about everyday life occurrences and shows you the ugly truth which society tries to avoid.

I would say this book is appropriate to read from the ages of 11 and above. I read this book at a very young age myself and it really makes me grateful to my teachers who made it possible for me to read. The Street Lawyer always reminds me that education is a powerful instrument which can make a difference in your development, both academically and socially. Reading not only develops your imagination but can change you as a person. If mature reading can be instilled into an individual from a very young age, it will have a positive effect on their future aspirations. 

I believe this book can be used to make older students discuss attitudes toward the poor and homeless, developing their social awareness skills. The book teaches you about helping those in need and looking beyond the face surface of situations. It can also be used for students to begin thinking about their future aspirations and maybe if they want to carry out a career in law or even anything else. Students can also be asked to carry out role-play activities in relation to the conversation between the characters in the book. This will involve working together in pairs or in a group with the aim of creating a scene from their own interpretation and understanding of the book. There is a certain emphasis on the media within the book so the book can be used to promote interest in one of the powerful sources of society which acts as a social change. Students can be divided into groups to talk about the media, focusing on the power of the media and how their intervention changed the course of events. This can lead to intellectual discussions and also may get young adults to engage in conversations over every day events and how they are portrayed in the news and newspapers today. This book can be used with young people for many activities. Reading this book can be viewed as both relaxing and fun, but at the same time educational. It is insightful, interesting and thrilling, all at the same time.