Rating: 4/5

What I learned from this book: tall people are The Devil. *lol*

This was … not the most excellent King I’ve read so far, but pretty good nonetheless.

There are four groups of people: a young couple (Mary and Peter Jackson), a family of four (father, mother, an 11-year-old boy and his younger sister), a washed-up writer, the writer’s assistant (who has to follow him at a little distance while his boss is crossing the USofA on his motorcycle) and a hitchhiker he’s picked up not too long ago.
These four groups have one thing in common: they are each either stopped by a cop out on the highway or are connected to the people who have been arrested and thus end up in the small town of Desperation.

The problem is that there is something profoundly wrong with the cop. From supposedly planted weed, to eerie phrases that steal into his speech pattern, unnerving the people he’s talking to. 
Also unnerving is the fact that the town is empty. From the recently re-opened mines to the main street. Not a soul to be seen.
And here’s a third unnerving fact: the animals (from coyotes to buzzards and scorpions) seem to have been instrumentalized too.
But why / how?

Well, that is exactly what the people are trying to find out after shit hits the fan and they realize they’ve pretty much landed in hell.

One thing I was definitely not into was the whole religion schtick. I know King isn’t religious himself, so that makes it a little better, but the pious message is strong in this one (or King’s sarcasm is too weak here). I honestly hoped David would die, preferably while praying, realizing in the last few seconds of his life that it was all just his imagination. Alas.

For those of you who are reading Stephen King, regularly even, this will be one of those rewarding stories that have some slight connection to others, telling us of children with powers like Danny in The Shining and yet another hole in the fabric of our reality that let in something - Pennywise was such a thing, the mist in the novella of the same name was basically a curtain drawn back as well, ….

I really liked the atmosphere in the little town, when we didn’t know quite what was wrong though we could already be sure that something was VERY wrong indeed. The origin story itself was cool as well though how they found out … I don’t know. Not to mention that I hated all the instrumentalized animals and that they had to die.

Like I said, very enjoyable, but not King’s best. 
By the way, my audiobook was narrated by King himself and let me tell you: the man is a darn good audiobook narrator!

P.S.: It was September 21st when the miners accidentally freed Tak from its underground prison, thus unleashing evil upon the world ... my sister was born on September 21st ... IT EXPLAINS EVERYTHING!