Rating: 5/5

Fun, vibrant, modern and rich with live
Green in nature is one thing, green in literature another. Nature and letters seem to have a natural antipathy; bring them together and they tear each other to pieces.

General
The sheer fun and vibrancy that Virginia Woolf brings in this book is tremendous.
I can only compare it to the typical English humor found while reading The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, the first few whimsical pages of The Once and Future King, while the lyrical nature of the work made me think of Jeanette Winterson. Finally Girl, Woman, Other popped up in my mind while reading this classic, due to the same approach of large strides through time, caught in flowing prose.

Orlando compelled me to read on, through lush and flowy sentences, putting thoughts of disbelief and historical accuracy far behind me. Nowhere did the book feel like an almost 100 year old piece. 

The Elizabethan age reimagined
The omniscient narrator (that I take to be Woolf) spices up the book. The first chapter starts off with how Orlando gets in Queen Elizabeth her favor, has him overlooking around 30 counties (very Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus like in my mind) and the armada from his house. We also have a hilarious story on how an almshouse was only founded to appease the guilty conscience of a Duke, accidently glancing Orlando and a conquest. 
During the little ice age, with the Thames frozen over, we meet Russian beauty Marusha Stanislovska Dagmar Natasja Iliana Romanovitsj aka Sasja (with a delightfully build up romantic inner monologue ending with the majestic first words: “Could you please pass me the salt?”). 
And then we have scandal materializing when Orlando tries to get rid of the engagement with Lady Margaret O’Brien O’Dare O’Reilly Tyrconnell aka Euphrosyne. We have beautiful iceskating scenes in the cold, where Woolf asserts that birds dropped frozen from the sky, people just crumbled from a gale of icy wind and everyday was a feast held outside on the frozen river in front of the palace.
It’s like a medieval knights tale, Lazarillo De Tormes medieval work or Candide, but than more successful in satirizing the day and age in a mischievous, tongue in the cheek manner.

The continuation of the narrative
Instead of being a single, downright, bluff piece of work of which no man need feel ashamed, our commonest deeds are set about with a fluttering and flickering of wings, a rising and falling of lights.

Chapter two starts of with our main character sleeping for an unexplained, mysterious (“religion founding” mysterious) full seven days. After this Orlando is kind of regenerated in a Doctor Who style and our narrator moves on with the tale since no answer on his strange condition is forthcoming in half an hour’s time. En passant we learn his house is like that in the Adam’s family, leading people to their untimely deaths, with the staff occasionally finding twisted remains and bones during cleaning. 
Our main character falls victim to two plagues: reading and writing (For once the disease of reading has laid upon the system it weakens so that it falls an easy prey to that other scourge which dwells in the ink pot and festers in the quill. The wretch takes to writing.).
We have a poet/critic who embodies a yearning for citylife, that made me think of how Woolf herself was portrayed in The Hours. 
But in the end Orlando turns away from fame and thinking of critique, decides to write just for pleasure and use anonymity to leave a mark on the world: ( Better was it to go unknown and leave behind you an arch, then to burn like a meteor and leave no dust.).

He then goes about homedecorating in the most extravagant way, until a the ugly head of love aka Romanian archduchess Harriet Griselda of Finster-Aarhorn and Scand-upon-Tree, turns up.

In chapter three Orlando flees to Constantinople as ambassador for Charles the second and gives the greatest party ever (I just saw The Great Gatsby pool scenes during this segment) before collapsing to another 7 days of sleep, and now a sex change. Contrary to what might be expected Orlando’s womanhood brings him much joy, ending with a simple life in Thessaly as a gypsy.
Butan old passion stirs (No passion is stronger in the breast of a man than the desire to make others believe as he believes. Nothing so cuts at the root of his happiness and fills him with rage as the sense that another rates low what he prizes high.) and she returns to England.

Life as a woman
Chapter four has Orlando getting to know her femininity and all the restrictions flowing from that moniker, from no longer showing her beautiful legs to being legally dead and a woman (which is basically the same thing as Woolf wryly notes). 
The archduchess Harriet returns and turns out to be a man (archduke Harry) and Orlando can get rid of him not by sword or female wit, but by cheating and a toad conveniently carried around the whole day. 
In London she discovers that a lady can’t go to the Mall without being squashed by the common people, given an emerald brooch and getting a marriage proposal. And she discovers the high society (At one and the same time, therefore, society is everything and society is nothing. Society is the most powerful concoction in the world and society has no existence whatsoever.), meets famous poets and writers, who all in the end dissapoint.
More and more she switches between gender expression and male and female lovers as the nineteenth century starts.

However chapter 5 has the winds of Victorian time sweeping into the life of Orlando and nature taking a prominent role. Her great poem The Oak ends up being published without much intrinsic satisfaction for her, but to great critical acclaim.
Societally speaking marriage becomes important; Orlando finds on the moors a fitting companion (who quickly notes she is a man at heart and of which she thinks: he’s just like a woman). This Marmaduke Bonthrop Shelmerdine leaves for South Africa at the end of the section.

Chapter six has Orlando alone (or with child, that's not really clear to me) crashing into the twentieth century. The great war is left in lieu for reflections on Orlando getting to the mature age of 36. Everything from this new age reminds her to earlier experiences and brings her memories. This leads her to think I’m sick to death of this particular self.
But she does like the vibrancy and speed of modern city life, while the love for the nature of England also persistently shines through. She remembers her husband and her history while we end the book at midnight Thursday 11 October 1928.

I feel Woolf covers so much topics and reflections on human experience in this book. But above all I found it a very modern, unique, vibrant and fun work, something not many classics can say.
5 stars

Initial response
Loved it, even worked from home this morning just to have some more time to finish this book in lieu of travel time. Full review to come!