Rating: 5/5

I'm an indecisive rater and my rating on this will probably fluctuate with mood and memory but regardless of that this is a great read. 

What I always found insulting was how easily critics, snobs, and pretentious twits write-off Stephen King because he writes stories about realistic people in fantastic situations. So what? Seriously, he writes amazingly so why give a damn what he writes about? Desperation is a perfect example of horror and fantastic writing and anyone who doesn't think so can go stick their nose in some classics of literature and sip wine and think about how superior they are.

The first thing that gripped me in this book was how goddamn creepy it really was. There are few things that scare me, really, but cops are one of them. Cops scare me because I'm terrified of prison. I have no reason to go but dammit if I haven't read and seen things that have convinced me that sometimes innocent people get put away and horrible, horrible things happen to them. So the opening scenes of Desperation which show a sheriff who is seemingly innocent had me gripped and on the edge of my seat already. The characters were tense because of the bizarre way the cop pulls them over and the fact that they do have pot on them. This is probably my favorite part of the book but that does not mean it is the only good part. King's use of repetition of the senses here really astounded me. I never knew how powerful repetition could be until I read this book and this scene and I begin to sweat as hard as I thought the characters were. As their paranoia grew I could feel my own paranoia growing until I wanted to shout at the book "Are you a good guy? Is this going to turn out as horrible as it feels?" I don't know how many other authors use this method or have used it successfully but this was my first book that exhibited it noticeably and it blew me away. King's literary tools and knowledge of how to use them really awes me at times.

From there the tension never slows and never stops. The characters are filled with real emotions, memories, and personalities. The woman (whose name I forget) is badass. Seriously, her and the writer were my two favorite characters, flaws and all.

Yes, this is a horror. Yes, it is not filled with symbolism or a greater cultural message which we all probably know. Despite all of this it is still remarkably well-written and any author that makes me feel what the characters are feeling and the absolute hopelessness of a situation gets a thumbs up.

Thumbs up King. Screw the snobs.