Rating: 5/5

Étienne Lantier - Claude, the painter's brother! Nana, the whore's brother! Jacques, the murderer's brother! Gervaise, the alcoholic's son!
 
I know this part of the Rougon-Macquart family tree better than any other, and each of the family members stands for a novel that sends a shiver down my spine - of reading delight and sorrowful mourning over the human condition. "Germinal" is a masterpiece in its own right, but one can't help thinking of the social background of the young man wandering up the street in a French mining town in the beginning of the novel. The tragic life experience he's already gathered, being the son of Gervaise Lantier/Coupeau, - who drinks herself into delirium in the poor parts of Paris, in L'Assommoir (The Dram Shop), whose daughter Nana ends up a prostitute, whose other son Claude commits suicide when failing to deliver The Masterpiece he strives for, whose third son is driven by murderous madness to commit unspeakable crimes. 

Despite the family history, Étienne Lantier is a decent man, and a socially progressive thinker. In the mining society, he plunges into the life of a rising working class, bound to the mine, living under conditions that ultimately lead to strike, and more suffering. The mine itself is a protagonist: a scary modern monster, swallowing human beings alive, but spitting out most of them again, marked for life by the Hades of profitability. 

I spent some childhood years in a small community close to a famous copper mine in Sweden, and one of the yearly school field trips led students down into the depth of the mine, on a guided tour around the maze of former mining activity. I will never forget the feeling of helpless panic when I first tried to imagine the unbearable heat close to the fires, the pain in the bodies crawling into the narrow paths, the physical exhaustion, the lack of air, the poisoned atmosphere, the darkness, the hunger... 

Around the mine, now part of UNESCO world heritage, a small town grew, with modern features such as health care and well-organised administration. But above all, it was a living hell for the poor families trying to survive on minimum wages to fill the pockets of the owners, who strove to rise on the social ladder. Child labour is a crucial part of the story of Falu Rödfärg, a product deriving directly from the mining business which eventually resulted in a strong national identification with the Swedish red, wooden houses. Whenever I see one of the many red houses in the neighbourhood, I think of the paint that was produced as a by-product of the copper mining, and how it has become unconscious, but lasting evidence of early Swedish industrialism to this day.

So when I read "Germinal" for the first time, I had a vivid real-life experience to fall back upon, to empathise with the characters. When they went on strike, found sole pleasure in promiscuity, let anger take over their minds, I KNEW why. I still felt the cold, dark mountain closing in on me. 

I have been to the copper mine several times as a grown-up, taking students and my own children down into the underworld, and now Zola's Étienne accompanies me every time, and I relive the dramatic scenes over and over - when he is trapped in the mine with Catherine. Hardly imaginable that a love story could have an uglier, darker setting, but it remains one of my favourite scenes in world literature.

As for the social question, despite its hopeful title, "Germinal" doesn't solve anything. The split between working masses and ownership is as wide as before when Étienne finally takes the road out of the small town again, after a dramatic showdown. 

Gaskell tried to find a solution in the engaging power of individuals, linking the values of North and South in her masterpiece on social tension in England during the same era. Nothing of the kind is offered the characters in Zola's novel - and in a way, that might make it a more realistic attempt at showing the life conditions in 19th century industrial communities. A true working class revolution, according to Zola, would fail because of the revolutionaries' inevitable transformation into oppressors, should they happen to be successful:

"Oui, c'est votre idée, à vous tous, les ouvriers français, déterrer un trésor, pour le manger seul ensuite, dans un coin d'égoïsme et de fainéantise. Vous avez beau crier contre les riches, le courage vous manque de rendre aux pauvres l'argent que la fortune vous envoie... Jamais vous ne serez dignes du bonheur, tant que vous aurez quelque chose à vous, et que votre haine des bourgeois viendra uniquement de votre besoin enragé d'être des bourgeois à leur place."

This mirrors Albert Camus' reflections on rebellion and revolution in human history, L'homme révolté forever striving to take the role of his jailers, thus producing new cries for justice which will end up dethroning him in an eternal violent movement. 

As a description of 19th century life, "Germinal" is unsurpassed in its earthly hell - no need for a metaphysical one at all!