Rating: 4/5

I love all of Ellis Peters’ Cadfael mysteries and this is no different; I would actually go so far as to say that this is one of the best. While for much of the novel it it feels more a historical fiction thriller than mystery, Peters bring the story around very nicely and finds a very Cadfaelian mystery: a tragic injustice that is overlooked in the chaos of the age that only Cadfael can unravel. 

What makes these novels is not the stories nor the characters (although they are frequently wonderful), it is the atmosphere. Peters allows us to truly be in medieval England; the rules and beliefs of that time apply. The dominance of the Catholic Church over the minds of the inhabitants, for better and for worse, is taken for what it was then, not how it is often perceived now. In a novel like World Without End by Ken Follett the characters are judged by our modern values; Follett cheats by having the principles with whom we are supposed to identify with most be those that share our modern values closest. In doing this modern beliefs become equated to good and contemporaneous beliefs with bad, a terribly frustrating and unfair situation to anyone who wants to read a legitimate attempt at historical fiction. (as you can probably tell I really disliked World Without End!). Peters does not fall into this trap. Her heroes and villains are heroes and villains in the context of their time, not ours. Cadfael preaches reliance and submission to God in a very medieval way: hardly the ideas that are associated with heroism now: “Cadfael went to Matins and Lauds before seeking his bed. The order of observances must not be disrupted, even to go out in defense of innocent lives.” However, it is not one sided dogma (‘"Beautiful!"... “Even sub-priors,” Said Cadfael mildly, stirring the bubbling cough linctus he was simmering over his brazier in the workshop, “have eyes”.’) Ellis Peters’s world of Shrewsbury and its environs is realm but it's the reality of dark ages England, not now.

If I had one little niggle with The Virgin in the Ice it is in the setting of the action. Most of the story occurs outside of Shrewsbury abbey while Cadfael is visiting Broomfield. This essentially frees him from the confines of the Benedictine order and Cadfael can act and do whatever he wants. One of the great paradoxes of his character is that he is a man of action who has voluntarily devoted himself to a life and rules of peace and inactivity. It creates a r through which Cadfael must act when and how he can; free from this structure, Cadfael loses this internal antagonism. Like with other great historical fiction heroes such as Horatio Hornblower or Richard Sharpe if you remove them from the rules that bind their society (the navy and army respectively), it becomes easy for them to become superheroes capable of everything. Peters largely avoids this with Cadfael so it really is not a problem. However, I hope that removing Cadfael from the Abbey so he may act more freely is not a device that Peters employs more frequently as the series continues. 

This is a fantastic novel and a great representation of a great series of mysteries. Read them!