Rating: 5/5

Orlando naturally loved solitary places, vast views, and to feel himself for ever and ever and ever alone.
 Orlando ~~~  Virginia Woolf

 Virginia Woolf’s 1928 novel 
   Orlando
 is a romping, time-travelling feminist escapade. The protagonist, Orlando, begins life as a handsome, young, male, seventeenth-century aristocrat who changes gender and moves towards 1928 ~~ pivotal as the year which saw the granting of universal voting to women. Not only does Woolf’s spiritual narrative comment on contemporary questions of traditional gender roles but interrogates assumptions that differences between men and women are innate ~~ natural.

An epic novel, it follows the journey of one character, Orlando, over the course of about 350 years ~~ 1588 – 1928. Although Orlando is properly titled 
  Orlando A Biography
, it is not, however, a biography of Orlando, but of the nature and history of gender, identity, and sexuality through time.

At the start of the novel, readers will encounter Orlando as a young boy of noble birth. His family entertains Queen Elizabeth I, who is the first to notice Orlando’s beauty and potential. As he ages ~~ slowly ~~ Orlando will spend much of his time with “low” people – those well-outside the realm of nobility, though he himself is a member of the court.

Orlando explores and enjoys sexual relations with people of varying types ~~ though each of his three serious ventures into love soon goes sour. Orlando will twice mistake the loves of his life for the wrong gender ~~ which is particularly complex after Orlando himself has become a woman, remembering himself as a man, loving a man who is actually a woman.

Orlando’s story is one of exploration and being open to the many possibilities of life. He is a writer, first, who spends hundreds of years working on one short poem called 
  The Oak Tree
, a strong symbol of nature’s presence and dominance throughout the passage of time.

Orlando witnesses the world changing, from the sexual freedom and marriageless years of the Elizabethan period, to the stringent, stuffy, prudish world of the Victorian age.

At a certain point, s/he wakes up to the present and is terrified, realizing that she suddenly exists in the now, and it is a now that she no longer recognizes, where women are property, where love is regulated, and where art and literature exist only in the past.

In approaching questions of gender, Woolf takes a long view ~~ as stated previously, 350 years long. Orlando defies this passing of time, living for hundreds of years and crossing gender boundaries to suggest that male/female binaries are little more than a performance. Woolf fully illuminates her conclusions by exposing how patriarchal gender regulations and restrictive social conservatisms reinforce artificial gender stereotypes.

   Orlando
, though massive in scale, brilliant in conception, and beautiful in execution, was actually considered by Woolf to be a writer’s holiday, so to speak. She refused to allow gender nor time to constrain her writing, which is shown by the fact that Orlando, who begins the story as a man and ends it as a woman, four centuries later, ages only 36 years in the process.

What is most fascinating for me is the fact that the book was, for Woolf, a game of sorts ~~ a lighter satire and departure from her more serious works; yet, 
   Orlando
 is incredibly important and speaks seriously, though fantastically, to issues of self-discovery, truth, art, and gender.