Rating: 4/5

Nine years ago a killer known as the ‘Icepick Prowler’ ruthlessly murdered seven women in New York. Now a man has been apprehended and he’s confessed to perpetrating these hideous crimes. But there’s one case that’s stumped the NYPD, an eighth woman was killed in the same time period, the police noticing a nearly identical modus operandi. However, the arrested man denies this killing and there’s irrefutable evidence to support his claim. Unlicensed PI Matt Scudder is approached by the father of the eighth victim with a request that he investigate this unclosed case. Is it possible that he can turn up anything useful after all this time?

Scudder is an alcoholic – though he’s not yet admitted this to himself – and as he moves around the city attempting to dig into people’s memory banks he hits bars, lots of bars. Readers of this series know that the truth will dawn and action will follow but it’s interesting to re-visit these books and witness him, in these early episodes, struggling to manage his craving for the demon drink. Published in 1981, at a time that cellular phones and internet were still in the future, everything feels like hard work. Matt trudges around, knocking on doors and using pay phones to chase down leads, doggedly sticking to his task.

I really enjoy the rhythm and flow of these books, Block’s phrasing is expert too. You can taste the booze and smell the barroom aromas and his descriptions of characters paint clear pictures in my mind – for instance, this one of a lady Scudder visited:

She was an attractive woman. Medium height and a little more well fleshed than was strictly fashionable. She wore faded Levi’s and a slate blue chamois shirt with the sleeves rolled to the elbows. Her face was heart shaped, it’s contours accentuated by a sharply defined widow’s peak. Her hair, dark brown salted with grey, hung almost to her shoulders. Her grey eyes were large and well-spaced, and a touch of mascara around them was the only makeup she wore.

The mood is most often melancholy, the ending both surprising and sad. But not after Matt will have settled back into his normal spot in Jimmy Armstrong's Saloon at West 57th Street and 10th Avenue, where he’ll wait for the next case to come along.