Rating: 5/5

"All life includes loss. It's taken me many, many years to learn to deal with that, and I don't expect I'll ever be fully resigned to it. But that doesn't mean we have to turn away from the world, or stop striving for the best that we can do and be. We owe that much to ourselves, at least, and we deserve whatever measure of good may come of it."

  Initial Thoughts 

We've all spent endless amounts of time thinking about it...what you would do if you could live your life over again, knowing what you know now? All those missed opportunities, like ordering pasta instead of a big old steak! I've laid awake many a night regretting that decision. 

Well Ken Grimwood is here to show us all exactly what happens when given such a chance. Through the written word of course. I'm not talking about some super scientist who's actually developed time travel.

Speaking of Ken Grimwood. Who the hell is he? I'd never heard of him until a few months back, while researching science fiction books to get into. And this book was featured on a few lists. I'm expecting big things. And if it turns out to be a dud, the next time I travel back in time I'll give it a miss and stick to reading Playboy.

  The Story 

We begin this story with the protagonist's death and reawakening in his college days. Jeff dies of a heart attack at the age of forty-three, in the year 1988. Luckily for him, he wakes back up in his college dorm as an eighteen-year-old in 1963. Twenty five years in the past, but with all the memories he'd collected up to the point his heart said "I'm done with this shit."

From this point on the story describes his adventures with each consecutive "replay," and what's realistic about this is thar Jeff begins as the average person would. It certainly isn't all about changing history for the good of mankind. There's a lot of women and a lot of money, as he uses his knowledge of future events to play the stock market and gamble. I know, it's not technically gambling if you know the outcome...if only! 

But caught in an endless loop of repeating his life, Jeff takes several paths and explores options he never had the first time around. There's some very interesting turn of events, but I’m giving away nothing nothing more at the risk of spoiling things for you.

  The Writing 

Here's the thing, for a sci-fi author, Ken Grimwood is pretty fucking good when it comes to putting words on paper. Don't get me wrong, he's not overly descriptive, with a clear, straightforward writing style. But that's what makes it so effective. Particularly for this type of story. 

The narrative is well constructed, and it's very accessible and entertaining. The prose have a nice steady flow and although some may find it slightly repetitive, it obviously needs to be a little bit because of the plot. I found the overall pacing was pretty good and I had to keep ripping through those pages in order to find out what happened next. In fact I challenge any man, woman or child to linger on this book for more than a few days. 

I loved how Grimwood incorporated numerous references to real-life historical events.  Sports, pop culture and the big political, social and economic events of the time...its all in here. Overall, it's very thought-provoking and I had a great time with it. 

  The Characters 

Most time travel books, that I've read anyway, tend to focus on the concept rather than the characters. But Replay bucks that trend being a lot more focused on Jeff and his love interest (one of) Pamela and their individual journeys. Both are developed thoroughly in a plausible and convincing manner throughout the course of their numerous lives. So the story evolves along with the characters in a very organic fashion that I definitely appreciated.

What surprised me most of all was how realistic it all felt. And I later learned that Grimwood based a lot of Jeff's character on events in his own life. For starters, both grew up in Florida and attended Emory College in Atlanta. They both have a career in radio journalism and both have been involved in childless marriages that ended up in divorce. So it's no surprise that he comes across as a living, breathing person. 

While it does make for a bit of a page-turner, the author takes his time to capture all of Jeff’s emotions beautifully. He accurately portrays the full range, from moments of extreme joy to the depths of pain and regret. It was all conveyed with brutal honesty that makes the story much more impactful and really resonated with me. 

  Final Thoughts 

It's great when you have no expectations in a book or the author and it completely catches you off guard. That's exactly what happened with Replay. I just can't believe it's not more well known. A hidden gem if ever there was one. It's the kind of book I could see having a cult following. Or a movie adaptation...where the hell is it? 

Saying all that, it actually won the World Fantasy Award in 1988. By doing that it beat books like Misery by Stephen King, Weaveworld by Clive Barker and, one of my all time favourite books...Swan Song by Robert R. McCammon. So it's certainly highly thought of within certain circles. I just think it hasn't been well advertised. 

It certainly given me some very interesting food for thought. Ken Grimwood has captured the essence of life and what it means to be given a second chance, while also being a love story that doesn't go too over the top. 

I discovered after finishing that Grimwood was in the process of writing a sequel when he tragically died of a heart attack. It's certainly ironic when you consider what happened to this novel's main character. A real shame, and I for one would have loved to have seen where he went with that one.

So finishing off, please, do yourself a favour and read ‘Replay’, you can thank me later. And I'm off to replay this aspect of my life and hopefully write a better review.

Thanks for reading and...cheers!