Rating: 2/5

Autobiographical comics are difficult to review because it feels a bit too close to insulting the people themselves. Even autobiographical prose I find easier. Perhaps because adding visuals makes me feel more voyeuristic as opposed to an essay that the author is putting out there. It's definitely a personal thing, but it makes me a little more uncomfortable.

Here, a couple moves to the countryside from Paris. It seems to have been a mutual decision, and perhaps done specifically to give the man, Manu, more space for his creative endeavors, yet he will not stop complaining about it. I thought it might be done in a 'fish out of water' way, which can be charming, but the comic focuses on their home, and the complaints he brings back after being out in the village. The one thing he seems to like about country life is that he would like to have an affair with the baker there, and doesn't understand why his wife is annoyed at hearing about her all the time. It's just not really funny. Both the wife and the villagers come off well, and Manu comes off like a prick, but I'm not convinced it was done in a skillful self-deprecating way. I think it's entirely possible he thinks his wife is being unreasonable in her demands to not live out of boxes six months after moving and to not have his brother come visit and insult their new way of life for hours. A joke or not, I'm really not interested in that baby boomer sort of humor where upsetting your wife is funny and all. 

The format is very similar to newspaper comic strips, with similar levels of plot and punch line. I didn't laugh at any of them, but there were some small moments of cuteness. One thing I like about "living in the country" stories is reading about things like cooking and gardening and baking and meeting the locals etc and I didn't get any of that (with the slight exception of Manu attempting to cut down some trees with the men of the village) because the comic focuses so much on the confines of the house. This just ended up not really being for me.