Rating: 2/5

Oh my! What to say about this book! It was published in 1999 so I don't know if the author still reads reviews. I hope she does because there are several things I would like to tell her. She claims to have an M.A. in Comparative Literature and the writing is o.k. The book was not so fascinating that I could not put it down. It took me a while to read it because I would get bored with it and read something else for a while before coming back to it. It is described as being funny. I didn't see much in it that was amusing.

This book was recommended to me by a woman I met who cleans houses. We started talking about books, and I asked her if she had read "The Maid" and she recommended this book. "The Maid" was a much more interesting book than this one, which is basically an autobiography.

The author says that she is a fabulous housecleaner. I can't believe that anyone who read this book would ever hire her to clean their house. She admits to having sex with a random lover on the bedspread in the master bedroom of one of the houses she was supposed to be cleaning, she tries on the clothes of the women whose house she is cleaning, and she snoops in their Rolodex and contacts influential friends of theirs to ask for favors. No wonder she prefers that her clients not be home when she is cleaning!

She complained that one of her clients fired her when she found Cheerios in her kitchen sink. If I had ever made the mistake of hiring her, I would have fired her for the same reason. I am very particular about my kitchen sink and counters. Since that is where we prepare our food, and we usually sit on the stools at the counter to eat, I sanitize my kitchen sink and counters all the time. I tell everyone who has ever helped me with cleaning to please not put their cleaning bucket in my kitchen sink to fill it. They can fill it in the bathtub. I also ask that they not pour dirty cleaning water down my kitchen sink. They can pour it down the toilet or throw it out in the yard. The Cheerios in the kitchen sink would tell me that she had poured her dirty cleaning water in my kitchen sink. Yuk!

Another tip she gave for people who hire cleaners is to leave treats and beverages for the cleaners. I worked most of my life, starting as a server when I was 14 until I retired from a professional job 50 years later. No employer ever provided food for me, nor did I expect them to do so. I took my snacks and lunch to work, or I bought something to eat at a nearby restaurant or snack counter. This book was written before everyone started bringing their own Yeti containers with water or whatever they want to drink. Of course, anyone who is working at my house is welcome to fill up their container.

Since I will be 80 years old this year and we entertain a lot, I have hired a woman to help me clean once a month. When I clean myself, and I often do extra things, like changing the decorations for the seasons, it takes me two hours. My husband does the floors so between the two of us it takes about 3 hours. When the woman who helps me clean comes, it takes her four hours or longer and my house is pretty clean when she gets here. Although I am in the house, I do not watch what she is doing. I can't imagine what takes her so long. She does not change the sheets on the bed (that would creep me out), do laundry or clean out the refrigerator. In fact, she does nothing in the kitchen other than cleaning the floor. Before we agreed to have her clean, she came for an interview and gave me a price, which we both felt was fair. That is what I pay her. I do not give her a tip. She set the price and we both agreed to it. 

I'm sorry to say that I would not recommend this book. I thought it was going to be the humorous experiences of a housecleaner. There was way more about the author's personal life than I was interested in reading.