Rating: 2/5

1.5 Stars

Yes, I did it! I finished rereading The Tommyknockers and boy was it one rollercoaster of a ride. Like Misery before it King tries something new: science fictional horror. Does it work? Short answer: nope! 

Before I give my review I’d like to give a little history first. It’s been seventeen years since I first tried to read this. I got as far as the first hundred pages and put it aside feeling like the story didn’t seemed to be going anywhere. For some reason, maybe because I was then hooked on King’s work that I was digesting each book one by one, I went back a year later and read the whole thing. In the sixteen years since then whenever anyone would ask me what I rated this book I’d say 5 stars despite only being able to remember two scenes from its seven hundred page length. Oh, how that has changed.

The Tommyknockers starts okay. Bobbi Anderson trips over a piece of metal poking out of the ground while walking her dog, Peter, in the woods behind her house. Can she leave it alone? Of course not and as such she discovers a spaceship buried under the earth. I was already getting hints of the books excess in this section, however, I pushed them off as the story started gaining traction with the introduction of Bobbi’s friend, Jim Gardener, and man what traction it is. If you thought Jack Torrance was complex think again. 

Gard is a mess of a character, an alcoholic and after fifty pages in his head suicidal. His introduction involves one of the two scenes that I can remember from my original read, in which Gard confronts Ted The Power Man who does PR for a nuclear power plant. Nuclear power is something that’s been on Gard’s mind, especially as he considers those in charge of it to be as careless and mistake prone as any human. A theme, which drives him through the novel as he joins Bobbi in digging up the discovered ship, or so we are supposed to believe. And despite how over the top his confrontation is with Ted, which is so over the top it’s hilarious, in the novels later stages his motivation doesn’t fully stand up. But more on that later.

As I’ve already mentioned this book is excessive. After Gard crawls back to Bobbi believing that she is in trouble the novel seems to have an identity crisis. 

The reader is given the history of Haven, Bobbi’s home town, a section that showcases King’s interest in false preachers that he would eventually write about in Revival decades later. Then the reader is given three lengthy short stories and a novel length section dedicated to several characters in Haven. These serve to show the effect the ship has on Haven’s population as they become telepathic and begin to create ingenious and destructive devices, which are all incredibly imaginative.

The only problem with these sections is this. They are too fucking long!!! 

The reader spends too much time away from Bobbi and Gard that they begin to think their reading a collections of stories about how the discovery of this spaceship affects a rural Maine town bookended by the two characters actually digging it up not an actually novel. An idea that I actually think would have worked better if it had been presented this way as the reader spends all of the books middle away from the two protagonists that it set up in the first part. To make matters worse when it starts to go back to those characters, who are the most interesting in the book, it continues to introduce new characters in overly long sections that make you wonder did I really need to read this? It makes you feel like the story is circling the drain, like the overall aim has been forgotten about. 

The Tommyknockers is notorious for being four hundred pages too long, however, that is not it’s worst trait. It’s the excess. In someways this book would be the most Die Hard King fans favourite one because it overdoes all his writing ticks. Every character has a lengthy backstory. There is constant foreshadowing. Whole chapters are written in one paragraph while others contain only one word. Plus, dozens of references to previous works including King himself. 

There is no restraint. Like the creations of the The Tommyknockers in the book, which the people of Haven being to morph into there is no invention too ridiculous.

There are good points too. The scares are there, twice I’ve found myself waking up at night, the first from hearing The Tommyknocker rhythm in my sleep and the second from being in some weird situation building devices powered by batteries. Gard is a unique protagonist, a deeply flawed human being who we are supposed to think is helping dig up this thing to end the power race that is going on between nations, despite how toxic it has made everyone around him. He is immune because of a metal plate in his head. Yet, really he’s self-destructive and almost incapable of acting in a way that would better him self or anyone. 

Bobbi, on the other hand, and like the rest of Haven are poorly developed. We never know the truth of Bobbi’s struggle as she becomes a Tommyknocker as it’s seen mostly through Gard. (This is not a good point but it came to me) The explanation behind The Tommyknockers is a stroke of genius. So are all the inventions made by Haven’s population. The problem is it’s mired in too many tangents, in King’s need to make sure the reader knows everything about everyone even though they all sound a like, especially the supporting cast. King usually has a flair for making the individuals in small roles stand out, but not here. Everyone feels like a clone even before the hive-mind like conversion. 

The imagination behind this book is something to admire, but it will have you yelling at the walls, “who edited this thing.” Which brings me back to giving it 5 Stars all those years. Back then King got me into reading that I immediately thought everything he wrote was a masterpiece. Now, reading this today I can say my tastes have matured. I still feel sad that I didn’t find the quality I found as a teen in this story but I can move on knowing I might find something in my next reread I didn’t find the first time.