Rating: 5/5

Patricia Highsmith lives in an ugly world. Her first novel, Strangers on a Train, is almost unbearably bleak. Ripley is...well, it’s a lot of things, but mainly it’s the first time someone wrote an entire series of books asking you to identify with a serial killer. But between them all, and under a fake name, she also wrote this beautiful, aching jewel of a love story. Who knew?

Highsmith

Not the public, not for thirty years. Astonishingly, Highsmith didn’t take credit for The Price of Salt until 1984. She didn’t want to be known as a “lesbian writer.” The book lurked along as a cult classic until then. It did this one silly, revolutionary thing, which unfortunately I can’t say without a big old : it allowed Carol and Therese a happy ending. Most gay novels were required, believe it or not, to punish their protagonists, as in the contested and sorry ending of Spring Fire, another early lesbian classic. 

Carol

The other revolutionary thing it did, weirdly, is that Highsmith somehow wrote Cate Blanchett. She wouldn’t be born for 17 years but Carol is definitely her, in all her architectural beauty and her ungraspability. She’s slippery and oblique, hard to pin down. Therese, only dimly aware that she’s gay, throws herself at Carol early on and is more or less ignored. She describes Carol as the Winged Victory of Samothrace at one point, which is funny because 

  

it has no head. Carol's tricky. But when she appears in the department store where Therese works, she tears through her world - heretofore as dismal as Strangers - and Highsmith lets her book explode with hope and life. It never really comes back down. Highsmith is one of our best writers, and this is her best book. 

Highsmith was anguished about her own queerness; her characters confuse passion with murder fairly regularly. She fought and hid herself. "Persistently," she said, "I have the vision of a house in the country with the blond wife whom I love, with the children whom I adore, on the land and with the trees I adore. I know this will never be." She couldn't live it, but she could almost write it.