Rating: 5/5

Funny Boy is a moving account of a young boy coming to terms with his being 'funny'– slowly recognizing that he is different- that he loves men, that he is gay. Even though the story is set in Sri Lanka, the funny boy's experiences resonate with any young gay boy who grew up elsewhere in the Indian Subcontinent. Of course, there are moments in this boy's story that most gay men will recognize as there own, no matter where they come from.

I give this book such a high rating because it is a well-written book, and at the same time it is a courageous book; it is not very usual that writers write about homosexuality in this part of the world. There are detailed descriptions of how 'funny' boy becomes funny. He plays with girls, likes putting making on and dressing up like girls. Somehow, such aberrations are not frowned upon in most households in the subcontinent; most families for religious or cultural reasons are not too quick to brand, categorize or shame such non-normative behaviour. However, this does not mean that non-normative sexual behaviour is encouraged or given legitimacy if one indulges it. The boy suffers because it is difficult for him to fit in. He is expected to play the boy's role but he wants the girl's role. Such struggles could be really killing when one is so young and unaware of codes sanctioned to bodies at birth. 

My favourite sections of the book are those where we are in the company of the novel's boy-protagonist, where we see: his loves, his fears, his hurts. There are long chapters, probably internally relevant to the story, to the lives presented in the story, I did not find particularly interesting as they deal with the civil unrest and political upheavals.

One of the most poignant scenes in the novel is toward the end. His mother for the first time sees his difference and looks at him in a way she has never looked at him. That unusual, strange, probing, rejecting look of his own mother makes him feel like a stranger in his own home. He instinctively understands what that look meant.