Rating: 3/5

Some love this book and some hate it. I find myself more in between, because this is a serviceable novel, with occasional exciting and insightful bits, but not one that coheres or gels in a satisfactory way. Yes, the narrative technique Brunner used to tell his story was, I guess, unique at the time it was written, but I believe its "experimental" nature has been grossly exaggerated. Basically, there is a definite plot in the middle of all this, a rather dull one, but it is interspersed with advertising slogans and newspaper excerpts and mini-anecdotes, and then, every few pages, the book returns to its normal story. How will the modern reader react to these distracting chapters, sometimes interesting and sometimes tedious? Probably as irrelevant. Do they build a picture of the world of the novel? Sure, sort of, I guess, but not in the most effective way - that would be, I think, in normal linear narrative. (It's not like George R. R. Martin needed to borrow this technique to make Westeros feel real.) Essentially, what I'm saying is that the famous "technique" of this novel is just a shtick, one that feels very anchored in the 60's, and not one that alters or improves the basic, conventional storyline at its centre. 

The biggest problem, though, that I had with this novel is that it's all so distant, so intellectual and smug. We don't care about any of these characters, not the extras in the background, not the main characters. The best character, because he is the only one with a perceivable personality, is Chad, the mouthpiece for the author. Everyone else is unreachable and flat. The world itself, drowning in overpopulated mire and violence, is not one we grow to care about either, since we only access it in bits and pieces. It never feels real or comes to life. I can't smell it and taste it. So, there is very little tension or narrative momentum throughout the book, because I am not worried about this place. The book, really, is just hundreds of pages of cultural criticism of the obvious kind. For proof of this assertion, just look at the majority of commentaries about this novel: everyone talks about how prescient Brunner was, and how cleverly he predicted all this. That's really all they have to say, that he predicted accurately. Well okay, fine, I give him that, and that would be great if the job of a fiction author was to predict the future. But it isn't. That's what gypsies are for. What Brunner has are useful and intelligent things to say about the world he inhabited, but he fails to find a compelling set of characters to populate his dystopian world, and a compelling story to happen in it. 

There are some great science fictional gems hidden here, for sure - the shenanigans with Shalmeneser, the resident AI, are fun, and the mystery surrounding the strange peacefulness of the fictional African country is a good old fashioned sci fi conundrum. There is a party-chatter chapter in the middle of the book that is brilliant, probably the best section of the novel. But the book fails to grip for more than 10-20 pages at a time. As I read, I was reminded, constantly, of the far superior The Windup Girl. This is another dystopian novel about how we are destroying ourselves, but man, is it suspenseful, and scary, and incapable of being put down. In fact, John Brunner's own The Sheep Look Up is a much more convincing and horrifying novel about our self-imposed doom. Zanzibar, though, is more dry, more academic, more dated, and overall just less involving.