Rating: 4/5

Friday afternoon, messaging with my work-husband (who has, more accurately, been my long-distance-work-husband for 18 months).

Me : “I can’t wait for the end of the day, I just want to go read on the couch. Just me, the cat, and this sci-fi novel, written in the 60s about a dystopic world where overpopulation has led to food, climate and housing crisis and corporations own the government... oh wait, that's the newspaper!”
Work-husband: “LOL”
Me: “I’m actually joking about the newspaper; it’s a real book, it was written in 1968 and it’s set in 2010. It won the Hugo Award and everything.”
Work-husband: “… OMG that’s creepy!”

This conversation summarizes a perfectly normal reaction to both John Brunner novels I’ve read so far. I am not a religious person, but in the case of Mr. Brunner, I do have to wonder if he was a prophet, because both “Stand on Zanzibar” and “The Sheep Look Up” (https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...) are uncomfortably close to reality. Sure, he gets a few things wildly off the mark and is clearly a man of his time who loved psychotropics, but otherwise… Eeesh.

In terms of structure, “Zanzibar” and “Sheep” are very similar: collages of newsreels and books cutting through the stories of handful of connected characters who deal with the not-so-unfamiliar world they live in differently. “Stand on Zanzibar” focuses primarily on two characters: Donald and Norman. Despite having good jobs and social standing, they are roommates as there simply isn’t enough real estate in New York to accommodate the enormous population. One is a spy awaiting activation, and the other an executive in a company that created an incredibly powerful AI and a system that filters and distribute the news people see and read. A humanitarian crisis in West Africa and the possibility of world-changing genetic manipulation in South East Asia will turn their lives upside down – and to summarize more would be too complicated and spoiler-filled: you’ll just have to look it up yourself!

Brunner’s books, while fascinating because of the almost impossibly real ideas he was playing with, are not always what I’d call a joy to read: his prose is dry and very heavy on dialogue, but he favors short chapters, which redeems his other flaws. His book are nevertheless very important, because while not as well known as other sci-fi novels of the same era, they are filled with a desperate anger that feels very relevant to read about today. Both this one and “The Sheep Look Up” also have a character who plays the part of Cassandra: an academic who can see the writing on the wall, screams it at the top of his lungs and gets shunned socially as a result of their clear-mindedness.

This book fully deserved the Hugo Award, and it deserves a bigger readership.

"Norman, what in God's name is it worth to be human, if we have to be saved from ourselves by a machine?"

"What this country needs is not better children, but better adults, who could raise their children better anyway."