Rating: 4/5

Why, what a splendid book. Gosh! Tak.

”I see holes like eyes.”

Desperation is one of the downright scariest books I’ve read, and the scares come early. King manages, for the most part, to keep the tension up throughout the novel, which makes it one hell of an uneasy read. Some sequences are somewhat bizarre, and others are bluntly offensive, although this is only what you’d expect from a novel such as this: it’s not meant to be easy reading after all. 

Something about this bothered [him], but for now he paid no attention. His fright had grown into a sense of foreboding so strong and yet so diffuse that he felt a little as if he’d eaten something laced with poison.

The story is definitely reminiscent of King’s earlier output and 1980s horror in general. Parallels can be drawn, not only with King’s own work, but also with novels like Floating Dragon and Phantoms. The nature of the supernatural antagonist is somewhat vague, but purposely so. Is it Demonic? Extraterrestrial? Biological?

Dolls with no little girls around to mind them were sort of creepy under any conditions, that was his opinion, at least, and to come upon one abandoned by the roadside, half-buried in blowing sand—

It’s a visual novel, and King makes very effective use of imagery. The abandoned RV with its door banging in the wind, the doll by the roadside… it’s enough to raise hackles. The desert in this novel isn’t as much majestic as it is creepy in its desolation. And always menacing.

”Tell you what, pilgrim—this smells bad.”

On the face of it, it’s typical King fare: very small town, multiple POV characters, supernatural evil, a healthy dose of Americana et al…. but Desperation does have one or two aces up its sleeve. It has some novelty value, having been released alongside The Regulators. It also has an epic and mythical sweep that can at least partly be attributed to the setting. Have I mentioned just how scary it gets?

“What’s that?” she whimpered. “Oh my God, what is it?”

There is an overt religious theme present here and King tackles themes like the nature of God (“God is cruel.” Vs “God is love.”), the nature of Divine Intervention, and Redemption etc. Just how much of this will appeal to the reader would probably depend. I can’t speak for others, but I enjoyed the book. 

”My head is full of blackbirds.”