Rating: 3/5

This book was actually scary!

Jodie and her brother Mark spend every summer on their grandparents' farm. But this summer, things are different. Instead of just one scarecrow in the fields, there are over a dozen. Stanley, the hired hand (who around here would be called one can short of a six-pack), has been avidly struggling through a superstition book and sees signs of good luck and bad luck everywhere. Not only do the kids' grandparents look older and more defeated, but they've been acting weird. Grandpa refuses to tell scary stories anymore. Grandma claims she's forgotten how to make her famous, delicious chocolate-chip pancakes. They're baking cherry pie instead of apple pie - even though Grandpa's allergic to cherries! 

What's going on?

Jodie looks out the window one night and sees the scarecrows twitch. "It's just the wind," she thinks, until she realizes that they're all twitching in unison, shuddering as they pull themselves off of their stakes and start marching towards the house...
...

Wow. This book was creepy. It was a horror-mystery! I always enjoy Stine's Goosebumps books more when he goes to a fun, different location. The farm was perfect for this! Running in terror through the corn fields, being isolated, having things like barns and horses that can play into the horror - it was a perfect set up!

Also, Stine tackles something a bit more serious in creating Stanley, the hired hand who is mentally slow.  He is also the bad guy. He used the superstition book to raise a scarecrow army. He told the grandparents that he would put the army to sleep - if they obeyed his every command! Bwahahahahahaha! That's why they are so careful not to make him upset or angry. They bake only his favorite foods and desserts, Grandpa stopped telling scary stories, and Grandma stopped baking chocolate-chip pancakes. But, Stanley either doesn't understand the book or is doing the spell wrong because although he THINKS he put the scarecrows to sleep - they're still alive! And walking! The scarecrows walk at midnight!  There's also mentioned (although not explored) the fact that Stanley has a son named Sticks and how difficult it can be to have a parent who is more like a child than you are.

Although this book is good, and one of the more enjoyable Goosebumps, it doesn't escape from the regular Goosebumps stupidity.  It's obvious to me that the book should be wrenched away from Stanley and burned. Especially after the climax! They still allowed him to have that thing and be reading it!?!!?? Stupid.