Rating: 5/5

As someone who is periodically seduced by urbane, crafty older women via secret rooms in their homes equipped with spring-loaded devices that discreetly toss entrants onto piles of cushions... I was curious to see if this little story would be true to the experience. I can speak to the authenticity, Vivant Denon was clearly a man who entered these elaborate portals himself, and the greatest evidence is that he doesn't over-share, choice details are all that is needed to bring this world into tastefully lighted focus.

We open with a man alone at the opera (these nights of passion always begin at a show, for me this is usually an afternoon screening at the dollar cinema) who has been stood up by the young lady he is mad about. Our wealthy Madame seizes this opportunity to spirit the young man away, and even helpfully sends a servant of her own to his house to tell them not to expect him home that evening (how often have I heard a woman phone her husband to demand that he pick their kids up from school? I couldn't guess). The seduction is already underway, the woman is jostled into the man's arms in the carriage ride (one must endure crotch grabs played off as absent-minded-diet-coke-in-cupholder-retrievals-that-are-mysteriously-missing, and a pro will lightly feign offense) and then the other woman is discussed (endless rantings about conspiracy theories, which is the modern parallel for society life among the sophisticated in America). When they arrive at her estate, a flirtatious stroll on the veranda commences, the night sweetly shrouded with shadows (scrambling after her through thick brush in an isolated section of the city park as she searches for her buried chest of sex toys [they always forget where the chest is buried, even though most of them have maps! it's part of the game!]). We meet the lackadaisical husband and dine with him (frequent calls from him are ignored, the ring-tone is usually a country pop hit detailing an episode of infidelity) and he dismisses himself early. The lovers toy with each other, circling around the whirlpool of desire (a crying episode, she screams at you to leave her alone, you turn and walk away and are soon tackled from behind, if your lucky you won't hit your head on a root). And then the lovers enter the forbidden room, and the tone changes from playfulness to eagerness (this could be a hollowed out tree, but my favorites are abandoned junk cars, and in one instance, an old tractor tire). 

The story continues, but I don't want to give everything away, especially the wonderful exchange of entendre that follows with the rival lover (attacked at Sonic drive-in with a mechanic's screwdriver). And then everything repeats in French.