Rating: 3/5

Most of science as we know it, as it was made in the first place, and as we learned about it in school is linear. That is we have a problem, which was successfully translated into an equation where the outputs are obtained by multiplying the inputs by a certain factor, while keeping everything in the first degree. Now of course in real life, things are much difficult, in many cases there are parameters which appear in both sides of the equation, making it second degree, a famous example being friction in the pendulum problem, which we disregard so often to keep things simple. The paradox is that although nonlinearity is almost the standard form in which Nature manifests itself to us, the entire tradition of Science, is based on transforming nonlinear systems to linear ones, creating an arsenal of mathematical tricks to do that, even worse, these complexities are viewed as ‘noises’, ‘irregularities’, something which ideally should not be there in the first place. This book tells of the journey of these scientists who challenged this mindset, and went to venture in this unexplored territories of science.

The research which will lead to the field the author calls Chaos appeared throughout so many disciplines, and spanned for the entire second half of the 20th century. From Meteorology, to Physics, then Mathematics, Astronomy, hydrodynamics, and finally Biology by the 80s. It started by individuals who pushed linearity to its limit. Now once the system is no longer periodic or predictable, we expect an erratic behavior which follows no pattern at all. The big surprise is that this was not the case, what we find instead is an order inside of disorder. Chaotic patterns which resembles each other but never repeat themselves identically, and thus the system never regains its periodicity. Another fascinating discovery is the extreme dependence on initial conditions, minor differences in inputs produce vastly different responses from the system, yet these responses preserves the same orderly chaotic pattern.

This strange results were of great interest to mathematicians, especially topologists, who study shapes. Their work led to other new discoveries, the most important of them is their independence from scale. The more you zoom in, the more they repeat themselves in the same manner. They called them Fractals. They gravitate around a state of equilibrium which they called a strange Attractor. its Universality was also proven. Thus a fair mathematical description was achieved eventually, but it was not in the traditional sense. In fact, most of the mathematics was experimental, which means by computer. Since most of mathematics was done by proof, this was very new inside of the field itself, and quit the breakthrough. At the same time, it was received with suspicion, after all it lacked a solid link with the natural world, and some thought of it as some kind of geometrical shapes obtained by someone playing with a computer.

To tackle this issue, physicists looked at Turbulence, being the complex phenomenon par excellence, an analogy between the start of turbulence in a stream and the phase transition of liquids provided a good start. With experimentation, finally a solid physical reality was given to this mathematical theorem. This would have not been possible without so many detours from other disciplines, such as Information Theory and Thermodynamics…

Now that these kind of doing science was quit established, other disciplines began to join the league, looking for solutions to problems which they previously lacked the adequate tools. Economists studying prices fluctuating in stock markets, ecologists predicting population growth and explaining massive extinctions, and finally physiologists trying to cure abnormal heart arrhythmia. With this vast array of applications, it is only the dawn of the Science of Chaos.

In the end, this was definitely a very light and fun read and that is quit the reason it is so popular. A great piece of journalistic popular science. However, the too many personal anecdotes and unrelated biographical details were too much for my taste. I which that time was invested in digging in more details on the subject.