Rating: 5/5

A brief excerpted passage of Anne F. Garréta's prose forcefully commanded my interest earlier this month whilst reading Luc Sante's piece in the current HARPER'S on the Oulipo group and a new anthology of miscellany from writers operating under its banner. Fast forward: I have read two Garréta novels in two days and this is my second review. Oulipo. Ouvroir de littérature potentielle. Workshop of Potential Literature. The idea behind Oulipo was to consolidate a group of artists whose mandate was to use mathematical and other formula to generate literary compositions. As such, these potential literatures were literatures beholden to generative constraints. Garréta was the first woman ever invited to join Oulipo and the first member born after the group set up shop. Her debut novel, the fantastically accomplished SPHINX, which I read and reviewed yesterday, was published in 1986, before she was a member of Oulipo, but bears all the hallmarks of a fully-ratified contribution. SPHINX is engineered from a constraint that makes it both a groundbreaking work of generqueer literature and an impressive feat: it tells a love story to whose two central participants no gender is allocated, tricky to pull of especially in the original French, a language whose grammar is intricately gendered. NOT ONE DAY is a later work. A number of novels came between these two. I am especially interested in the one about a serial killer who preys on characters from Proust. NOT ONE DAY was written on "Apple Macintosh machines, July 19th 2000--November 19th 2001," specificities regarding the location and pockets of time in which it was composed central to its foundational set of constraints. It was published sixteen years after SPHINX and finds what I sensed to be a modality of wisdom hinted at in the earlier novel in full, resplendent flower. If SPHINX formulated an amorous relationship unmoored from fixed gender binaries but nonetheless imperiled by inflexible polarities of dominance and subjection, NOT ONE DAY reflects upon years and many lovers, elaborating a "rhetoric of desire," revealing an author who has found herself in variegated roles insofar as her couplings (and close calls) have been concerned, and who has come to possess a fairly untroubled grasp of the sublime tenuousness of human connection, inflamed by our drives. Both books made me think of Roland Barthes' A LOVER'S DISCOURSE, SPHINX in the passages where the author presents what I called in my review of that book a "profusion and enumeration of rites of amorous agony," NOT ONE DAY more comprehensively, presenting as it does a "stammering alphabet of desire." NOT ONE DAY also made me think of Chantal Akerman's 1982 film TOUTE UNE NUIT, a film depicting multiple fragmentary encounters between numerous pairs of lovers whose title its resembles. In the "Ante Scriptum" which prefaces NOT ONE DAY, the author lays out the contours of the project she has set for herself: she is to spend five hours on each brief section over a set span of time, not using notes or in any way preparing things in advance, working solely from memory and in-the-moment inspiration, in order to record reminiscences on either lovers, women she desired, or women who desired her. The sections are to be written in no proscribed order, merely as things come to her, the women depicted in each given a brief code name (E*, D*, Z*, etc.), the sections finally arranged alphabetically by name of corresponding female subject. The sections are named for the night they were written in the sequence of composition, but appear in a different order, hence the scrambled index at the front of the book. This chain of interlocking vignettes, uncovered from memory, consequently invoke philosopher Henri Bergson's concept of the perpetually modifying memory chain. Memory and desire are the central elements here, a fact repeatedly addressed explicitly: “Writing at the whim of memory twists and turns on uncertainty. Like desire itself, never assured of its end or its object.” The ten sections of reminiscence are beautifully crafted and invigorating, filled to the brim with indelible, poignant, sometimes irreverent prose, such that endeavoring to quote them almost seems fruitless because ... where does one stop? One passage I love and would like to quote pertains to an inexpert seduction at the hands of a married nominally heterosexual female writer. Garréta riffs on the idea that “a novel is like a car: any amateur mechanic knows upon initial inspection the type, its most common pathologies, and the structure of its engine. There are a few common models, a minuscule amount of rare ones that force you to revise your understanding, oblige you to dismantle them completely to understand their workings. We encounter more family sedans on the roads of literature than Ferraris or prototypes.” This ends up serving as prelude to her making love to the lady writer who is herself subsequently described as a kind of mechanical doll. What else is an Oulipo writer but a kind of sophisticated mechanic? Each section depicts a different kind of relationship with its own autonomous dynamic, precipitating its own species of ecstasy, deadlock, discovery, or indignity. One section has nothing to do with another woman, focusing on desire in relation to Garréta's love affair with American highways, which I can relate to as as a Canadian who has his own abiding passion for the long distance North American drive (not to mention road movies). The whole book is written in the second person, Garréta writing about herself as "you," a tactic which situates her as analysand--“nothing but you and you playing against yourself—are you not your best adversary?—at the ancient and unreasonable game of analysis”--but also serves to create an intimate enmeshment with the reader, the other pertinent "you" in the scenario at hand. The subject is not a subject. Je est autre. Each of us is a whole population situated in assemblages of intertwined populations. "You" is a "reader, silent, who isn’t even a person, at best the signifier of one…” The term Deleuze and Guttari used to designated the porous population that each of us constitutes is "haecceity," a beautiful word. There is no subject. There is desire and memory. We are not stretching things when we invoke Barthes, Henri Bergson, and Deleuze-Guttari. This is a literature steeped in theory, especially semiotics and hermeneutics, declarative as such. In the final section, "Post Scriptum," a sly Afterword that mischievously pulls rugs out from under us and jabs obstructions through our spokes, all the while riffing gloriously, we are almost certainly asked at one point to remember Bataille and are positively inarguably presented with Lacan's "object petit a," spelled out bluntly comme ça. "Post Scriptum" is the icing on the cake, a delectation. SPHINX was a work attuned to the lover's agonies and the torments of impossible attachment. NOT ONE DAY knows life, has lived in up and down and side to side, sometimes agile, sometimes endearingly clumsy, and it knows what a person needs to know: it's all gravy, worthy of devotional praise, because nothing is at stake, the beauty of it all being that nobody gets out alive. I like to think of myself as a man who has endured cataclysmic codependent dissolution and attained wisdom at the other end of travail. I remember my past lovers with the same dignified earnestness and puckish irony as does Garréta hers. Lamentation has become a dish only rarely served in my condo. I find nothing less attractive in others than self-pity. Why would I give myself special dispensation as regards indulgence in same? I either live a post-sex life or I am on hiatus. Literature and art are my earthly Valhalla. Post-sex? Well, I have been known to moderately appreciate the onanistic pleasures of pornography. I take from "Post Scriptum" that Garréta might not strictly approve of my occasional streaming of porn, but I know she would get it. Shrug. Desire is formidable in a body, like memory, persistent, it doesn't stop flowing until the blood does.