Rating: 1/5

After reading The Confessions, I expected the Reveries to be some form of sequel. Nothing can be further from the truth. Written in 1776-1778 (the tenth Reverie is unfinished because Rousseau died by this time), these are ten little stories about Rousseau's imaginations that boiled up during his long and solitary walks.

I found the whole book extremely tiring to read. Basically, it is one big apology of his past. It's highly ironic that a man who claims to be overcome by misfortunes and finds, in spite of all the wrong doing of others, happiness in his solitude, undertakes the effort to write that all of this doesn't bother him ("The evil that men have done does not affect me in the least..."). The same could be said about a lot of topics in the Reveries; this book displays Rousseau's split-personality that he showed us earlier in his Confessions; it even adds another dimension to his vanity (which is not a positive remark on this book). 

Even though it is at times annoying to read these statements of self-proclaimed greatness, it is at the same time funny to see the internal contradictions. This is what makes the book readable, but only barely so. 

It is clear that Rousseau sees this as well. As he explains in the sixth Walk: "Perhaps pride has a part in these judgements. I feel too much above them to hate them. They may provoke my scorn, but never my hatred; indeed I love myself too much to be able to hate any man." This, coming from a man who claims, in the same chapter, that he is so just, impartial and good that he could have had the powers of God only to make other men happy, without even thinking about himself. He even goes on to claim that it is best not to have these powers and to flee these so-called enemies - Rouseau righteously self-sacrifices himself in order to prevent these "others" from acting wrongly. 

As a last example, I would like to point out that in the seventh Walk, Rousseau even manages to turn the spotlight back on himself by using such arcane topics as botany. He claims that his study of plants (and nature in general) is much more exalted than all these "pharmagologists", who only see nature as a tool for mankind to abuse, and all these "vain scientists", who collect stones only to be able to boast about them. At the same time, Rousseau tells us time and time again that he has such a huge collection of plants, that he can spend many hours on, dreaming about past glories.

I don't remember the exact chapter, but somewhere in the Reveries, Rousseau confesses that he made up parts of the Confessions (so I guess that's a meta-confession?), but only when his memory failed him and then only to portray him worse than he really is - he tells that he left out, on purpose, situations that might illustrate his goodness. I think this is the perfect moment to end this review: enough said.