Rating: 2/5

2 stars. My childhood did not deserve this
~I read all the volumes man~
TW: kinda weird pedophilia/incest 

My childhood me would cry reading this. I love Sailor Moon with all my heart, but I guess that statement is only true for the anime.

Plot

The vague story line is basically the same as the anime so- 

The whole story is so damn fast paced. No joke, but reading this felt like all events happened in a matter of maybe weeks, when in fact it was YEARS. The story felt like 'oh Sailor Moon is getting into a fight' and 'yay. the Sailor Guardians won!' I know, it might be uncalled to compare the manga with the anime, but I am disappointed by this read, because I am such a big Sailor Moon fan. The filler episodes made the whole plot so much better. It gave villains a chance to actually do something and to be very evil and to learn about their personality.

The drama and suspense in the anime was real. There were ACTUALLY battle scenes were I was not sure that the Sailor warriors would win and they LOST some battles too like normal heroines fail sometimes. The manga rushed through all of that. It went like 'Oh a new enemy appeared' and right after they were destroyed. 

Straight up in the middle of the whole story it felt like the author did not have any ideas anymore and threw random things in there and honestly, that is actually true because the writer confirmed that. (I cannot tell you that a big part of the plot is time travelling and all of it does not make sense)

I do not want to speak about anything concerning the incest and pedophilia. I was never a big fan of Chibiusa anyway, but yeah no.

Characters

Generally, all of them lack personality and character development. I had issues to be invested with the characters when they hardly had any characteristics or emotions beyond surface level. The romance felt very chaotic too. Both love interests start out hating and despising each other and then suddenly they kiss and forget everything they ever hated about each other for no reason, but they loved each other in another life time I guess...

I hate how bland and flat like every character is? They all talk about friendship and love and I seriously never saw all the girls causally hanging out and talking about feelings like normal human beings do. Whenever a character died it did not make me sad a little bit. I just went on reading so I can finally write this review and continue with my life. The only props I give Sailor Moon are that there is so much open lesbian representation for story written in that time it was written.