Rating: 3/5

The fourth and most critical slammed sequel with the original Ellen Ripley.

Ellen Ripley is resurrected centuries after she died keeping the alien DNA out of the hands of Weyland–Yutani. This time by the Military and so Ripley clone 8 is actually an succes and the queen gets harvested out of her and she somehow remains alive as a by-product. but something has gone wrong Ellen Ripley is no longer fully human she has some Alien in her make-up. This alone was the angle that did really capture my imagination especially the scene with Johner in the gym where first see a fully powered Ripley in the face of some serious bad hombres. 

As always the Aliens are seen as something to be used and harnessed for military industries, and they are not moved at all when the procure a batch of deep frozen humans in hypersleep on their way to a colony only to wake up as breeding material for the Aliens. And then it quickly goes wrong when the beasties decide to take over in a very effective way. Humans stand no chance at all.

Ripley and the crew of mercenaries that brought the frozen colonists are trapped and must find a way out while the ship quietly in the face of disaster flies to Earth where the military expect to overpower any Alien thread. 

Ripley and the crew from the Betty find their paths crossed by human stupidity and greed. There are some surprises along the way before Ripley can finally take her mind of the Alien thread for now. 

Ellen Ripley is in my book one of the early female hero's who go easily where the likes of Schwarzenegger, Stallone, and friends only walked. She was the great female survivor from Alien and became an major hero in Aliens, my daughters still love her kickass approach when she goes after a loved one. They saw her take responsibility in Alien 3 for defending the whole human race and in the fourth one she was taken form her grave and reborn in a world that considered her a meat byproduct. We see her struggling back to humanity and to the role of mother that has been taken away, gifted to her and once again taken away before been given a new mother role that is more a nightmare than anybody should be exposed to. Ellen Ripley does once more succeed where others would gladly see her fail. She is the nightmare of an Alien race that keeps being destroyed and stopped by the insurmountable Ellen Ripley. 

AC Crispin does write a decent novelization too bad she did not take some more freedom in expanding Ellen Ripley because she can write and should make her more dimensional as she chose to do.