Rating: 5/5

Ostensibly a diary of a young man finishing, unwillingly and unhappily, his law degree and, more happily and enthusiastically, starting a career as a writer, Pla really worked on The Gray Notebook for over 40 years and only published in much later in life, reworked but not still in the form of a daily journal that makes it such an interesting and hard to explain work. What is best about it, I think, is a model for how a young writer should work on his or her craft. The journal is filled with wonderful descriptions of the beautiful landscapes of Catalonia, whether it is the mountain walks above the ocean or the sea ports filled with small fisherboats and the men who work them. It is about the food, the wind and weather, and the people who Pla meet and knew and talked to, both in his small hometown north of Barcelona, and the more sophisticated literary and political scene in the cafés and clubs of Barcelona. Pla is a journalist, and this book is not so much about narrative and invention—though the apocryphal writing process bring this somewhat into doubt—but about reality and perception and how best to put the first, through the latter, into words on a page. No mean feat. And something that every writer must both think about, and work hard on.

It has a touch of Proust to it, the remembrances of a youth long gone—though again, living on the page on specific dates and places—and how a young man turns these events into his image of the world and how he will be in it. And does Pla succeed in this? Very much so. Unlike Proust this book is not about how memories of events can turn into creative ideas and interpretations of what has happened and how it changed things, it is really meant to be a clear, precise, but also beautiful look at what the world is like. And what better world for a writer to describe than the world he knows best? His hometown, his family and friends, and the dinner he ate ever week. Of course part of the joy is that the Catalan culture seems to provide such charming examples of this, a culture and language that Pla is able to create out of very little while at the same time referring to a vast history and specific locations and motivations. The Gray Notebook is a book that encompasses a locale and a time and a place and a set of people, but done in such an inspired way that it can't help make the reader look at their own time and place and friends in a new and different way, a way that is because both more perceptive and also more creative, as one can only imagine how Pla would describe what is happening around you in his own words, or inspire you to do it yourself.