Rating: 5/5

This book's what happens when you give a theatre kid fangs.

So basically Lestat reads Interview with the Vampire and gets so annoyed by Louis’ version of events that he rises from the grave to yell “FIRST OF ALL” for 600 pages.

His entire defense is basically:
1. Louis is a dirty liar
2. I’m so much sexier than he made me sound
3. Have you considered the transformative power of glam rock

Totally get why people in the 80s lost their minds over these vampires. Also losing my mind.

Sometimes it reads like fanfiction written by someone completely obsessed with Lestat. Like some madman/woman looked at this manipulative immortal nightmare man and went: but what if he became a rock star? What if ancient vampires listened to synth music and had emotional breakdowns backstage? And you know what? Sure. Why the hell not? At a certain point you just surrender to the vision.

Because tbh Lestat would become a rock star. Of course he would. This is a man powered almost entirely by ego, theatricality, unresolved psychological damage, and (most importantly) ego. He doesn’t want to hide in the shadows lamenting the human condition with Louis. He wants stage lights. He wants to announce his existence to the world in the most dramatic way possible.

Love that journey for him.

What makes Lestat such a compelling character is how different he feels from the traditional gothic vampire archetype.

Most vampires are defined by restraint. They’re cold and detached, elegant in this very controlled deathly way. They represent decay. They brood in crumbling castles and speak in ominous whispers while looking emotionally constipated.

Lestat, meanwhile, is basically kicking down the door screaming “BUT WHAT IF WE EXPERIENCED EVERYTHING ALL AT ONCE.”

Then the book goes one step further and flips the defining trait of vampires on its head. Hunger. Lestat is HUNGRY.

Not just literal bloodlust either, but hunger for sensation, beauty, knowledge, love, meaning, art, spectacle, transcendence. He approaches immortality less like a curse and more like an all-you-can-eat buffet of human experience. He wants to devour life itself. He’s driven by excess rather than absence.

This book's also so unserious about being serious. Characters will spend 20 pages discussing God, evil, death, and the unbearable weight of immortality and then immediately do something so stupidly impulsive it feels like watching a raccoon discover cocaine.

I love that Anne Rice understands that immortality wouldn’t necessarily make you wise so much as unbearably accumulative. Because let's be honest, Lestat might be intelligent, but he's rolling Nat 1s on wisdom checks. These vampires are just centuries of grief and desire stacked on top of each other wearing expensive coats.

Also every single person in this series is SO dramatic. And I am obsessed. Nobody just says “I’m upset.” They stagger through candlelight in emotional agony while describing the beauty of despair in 12 page long monologues. They don't trouble themselves with measly conversations. They have gothic TED Talks.

Likewise, the prose is drenched in atmosphere. It's every shade of purple. Every sentence is wearing lace gloves and sighing heavily near a cathedral window. Sometimes I wanted my girl Anne to relax, but then she’d write something devastatingly beautiful yet also insanely camp and I’d shut up immediately.

I think with a lesser author this would be a cringe fest. But she commits to the bit without a shred of irony. There's no distance. She believes in every ounce of the melodrama with her entire being, and that sincerity gives the novel this weird hypnotic power.

Anyway. Five stars for the vampire glam rock existential crisis manifesto. Lestat you insane bisexual disaster, I get it now.