Rating: 4/5

Imagine if Brother Cadfael had never left his military life and taken his vows and you would have the Chevalier Galeran Lesnevan, the Breton knight of Viviane Moore's stories. Galeran is a soldier, if a very chivalric one towards the ladies and people of his own status. He is quite fond of his drink, fond of women - sometimes foolishly so - and fond of his sword. He sometimes has a swagger to him, not unlike a haughty samurai or a brash Venetian bravo, and he can brush aside the lower orders if they dare to intrude into his investigations. For Galeran is a medieval detective who occasionally is called by the high and mighty to solve mysteries and bring criminals to justice.

Blue Blood is set in the town of Chartres at a time when the great cathedral was being built. Galeran is on his way to the court of Thibaud IV, Count of Blois, but decides to call on an old friend in Chartres, Audouard the master of stained glass. While in the town Galeran is sucked into investigating the murder of an old jeweller whose naked and battered body has been pulled from the River Eure. What follows is a fairly straight-forward murder mystery which becomes increasingly mysterious as the body count rises. Red herrings a-plenty, villainous people who are not villains at all, and innocents who are ready to stab you in the back or cut your throat. Galeran must work his way through a maze of suspects each of whom seems to have at least one motive to murder, as well as the fears and memories of the Great Fire that ran through Chartres a few years earlier, and the ruthless nature of medieval justice.

While the mystery itself is not complicated it is more than made up for by the author's ability to bring the period to life. The characters and their natures are believable as people from the twelfth century, even if having a twelfth century private investigator stretches things a bit. Everything is shaded by the Church and its saints. Judgements are made and forgiveness of evil is prayed for with Christian intensity, even criminals might cross themselves before plunging the knife home. It all sounds very medieval. 

As a bonus the author provides some recipes of the period at the end of the book. Hippocras, a spiced wine, Potage a la Vierge and Taillis aux Epices sound delicious, Sauce de Trehison not so much: a stock of red wine and vinegar flavoured with a cinnamon stick and allowed to rest overnight, then chopped fried onion and lardons added with mustard and a large dollop of honey and served with a slice of toasted bread that has been dipped in the stock. I'll stick to melted cheese on toast with a splash of Worcestershire sauce.