Rating: 4/5

As you might guess from the title, this is a story of a young boy discovering his homosexuality. The setting is Sri Lanka (formerly Ceylon) during the 1980s or so, so the second major theme is politics: the horrible violence between two ethnic groups: the Tamils and the Sinhalese. 

The young boy’s family is Tamil and they are in the minority. We don’t get any real overview of the nation’s geography and history in the book (it’s semi-autobiographical fiction), but as a former geography professor I can’t resist giving a brief ‘in a nutshell’ overview at the end of this review for those who are interested.

The semi-autobiographical story: on the weekends all the relatives gather at the grandparents' house where the young boy shuns (and is shunned by) the other boys playing cricket. He plays ‘bride-bride’ dress-up with his girl cousins. His favorite books are Nancy Drew and Little Women. Eventually his father sends him to a school that will ‘make a man of him.’ It’s an abusive place where the boys suffer punishments akin to torture. We watch the boy as he comes of age and has his first gay experiences. 

The byzantine intricacies of being Tamil in a Sinhalese-dominated country are the backdrop to almost everything that happens in the story. The schools separate Tamils and Sinhalese students by class but exceptional students may be allowed into the other ethnic group’s classes. Potential violence and actual violence are always on the horizon. The next anti-Tamil pogrom may happen at any time.  And does happen to them; houses are burned and relatives killed, after which they start planning to emigrate ... 

The boy’s family is well-off with cars and servants. His father is a banker who also owns a resort hotel with Sinhalese staff. As a Tamil, he can’t correct Sinhalese people, so he has to run the hotel through a Sinhalese manager. There is an extended sub-plot involving the boy’s mother and a male friend of hers who is a journalist writing stories that upset the government.  The journalist is killed and the young man and his mother begin an investigation, getting in over their heads.  There’s another extended subplot involving a Tamil aunt visiting from the US who starts to fall in love with a local Sinhalese man. 

A good story that was a bit slow getting started. The bride-bride stuff and the visiting aunt’s doings at the beginning of the book seemed dragged out to me, but after that the book moved along well and kept my interest. 

The author (b. 1965) has written four novels and many short stories. Funny Boy was made into a film in 2020. The author’s mother was Sinhalese and his father was Tamil. The family emigrated to Canada when the author was 19 years old. 

Here’s my nutshell description that is not given in the book: Sri Lanka, unfortunately, has the perfect conditions for ethnic violence: groups with different geographical distributions, different languages, different religions and skin tones. The population is about 22 million, so Sri Lanka has double the population of Ohio in an area half the size of Ohio. 

The country has three major ethnic groups (often erroneously referred to as ‘races’). The Sinhalese group dominates with 75% of the people. Sinhalese and English are the two official languages. The Sinhalese are generally Buddhists. The Tamils, who speak Tamil, make up about 15% of the population and they are generally Hindus. Both groups think the other group is ‘darker skinned’ but the reality is that skin tones in both groups vary from light brown to dark brown and that varies for both groups by region of the country. 

Both groups have lighter-skinned minorities called ‘burghers,’ who have some European ancestry, mostly Dutch, Portuguese or British. They tend to be Christian. (LOL a common name in this group includes apparent relatives of mine called ‘Fonseka.’) A third ethnic group, 9% or so, is Muslim, still commonly called ‘Moors,’ a name given to them by the Portuguese, even though they were unrelated to the Moors of the Iberian peninsula. They generally speak Tamil but still use Arabic for religious purposes. They predominate in some of the eastern coastal sections of the county. 

 

Although Tamils are a minority, in the northern third or so of the nation they are the majority of the population. Sri Lanka became independent from Britain in 1948. Anti-Tamil pogroms occurred in 1956, 1958, 1977 and 1981. Some were state-sponsored terrorism. (In the novel, these events mark the calendar: people say ‘right after the 1977 riots,’ etc.) Another pogrom in 1983 essentially started a civil war that raged until 2009. The Tamil Tigers fought to break their section of the country away from Sinhalese domination. As many as 100,000 people on both sides were killed. Many escaped the violence by emigrating to other countries, especially Canada and Australia. The author and his family fled to Canada, as did author Michael Ondaatje, and the folks in the novel Milltown, a great book by my GR friend and GR author Shane Joseph. 

The capital and largest city, Colombo, is near the middle of the west coast of the nation. Its metropolitan area has more than 5 million people, about a quarter of the nation’s population. The ethnic mix in the capital is about one-third of each of the three major groups. History will tell us if that combination allows the city to show the rest of the nation “why can’t we all just get along?” or if it becomes a powder keg for future violence. 

Top photo: a peaceful Sri Lanka landscape from vervemagazine.in
A neighborhood burned in the violence from opiniojuris.org
The author from theglobeandmail.com
Map from mapsontheweb.com