Rating: 3/5

“The Life Before Her Eyes”
By Laura Kasischke 
Harvest Books, 2002, New York. 

	“The Life Before Her Eyes” by Laura Kasischke was the third novel she published. If one were to read the synopsis of this book they would be under the impression that this book is solemnly focused on a school shooting that takes place. Unable to decide whether it benefits the book taking a different approach, the novel becomes quite captivating. 

	The novel begins with Diana and Maureen, two best friends. These two are completely opposite in character, Diana being the wild child and Maureen the conservative Christian. They both decided to go to the restroom before going to class. While they are pampering themselves, they begin to hear screams and gunfire outside in the hallways. At first, they aren’t convinced it’s real, until they find themselves face to face with the shooter. Michael Patrick, the shooter, who isn’t mentioned any more in the book until the very end, told Diana the previous day that he was bringing a gun to school and killing everyone, but again Diana wasn’t convinced he was serious. 

	While both of the girls are facing the shooter, only seeing their reflection in the mirrors, they are faced with a life-altering decision when Michael asks both of them which one should he kill. While both of them plead for him not to kill either of them, the suspense starts to build when Maureen says “if you’re going to kill one of us, kill me.” The shooter then looks to Diana and says “What do you have to say?” She doesn’t respond until he puts the gun to her temple, and she says “kill her, not me.”

	After reading the prologue it was to my surprise that the author didn’t continue on with the shooting for the rest of the novel. Instead, we are brought into Diana’s middle-aged life with reoccurring flashbacks from her past. The author takes us on a journey of how Diana used to be this wild child growing up and her friendship with Maureen. We also see her present day life with her daughter and her husband, which seems to be perfect until that dreadful day starts affecting everything around her. 

	The novel becomes a bit confusing with all of the flashbacks and reality. It starts to become hard to tell what is real and what is fantasy. With that being said, it seems that what happens with Diana is left for interpretation. 

	The novel ends with a sudden rush of action between the shooting that took place and Diana trying to save her daughter Emma in the present day. Based on the last few pages the twist becomes that Michael does shoot Maureen but also shoots Diana, but she survives. It becomes a bit hazy after that, as some people believe that Diana’s “perfect” life is what she imagined in the minutes before she is shot. In other ways it can be interpreted that she did went on to live this life, only to be haunted by survivors guilt, because she is the only one that knew what really happened that day.