Rating: 2/5

TL;DR - it's worth reading if you enjoy the franchise, the characters, and are willing to self-edit (that is, skip the repetitive expositions).

Although I read this book when it was first published, and reread it a time or two in the intervening decades, most recently I "read" this book as an audio book, which is an interesting test for a book. The book is in the first person, so listening to it heightens the effect of Lestat telling you his story; however, I hadn't realized how much of the pontificating I usually skipped over when rereading the book in print. At times during the narration I wanted to stop Lestat and tell him, "I get it--you've made your point. Move along, please." I had forgotten the endless exposition about the nature of good and evil and spirituality, and I had forgotten how much Lestat verges on being a "Mary Sue" (an overly idealized character). His flaws are extensive, some of which even acknowledged in faux-self-deprecation, but somehow everyone loves him despite these flaws, and forgives him the most outrageous transgressions, which always end up benefitting him.

The character of Gabrielle has always been more interesting to me than Lestat. Where his extreme extraversion annoys me, her uncompromising introversion attracts. Where Lestat's transformation to vampire leads him to endless ruminations about the need to love humans and humanity, his dependence on and need of them, the utter lack of meaning in a life without the love of humans, Gabrielle uses her transformation to free her at last from the demands and needs of others. She sticks around for a few transitional decades to try to wean her son into adult independence, but ultimately puts her own selfhood first. 

Detaching to look at the structure of the book, the tale within a tale is carried too far, and by the time Lestat meets up with Marius, I was snorting as I counted the layers, as we have Lestat, who tells us the tale of himself listening to Marius, as Marius relates the tale of Marius listening to the tale of the Egyptian priest, who relates the story of Those Who Must Be Kept. There may have been another layer in there, but who can keep track? While the individual embedded stories were interesting, they also felt like a massive info dump, to give us the necessary background to appreciate the amazing specialness of Lestat, when he is the one to whom the Queen (silent and unmoving for centuries) responds.

If you're going to read this book for the first time, make sure you have the next book "Queen of the Damned" ready, as "The Vampire Lestat" ends in a cliffhanger.