Rating: 3/5

Playback, 1958, is Raymond Chandler’s last completed novel, #7 in the Philip Marlowe detective series, finished a year before Chandler died. Poodle Springs, and finished manuscript, was completed many years later by Robert B. Parker. Playback was originally written as a screenplay, though Chandler himself reworked it as a novel. Many people, I’m told, prefer the screenplay to the novel, though I haven’t read it. I can see that, because the story is lean and dialogue-centric, still. It’s probably the least favorite of everyone’s reading of the seven books (or eight, if you consider Poodle Springs).

The story takes place outside of LA, in a small town named Esmeralda (La Jolla), and is focused on a single job Marlowe has to do: Shadow a woman and report back. Over the whole book, he never knows why he is doing the job, and asks the folks that hired him to explain, and then the woman, who also tries to hire him, and he never really learns why, which is amusing. He also is repeatedly offered money to do the work, they pass it back and forth over the course of the whole story, but in the end he takes nothing. That’s amusing. A little. 

As with any Chandler book the plot is not as important as. . . I don’t know, the clever repartee, the jokes, the engaging characters? There is terrific dialogue in places, and of course Marlowe, a handsome dude, sleeps with the woman-in-question, but in the conclusion we get a set-up for Poodle Springs, in that a woman he fell for during the occasion of his best book, his masterpiece, The Long Goodbye, Linda Loring, calls him up and well . . . they get together in Poodle Springs.
This is a short book, but fun. I was going to do a parody of the book but saw Ian and Paul did them, and they are terrific so I leave you with some of the entertaining writing from the book:

“She had a pair of legs--so far as I could determine--that were not painful to look at. . . ”“‘ Christian Dior,’ she said, reading my rather open mind. “I never wear anything else. A light, please.”“You’re wearing a lot more today,” I said, snapping the lighter for her.
“I don’t greatly care for passes this early in the morning.”
“What time would suit you, Miss Vermilyea?”

He’s riding in a luxury car with “a cigarette lighter into which you dropped your cigarette and it smoked it for you.”

“I wouldn’t say that as she said goodbye she looked exactly wistful, but neither did she look as hard to get as a controlling interest in General Motors.”

“Don't kid yourself. You're a dirty low-down detective. Kiss me.”

“Javonen smiled - very slightly. Call it a down payment on a smile.”

“One of the women had enough ice on her to cool the Mojave Desert.”

Chapter twenty is a monologue by an old guy named Fred Pope, just for the heck of it, expounding on the town of Esmeralda, where the action takes place, outside LA. Just because he can, this Chandler; here’s just one line I like from maybe twenty, a comedy routine of jokes about sleepy small towns:
“Sundays it was like you was already buried.”

“The next hour was three hours long.”

There’s an alcoholic’s joke (Chandler being an alcoholic):

The doctors told him he needed to cut down on his drinking. . . or he woul;dn’t live a year. He cussed them out and said if he couldn’t take a drink whenever he wanted to. . . he’d be damned if he’d take one at all. He was dead in a year.”