Rating: 5/5

It’s easy to see where the strength of Lyra Belacqua came from!

Sally Lockhart is a sixteen year old orphan, independently wealthy by bequest, but hamstrung and constrained by the misogynistic rules of Victorian England. When she walks away from life with her mean-spirited aunt, it will take all of her wiles to avoid the legal clutches of the domineering lawyer who is the executor of the estate left to her by her father. On top of dealing with that, she soon finds herself up to her bloomers in murder and mayhem – a mystery swirling around letters, puzzles, opium, smuggling, Chinese secret societies and a priceless ruby.

Sally Lockhart is an enigmatic, strong, courageous, multi-faceted heroine. She’s also easy to like, easy to care about and easy to cheer for. How’s this for a description of a unique, young polymath?

“Mr Lockhart taught his daughter himself in the evenings, and let her do as she pleased during the day. As a result, her knowledge of English Literature, French, History, Art and Music was non-existent, but she had a thorough grounding in the principles of military tactics and book-keeping, a close acquaintance with the affairs of the Stock Market, and a working knowledge of Hindustani. Furthermore, she could ride well (though her pony would not agree to the Cossack procedure); and for her fourteenth birthday her father had bought her a little Belgian pistol, the one she carried everywhere and taught her to shoot. She was now nearly as good a shot as her mother. She was solitary, but perfectly happy …”

One might definitely wonder if Nancy Springer took the liberty of taking a page (and an idea or two) from Philip Pullman’s book when she created Enola Holmes, Sherlock and Mycroft’s younger daughter, who lived in London with that same gritty streak of determined independence.

I’m definitely a new Sally Lockhart fan and I’m looking forward to finding a copy of THE SHADOW IN THE NORTH, #2 in a series that is sure to be exciting and entertaining. I should also add that, in addition to character and plot development, THE RUBY IN THE SMOKE does an excellent job of evoking that creepy, fog-bound and mysterious Victorian setting that fans of the historical mystery genre are so familiar with.

Highly recommended.

Paul Weiss