Rating: 4/5

Ultimate Game Author: Christian Lehmann Publisher: David R. Godine Translator: William Rodamar 1999 192 pages $10.50 ISBN-10: 1567922155 Reading Level: 11-14 Rating: 8/10
Ultimate Game
	The Ultimate Game is a story of three French teenage boys that learn an important lesson. The book starts out when the boys find a video game store that has their favorite video games many which involve war and violence. The boys, Charles, Andreas, and Eric all love computer games and play them often. When they are paying, the owner of the store gives Andreas a special game for free. When the boys play the game they have a choice to be a soldier in any war. The game is filled with horrible scenes of war. Two of the boys realize that war is not a game but rather a tragic thing with severe consequences. However, Andreas the most violent boy, refuses to give up the game. He becomes more violent and fails to learn the lessons the other two learned. Charles and Eric must stop him!
	Christian Lehmann, the author lives in France and originally published the book in French. It was then translated into English. Christian Lehmann, tries to send a message to teenage boys that war is not fun like their video games. The author succeeded in giving a clear moral of antiwar and antiracism. For example, Andreas is racist. He wears a Nazi insignia on his jacket. He admires Nazis and says stereotypical things about Jews and Middle Eastern people. He finally learns his lesson through the game when he is accused of being Jewish in 1942 and is taken to a concentration camp. 
This book was fast paced and exciting. The characters were interesting and had unique personalities. I can really relate to the characters because this book was written in the past decade and I play video games too. Ultimate Game won the Batchelder Award. This award is given to a book written in a foreign country and then published in the U.S. This was one of my favorite books, because it is a powerful and moving novel and made me wonder if violence in video games can cause a teenage boy to be more violent in the real world.
By, Ben Reisner