Rating: 3/5

Got this book from the "lit in translation" section at one of my fav indie book stores. Loved the cover, liked the idea of reading a Swiss author, and the story sounded just tragic enough to be interesting. I didn't research Ramuz much more than to learn he wrote in French, had lived in Paris, and had met Stravinsky but I did learn that the publisher, Deep Vellum, was from an indie bookstore in Dallas which seems cool. They have a lot of works in translation from authors I've never heard of. So many books to read...

At any rate, this book-novella was just okay for me. I liked the introduction which talked about his prose style. A lot of French people, apparently criticized him for eschewing more conventional grammar and sentence structure and he felt out of place in Paris speaking his Swiss-French from near Lausanne. But he persevered and wanted to do things his way, so good for him. Reading the book, I couldn't tell exactly what this prose styling amounted to other than the profuse use of commas and piling up short clauses. The translator says something like there are commas where more properly there should be semicolons and talks about the piling up of clauses as being like the inevitable flow and push of nature like the wind or snow or whatever. Yeah okay. It read fine, pretty well.

I think what I liked best was the descriptions of nature and the small Swiss farming villages. The first half of the novel was a little interesting with the characters, but also they seem underdeveloped. There's a marriage, it falls apart, then gets back together, then falls apart. I never could get invested in the people as people, but neither did they lend themselves to strong symbols. It is said that Ramuz is an allegorical writer so that checks out, but I think the overall project of the book suffers for it. In allegory, is it a man v nature novel? It seems that nature marches on impassively as these people's relationship falls apart, misery intrudes, and melodrama heightens. The conclusion seems nothing more than that-melodrama-and the protagonist seems only to go through the motions of madness, not embodying it in any particularly engaging way. Still, it wasn't all bad, nor poorly written.