Rating: 5/5

"England was already frozen into a winter years long, and he knew it. King Stephen was crowned, and held, however slackly, most of England. The Empress Maud, his rival for the throne, held the west, and came with a claim the equal of Stephen’s. Cousins, most uncousinly, they tore each other and tore England between them, and yet life must go on, faith must go on, the stubborn defiance of fortune must go on in the husbandry of the year, season after season, plough and harrow and seed, tillage and harvest. And here in the cloister and the church, the sowing and tillage and harvest of souls."

Many might find this descriptive interlude too much or want to get on with the plot. But, for me this is a large part of why I am attracted to Peters’ storytelling.

I love how Peters provides the reader with the growing relationship between the monk and the deputy sheriff. Yet, she reminds us that they represent two separate and often distinct functions: "“It is the sheriff’s duty. It is not mine. Among men of honor and decent Christian life I see no enemies, on either side. Mine is a different discipline. With any man who comes only to rescue and fetch away children to their proper guardian, I have no quarrel.”"

Their banter as Hugh Berringer’s wife is about to give birth to their first child is a good example:
"“Now I am going home to my own bed, for once—even if I am banished from my wife’s by my own arrogant brat. But what would a devout religious like you know about a father’s tribulations!” 
What, indeed? “You must all come to it,” said Brother Cadfael complacently, “you married men. Third and unwanted where two are lost in admiring each other. I shall go to Compline and say a prayer for you.”"

As you now understand, England is suffering from this Civil War and Cadfael’s monastery is thrust into the midst of it when Worcester is attacked and vandalized. So, we learn that there are more than two political factions; there is a criminal element in Shropshire. "Whoever commanded there must have gathered to him the lawless, restless, masterless men of two or three shires, happy at seeing England torn in two, and its open wounds inviting their teeth."

Three of the refugees, ostensibly seeking refuge in Shrewsbury are missing; an adolescent sister and brother of nobility and a young nun who accompanies them. Mayhem and death are what much of this story forebodes. It is a good solid tale of investigations by Cadfael (and Berringer) but my high rating is for how skillfully the author gives us every nuance of that place and time. 

From the weather, to the way a patient is treated, to how directions are provided, all is so perfectly rendered and so well put. And, there is a thread that runs through it all: "“You must not take to yourself more than your due. What you yourself did, that you may rue, and confess, and do penance for, to your soul’s content, but you may not lift another man’s sins from his shoulders, or usurp God’s right to be the only judge…There is no profit in ifs. We go on from where we stand, we answer for our own evil, and leave to God our good.”"

If the plot isn’t quite originally brilliant, it isn’t far from it. And the descriptions of characters, activities and places is brilliant. One of the best of all Peters’ stories. 5*

Below are some further examples:
"Cadfael saw a great quiver pass over the mangled face and past the swollen lips. The tip of a dry tongue strove to moisten, and shivered and withdrew from pain, but the lips remained parted. The strong teeth unclenched to let out a long, sighing groan. Cadfael had honeyed wine standing in a jug beside the brazier, to keep warm. He trickled a few drops between the swollen lips, and had the satisfaction of seeing the unconscious face contort in muscular spasm, and the throat labor to swallow. When he touched a finger to the man’s lips, again closed, they parted in thirsty response. Drop by drop, patiently, a good portion of the drink went down. Only when response failed at last did Cadfael abandon the process. Cold, oblivious absence had softened gradually into sleep, now that a little warmth had been supplied him both within and without. A few days of lying still, for his wits to settle again right way up in his head, thought Cadfael, and he’ll come round and be on his way back to us. But whether he’ll remember much of what befell him is another matter. He had known men, after such head injuries, revive to recall every detail of their childhood and past years, but no recollection whatever of recent injury. He removed the cooling brick from the foot of the bed, fetched a replacement from the kitchen, and sat down to resume his vigil."

"I’m for Bromfield again.” He had come by the most used roads, but they were less than direct, and he had a good eye for country. “If I make straight southwesterly from here, I take it that’s the way the crow flies for Bromfield. How are the tracks?” 

“You’ll be threading part of Clee Forest if you try it, but keep the sunset a little on your right hand and you’ll not go wrong. And the brooks are no stay, nor have been since the frost set in.” The steward started him off in the direction he should go, and saw him out of the wooded hollow and on to the narrow, straight track between gentle hills, turning his back upon the great, hunched bulk of Brown Clee, and his left shoulder on the grimmer, more rugged shape of Titterstone Clee."

"….the claimants began to come in to look for their horses, as doubtless they were flocking to Ludlow to pick out their own cows and sheep. Some, no doubt, would be claimed by more than one, and give rise to great quarrels and the calling in of neighbors to identify the disputed stock. But here there were only a handful of horses, and little ground for the opportunist greed of the cunning. Horses know their owners as well as the owners know their horses. Even the cows in Ludlow would have plenty to say about where they belonged."

"It is not enough to say that a thing is so because of one fragment of knowledge, even so clear as a confession, and put away out of sight those other things known, because they cannot be explained. An answer to a matter of life and death must be an answer that explains all.”"