"The difference within me that I sometimes felt I had, that had brought me so much confusion, whatever this difference, it was shared by Shehan. I felt amazed that a normal thing - like my friendship with Shehan - could have such powerful and hidden possibilities."

"Right and wrong, fair and unfair had nothing to do with how things really were. I thought of Shehan and myself. What had happened between us in the garage was not wrong. For how could loving Shehan be bad? [...] It had to do with who was in charge; everything had to do with who held power and who didn't. [...] Was it not possible for people like Shehan and me to be powerful too?"

First from the lens of the naïve simplicity of childhood, then from that of the more intricately built world of the adults, with its secrets, its injustice, and its capacity of violence, the protagonist of Shyam Selvadurai’s novel Funny Boy, Arjie, takes us on a journey in Sri Lanka, exploring his sexual identity against the backdrop of the Sinhala-Tamil cultural tension culminating in the 1983 riots. 

Arjie’s gradually increasing awareness of his ‘funny’ sexuality is juxtaposed with his awareness of the position given to his Tamil ethnicity within the prevailing discourses of national identity in the late 1970s and early 1980s Sri Lanka. As is the case with many South Asian novels in English, the private and the public, the personal and the political become inextricable. Selvadurai weaves the fabric of everyday life with at times violent communal, national, and gendered threads. 

The novel is filled with transcendental moments, both positive (Arjie’s dressing up and role-playing as a bride as a child) and negative (the destruction of his family home by the rioting mobs), moments that remove Arjie from the bound of spatial spaces, literal or metaphorical, gendered or ethnic. As a non-heteronormative Tamil, Arjie occupies an almost invisible space. Arjie’s comment “I don’t feel at home in Sri Lanka any longer” is sad in more ways than one because for a queer figure the home and the nation are already always unavailable. The novel, then, becomes a space of reclamation for the subaltern.

Indeed, it is a powerful novel, much more powerful than I had expected it to be. I started reading this with hopes that I won’t be disappointed. I’m finishing it with a surety that it will always stay with me.