Rating: 1/5

I know that one's taste in books is subjective and what one person may like might not necessarily appeal to another but I really cannot stress how utterly terrible I found this book.

Imagine Zola's La Curee mixed with a touch of Mary Poppins and just enough Eyeless in Gaza to make one think that this might be a halfway decent read, rewritten by Jeffery Archer as a TV mini series for a minor digital channel and you are 10% of the way to understanding just how awful this novel is.

There is no character development, no plot development, repetitious phrasing and a stunning lack of originality. The story starts in 1866 and ends in 1892, yet in all those years not one of the characters has been on any kind of journey, the evil schemer is still the evil schemer (pursuing exactly the same evil scheme), the talented but naive young man is a talented but naive older man and so on. None of the characters have a second dimension, every reaction to every situation is completely predictable and every interaction exists only to move the plot forward, not that it actually does move forward with the resolution of the incident that happens in chapter one coming some 590 pages and 24 years later.

Then there is the repetitious nature of the writing. In one chapter we might see a scene happen, for example a character losing a lot of money at cards and having to leave England, only to be told two chapters later that said character has had to leave England due to losing a lot of money at cards. This happens time and time again throughout the novel and it is almost as if the author has decided that his readers will be do disassociated from the text that they won't be able to remember anything that has happened. You can almost hear the voice over saying "Previously, in this novel..." which is one reason why it feels so much like it was written with one eye on an adaptation as a mini series, and yet being written relatively early in Follett's career there was no reason why this should be the case. Oh, and if you replace banks with churches you also get a novel that is basically World Without End even down to the scheming mother and self-righteous poor relation.

To give credit where it is due there is one cracking line in the novel, when old Ben Greenbourne (yes he's curmudgeonly, yes he's Jewish, yes he's a banker and yes he is as stereotyped as that makes him sound) says following a highly predictable (and satisfyingly amusing) banking collapse: "If I spend money to rescue you now, the foolish investor will be rewarded and the careful one will suffer. And if banking were run that way, why should anyone be cautious? We might as well all take risks, for there is no risk when failed banks can always be rescued." The flouting of basic punctuation and sentence construction rules aside I rather wish every banker and politician had read that sentence sometime prior to 2011.