Rating: 4/5

Alien franchise 04 Alien Resurrection: The Official Movie Novelization by A.C. Crispin

3.5 Stars

challenging dark hopeful reflective sad tense
Medium-paced

Plot or Character Driven: A mix
Strong character development: Yes
Loveable characters: Complicated
Diverse cast of characters: Complicated
Flaws of characters are a main focus: Yes

I have to be honest (which I hope I always am) ...I was impressed with this novelization, from what I can remember from seeing this movie ONE time (and when I saw it...I said at the time, "I never want to see this film...again. Why would I do this to myself.") I am now going to watch it on Thursday, so that I can comment on the discussion that is happening over at Project Geekology podcast that is run by Dakota Lopez.

I have (thank goodness) forgotten EVERYTHING that happened in this movie. I dumped that knowledge IMMEDIATELY after allowing my eyeballs and brain to seeing this film. I absolutely HATED this film. So, for me to rank this novelization at where I did...means something.

It will be interesting, now that I've read the novel, then watches the film...where I stand on the film. Will it change my mind (I doubt it), but when I read the novelization of The Last Jedi by Jason Fry, made me understand and like the film BETTER than I would've...if I hadn't read the book. That novelization was INCREDIBLE. I really don't think the film is great. I don't hate it, but I do believe it broke things, that shouldn't have been broken (in the trilogy) that you cannot come back from. The novelization helped/eased this transition...better.

Okay, now about the story...itself. 

When I finished the previous book/film (read/rewatch), I had forgotten about HOW we could have Ripley...even in the story. So...I said, "okay", and then the film progressed. 

I actually feel that since I read the unproduced script/story by William Gibson, then adapted to a novel by Pat Cadigan...helped with some of the dynamics explained in this story. Not that anything was stolen or cherry picked, but since my mind was allowed to go "there" in the other book (which I just read, yesterday...as of Wednesday, Oct. 1st, 2025), I was already thinking one way...which allowed this storyline to hit better for me.

I encourage people to pick up that book and read it. It isn't canon (whether that matters, or not), it would be helpful...and I really liked that story...though I did have some disappointments with what happened in the story...so it isn't perfect (I rated it 4 Stars).

I love the characters of Corporal Hicks and the synthetic, Bishop. I felt that they got a "raw deal" in the Alien³ novelization. 

This story is basically ALL new characters. It really goes there, too. Wheland/Yutani was bought out by Wal-Mart. That had an "ick factor of ten".

The main character in this story is "Ripley", but that in itself...a storypoint that you need to read. So, I will not go further into HOW.

So, all the characters in this novel are new. You are eased into a new story, a new timeline, and some of the same sh*t happening by stupid and corrupt people.

The average "joe" is dunked on, pretty much at every turn in this universe. Corporations and the people they align themselves with...do sh*tty things...all the time.

By the time the novel was over, I was...glad, but I at least had an understanding of where the writer/director wanted to go. So, it has a plot, but it is ultimately driven by the characters...even briefly on the page.

Will I read this book, again. Possibly. It adds something to the universe...that I am in a better place to receive. Whether I'll watch the film again, after this rewatch is for you to see in my Letterboxd account...some time tomorrow (Thursday, Oct. 2nd).

Okay...that's about it. 

I am probably going to now delve into more of the novels and omibus stories that are within the Alien franchise, and "might" even read some of the AvP (Alien vs. Predator novels). I'm not sure I watch any of those films (which I haven't...up to this point in my life), but I might...we shall see.

Next books to read are probably Alien: Bishop and Alien: Vasquez novels. Then...I'll try to pick and choose from there.i