Rating: 2/5

This is a disappointing entry in the Expanded Universe canon. Vonda McIntyre is a respected sci-fi writer who has won both Hugo and Nebula awards. I have enjoyed some of her earlier Star Trek novelizations. So how she produced this sub-par Star Wars book is a bit of a mystery.

I won't bother you much with the plot except to say that it deals with some pretty stale Star Wars tropes, including the kidnapping of the Solo children (again), the attempt by a former Imperial official, now in hiding (how many of these guys are there?) to revive the Empire once more and the search for yet more lost Jedi. Seriously? * yawn *

But the clichéd plot elements aren't really the problem. The issue here is execution. The writing is poor, the characters are handled inadequately and the stylistic choices are pretty questionable.

To wit: I don't need the author of an EU novel to give me Shakespeare. But there was a point in reading this book at which I began to believe that McIntyre could only write subject-verb, subject-verb, subject-verb. There was virtually no variety in sentence length or construction. Yikes! Second, it is not clear to me that McIntrye "gets" these characters. I can't say much about this without providing spoilers, but suffice it to say that several major characters take actions that don't seem completely commensurate with their character traits in the films or other EU books. Finally, the stylistic choices are very strange. When we cut away to the scenes of the children who have been kidnapped, McIntyre changes her writing style. She seems to be attempting to write from the children's point of view without actually moving to first-person. This attempt just seems to create an artificial, strained and juvenile feeling to these scenes. It does not add any value. My advice would have been to stick with third-person omniscient and let the third person remain an adult. And if you're going to use first-person narrative, go all the way. This in-between voice (third person juvenile) didn't work.

All of these complaints, and I haven't even had time to mention the rubber science in this book (e.g. an anti-Force that sucks power from the Force or a freezing star, etc.) But you get the point already. This book just isn't very good. Suffice it to say that this one is for the die-hard completists only.