Rating: 5/5

Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner is an amazing book. 

First of all, the title comes from the idea of putting all the people on the planet in one place. A nineteenth century commentator speculated that if everyone were to stand, and have maybe a couple feet square around him or her, then everyone could stand together on the Isle of Wight. Some time later this concept was expanded due to population increases to speculate that the same experiment could be done on the Isle of Man. Brunner, setting his novel in the not too distant future of 2010, extrapolated that then, with population continuing to expand exponentially, the gathering would need to be conducted on the African island of Zanzibar.

Stand on Zanzibar uses a narrative technique pioneered by the Lost Generation novelist John Dos Passos in his USA trilogy. Brunner used a cacophony of voices and characters, news bulletins, and illustrative sketches and a large cast of characters and settings to create an experience of out of control, inevitable and relentless over population. Winner of the 1969 Hugo Award, this is a thought provoking, dystopian tour de force that can overwhelm the reader, but through masterful crafting, stays on track and has a satisfying, if not disheartening end. Eclipsed by other dystopian novels like Brave New World and 1984, this is nonetheless a worthy entry in that list.

I have long been a fan of writers like Philip K. Dick and William Gibson who bravely set their stories in the near future and there could even be an ever-growing sub-genre of science fiction whose vision has now become contemporary. Brunner has done an admirable job in contemplating a time, only 40 odd years in his future where over population and increasing poverty are progressing at an alarming rate. 

Most alarming to me was Brunner’s prophetic ideas of “muckers” those people who have run amok and go on mass murder killing sprees. 

Brunner’s vision is not without hope, but his predictions fall too close to home to go without notice, and hopefully, with some contemplation.