Rating: 4/5

Resurrection has been alienated! I also kinda want to give this another quote. What should it be? I was thinking "If you thought Alien 3 was bad, get a load of this" or something...

So...what happened? This installment was unnecessary because Alien 3 had ended with a sour note where Ripley committed suicide by back falling into the furnace. The facilities are closed down and almost all was forgotten, also, as the third film had already ended with a sour note five years earlier, the fact that there are many changes to the story compared to the first two is sort of not helping with all its other major flaws! In addition, Ripley is cloned after she died in Alien 3 - and she's somehow cloned with the Xenomorph Queen chestburster growing inside of her, and she barely acts like herself, and instead is weird and uncomfortable to watch. Just like the said film, the story is extremely weak and boring, with almost a lack of scares and the scare factor is even far below that of its predecessors of the first two films. Call is held at gunpoint by Purvis, despite the fact that she is an android and cannot be hurt, yet Ripley and the others think she is in danger. For some stupid reason, this film ignores a majority of events from the earlier films that came out before Alien 3 and this film. Most of the jump-scares are still predictable, just like the third film. The "Newborn" created from a hybrid of Xenomorph and Human DNA looks absolutely ridiculous, and yet it replaces the Xenomorphs as the main threat for the film's climax. There's only any crisis at all because the Auriga is programmed to automatically return to Earth in the event of an emergency. Note that this is the exact opposite of what the Sulaco was programmed to do (drop the crew off on an inhabited world and then fly into deep space) in the previous film. Joss Whedon's one-liners are distracting, don't fit the characters or the series, and are grating. Also, there are two too many: too many lesbian innuendos and too many face touching scenes. The direction by Jean-Pierre Jeunet isn't very good. The acting is abysmal, especially from Winona Ryder as Annalee Call, and most of the casts as well.

Even worse, this film was relatively sedate. There was only one major thing that went wrong during filming — Ron Perlman injuring himself and nearly drowning while filming one sequence, which required the shooting schedule to be slightly reshuffled to give him time to recover — and production and post-production otherwise flew by without a single problem. At most, there was that water chase sequence which proved an exhausting experience for all in the cast and crew. That's not to say things were entirely okay behind the scenes, though, as writer Joss Whedon had major differences of opinion with the producers and director Jean-Pierre Jeunet over the tone and design of the film, but was overruled on every occasion. Even then, he didn't kick up much of a stink, since he was too busy setting up Buffy the Vampire Slayer to get involved in any major disputes. It's also been noted that his show Firefly a few years later has a strikingly similar set of characters as the film, which is speculated to be his effort to show what he really wanted them to be like, much like the Buffy series was his response to how the original film butchered his script.

However, there still are some pretty scary moments, and the scene near the end where Ripley 8 sucks the Newborn out, is admittedly pretty heartbreaking to the fanbase. Ron Perlman as Ron Johner is one of the few highlights of the film. And the practical effects are average.

If this is considered worse than the previous film, well then, how come it has a higher score and its audience score? 
  No idea!
 Possibly in fact still better than Alien 3 is what I can really say.