Rating: 4/5

“Not One Day” by Anne Garréta is an intimate exploration into desire and an inquiry into the power desire holds over our bodies, minds, and beliefs. 

Upon reading the first chapter, I was enraptured by Garréta’s voice: sharp, witty, dry, sarcastic, and yet tender. As Garréta weaves her stories onto the page, her writing itself elicits pleasure and desire; her sentences stretch and expand into pure poetry. 

I was also in awe of the translation itself and extremely taken by how Emma Ramadan accomplished to deliver (what I can only imagine to be) the fluidity, movement, poetry, and heart of the original French text. As we see Garréta open up (or fail to open up) while recounting her memories, “Not One Day” feels like an incredibly human text. As much as humor, joy, loss, and heartbreak are felt across this text, the feeling I cling to most at the end is loneliness.

While centered primarily on sexual lust and the performance of courtship, I appreciate how Garréta widens the scope of her discussion of desire. For desire is also about our personal motivations and sense of self, not to mention a weapon used against us in a world driven by capitalism. What we also learn is that shame around particular desires can be just as revealing as desire itself. 

“Not One Day” is a text that by the end, Garréta herself cannot tell whether she is grateful to have written. Does desire lose its purity and meaning when it is showcased for all to see? Or is a revelation of desire an honest look into all that we are? 

Garréta’s narration is an interesting one to follow. Firstly, her accounts raise questions for me about how much of queer desire is inextricably tied to versus broken free from patriarchy and the male gaze. Secondly, as we learn in the end, Garréta’s voice is not to be trusted. (Although this does inspire an excitement towards rereading the text and spotting the fiction in her words) There are judgements Garréta makes that are disagreeable, and feel biased (as the world in which we inhabit across “Not One Day” feels primarily white, academic, and middle/upper class). However, I stayed hanging onto every word, captured by way Garréta constructs each narrative. It is a testament to how the text still feels honest even if we consciously know it is not. (Which in it of itself raises questions about how we measure authenticity and honesty)

I mentioned earlier how human Garréta’s text feels. It is no more so than at the end when she unveils her tricks, her deceit, and her failures to the reader. I suppose it is refreshing to know the writers we marvel get just as frusturated at themselves and fall short of their goals as we do. For we always desire (even when the subject makes clear that they have not fully given themselves away in their text) to find bits of ourselves in other people. Because ultimately, therein lies a comfort (regardless of how short lived that comfort may be) or knowing you are not alone. 

Desire can be all-consuming, passionate, and euphoric, yet an equally mundane, painful, and lonely path.