Rating: 4/5

This book was donated to my Little Free Library Shed. 

But…

After the disappointment of “The Exchange,” I wasn’t sure I wanted to plunge myself into another Grisham. Review here: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... 

Still…

I have found his earlier books to be quite satisfying. 

So…

I began reading. 

Michael Brock was an associate at one of Washington D.C.’s top firms, Drake &amp; Sweeney.

He didn’t have time to notice what was going on in the outer world, with having to be concerned about billings for the firm. 

But…

One day that would change when “Mister” strove in and took him and 8 other fellow attorneys as hostages. 

Mister died, and Michael may have escaped the event unscathed; but, something changed in him. 

Thus…

Opening the door for him to become an advocate “street lawyer” for the homeless. (Hence: the title of the book.)

“The frightening part of homelessness is what you don’t see on the street. About half of all poor people spend seventy percent of their income trying to keep the housing they have. …There are tens of thousands of people in this city who are clinging to their roofs; one missed paycheck, one unexpected hospital visit, one unseen emergency and they lose their housing.” 

What Michael learns under the tutelage of street lawyer, Mordecai Green, helps him realize leaving the firm to work on behalf of the homeless is what he was needing in his life. 

And…

Then there is that file that tells the full story as to why Mister was at his original law firm, in the first place. 

“The trend in urban America is to criminalize homelessness. …Can’t beg, can’t sleep on a bench, can’t camp under a bridge, can’t store personal items in a public park, can’t sit on a sidewalk, can’t eat in public. …The cities selectively enforce general laws, such as loitering, vagrancy, public drunkenness. They target the homeless. Sweeps are common. …shovel up all the homeless, dump them somewhere else.”

This story was published in 1998, and yet, the circumstances of the homeless that are shared here, feels as if it were written today. 

Grisham does a fine job of casting a young, idealistic lawyer as the underdog and pitting him against a big, powerful opponent with money and resources…

While…

Providing readers with a quick plot line with social issues that give this story relevance. 

And…

This story is truly character-driven. 

Although… 

Michael’s transition from top firm associate lawyer on track for partner to street lawyer, may feel rushed, it is still readable. 

Because…

As readers we are rooting for the underdog, and we like what we are seeing when we do. 

This may not be the courtroom drama readers will come to expect of Grisham…

But…

The page-turning is quick and the story moves along, especially for the inevitable showdown with his former firm.