Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars. This 1928 British mystery reminds me a little of an early Agatha Christie novel (I imagine that's not just a coincidence), complete with a Miss Marple-type character in Miss Maud Silver, a small lady with mouse-colored hair, knitting needles and an extremely sharp mind. Surprisingly, though, Grey Mask predates the first Miss Marple book by a couple of years.

Charles Moray, a wealthy young man, has never recovered from being jilted just a few days before their wedding by Margaret Langton. He went off and traveled the world for four years to drown his sorrows, and is just now returning to England. When he gets to his closed-up home, he finds (and secretly listens in on, through a convenient peephole) some people discussing a criminal enterprise - including a possible murder - led by a man in a sinister, featureless grey rubber mask. 

The worst shock is when Charles sees his ex-fiancee Margaret show up to report to Grey Mask. Because Charles still has Feelings, though with a lot of anger mixed in.

What's going on, and how can Charles extricate Margaret from this mess? He doesn't want to involve the police, for fear of ruining Margaret's life. Miss Silver to the rescue!

Grey Mask is a little dated. There's a lovely and incredibly silly 18-year-old girl ... 

(not Margaret, but a rich girl with hardly two brain cells to rub together, who is the person that the criminals are considering murdering). And there's more than enough melodrama, romantic tension and virtuous self-sacrifice to fill my quota for the week - but it's a pretty good mystery for a 90+ year old book. It sucked me right in and spit me out around 2:30 am. Miss Silver actually plays a fairly minor role in this book, though my guess is her role becomes more prominent in the later books.

You can get a free copy of this and several other Miss Silver mysteries in ebook form, here on the FadedPage website. While you're at it, take a look at this Miss Silver fan's webpage for an interesting discussion of the differences between Miss Silver and Miss Marple, and a general analysis of the Miss Silver mysteries. My favorite part was this:Every Miss Silver mystery has at its heart a romantic couple (not a romance necessarily). This couple must and will unite; under no circumstances will either party die or prove to be a villain, and if a crime was committed by either, it will have been in ignorance, and with no lasting ill-effects. (Such foreknowledge about the end has never diminished my enjoyment of the books–the romance triumphant is as much part of the series as Miss Silver’s velvet coatee, or the creepy brooch with the hair of her grandparents).I'll definitely read a few more of these sometime.