Rating: 5/5

Amy and Isabelle by Elizabeth Strout was such a wonderful experience.

I am finding it difficult to write this review, because I have so many feelings about both characters (Amy and Isabelle), it’s hard to know where to start. Strout has done her usual trick of building up her characters in front of our very own eyes, just at the right speed – so we are spoon fed – bit by bit, and we end up with a total person by the end of the story. These two characters are very, very real.

Amy is sixteen-years old, and full of attitude and mood. There is so much she dislikes about her mother, it’s often unpleasant – but we get to feel for her, her struggle to be a grown up and be accepted. She’s in that abyss between being a child and an adult – most of us can remember how hard that was. 

Isabelle, Amy's mother, is such a complex character – she is so ashamed to be her. It is so sad. The poor thing never thinks she’s good enough, she’s like a frightened bird. Isabelle doesn’t really fit in with the women at work, the gaggle of typists who argue, laugh and bitch amongst each other. (Fat Bev is HILARIOUS!!). Isabelle has a particularly sad obsession with her boss, Mr Avery – god knows why, he appears to be such an officious, particular, petty man. She pines for any interaction with him. Amy spends some time working at the office during her school holidays.

Now the story takes off with Amy’s encounter with Mr Robertson, a relief teacher. She has a crush on him, and in time it is reciprocated – in a fashion. They do end up having some sort of liaison. There is fallout. But Strout handles this totally inappropriate encounter with such skill, it’s not as appalling as it should be. I really don’t know how to feel about it – is this the way the famous story Lolita is written? A book I have steered clear of because of the subject matter – thinking it might be unpleasant, uncomfortable. Should a relationship like this be written in such a passionate way? 

Apart from the heavy subject matter, there is plenty of humour here. As mentioned before, Fat Bev is hilarious – and I reckon she has a heart of gold. Dottie too – she has her fair share of drama to handle. But Fat Bev and Dottie, both have an impact on Isabelle’s life which is quite revealing. The dynamics of the office ladies where often my favourite bits - always interesting.

There is so much going on in this brilliant story, a short review does it no justice to it at all. I knew this would be good because I love the author – and it certainly was.

5 Stars

Cheers Mark
President of the Australian, Elizabeth Strout Fanciers Club
Cairns, North Queensland, Australia