Rating: 5/5

Brunner’s masterpiece is a disorienting trip into the future which is actually our past. The disorientation stems from the staccato writing style mixing journalism, headings, excepts, and vignettes to the scattered narrative following the author’s inspiration, John Dos Passos’ classic USA Trilogy (reviewed by yours truly here on Goodreads). He is writing in the craziness of 1968 (think Sgt Peppers, Summer of Love, Vietnam War escalation, war protests on college campuses, etc) about the distant (for him) 2010 and while he misses on some things (we are not yet controlled by eugenics) he nails others (corporate takeover of politics, slates are basically somewhere between iPhones and iPads) and especially the user interface of the Shal AI supercomputer which is scarily similar to that of ChatGPT. For the reader in 2023 or later, this reads like alternative history rather than sci-fi, but doesn’t feel hokey or outdated. One of the major characters, Chad Mulligan, has quotes from his books here and there and comes into the narrative late in the story, reminded me a lot of Heinlein’s stand-in Jubal Harshaw in Stranger in a Strange Land. 

I loved this quote:
(HISTORY Papa Hegel he say that all we learn from
history is that we learn nothing from history. I know people
who can't even learn from what happened this morning.
Hegel must have been taking the long view.
-The Hipcrime Vocab by Chad C. Mulligan)

There are essentially two protagonists, Norman House, corporate executive at General Technics (Brunner assumed Big Blue would basically take over the world) and his roomate Donald Hogan, spy and secret agent. Donald in a moment of transition:
And in under ten years he had to face the truth--he was
getting bored. He could almost wish that they'd pull the
second string attached to his work, the one which had caused
him so much heart-searching.
Lieutenant Donald Orville Hogan, you are hereby ac-
tivated and ordered to report immediately repeat IMMEDI-
ATELY to-
"Oh, no!"
"Something wrong with you, blockbottom?" a harsh voice
rasped inches from his ear. A sharp elbow jostled him and a
scowling face stared into his. Confused, he discovered that
without realising he must have made his decision about what
restaurant to patronise today, and wandered down into the
milling crowd that streamed the whole length of Fifth Ave-
nue.
«What? Oh--no. I'm all right."
«Then stop acting like you're off your gyros! Look where
you're going!"
The angry man he'd collided with pushed past. Mechani-
cally, Donald put one foot in front of the other, still rather
dazed. After a few moments, he concluded that the advice
was worth taking. Perhaps part of his trouble was that he'd
fallen into such an automatic routine he had lost the alertness
and interest in the world around which had attracted Dr.
Foden to him ten years back, in which case he was unlikely
to get the option of resigning his job. More probable was
what he'd half-feared when with a flourish of trumpets and a
ruffe of drums they declassified Shalmaneser, and he'd fore-
seen automation making even synthesists obsolete.
And if he was going to give up his job, he wanted it to be
on his own terms, not because he'd been fired for incompetence. (p. 51)

Here's another interesting passage:
"Prophet's beard, it certainly is! I found time to look over
some of Chad's books after Guinevere's party, and ... Well,
having met him I was inclined to think he was a conceited
blowhard, but now I think he's entitled to every scrap of
vanity he likes to put on."
"I thought of asking State to invite him to come in on this
project as a special advisor, but when I broached the matter
to Raphael Corning I was told State doesn't approve of
him."
"Why should they? He's successfully mocked everything
authority stands for."
"He doesn't think he's been successful."
«He's certainly coloured public opinion. He may not have
changed it radically, but what social theorist since Mao has
managed to turn it over? The mere fact that his books are
prescribed for college courses means his views are widely
disseminated."
"Yes, but so are Thoreau's and-- Never mind, we're
digressing. You said something about our not wanting the
Yatakangi genetic technique and then you started off about
Mr. and Mrs. Everywhere."
"Right. I've almost forgotten to make my main point. I've
watched this happen a couple of times, over eugenic legisla-
tion and over the question of partisans. After they've been
using a personalised TV set for a while, especially if it
includes a homimage unit, people begin to lose touch with
actuality. For instance, you're supposed to have a fresh base-
recording of your appearance put in about once a year. But I
know people who've merely had a fresh track made of the
first one, for four and even five years successively, so they
can go on looking at their younger selves on the screen. They
deny the passage of time. They live in an extended instant.
Do you see what I'm steering towards?" (p. 315)

I felt that the bold passage is an interesting description of our Instagram/ShapChat culture.
There is a lot to process in this book, but rest assured it is definitely a 5-star sci-fi classic.