Rating: 5/5

This is an SF novel, re-worked by the author from his short stories and originally published in 1952. I read it as a part of monthly reading for July 2022 at  The Evolution of Science Fiction group. Way earlier, around 1990, I’ve read the Russian translation of the book (except the last story) and was impressed by it. Re-reading it in original English more than 3 decades later I was glad that it kept its captivating story and memorable characters. Even if it reads as old-fashioned, with not a significant diversity of characters, it is still a great book.

The structure of the book is as follows: there are eight stories (plus an epilogue, written in 1973 and out-of-character, with the author’s preface), each preceded with a pseudo-academic musing supposedly written by a dog, who is part of canine civilization, even if the last word is misleading, for there are no cities and civitas is Latin for "city". These prefaces are written partially as a parody of Biblical texts, e.g. their “Proof from Design”, where God made all things to fit where they belong, like the long necks of giraffes where leaves are high or the white fur of arctic animals because of the snow, or gold near the equator because it is closer to Sun. Dogs use similar proofs to show that they developed robots:

Tige’s insistence that the robot is an invention of Man, a heritage that our race carries forward from Man, has been sturdily attacked by most other students of the legend.
The idea that the robot may have been fashioned and given to the Dogs as an aid to the development of their culture, Bounce believes, is an idea which must be summarily ruled out by the very virtue of its romanticism. It is, he contends, a story device on the face of it and as such must necessarily be suspect from the first.
There is no way now of knowing how the Dogs evolved a robot. Those few scholars who have given some time to a study of the development of robotry, point out that the highly specialized use to which the robot is put does indeed argue that it was invented by a Dog. To be so specialized, they argue, the robot must necessarily have been invented and developed by the race for whose particular use it is so singularly fitted. No one other than a Dog, they contend, could have done so good a job on so intricate a tool.

The stories themselves start with “City” which gave the book its title and describes a version of a global village, the Earth turned into after hydroponics replaced land agriculture, driven by atomic power helicopters solved transportation problems and fear of A-bomb made people leave cities. It also introduces Webster family and their robot servant, Jenkins, who are paramount to the future stories, with the saga spreading for thousands of years.

It is very interesting how these stories connect to the works of Olaf Stapledon, who also had a pseudo-academic future history in his Last and First Men and Star Maker, as well as a talking highly sentient dog in Sirius: A Fantasy of Love and Discord. Possibly, like a lot of scientific discoveries made almost simultaneously by different people these ideas were part of the Zeitgeist of the 1930s and 1940s SF.