Rating: 5/5

I am so glad that I got a chance to read this book. This novel was chosen by my teacher for us to read for an assignment. I should be working on the assignment right now, but it's been awhile since I wrote a book review. I loved this book so much and I am relieved to have read another book. I'm in a huge reading slump and this book might've gotten me out of it. I learned so many things and it was easy to relate to.

 
  "Yet those Sundays, when I was seven, marked the beginning of my exile from the world I loved." 

 In Sri Lanka, there is conflict between the Tamils and the Sinhalese. Arjie is a boy who is Tamil and lives with his family in Sri Lanka. As he grows up, he realizes his sexuality and the state of his country. This novel shows the racism in Sri Lanka, the violent acts that took place and shows the perspective of an innocent family. Throughout this book, there were many themes that were brought up, which include gender roles, sexuality, coming of age, discrimination and many more.

 
  "Society is not as forgiving as a sister."

 This is a serious topic that hasn't been getting a lot of attention. As a Tamil myself, I haven't heard a lot about the genocide that is taking place in Sri Lanka. My mother was born at a very late time during the genocide and she hasn't told me much about it. I don't want to press on the topic because it may have been painful for her to relive her experiences. I have asked a couple of questions and she told me that most of the time, her family was on the run, from one place to another, to avoid being harmed by the Sinhalese. It's sad to see two different races fight over power.

 The characters were great, I loved the main character a lot. Arjie is different from the others and it is because of his sexuality. He doesn't realize this at first, but he is more aware of it later on. He loves dressing up and playing with dolls. But society will not accept him because he will turn out to be 'funny'. Sonali is a sweet sister who supports Arjie on all of his decisions. Diggy is a boy who likes to fit in with society and is trying to look out for his brother, even though he is a little forceful and selfish at times.

 A lot of characters in this book had horrible fates, it was very sad to see them go through the things they did. Marriages were mostly based on parents's opinions and their choices. A lot of people were racist, rather than looking at the person for their personality, a lot of people judged the person for their race. Sexuality is another factor that is forced upon everyone. In this society, they believe that being gay isn't normal. It is unbelievable, yet it is still taking place in present day. Marriages are supposed to be between Tamil people only and being gay isn't normal. We are slowly moving to accept everybody's differences, but it is taking awhile. I don't know why we can't just live and think about everyone as human beings, instead of treating a different race or a different sexuality as something weird and make a person feel alienated for who they are. 

 Sometimes, I have conversations with my mom because I am interested to hear her opinion. She didn't understand what homosexual meant. She didn't know that there were different types of sexualities. I told her everything I knew and explained how it wasn't wrong to be gay. And my mom finally understands and it's nice to see that she accepts it. My other relatives have yet to accept this but I am going to try my hardest to raise more awareness on this topic.

 I want to learn more about what is going on in Sri Lanka because I am a Tamil. I should know about my background country. I went to Sri Lanka last year and I noticed that most of the signs, shops and people were Sinhalese. There were times when my family members were told not to go outside because there were riots. I didn't understand what was going on and when I asked questions, they were never answered.

 I loved this book, even though it was heartbreaking. It forces you to see reality and how the world really is. It shows the struggles of people who want to marry a different race or of being different. The writing style was beautiful and I hated stopping in the middle of the book. I hope to read more by Shyam Selvadurai and am so glad he wrote this book.

 

 I hope to write another review soon, so I'll see ya later!