Rating: 4/5

Vonda N. McIntyre's "The Crystal Star" pits the beloved characters of the original "Star Wars" films into an interesting and socially important situation. In doing so, it elevates the book out of the simple space opera genre and into the realm of socially-conscious science fiction. Not that other novels in the Star Wars Expanded Universe haven't made attempts at poignancy and relevance to current events. "The Crystal Star" just does it in a rather blatant way.

That McIntyre's novel is clearly written for a young adult audience is both weirdly appropriate and disturbing. Nevertheless, the book still manages to be entertaining, and it still captures the spirit of "Star Wars". 

The issue the novel deals with is human trafficking and the contemporary slave trade, an issue that is as hot-button today as it was when McIntyre first published this book (1994), but one that rarely receives much attention in mainstream media and by our nation's leaders. McIntyre is clearly aware of the lack of thought and interest by politicians, journalists, and everyday citizens of this issue, and she does not hide her harsh criticism of them in the novel.

The book starts with a violent kidnapping of the three children of Princess Leia and Han Solo. Leia, the President of the New Republic, is involved in trade negotiations, while Han and Luke are off on a mission in another star system. The children are being watched by Chewbacca, who is severely injured in the attack that precedes the kidnapping.

Leia stops the negotiations to find her children, jetting off in her personal starship Alderaan with Chewbacca and R2-D2. Her investigation leads her to a fleet of ships long-forgotten in a desolate part of space. The ships contain cryogenically-frozen slaves deposited there by the Empire, left to die. When she resurrects some of the slaves, she discovers---to her horror---that the slave trade is still going on, long after the Empire fell, and has been going on all along under the noses of her and the other leaders of the New Republic. She discovers a secret conspiracy of New Republic politicians who have been profiting from this slave trade, most of whom are secretly planning a coup of Leia and a rebuilding of the Empire.

Across the galaxy, Han and Luke are discovering the same thing, completely unaware of what is happening to Leia and the children. Their investigation of a space station near a rare crystal star discovers a growing "cult" led by a former Imperial officer named Hethrir, who has been stealing children across the galaxy for his personal plan to resurrect the Empire and place himself in the role of the new Emperor. He attempts to do this with the help of a powerful alien entity named Waru, which apparently has the ability to heal the sick and the injured, but also has the ability to drain the Force from others.

All the while, the children---twins Jaina and Jacen, and toddler Annakin---must use their own resources and powers of the Force to escape their prison and rescue the hundreds of other children that have been kidnapped.

McIntyre tells an exciting and action-packed story, but her social commentary about a very important issue makes this one of the better Star Wars novels.