Rating: 3/5

Scarecrows lend themselves to horror —Just look at the name— and the remoteness of the countryside/a farm (where scarecrows are most likely to be found) makes the setting an ideal one.

All that to say that R.L. Stine had a good premise here before he even wrote the plot. Jodie and Mark, twelve and eleven year-old siblings respectively, are visiting their grandparents' farm. It’s a summer tradition that they look forward to every year, but this year there’s something wrong.

So far so good; Stine does a good job establishing an eerie atmosphere early on — Stanley’s obsession with superstitions, Jodie’s suspicions, Mark and Stick’s pranks, the false alarms, etc.— but the eventual climax is pretty lackluster (and predictable). 

I know it’s the title, but the scarecrows literally don’t do anything but walk. Couldn’t there have been something more specific they were doing or wanted (e.g. rule the farm, make scarecrows out of the humans, etc.)?

Also, why would they think Mark was their leader?

And if Stanley didn’t know that some of the scarecrows were still awake, why did he, at the beginning, tell Jodie that they walk at midnight? Either he should’ve known they were awake and was still actively using them to keep the grandparents in line (but the scarecrows later turn against him), or Stick shouldn’t have known they were awake.

On that note, it’s too obvious early on that Stanley and his book are going to be responsible for the walking scarecrows. As effective as the book’s spooky vibe is, how much better would it have been had Stanley not been going around advertising his superstitions book and instead was just reading it and mumbling all the time? 

Furthermore, why hadn’t Stick burned the scarecrows earlier, especially since he was apparently the only person who knew they were awake?

The ending is great, except for the nagging question, “Why wasn’t Stanley’s book immediately confiscated after burning the scarecrows?”

Ultimately, it feels like Stine had a great premise by default, but just didn’t bother to do anything substantial or unique with it.