Rating: 2/5

I'm mystified by how there could be a lot learned about art from this first book in this series, but there is a flavor of what kind of traveling and people and art institutions are involved in the selling of art and in the scrum of public display by museums. Everything is introduced a bit bubbly and brief. The characters are a little silly. There is a murder and a short life-and-death tussle which feels peculiar given the light touch throughout, but it is serious for only a page or two. 

English art student Jonathan Argyll is obsessed with art and making a name for himself, but he's kind of a Jimmy Stewart comedy idiot in follow-through. Generale Taddeo Bottando is the chubby chief of the Italian National Art Theft Squad, or 'Bottando's Brothel', so-called because eight of the ten researchers he employs are women. He loves art and he works closely with police, museum security and other countries' art agencies. He is not tough or cynical, and he appears to be most comfortable with routine and white collar criminals and the educated upper class. Flavia di Stefano is one of the 'Brothel' and a favorite, being good at her job. 

Argyll is in pursuit of a Raphael rumored to be hidden under the work of another painter who intentionally covered over the more valuable painting by Raphael with his own landscape in order to avoid Italian taxes and fees upon sending the supposedly less valuable painting out of the country. Bottando and Flavia are given the task to find out what Argyll is up to when his quest appears to concern various museums and art dealers in England and Italy in a bad way. Argyll strikes them as slightly squirrelly, but not criminal; however they continue to monitor and question him. Eventually, the department realizes they can't discount Argyll's theories entirely - and the paintings, as it seems two Raphael's may be involved, and one or both could be forgeries. The mystery chase is on!  The ending was a twist involving an original Raphael having been painted over by another, less important, painter, which then, sadly, centuries later, the same painted over Raphael painting was painted over again by a painter faking a Raphael, unaware he had destroyed the original Raphael underneath in preparing the ancient canvas for his forgery. Whew! 

I'm not really a fan of these characters, but it's a light entertainment of some interest. There is a crisp omniscient point of view that describes characters' actions and feelings with the same arch humor that P. G. Wodehouse used, which makes his books such a delight. However, if this was a movie, I'd say the director used too quick of scene frame cuts in the conversational action. Perhaps the author was being so conservative with words for comic effect and to develop the series' voice, but I needed to reread chapters to make sure I understood what had happened.