Rating: 1/5

Reading this book is the first novel you have the absolute proof where you can confidently say, “Stephen King is now a typical middle aged author”. Because he uses the plot device they all use. 

Love between older man and young woman. And every aspect of it is such a silly middle aged fantasy that is almost pathetic to read. The character in the book is a stand-in for King at that moment in his life. He is above 40, rich for writing popular novels, which so far is nothing new for King’s characters, but here he also has a wife which seems to be like his real life wife, but in this book, she dies. Not divorced, the character doesn’t have an affair, just his perfect wife from his perfect marriage dying, so that King through his character can comfortably engage in his fantasy without feelings of guilt or complicating it.

And the object of attraction isn’t just a younger woman, it’s a very young woman who if I remember correctly was 20 or 21, but when the book introduces her she apparently looks even younger, as young as a teenager, but middle aged man can’t comfortably fantasize about fucking 16 years old, but it is perfectly harmless for them to want to fuck a 20 year old who looks 16.

Notice how nicely the fantasy is being laid. Married man doesn’t have be guilty about his feelings, because he loved his wife and she is now dead and probably would want him to continue living life. The girl is young, looks young, but isn’t illegally young. And from here, the rest should be obvious . The girl is in trouble and has a small child, so the man isn’t just going after a horny college student, no, the man is helping a poor single mom, whose husband has also died young (and who we learn is the only person the girl has had sex with, so as virgin as they come without being a virgin). And most of all, the man is an absolute gentleman when it comes to the girl. He keeps his distance, respects her, helps her, is absolutely wonderful with her little girl, and the young woman has to BEG him to fuck her. 

I’ve not talked much about the actual story, because it’s not really important. All we need to know is that this is a purely King fantasy, and I almost felt awkward reading it, because I felt like it should have remained in King’s head when he lies at night and looks at his wife snoring and starts to wonder…