Rating: 4/5

First off, I want to mention that this book was co-written by Crispin and Kathleen O'Malley, even though the latter is not mentioned on the cover (or even on the 2015 re-issue by Titan Books). A lot of people do not like the movie ALIEN RESURRECTION, but ever since I saw in it November 1997 I always thought it paid homage to the Dark Horse Comics that preceded it. And I still do, even more so now that I have just come off reading every single comic and novelization.

The influences are apparent in the Ripley clone, struggling with her inhumanity and the memories of the original Ripley's life, a concept introduced in Steve Perry's 
  Aliens: The Female War
. Then there's the space station Auriga where scientists are conducting secrets experiments to re-create the xenomorphs, much like in Aliens: Rogue and Aliens: Labyrinth. There is even a scene where a dying man impregnated by an chestburster clutches the scientist (Dr. Wren) responsible for his death as the xenomorph emerges from his chest and kills the scientist at the same time, a scene straight out of 
  Aliens: Outbreak
. Not to mention the mercenary crew delivery some human victims to the station, unknowing of the dark and sinister experiments that are going on, and then having to cross the station after the aliens escape to get back to their ship

The. influences are there, and Joss Wheden interweaved all the elements together in a simple story, placing it over 200 years after Ripley's death on Fiorina 161 (named Fiori 16 in the script), and ends on Earth which had never been seen in any of the preceding movies (aside from orbit from Gateway Station in ALIENS). There is also the concept of a mutated Alien Queen giving birth to a "Newborn" which is a mix of Alien and Human DNA. ok, that last part I always thought was the silly part.

Cripsin and O'Mally expertly write a gripping adaptation, creating motivations for the characters and events at every turn, and describing a lot of gruesome deaths from the dying characters' perspective. That part made me feel uneasy. Also, the book includes words in bold type, a concept that I haven't seen a lot of in a paperback novel. The words and sentences in bold mainly represent quotes from the past or words that are shouted out by the characters. The authors did a lot of research on the previous three movies, as there are several quotes and scenes from them as Ripley's genetic memories of her original host come back to her. For example, Ripley remembers her fondness and attachment to her daughter Amy, and to the girl Newt and those memories help to motivate her in situations where she is almost loosing her humanity.

Highly recommended, even though it lacks the visual imagery of director Jean-Pierre Jeunet, this novelization displays other talents of quality writing. Even if you hate the movie, this book will probably make you like it a lot more.