Rating: 5/5

Marcovaldo is a book that I read for the first time when I was 8 years old and then, at intervals of about 10 years, I have always gladly reread. I would say that it is therefore a book that has marked my career as a reader. At the age of 8, I saw things there, which although not the ones that hit me when I matured, remained impressed and I still feel them today. Calvino is a writer of the rare ones, of those who write profound and timeless stories, but with the style of fairy tales, so that his books can be read by both children and adults, sure that both will like them and sure at the same time that they will see different things, but always important and above all always current, just like all the books of the great writers. The issues that Calvino deals with are the hectic and dehumanizing life of the city, urbanization without rationality, without control, without order, growing industrialization and at the same time the poverty of the lower sections of the population, the difficulty of human relationships, all themes still very valid today. The complete title is "Marcovaldo, or the seasons in the city" and speaks of a common man, a worker from a city that is never said (but in those years the working city par excellence was Turin) who works for a company called SBAV, we will never know producer of what. Marcovaldo is in this urban context, but he is a Dreamer, one who observes the typical objects of the city but sees other things in them: the traffic lights, the billboards, the posters, the windows for him are other things, and instead the small manifestations of nature in the city attract him like magnets: the skinny birds, the dried leaves, an ant, an earthworm, a mushroom under a tree, for him are the signs that the seasons change and are the reason for great internal reasoning, which often lead him to reflect on his desires and his miseries. An ante-litteram Fantozzi, a non-adapted in the modern world, victim of everything and who therefore becomes in the eyes of the reader a loser, an anti-hero, or a hero like the Charlot of Modern Times. Marcovaldo's adventures are surreal, but always contain an element of reality; reality that is always the initial element of each chapter, that is Marcovaldo observes the change of seasons in the atmospheric signals and in the very small signs of animal and vegetable life that the city allows to survive and from there he starts with his dreams of a return to Nature, to then be unfailingly disappointed. It is certainly a melancholy book, just like Fantozzi's films and Charlot's stories. But it is also a humorous book, which uses humor to make you want to read the story to the end, to make you smile a little, but above all to reflect. Marcovaldo in his own way is a poet, bewildered, out of this world, but he is a poet: he tells us ecological poems, very current after fifty years, when for example he describes the beauty of the starry sky to his children, blinded instead by the intrusive luminous signs of the city, or as when, happy as a child, he tells us about the snowfall in the city. And Calvino (a true precursor of the times) also finds a way to insert the theme of DIY health cures, so current today, when in the episode "The care of the wasps" he describes us a Marcovaldo who discovered how to treat his rheumatism with bee venom and who, improvised as a doctor, instructs all his children to catch as many as possible wasps and to put them in some jars, until his son breaks one and all of them end up in hospital for the bites. A book that for me was, and is, a milestone.