Rating: 3/5

My first taste of Ellis Peters (Edith Pargeter) turned out to be an enjoyable foray in countryside Shrewsbury, England, where people suddenly turned up dead in front of a huge and mysterious door with a scary myth surrounding it...

Peters was most renowned for her medieval murder mystery series starring Brother Cadfael, but this one was set in modern contemporary setting, albeit with strong flavour of medieval folklore and religious heritage. The investigator character was policeman George Felse, but honestly I couldn't say much about him based on this title alone. He's basically a stolid experienced man without personality quirk or something that makes him stand out among iconic fictional detectives, and in the climax/revelation scene he wasn't even present, though he did lay a crucial trap to ensnare the culprit. In general, the most memorable character moments came from the local residents of Mottisham, with a stiff and rather dysfunctional family at the centre of intrigue. 
 
(mild spoiler on character/case development onward)

The cases were pretty simple compared to your usual detective fiction trickery; there's no Rube Goldberg-ian shenanigan, and after the investigators figured out the why (which was fairly clever), the path to the solution was straightforward enough. From a certain middle point of the story, the culprit was very predictable to me; but I didn't mind as it led to a satisfying outcome. There were some peripheral characters that could've been fleshed out more though (I was kinda surprised that the bishop didn't play a bigger role, for instance), as while there's a good number of named characters, the pool of serious suspects itself was noticeably small.

Just as important as the murder mystery, there's character drama, which I'd say was the book's main strength. The intrepid young woman, Dinah, became an increasingly important character as she's entangled into the family secrets of her lover, and there's also another romantic sub-plot involving her brother. The matchmaking played out like the romance in some of Agatha Christie's mysteries—which is to say, enjoyable, subtle, and even subversive. The emotionally charged climax might be the best scene in the entire book, where Peters completely succeeded in making me sympathize with certain character and despise certain other the way she intended to. 

To recap: good character work, predictable but enjoyable mystery, and good doses of local flavor that certainly enticed me to get even more taste of Peters' works.