Rating: 1/5

For 2020, I decided to reread (in publication order) all the Bantam-era Star Wars books that were released between 1991 and 1999; that shakes out to 38 adult novels and 5 anthologies of short stories &amp; novellas.

This week’s focus: The Crystal Star by Vonda N. McIntyre.

SOME HISTORY:

Vonda N. McIntyre’s most lasting contribution to science fiction will probably be Dreamsnake, her 1978 novel that won both the Hugo and the Nebula Award. She also wrote a number of Star Trek novels in the 1980s, so it’s no wonder that Bantam contracted her for a Star Wars book. However, The Crystal Star was released in December of 1994, and it didn’t do suuuuper well. Crystal Star made it to number eight on the New York Times bestseller list for the week of November 27, 1994; it was ultimately on the NYT list for two weeks. 

MY RECOLLECTION OF THE BOOK:

I remembered very little of this book. That was clearly a conscious choice on my part; after reading this, I’m not sure how much I WANT to remember.

PRINCESS LEIA COSTUME CHANGE COUNT:

When her children are initially kidnapped, Leia changes from fancy robes into a tunic/leggings look. And as the bounty hunter Lelila, she wears intense purple eyeshadow and puts streaks in her hair. I lied earlier about remembering nothing from this book; I definitely remember the hair dye wriggling through her hair.

A BRIEF SUMMARY:

Princess Leia’s children are kidnapped! She and Chewbacca chase after the kidnappers, and are the most method of method actors. Meanwhile, Han Solo, Luke Skywalker, and a purple C-3PO head to Crseih Station in search of weird goings-on or potential Jedi or something.

THE CHARACTERS:

Despite his prominent position on the cover, Luke does not play an important role in this book. In fact, you could have eliminated him from the story very easily. He tags along with Han on the trip to Crseih or Asylum Station, acts weird, quickly falls under Waru’s sway, and is willing to die?? Not to mention that instead of adopting a disguise like Han’s beard or Threepio’s purple paint job, he just uses the Force to look like a different person. Why would you do this? It seems like such a waste of power, and surely the old Jedi would have pulled this trick all the time.

Han is grumpy and gets drunk a lot. He’s very distrustful of Luke. That’s it, that’s his subplot. He also has this weird exchange with Luke in the beginning, where he says that it’s perfectly fine for him to flirt with other people. I suppose this is foreshadowing that we’re going to run into one of his exes over the course of the story, but it’s a weird attitude for him to adopt. He’s not jealous like he was in The Courtship of Princess Leia or even Dark Apprentice, he’s just a grouch.

After discovering that her children have been kidnapped offworld, Leia immediately takes off in pursuit of them. Which is great! I totally accept that she would drop everything and chase down the people who hurt her family, mama bear style--especially when you remember that her planet was destroyed by the Empire, and her family is all she has left. But whether to raise suspense or keep us guessing, McIntyre writes from Leia’s point of view in a disjointed way. In the first chapter, her children are gone--her children are gone--the bomb--her children! She almost starts to sound whiny, and I don’t think that was McIntyre’s intention at all.

Leia also assumes the identity of Lelila, a bounty hunter. She goes all into this role. When she is the bounty hunter, she refers to herself as Lelila, and Leia as a separate person. This was really weird, and I’m not quite sure what the point was.

So we have Han’s viewpoint for the Crseih Station arc, and Leia’s for the tracking down the kidnappers arc. Since we need to know what’s happening to the children, McIntyre writes from both Jaina Solo’s viewpoint, as well as from Tigris, a preteen working for the villain. 

Jaina is five years old. Frankly, her internal narration as well as the things she accomplished seemed far beyond anything that a five year old is capable of, but I accepted it. (At least she had more to do than in some of the Del Rey books, where all the authors could think to do with her was to give her endless boyfriend troubles!). Jaina is curious and brave, and like her mother, she doesn’t settle for just rescuing her brother. No, Jaina rescues all the children in space slavery! 

Tigris is not as interesting. He’s manipulated by Hethrir, and unable to see it. 

The villains are...meh. Hethrir is your typical Force-sensitive, wants to resurrect the Empire type. Waru is a giant gold-scaled blob of viscous stuff. He’s from another dimension, or another galaxy, or something. He’s formed a cult? There’s probably a kernel of something interesting there, regarding cults and healing versus the threat of not healing, but since he’s a blob of golden jelly it’s hard for me to take him seriously.

ISSUES:

I can sort of see what McIntyre was going for with the child slavery plot line--the New Republic has outlawed slavery, but it can be hard to see beyond your own borders--but the execution is not great.

Sometimes Star Wars media take the concept of a “galaxy far far away” too far: instead of glass, we have to use “transparisteel.” Instead of elevators, they ride in “turbolifts.” But persistent Earth-isms can be just as off-putting, and there’s a lot in this book. People eat cookies. A child is described as being a centaur. Now, I’m not doubting the existence of centaur-like aliens in the SW universe--Mos Eisley cantina alone had a wolfman and a devil man--but it felt weird to outright call her a centaur or “centauriform.”

Xaverri is interesting--how easily she fell into Waru’s cult, but how she’s also able to see the bad parts of it--but her backstory is depicted in the lightest of strokes. She had a family taken from her by the Empire; now she scams them. There’s not a lot to go on, and A.C. Crispin will use that to her advantage in the The Han Solo Trilogy.

Force things: Hethrir has the ability to dampen the Solo children’s Force abilities. However, they are able to get around it by manipulating molecules to make light and moving grains of sand or insects. How does this work? Is this a common skill? Does this require special training? (We are never told!)

Similarly, Luke and other Force-sensitive individuals on Crseih Station are not just unable to use the Force, but feel very sick. This is very different from the effect that the ysalamiri create, which seems to be a Force-less bubble with no adverse health effects. Apparently this is because of the resonance of the crystal star, but it’s just one more unexplained weird Force thing.

And the other Force users we encounter in this book are the opposite of subtle. We know that Hethrir is bad because he suppresses the alien children’s abilities, and sells them into slavery, and wants to restart the Empire! Meanwhile, his former lover Rillao is good because she can only use the Force to heal and to soothe. For once, I would love for the bad guy to be a Force healer; how could they use the Force to injure and worsen conditions? That would be fascinating! But alas, we have not yet reached that level of nuance and are stuck in a very black-and-white view of the Force.

The ending is atrocious. Waru needs to consume a powerful Force user to be able to return to his dimension or what have you. Luke begs for Waru to kill him! He dives into his golden viscous jelly. Leia dives in after him. Han dives in after the two of them! They are almost lost! The only thing that makes them regain their senses are the children yelling “Come back! Come back!”

NO.

IN CONCLUSION:

I love some of McIntyre’s other novels, but The Crystal Star is just bizarre. Very little from it is carried over to other stories, so I think you could skip it during your own 90s Star Wars reread and not even notice its absence.

Next up: the first in the Corellian Trilogy, Ambush at Corellia by Roger MacBride Allen.

My YouTube review: https://youtu.be/wipwdCjNf6g