Rating: 5/5

I first read this book many years ago, and it was one of the first books I reviewed on Goodreads. I therefore felt it was time for a re-read and a new review. Child of the Morning is Pauline Gedge’s debut novel, written way back in 1977. If you’re more familiar with her later works, such as the Lords of the Two Lands trilogy, published in 1998, or the King’s Man trilogy, published in 2007, you will probably notice a difference here. There is a definite sense of lack of polish compared to the books she wrote after this one. And it isn’t that her signature creative flair and linguistic mastery is missing – it shines through here, strong as ever. If I had to put the lack of polish down to a root cause, it would be the magnitude of the book’s subject: Hatshepsut. Gedge has written truly excellent standalone novels in her time, but in this case Hatshepsut really does seem like too big of a subject to take on in one book, because the pacing is a little off here. We get too many significant time skips for my liking, leaping ahead by several years in certain places. Gedge covers it very well through her lavish descriptions which set the scene and bring us up to speed without feeling too rushed, but nevertheless I think the story probably could have been improved if Hatshepsut’s story had been extended over more books/pages.

One thing that is necessary in order to properly review this book, and yet something which does not affect its final score at all, is its historical accuracy. Regular readers may be puzzled, since I usually factor in historical accuracy. But the fact of the matter is, in the fifty years since Child of the Morning was published our knowledge about Hatshepsut has come on a great deal, and I can hardly penalise an author for historical inaccuracy when new discoveries are made after their book released. Nevertheless, it’s worth noting what Egyptologists have overturned, for the reader curious about how well Gedge’s book matches up. The biggest change is that we now know that Djehutymes III didn’t try to erase Hatshepsut from history until near the end of his 32-year solo reign, and that Hatshepsut probably died of natural causes, rather than being murdered. The implication is that aunt and nephew did not have a combative relationship as previously thought, but that Hatshepsut’s erasure was an impersonal decision, either related to the Egyptian concept of ma’at or an attempt to secure the throne of a line of kings repeatedly born from concubines over the past three generations. Another caveat is that Gedge relies on the overturned Heiress Theory to explain some of the character dynamics between Hatshepsut and her brother-husband Djehutymes II, and Hatshepsut’s daughters with Djehutymes III. This was the hypothesis that although ancient Egypt had male monarchs, the right to rule was carried in the female line and thus pharaohs had to marry their sister in order to take the throne. Donald Redford debunked this in the 1980s, although it clings like a miasma to the general public’s imagination.

What’s particularly interesting about this book is that even though it engages in some well-worn Hatshepsut story devices (partly due to outdated research, which can’t be helped), it rarely feels tropey. Child of the Morning has Hatshepsut and her nephew at odds, and Senmut as her lover, and goodness knows I’ve read plenty of Hatshepsut novels with those clichés that just came across as low effort and hammy. Why doesn’t this book? It’s because even though it uses the same base authorial choice, Gedge keeps it fresh by adding human depth or by twisting the trope on its head. Even as Hatshepsut and Djehutymes III are hostile to one another, it is an undercurrent beneath a frequently cordial relationship, one where mutual admiration exists: Hatshepsut is not the evil stepmother greedily stealing her nephew’s throne, but merely has the confidence to claim what is hers, while wistfully wishing that Djehutymes III had been born her son and heir, and refusing to let him topple her ahead of due time. I’ve criticised the romance between Hatshepsut and Senmut in Libbie Hawker’s Sovereign of Stars not so much because it is a cliché, but because it layers the clichés by having them fall in love at first sight as teenagers and makes Neferure the product of the affair. The romance between Hatshepsut and Senmut in Child of the Morning is more well-formed; it does not happen at first sight, and even when attraction kicks in later it isn’t consummated for many, many years, with both characters adhering to the sensibilities of their roles and other relationships, until they are older and freer. In other places, the book outright bucks the tropes: Neferu-bity doesn’t die because she is fragile, but because she is poisoned, and arguably the same thing happens to Neferure. Hatshepsut and her brother-husband Djehutymes II have a genuine desire for one another, alongside their rivalry.

What truly stands out about Child of the Morning, however, is the quality of its writing and story-telling. I was struck by the ratio of description to dialogue, and noticed that other Hatshepsut books I’ve read spend much more time on dialogue and much less time on description. Often, I’ve struggled with ancient Egyptian novels failing to bring ancient Egypt to life; they don’t devote enough time (or possibly do enough research) to setting a scene that vividly renders the exotic and alien culture. Such novels seem to frequently misunderstand the attitudes and values of the time, and feel as if they are set in the modern day. Pauline Gedge not only lavishes page spaces on the environment, but uses incredibly creative metaphors to hold the attention and write descriptions that are unusual and fresh.

  “The night folded around them with a sweetness and poignancy heightened by the new pale stars that prickled silver fire in the water of the lily ponds, by the scented winds, and by the nearness of each other.”

“Her belt was silver, also, as were her sandals, and while in the afternoon brightness she had glittered and flashed like the Sun Himself, tonight she glowed dully, coldly, the moon at the full. Senmut, utterly out of his depth, was afraid.”

In contrast to many, Gedge seems to know her subject intimately, to understand the social attitudes of her characters and the environment through which they moved, shaping and being shaped by it in turn. She also has a keen ability to create vital characters who are not merely names on a page but possess human complexity and fascinating nuance and ambiguity. Not once does she rely on character stupidity to explain a plot twist, make a character do something out-of-character, or fail to provide clear and believable motivation to their actions.

Child of the Morning may lack a little polish, perhaps a little something to be desired in its pacing, but right from Gedge’s debut her genius as an author is evidence: her linguistic skill and inventiveness, her deft portrayal of human characters, and her cognizance of a distant time and place that is at once strange and familiar. 

9 out of 10