Zola had a very structured technique for the industrial production of novels, he would decide on where the action would take place and who the principal characters would be Les Rougon-Macquart gave him a family tree and a glorious mess of hereditary tendencies and illnesses to work within, the setting would be interrogated thoroughly and mined out. In researching Germinal Zola visited a coal mine and was intrigued by the big strong horses working underground - how, he asked, did the mine company get the big horse down the narrow lift shaft? The answer, inevitably, is the cruel one, little foals go in, but don't come out. That reality is the undercoat to the novel that Zola stamps into being - to mix metaphors horribly in a tragic mining accident of writing  I'll observe a minute's silence at some point for butchering my own sentences. 

A man arrives and finds work in a mining village in Northern France during the time of the French 2nd Empire. The existence of the miners is hard, they sleep in the beds in shifts, youngsters make love where they can, families struggle with every penny to keep body and soul together. Even the countryside comes across as bare and bleak.

The mine manager observes the youngsters having sex where-ever they can in the countryside with a certain jealousy. Despite their lack of sexual inhibitions the mining families are desperate and envious of the comforts and security they imagine the professional class above them enjoys. 

Then there is a strike and things really start to get bad. Nobody was happy before, nor will anybody be afterwards. Thank goodness we can read this in the glorious times of the fifth Republic and that structural inequalities no longer exist, and Liberty, equality and fraternity constitute the basic realities of all lives and no foals are lowered down mine shafts.

This is part of Zola's major series showing the influences of hereditary and environment, however it can be read and enjoyed as a free standing novel.

One of the problems though about setting novels in the recent past is that with the end of Empire  at least in France, outside of France empire went on  is that it can be argued that Zola sought to spice them up with sensationalist acts of violence and sex  or all three combined  then again, these are novels - not reportage despite Zola's writing technique.