Rating: 5/5

If we were to give credence to the claim that Terry Brooks' work is derivative—a refrain I don't find unreasonable, having read The Sword of Shannara and noting its similarities to Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, but think is nonetheless tired—then perhaps there was no better author to adapt someone else's work; their ideas, their characters.

Their galaxy...

And in adapting George Lucas's The Phantom Menace, Brooks hit it right outta the park.

The Phantom Menace novelization is the best of any movie novelization I've ever read. It was so much better than I could've ever expected or hoped for.

Not enough credit is given to Terry Brooks as a writer. His skill gets largely overshadowed by the criticism mentioned above. But he has a natural way of stringing words together, creating sentences that flow so easily, often beautifully.

The way he described podracing was a joy to read. He managed to keep the pace of those high-velocity scenes quick and exhilarating while taking time to show how Anakin saw the world. I hadn't really considered the advantage different aliens had in podracing; whether it be extra limbs, particular flexibility, better-developed eyesight—whatever—would make them likelier participants for the sport, and how unique it was for Anakin to even attempt it. And once he's in his pod, with the rocky landscape speeding by, both it and his competitors posing dangers to him on all sides, Brooks' description of Anakin's innate Force-sensitivity, allowing him to feel his surroundings and anticipate them, was simply marvelous.

Unlike the movie, the novelization has one additional podracing scene, at the very beginning. We read about the mentioned incident of Anakin smashing up Watto's pod, and his losing. I can understand why this wasn't in the movie; having one major racing sequence, everything riding on its results, makes for better onscreen momentum.

But in text, as expertly depicted by Brooks, the extra race was a delight.

Being a novelization, however, there are added scenes that don't work, specifically Maul's arrival on Naboo just before the climax. I didn't need him to check in with the Neimoidians to tell them he was there. No matter how they cowered in his presence, the less Maul is shown and says is better; it makes him all the more imposing, and the surprise of this scene more iconic.

I'm not sure what material Brooks was given to adapt this story, outside of the script. Did he write his pre-, during, or post-production? Did he see any of the film before writing this, or did he not have that benefit? Did he get a screener copy pre-release, or did he see it in theaters like the rest of us?

Whatever it was, the result shows that Brooks has immaculate media literacy. He understood every character and their motivation, giving their words and reactions weight aligned with their unique circumstances. 

When Anakin had to leave Shmi, Brooks knew it was an impossible choice for a little boy to have to make. It was not only being separated from his mother, but leaving her behind to remain trapped in slavery, now alone. He wrote Anakin as understanding that, despite being so young, and it setup his later struggle with the Jedi—that he would have to leave his mother in the worst possible conditions to train with them, to learn about the basic mysteries of himself. It's cruel, and only allowed to happen because of Shmi's selflessness. Her life made her no stranger to injustices; this was just another.

It haunts Anakin. It haunts me. If the movie's depiction could make me cry, reading this had me sobbing.

Suffice it to say, this novelization was a resounding success! I'd recommend it to any Star Wars fan, maybe especially those pesky prequel haters. If George Lucas's take didn't work for them, maybe Terry Brooks' will.