Rating: 2/5

I’m more inclined to recommend individual stories out of E. Annie Proulx’s Close Range as opposed to the whole book. Every story is set in Wyoming (as is noted by the book’s subtitle). This makes for an interesting dynamic as the reader already has an idea of what Wyoming is like and a setting description given in one story can bleed over into the others. The most famous story is now “Brokeback Mountain” because nothing promotes a book like the movie. (For the record, “Brokeback Mountain” is one of the book’s best.) It chronicles a love affair between two cowboys over a twenty-year period. “The Half-Skinned Steer” was in John Updike’s Best American Short Stories of the Century, which makes me realize that, at this point, I usually like authors John Updike likes (as well as his work), but I usually disagree with the stories he picks. My pick from Close Range is “A Lonely Coast.” It has one of the best symbolic hooks I’ve read:

You ever see a house burning up in the night, way to hell and gone out there on the plains? Nothing but blackness and your headlights cutting a little wedge into it, could be the middle of the ocean for all you can see. And in that big dark a crown of flame the size of your thumbnail trembles. You’ll drive for an hour seeing it until it burns out or you do, until you pull off the road to close your eyes or look up at sky punched with bullet holes. And you might think about the people in the burning house, see them trying for the stairs, but mostly you don’t give a damn. They are too far away like everything else. 

The year I lived in that junk trailer in the Crazy Woman Creek drainage I thought Josanna Skiles was like that, the house on fire in the night that you could only watch. 

One of Proulx’s strengths is her word use. Either she’ll conjugate a word in a new or uncommon way or she’ll use a common word in an uncommon way. As a whole, the writing just feels right and there’s no need to run to the dictionary every page. She’s not abusing her lexicon just to sound smart. With that said, these obscure uses are not enough to keep the reader interested until the next word juke. Additionally, there’s a similarity to the stories (yeah, I know, they’re all about Wyoming and that style of life), but not in a good way. Often times, I found myself at the end of the page, realizing I didn’t absorb any of it, and was unwilling to go back and try again. Still, the stories that hit, hit well. Then again, maybe John Updike has a different opinion. Two stars.