Rating: 4/5

Rating: 4* of five

Perfectly wicked little jeu d'esprit; I absolutely can not imagine a corporeal Poirot putting up with such a rosbif as Arthur Hastings! I can hear Dame Ags gagging behind her typewriter every time he says something else dimwitted:
“Enemies! People these days don't have enemies! Not English people!”
–and–
“But she seemed like a thoroughly nice girl!” said of a suspect who is found dead of an overdose
I know she created Hastings as a foil for the too-clever Poirot to explain himself to, but it's about this time we begin to see the poor chap sent off to the Argentine to be married more often. I don't recall which was his final appearance (before Curtain), but I get the feeling he was for the chop as he bumbles and mumbles his way through one of Poirot's more annoying-to-him puzzles. At every step, poor old Belgian, he is positive he knows who did what to whom. Then they die! He is up and down the ladder of clues. He was right, wasn't he, every step of his reasoning? And yes, it is really necessary to have Hastings to narrate. Anything else would be unbearably precious. 

And precious is not the word for this story. Wickedly astute. Mordantly amusing. Casually anti-Semitic and deeply unimpressed by Americans. But never twee.

So when it suddenly popped into my Overdrive queue, I leapt upon it like the lion upon the chamois. Gorged my weary, twitching eyes on the feast of unrepentant bourgeois snobbery and ridiculous prejudice. Battened on the clearly experienced writer's unsparing judgment of actors, of opportunists and wheeler-dealers, of the mildly amusing ways they have of trying to drag Our Sort down with their vulgar dollars and scents. (That joke will be *gold* after you've read the book.)

And Lord Edgware? Good riddance to bad rubbish. I was almost, almost sorry the killer didn't get away with it; had it not involved the collateral damage it did, I'd've said, "let sleeping dogs lie," and gone about my day. Ma'at must be preserved, though. Dame Agatha knew best.

Agatha Christie's Poirot season 7, episode 2: Lord Edgware Dies

Rating: 4.5* of five

A fairly faithful adaptation of the story that, but for a late-act solution to a problem handled quite differently, runs along the amusing rails laid down in the novel. A few other things are different for some actually interesting reasons...the seriously dull Donald (!) is a playwright not an actor and it really improves that little thread, for example...but, in the main, we get the purpose and point quite well served.

Hastings, always in my mind the inimitable pro bumbler Hugh Fraser, still makes me want to pluck my own eyes out; Japp, as Philip Jackson plays him, is endearingly outclassed; Pauline Moran's Miss Lemon (absent from the novel; see hint about "late-act clue" above) is acerbically pointed as always.

No mention need be made of the One True Poirot.

I rate this version above the book because the more, erm, objectionable traits are eliminated. This is more comfortable for me as a consumer of entertainment and impacts the novel and its pleasures not at all. The story is unaltered by their alteration. So why were they there at all?