Rating: 5/5

Just finished reading The Complete Robot by Isaac Asimov, if you all haven’t read it you should do so. It contains all the stories from I, Robot as well, not the Will Smith paff though, it is completely different. 
Here is a run down of the stories.

A Boy's Best Friend:-
A boy and his dog on the moon but the dog is a robot, what happened when his parents want to give him a real dog and what makes you love something?

Sally:-
Only cars that have positronic brains are allowed on the highways and when they are retired where do they go? This is a story about a man who loves cars and owns a Car farm where cars live out their retirement.

Someday:-
A Bard is an electronic device that tells children stories using a massive file of plots and twists. What happens when a toy is no longer appreciated, how does it feel?

Point of View:-
A short story about how children, their parents and the Multivac all think differently. I feel this is one of the weakest stories in the book.

Think!:-
Interesting story about computers and telepathy; has some interesting thoughts and twists but again is not that gripping. 

True Love:-
Now this one was good, if you program a computer to think and feel like you what will it do? The main character is looking for a girlfriend and uses the main computer to look for her based on his likes and dislikes that soon become the computers too.

Robot AL-76 Goes Astray:- 
Another good one about a robot that gets misplaced in rural Virginia where everyone is terrified of it, what can it do and how does it feel when it thinks it is already on the Moon? A very funny story which had me laughing at many points, this is very much like the plot of the movie Short Circuit in a way.

Victory Unintentional:-
The best story in my opinion which had me rolling on the floor. I kept picturing the Jovian’s as Man Utd fans, if you read it you will understand what I mean. 

Stranger in Paradise:-
One of the more human focused stories here, more about two brothers in a Society were brothers are not common. It seems in the future that there is no marriage and people just meet to have babies then go their separate ways. Having two people from the same parents in an unknown factor and it affects the characters as they together try to create a robot to survive on Mercury.

Light Verse:- 
Is okay it is about a rich older lady who loves her robots and light sculptures and she is famous for her light sculptures until a horrible thing happens to one of her robots.

Segregationist:-
Another bland one here devoted to the exploration of any racism when dealing with robots and how close we are becoming physically and anatomically. 

Let's Get Together:-
An interesting one from when Cold War paranoia was at its height. What happens when your enemy is better at making robots than you and to what lengths will they go to win a war?

Well anyway it is a quick read due to the fact that it is a bunch of short stories so you can power through them easily. 
Give it a try you won’t be disappointed at all.