Rating: 2/5

I read Last Exit to Brooklyn a few years ago, when I actually lived in the titular city and tried to “run” a regular drinking session where my friends and I discussed incest book club. I chose this book for: its reputation, a trusted friend’s personal recommendation, and because Hubert Selby Jr. also wrote Requiem for a Dream (never read, love the movie). Though I generally have a sunny disposition, I also have a penchant for sad songs, movies about addiction, and slutty women. It is a reflection of a core that doesn’t usually see the light of day, one that stays hidden mostly due to an annoying need to be liked by the entire human race (unless you are really close to me, then I will abuse you much more than the people I hate).

This novel has acquired cult status level for the same reasons that a lot of other creative works have. It exploits a variety of taboo subjects: here we have sex, drugs, and a metric fuckton of violence. Gay sex, Bible quotes, alcoholism, spousal abuse…it’s all there, set to the backdrop of a long-ago Brooklyn, glorified by the relative newcomers for being more real, more authentic. These particular readers are trying to erase their own roots for their own reasons, and in the mindless appropriation of all things related to their newly adopted city, piles of thick-rimmed black glasses are left too dirty too see what this book is actually made of.

Hubert Selby, Jr. writes strangely yet evocatively, and Last Exit is obviously meant to represent a largely ignored (in literature published before 1964) class of human.

The New York Times Book Review says it is: “An extraordinary achievement…a vision of hell so stern it cannot be chuckled or raged aside.”

Harry T. Moore says: “The raw strength and concentrated power of Last Exit to Brooklyn make it one of the really great works of fiction about the underground labyrinth of our cities.”

Imagine a hundred more reviews like these. The above two were lifted directly from the book’s Amazon page, which proves that the novel is being marketed in such a way as to cement it as a “classic of postwar American writing.” To appeal to those of us attracted to sad songs, addiction, and slutty women. To appeal to those who identify with, or at least try to project an image of identifying with, the seedy underbelly of life.

The problem with this is that they are looking to explore the seedy underbelly of a city that is a seedy underbelly itself. 

Synopsis (credit, Wikipedia, obviously):

Last Exit to Brooklyn is divided into six parts that can, more or less, be read separately. 

-Another Day, Another Dollar: A gang of young Brooklyn hoodlums hang around an all-night cafe and get into a vicious fight with a group of US Army soldiers on leave.
-The Queen Is Dead: Georgette, a transvestite hooker, is thrown out of the family home by her brother and tries to attract the attention of a hoodlum named Vinnie at a benzedrine-driven party.
-And Baby Makes Three: An alcoholic father tries to keep good spirits and maintain his family’s marriage traditions after his daughter becomes pregnant and then marries a motorcycle mechanic.
-Tralala: The title character of an earlier Selby short story, she is a young Brooklyn prostitute who makes a living propositioning sailors in bars and stealing their money. In perhaps the novel’s most notorious scene, she is gang-raped after a night of heavy drinking.
-Strike: Harry, a machinist in a factory, becomes a local official in the union. A closeted homosexual, he abuses his wife and gets in fights to convince himself that he is a man. He gains a temporary status and importance during a long strike, and uses the union's money to entertain the young street punks and buy the company of drag queens.
-Landsend: Described as a “coda” for the book, this section presents the intertwined, yet ordinary day of numerous denizens in a housing project.

Like I said: evocative. Not to mention the author’s distinct neglect of “proper” grammar and literary conventions. However, as I quickly thumbed through the pages of this surprisingly fast read, all the deep, dark, supposed “truths” of how people really lived rang so empty that I became disgusted by all the fucking tricks he was using. He skipped the more subtle yet infinitely more powerful inner darkness of things, to focus on dry, famously “colloquial” accounts of girls getting gang raped, girls being beaten, transvestites slogging through life on benzies, etc etc ETC.

It brought another of our "book club" selections to the forefront for comparison: Truman Capote's Breakfast at Tiffany's. I didn't love this book either, but for all its shallowness Capote nailed the dialogue head on. It sounded like actual people talking. Last Exit's supposed mastery of the same thing is a complete farce.

This was my original review, from 2009:

"I thought it was successful in its goals, and innovative, and very interesting structurally and it affected me profoundly. However, I couldn't get past the violence and single-mindedness of this book. In its "realistic-ness" I found no reality, if that makes sense."

I gave it 3 stars originally, but I will reduce it to 2.

I still stand by that short and sweet account, but I have finally figured out where my intense dislike for -- NAY, repulsion towards, this novel comes from.

The Brooklyn of this book is not my Brooklyn. I don’t think it was the Brooklyn of its characters, or the Brooklyn of 1964. If there is one goddamn thing I have learned about life, it’s that it’s hard, and full of things and people that make you feel bad. There is a yin to that yang however, and sometimes the hardest shit reveals more beauty than any empty life of ease and luxury could offer. I would have found Last Exit to Brooklyn more believable and real if Georgette the transvestite had found some solace in her friends, if Selby Jr. had included moments of muddled joy in between the raucous, never-ending torment and hard-hitting unlikeability of the characters. 

My Brooklyn was sweaty migrant workers broiling in the relentless August sun, yes, but who knows what unholy hell they escaped from? Brooklyn was and is: empty, drugged out eyes at parties, quick fucks in bar bathrooms, countless empty mornings robbed of endorphins – tempered by the heady highs of pursuing Dionysian fun. The terror of a walk home in Bed Stuy at 3 am folds its leaf over gently and reveals the awesome beauty of a walk in Park Slope on a glorious May afternoon. 

Brooklyn is a million things; so is every other city.

Do you see my point? This book neglects the roundness of life. It cuts corners and goes for shock value instead. That’s not authenticity, and those who loved this book because it was real and authentic should reevaluate...everything.

They say any press is good press...