Rating: 5/5

In this tale of passion, Jeanette Winterson contrasts two characters bringing into view the shaded nuances of differing sides of passion. Henri is a boy from the French countryside; his people are slow to love, lukewarm. He lacks confidence and represents innocence. It takes the fire of Napoleon’s war to stir his passion but when stirred it will adhere him to Napoleon’s side for eight long years and lead to the fateful winter of 1812. Nearly a million soldiers and civilians are left dead within six months that frigid winter when the French army marches on Moscow. The war robs Henri of his innocence and introduces him to violence and the duplicitous ways of mankind.

Another side of passion is revealed by our second main character, Villanelle, the red headed daughter of a boatman in Venice. Only the sons of boatmen are supposed to have webbed feet, but Villanelle comes into the world with webbed feet. Born during a solar eclipse, even her red hair expresses her passion. Venice is the backdrop for her flowering personality, which takes on some of the qualities of that “City of Water,” also known as “City of Masks.” Villanelle has a lot of self-confidence and isn't afraid to take life as it comes.

 Since Bonaparte captured our city of mazes in 1797, we’ve more or less abandoned ourselves to pleasure. What else is there to do when you’ve lived a proud and free life and suddenly you’re not proud and free any more? We became an enchanted island for the mad, the rich, the bored, the perverted. Our glory days were behind us but our excess was just beginning. 

Villanelle will dress as a boy and work in a casino at a card table. In this way, Winterson explores gender fluidity. After all, her webbed feet were supposed to belong to the male boatmen. Villanelle enjoys the games of chance at the casino but we can see that this thrill…is it passion…bleeds over into her daily life. At the card table she meets her great love, a woman with grey-green eyes and dark red hair. Villanelle wonders whether to reveal her true gender. 

Jeanette Winterson’s prose is like a poetic dream but one that never loses the thread of story. Like a sculptor with words, she shapes a form that soars and plummets, that adds and subtracts, drawing out the curves and nuances of humanity in all its sordid grandeur. She looks at the messy, rough, hard shape of us but doesn’t neglect the luminous, the terrible, the magnificent, the numinous…her words create an uplifting emotion, much of which comes from the sheer beauty of her thoughts strung like philosophical jewels, little shiny bread crumbs that could lead to a witch’s house or a sublime haven, I’m not sure which, but I’m going either way.

This story of passion boils over into tragedy. Finally Henri has had enough. Villanelle gets caught in a sticky web. A story of war, love, games, and disguises might reveal God or possibly the Devil. 

 Travellers at least have a choice. Those who set sail know that things will not be the same as at home. Explorers are prepared. But for us, who travel along the blood vessels, who come to the cities of the interior by chance, there is no preparation. We who were fluent find life is a foreign language. Somewhere between the swamp and the mountains. Somewhere between fear and sex. Somewhere between God and the Devil passion is and the way there is sudden and the way back is worse. 

Winterson refers to the cities of the interior several times, mentioning that there is no map for the interior. This seems like the mind, where you can have grand adventures and travel great distances without ever leaving your home. You can also get lost there and never find your way out. Villanelle traveled the interior canals of Venice through intuition and many years of experience.

This is a story that could be read a hundred times and never get old. Labeled as historical metafiction, magical realism is also present. I loved it!