Rating: 1/5

Oh man... what to say. Many of this book's issues have to do with the time period it was written in. The House of Thunder was initially published in 1982 under Dean Koontz's pseudonym Leigh Nichols. The other issue is how much growth Koontz has exhibited as a veteran author, and this was far from his best work. 

Susan Thorton wakes up in the hospital with a head injury. She is fuzzy on details but starts having flashbacks of a horrific event in college that left her Jewish boyfriend dead in a place known as the House of Thunder. Before long, she is either seeing ghosts or hallucinating about people from that time that she testified against and are now dead. 

Dr. McDreamy, oops, I mean Dr. McGee... (Although this book is old enough that McGee was first). IS so handsome and dreamy, and did I mention handsome and kind and kisses Susan on the cheek and holds her hand all the time... Wait, back the F up... What?!?!?! Susan just woke up from a coma and is hallucinating and this Doc is freaking taking advantage of her? Oh, wait... It's ok because she is in love with him after three days... 

I feel like Koontz wrote this under a female name to try to convince people that his MC was believable to women... She is not. She is a poster child for all of those memes about men writing female characters without understanding anything about women. (Thank the sweet baby Jesus that he fixed this issue by the time he wrote Jane Hawk).

The greatest part of this book: The rando character named Enid Shipstat. There was a bit of a creep factor in the beginning, but it was quickly lost in the ridiculousness of the dialogue. 

The costumes were more interesting than most of the narrative. I actually wish that there would have been more about that.

The ending was soooo ridiculous, but at this point, I wasn't really expecting it not to be... 

I tried to give this a 2 star, but as I wrote this... I just couldn't find enough good in it to consider it ok.... Also apparently, the only way that men can be mean to women other than to threaten rape is to call them "bitch" or "slut" repeatedly... It became tedious. 

Left at a 1 star. I do not recommend you sully the greatness of Koontz books such as Odd Thomas and Jane Hawk by exposing yourself to this early garbage.