Rating: 4/5

Jane Wilkinson is a talented young American actress who is unhappily married to Lord Edgware. She asks Hercule Poirot to talk to Lord Edgware, to get him to agree to a divorce. Hercule Poirot obliges. Which seems like a good thing, as some people seem convinced that Jane Wilkinson would kill her husband if he doesn’t agree to a divorce. Poirot is shocked when he meets Lord Edgware. Because Lord Edgware not only immediately agrees to get a divorce, but because he’s also already sent a letter to his wife, telling her exactly that. But his wife never got that letter.

Then, as the title suggest, Lord Edgware dies. And all the evidence points to his wife, even the police are convinced that she’s done it. But she couldn’t have done it. She has an airtight alibi. She was at a dinner with twelve other people. And she didn’t have a motive anymore. Poirot had already told her that her husband agreed to get a divorce. So it’s up to Poirot to put all the puzzle pieces together and uncover the real truth.

Lord Edgware Dies is basically one big flashback, as the narrator captain Hastings starts the story by reminiscing about a very famous case where the titular Lord Edgware among others died. A case which Hercule Poirot solved but did not take credit for, because the famous detective considers it one of his failures. Which is such a fantastic way to grab us readers from the get go.

I absolutely appreciate that the friendship between captain Hastings and Hercule Poirot is very much on display here. And it’s much better done here than in their previous book together, Peril at End House. Because it’s so clear how much they respect and appreciate each other. For example, Hastings is feeling inferior to Poirot in terms of his sleuthing capabilities. And Poirot is quick to point out that Hastings does bring something important to the investigation as well. In Hastings, Poirot can see what the murderer wants Poirot to believe. That’s an important resource that Poirot can use to solve the murder. And Hastings can also occasionally stumble upon a brilliant thought simply by being himself, because he sees things in a different light than Poirot does. Poirot doesn’t want Hastings to learn from him and become an inferior Poirot. He wants Hastings to simply be the best Hastings he can be. And that’s honestly quite a nice compliment.

Overall, a gripping murder mystery that can be a bit predictable in the beginning. But through quite a few cool plot twists, it still manages to keep you guessing in the end.