Rating: 4/5

'I could never decide whether "Mad Annie" was murdered because she was mad or because she was black'
  

This is my first Minette Walters novel and i must say i was impressed, not only is the story well written but the use of coroners/police reports, news articles and letters added a little something with the mystery and the secrets hidden in this story. Set in the the late 70's then the late 90's, a twenty year gap between the what happened then and what was happening now. This novel tackles racism, classism , animal cruelty and mental illness in away that really opens your eyes to how cruel and nasty people can be over such trivial things, especially back then although these issues still exist today, i dont believe its to the extent it was. With secrets hidden for years, lives torn apart and a determination for justice, this novel was well beyond what i thought it would be. 

Mad Annie was found in the gutter, like tossed garbage dying a slow painful death. Police quickly ruled it to be an accident due to the fact she was labeled a drunk crazy cat lady by most in the white community she lived in, she obviously walked out onto the road and got hit was what most thought, good riddance. Everyone believes this , and no one questions beyond that, except M Ranelagh, who happened to be the one to discover poor Annie and rush to call an ambulance, watching her die and the state she was in minute before her death, M doesn't believe it was an accident, she believes someone murdered Mad Annie.
Her persistence and want for justice get her labeled 'the nigger lover' and soon those in the community turn against her and persuade her husband into thinking she has gone mad as well and seeking professional help for her at the Department of Psychiatry. Threatening a divorce M and her husband decide to move away, and sort out their lives, oathing to never speak of Annie or her death again.
20 years later, M's coming back to where it all started and this time she wont make the same mistakes twice, she wants justice for both Annie and herself. To find the truth about what happened she must dig into the past of her neighbours, her husband and those she called her friends in order for justice to be made, and to deal justice to those who turned their backs on evidence poor Mad Annie was murdered.

My favourite character was Mad Annie, she was misunderstood by everyone in her community and i really felt for her having had such a hard life. Being black doesn't devalue a persons life, and it never should. Seeing the full extent of the racism really got to me at some points, because no one stood up for this poor woman who was not only mentally ill but had a kind heart and a love of cats. Awareness about mental illness is still not that great, but compared to what i read in this novel, we have improved alot from then, but still have a long way to go. The story of Mad Annie unfolded slowly, making me feel for her every time some new light was shed. I literally wanted to put my hands in the book and strangle some of these characters for how cruel and unkind they were to this woman- they even piss on her at one point.. to do that to someone.. why?..just WHY!?

In all i thought this was an amazing book, that shed alot of light on many issues from then and now, really making me think and feel (that's what a good novel is supposed to do right?)
The secrets and lies were juicy and i was as determined as M to find out what happened to this poor woman and why someone would take away her life, especially whether it was because she was 'mad' or because she was black. Well done Minette Walters, will definitely be reading some more of your novels in the future.

Recommended for: Mystery/ Thriller /Fiction