Rating: 3/5

I found this book several years ago in the hallway of my first apartment building in New York (the one that also frequently had chicken bones littering the halls). It had been discarded by my neighbor across the way; she had put out many books over the time I lived there, mostly of a semi-mystical, feminist bent (for example, this is also where I found a copy of Women Who Run With the Wolves). I was kind of fascinated by the neighbor, as she designed clothes and had a fabulously overstuffed living space and wrote things in the blank back matter pages of the books, like drawings of plans to redesign her apartment, and as in this book, a recipe for lemon bars. 

I took one look at the cover of this book and was appalled by it, but upon reading the description was so intrigued by how insane it sounded. I have kept the book for the last 6 years, through 3 subsequent apartments and therefore, several culls of my book collection. I just finally read it, today. 

It is batshit. It is not as appalling as the cover art. It was actually a really enjoyable book to read. It is about the intricate laws of a society in which people are reincarnated through 14,000 lives and must right all the wrongs and emotionally process the conflicts of the past in order to evolve to a point where they are allowed to apply for a meeting with their Soul's Twin. The hilarious parts of the ones that describe the bureaucracy of the governmental agencies that must uphold these laws; the tone of this reminds me of Douglas Adams. Amidst all of that is a lot of spouting of spiritual tenets, such as that we are all One and therefore must release all negativity in order for positivity to flow from us and therefore, be returned to us. Memories of past lives are displayed as comic panels as the characters are regressed through them to discover theirs truths and these images are recorded with a "photomental camera". Finally, there is an accompanying CD containing opera music that the text cues you to listen to at certain points. I do not have the CD, my neighbor must have kept it.

So, yeah: hot mess. But fun.