Rating: 4/5

At first, as I began reading this book, I thought it was dull, dull, dull! It's written in such a calm style that it's like listening the calming new age music that's is supposed to relax everyone. This music (or this style of writing) doesn't relax me; in fact, does the opposite. 

Nevertheless, I continued reading. I began to read the information about Salt Lamps and crystal salt ionizers. The use of crystal salt is said, by this author, to be very beneficial to our health.

The crystal salt discussed in this book is not the same iodized salt we find in our kitchen cabinets. It is salt mined from various places in the world and is the salt which was left behind eons ago as the original vast oceans on earth began to evaporate away. It retains a slight pinkish color.

I have tried drinking the "sole" (pronounced so-lay) salt water mixture suggested by the author. It does not have the taste typically associated with a salt water rinse; it is much milder. The author suggests drinking a small amount of this every day to enjoy many health benefits.

I have purchased two salt lamps, basing my purchase decision on the information in this book. These lamps help neutralize electronic emissions from all the electronic hardware we work around and clean the environment in our rooms. The effects of these lamps can improve sleep, improve skin conditions, and have an effect on persons who have ADD and ADHD. We have experienced several health improvements in the few weeks we've operated them.

Being a skeptical reader at heart, I thought some of the claims in this book were extreme and perhaps just "hocus pocus". However, now that I've actually tried some of the suggestions from the book and experienced health improvements, I'm no longer skeptical. 

I recommend this book to everyone. Read it and learn if you have any health issues that the author says are helped by crystal salt. Put the information to the test. It's a alternative health method that might prove to be very helpful for you.