Rating: 2/5

The plot was good I think but the book in totality lacked the cohesion or fluidity. I am no fan of his way of writing, but if you've got it, you can read it in a stretch lying down, under a table-lamp before going to sleep. 
The novel starts as it does, but the urgency in Deanna’s character forcing Theresa to go meet Garrett and see if he is the love of her life looks sad and bad. The Garrett person is already in pains and to go down there, meet him for your own gains is very selfish. 
Then, their experiences together, their so immediately falling in love with each other felt unreal because it appeared that the chances of everything falling in place so soon does not happen so easily in real lives. Garrett who couldn’t think of anything without Catherine in his minds suddenly steered in path of finding of love again in his life is just fictitious. I don’t deny the possibility but it was a bit tacky. Rather, the inabilities of Garrett fighting his feelings for Catherine and Theresa simultaneously later have been displayed aggressively. 
I got bored with it while Garrett and Theresa were trying to figure out their lives together, how they wanted to live their lives. It got way too descriptive and even then Garrett was showed to have not thought of everything in anticipation when he asked Theresa to move to Wilmington.
Frankly, I was worried I was not getting tears in my eyes until the last. Yeah, this novel will bring tears in your eyes. I didn’t like the climax. It felt like even God was willing to skip on dealing with the complications in people’s lives and it was easier to remove him from her life. But, the sequences of actions enveloping the climax were adequately written. The last letter to Catherine to make it reach Europe made it a bit cheesy but okay, another for Theresa to forgive him. Truthfully, the letter he wrote to Theresa sounded the best of all and what she had written to him in the last owing to moving on welled up my eyes. 
I don’t know if it was intentional but I liked the way she signed her letter ‘T’ and not Theresa so that even if anyone found out about it, they wouldn’t know who the sender was and she wouldn’t be caught in the vicious circle of what she had created when she went to contact him.