Rating: 4/5

Continuing on after “X-Wing: Rogue Squadron” in my readthrough of Michael Stackpole’s X-Wing books is “Wedge’s Gamble”. After thinking the Rogue Squadron book was fine albeit disappointing, Wedge’s Gambit in my view was a big improvement.

Most Star Wars fans think of “Revenge of the Sith” and its exhilarating opening when they hear the phrase “Battle of Coruscant”. Well 9 years before that battle was shown in theaters, Stackpole depicted a much different battle on the planet in a different Star Wars’ era which Wedge’s Gamble covers. Most of the book is set up for the New Republic’s invasion of Coruscant and despite the fact they’re fighter pilots, Rogue Squadron is chosen to lead the initial reconnaissance and sabotage work in preparation for the space battle and invasion. As such, the book has far less of the dogfights than last book and much of the squadron’s mission and the book’s action instead feels more in line with what fans have seen in “Andor” or “Rogue One”. Despite not quite understanding why the Rogues were selected, the mission to Coruscant was entertaining. There’s a lot of exposition about the planet and the Empire’s control of it (this was pre-Phantom Menace mind you but Stackpole’s depiction does mostly line up with George Lucas’ vision), much of which related to the Empire’s oppression of non-humans and descriptions of the Imperial Palace and how this planet-wide city’s climate control works (and how this factors into the Rogue Squadron plans). The action in the city, both on the ground and in the skies, was pretty entertaining. The Empire’s plot to stop the Rogues and New Republic, while perhaps should have been kept a secret from the reader until the end, was much easier to follow than the last book’s (I honestly can’t remember what it was) and much more horrific.

As for the characters, I did like the Rogues as a group a lot more than last book. Wedge as always is great (what can I say I’m a fanboy) and Corran Horn, while still not my favorite, was a lot more likable. The various aliens in the Squadron were good in the usual Star Wars alien sidekick way, while the female Rebels were honestly a bit underwhelming (they frankly blended together with how beautiful and talented they’re supposed to be with only superficial changes to their personalities/backstories). The Empire and criminal villains meanwhile were the weakest of the ensemble cast, the Black Sun drug lord being by far the worst/underdeveloped and Director Isard honestly not leaving much of an impression despite being the overarching villain. In short Stackpole’s depiction of the Empire is a lot less nuanced than say Timothy Zahn’s.

Besides some weaknesses and weird creative choices, “Wedge’s Gamble” was the entertaining Star Wars content I was hoping the X-Wing books would be. We’re halfway through Stackpole’s (initial) run, so hopefully the next two books are as good as book 2.