Rating: 4/5

Julian Barnes informs us that Mario Vargas Llosa once described Houellebecq's Platform as insolent. He meant it as a praise and I totally agree. There's nothing optimistic here. No silver lining in reality's dense smog but no degradation either. Only raw misery and a steady pace through modern age's thick shit.

Platform is a good example of form following function. We watch everything through the eyes of a 40-year-old man who seems to be alienated from everything and everyone in a Meursault kind of way. He lives in a world where the western people seem to live robotically (work, spend, fuck, die) in their nests, while the East is merely a punch bag for their neuroses. A fuckland which serves as a medium to blow some steam off through sex with ever-willing girls and/or all kinds of fetishes and perversions. West is the pillar of the world, whereas in the East, women have to sell their bodies in order to make a living. Now, rationalization commands us to adopt some ridiculous beliefs sometimes, like we may very well be doing them a favor. They need money, we need sex. They sell, we buy. One could say that we are their benefactors even. We are the ones that put food to their tables and so on. That's, more or less, the reality Houellebecq depicts in his novel. Yes, the sex scenes are purely pornographic, but is it really any wonder?

The protagonist experiences a certain enlightenment, which is somewhat different than Meursault's. A change that could be radical but is merely subtle, enough, however, to offer him a fleeting glimpse of something that resembles happiness. But can there really be such a thing when consequences need to be paid? It could be that Meursault has evolved and now turns his gun towards a different direction. Afterall, there are many ways of killing an Arab.

While the prose is mostly dry as a wasteland, there is a number of really strong moments where our hero breaks, if only momentarily, his mental boundaries and makes important questions which are directly transferred to the reader. At the same time, the immediacy of the writing style gives the novel an unpleasantly realistic aura that serves as a starting point for several questionings. The fact that what we read is in the mind of an unsympathetic individual but yet seems so true and real causes a certain discomfort that only honesty can exorcise. Honesty and guts.

Houellebecq's Platform has been accused of being misogynic, racist and pornographic. But what if it's not Platform that's all that, but our own society? And what if it's simply time for us to reap what we've sown? That would be something of a start, I guess.
4 stars