Rating: 3/5

"We actually saw and heard nothing to frighten us. Yet, we felt frightened. The question is, why? (page 54)"

AUTHOR'S WRITING STYLE: 3 stars!

Yay: This book is a part of the Alfred Hitchcock &amp; The Three Investigators series. It is ideally written for kids and teenagers in third person past. 

It is a quick read, just 179 pages long, and at some points of the book, there is a one-page black and white drawing professionally made using only a pencil.

Nay: Robert Arthur sounds like a bully to Jupiter Jones during the Introduction claimed to be written by Alfred Hitchcock himself.

Jupiter Jones is described as fat and Baby Fatso. To give balance to this insult, Jupiter is also described as a curious bookworm who has a good memory.

CHARACTERS: 3 stars!

Yay: Jupiter, Pete and Bob are the lead characters of the story. They are young, they are best friends, and, at the same time, they are calling themselves "The Three Investigators."

Jupiter stands as the leader of the group. What I love about him is, he does not allow himself to be limited and mediocre. He has an above-average observation skill.

Pete is the scary one. He gets scared easily and gets disorganized too. Though, he is described as the tallest among the three.

Bob is responsible for research. He wears a leg brace; therefore, he is left behind most of the time when Jupiter and Pete are out in the field to investigate something.

Nay: Seems like the page-time focuses on Jupiter, Pete and Bob too much. The supporting characters around them such as their parents, siblings and friends are given no importance.

Unluckily, I have no idea who Jupiter, Pete and Bob are. Beyond the basic description of being The Three Investigators, they are no one.

Don't get me wrong. The flow of their investigation is good. They are smart, brave and strategic. They are even vulnerable. 

Yet, something that is personal is lacking to the narrative. It is like watching an episode of CSI where the episode becomes busy with layers of evidence and theories without realizing these crime scene investigators are humans. They can be anxious and traumatized after each case too.

PLOT: 4 stars!

Yay: Jupiter, Pete and Bob investigate the mystery behind the terror castle in California. They are proving to themselves and to Mr. Alfred Hitchcock if ghosts and phantoms are true or, just a product of an active imagination.

Nay: I dislike myself for saying I have read mystery stories like this multiple times. This story format is not something new to me anymore. 

I was a fan of Hardy Boys and Nancy Drew when I was younger. I even read Archie's Mysteries until now, but to some extent, it is fair to say my expectation is only high.

For a first-time reader of a mystery novel, The Secret of Terror Castle is good enough. Go read it. Listen to its audiobook. Watch the 2009 movie too.