Rating: 5/5

You know how sometimes a certain read is kind of disappointing so you browse social media instead and come across a book whose title is really eye catching and then you forget the 12 books you are currently reading and start reading that one instead?
That's how I started reading this hilarious giggle fest of a book that totally fulfills the promise hinted at by its title and it was a great decision to do so. Erma Bombeck's books all have whacky titles and are an extension of her humorous newspaper columns in the early 1970s which were very popular.
In this book, the author talks about the travails of travel, illustrating her points with examples from her own travels with family and for work. From differences in packing style between her husband and herself to differing preferences about what to do on a vacation, picking a date to start a family vacation, coping with driving in a foreign land, not knowing the language of a place, to descriptions of tour groups on buses and cruise ships she is incredibly funny and very very relatable!
When she talks about the dream of a romantic gondola ride in Venice transforming into the reality of everyone having to wear masks to counter the smell of rotting weeds or the extreme difficulty of the restroom problem for women in particular while traveling, it's like she is talking about us! 
It also has the occasional reflections about family and kids and how travel changes over the years as they grow up and those are very nice to read too. It was written in the early 90's but though the times have changed so much, it is a perfect example that sometimes the more things change, the more they remain the same.
When you are in the mood to read something light and really funny, this is a good one to pick up.
Laughter is the best medicine.. this is a gem from the book..

"My husband and I do not look for the same things on these trips. He is focused, asks questions about the size of the bricks and the date the cathedral was restored. He maintains a diary of where he has been and what he has seen.
My observations include the IQs of women who wear heels on these excursions, how late the gift shop will remain open, and how do we know if Mary, the mother of God, really lived in that house? Did they find monogrammed towels marked BM for Blessed Mother?"