Rating: 5/5

The main plot device of this book is based on what really happens to the distinctive features of a society when it is assimilated into the Borg collective. As the “Next Generation” episode “Best of Both Worlds” demonstrated, the memories of an assimilated creature are not lost when they become a Borg drone. Therefore, the terror, frustration and hatred that one experiences when being assimilated would become part of the Borg collective consciousness. Clearly, that does not affect the behavior of the Borg, for there appears to be no change in their behavior.
 In this story, Voyager is traveling through space controlled by the Lhiaarian Empire, a vast region where the emperor must give personal permission to travel through it and going around is unrealistic. Voyager is also carrying the last few survivors of the Skedan, a race of telepaths whose culture was destroyed by the Borg. The Skedans were part of the Lhiaarian Empire and were promised protection by the Empire when it was known that the Borg were on their way. That assistance never arrived so the few remaining Skedans blame the emperor for their destruction. 
 Seven of Nine begins experiencing hallucinations and flashbacks to events where she was part of the assimilation of a species. She begins taking on the personality characteristics of a young girl that was assimilated and when it happens, Seven of Nine becomes more open and agreeable. The Skedans use their telepathic abilities to manipulate the Voyager crew as the Skedans have plans to seek their own revenge. The surfacing of Seven’s memories as a Borg helps her make the right decision when one has to be made. 
 While the story has some flat spots, the raising of the issue of what effect assimilated memories have on the Borg collective consciousness is one that had me thinking throughout the entire story. It would seem that these memories would have some effect on the Borg, leading to the potential for conflicts within the Borg. A schizophrenic Borg collective makes for a very entertaining thought. 

This review appears on Amazon