Rating: 2/5

Another books from Nicholas, and another of the same type

At this point, I don’t feel the need of keep reading his books, I’m pretty sure its just the same book over and over again.

This is his first novel and it shows, because:

1)	The way its written

2)	One of the worse books I’ve read by him

I don’t even know where to start with this book.

The plot of this book, its very not realistic, and sometimes I have problem with it, because at the end of the day it’s a romance and it should be realistic, but in another times, I get it because it’s fiction and it’s supposed to give you this kind of unrealistic love story but if you’re going to do that, please do it right, but of course this wasn’t the case.

I get that Theresa wants to know about the person who wrote the letters, but she was beyond obsessed, not just this but she implies multiples times, that she’s in love or what about he’s an old man? He’s married? Etc. And I’m just here like…

Her fried is the one pushing her, which that’s weird, like you can be girl go find him or something like that, but she was also implying that she could fall in love with him and I’m like no, friend no, friend.

Before reading this book, someone mentioned that all Nicolas Sparks books are set in NC, which I never noticed that, and I was reading this book, and at the beginning I was really excited that we get a new state, but then, of course, the person who she’s looking lives there and she has to go, therefore this book is set there, so we have the same “ambience” as the other books.

The love of course it came pretty fast as the other books.

The writing, omg, the writing, I always have seen this white man writing women, but I never actually re called a book like that or an author, but let me present you this one:

"Her breasts had always been smallish, and though it had bothered her when she was younger, she was glad now because they hadn’t started to sag or droop like those of other women her age”
“Her stomach was flat, and her legs were long and lean from all the exercise”

And multiple characteristics about her body and how hot she is in comparison of other women.
It does have its good moments and sometimes cute, like in the unrealistic way, but just that one part good.