Rating: 3/5

SEXY and EERIE.

For a grown up man like me, what a way to celebrate Halloween. This book has that eerie feeling that one gets by reading Emilie Bronte's Wuthering Heights and at the same time watching an R-18 movie with frontal nudity. Lily Dahl, this novel's main protagonist, is a 19-y/o county girl who is a waitress in a highway side cafe in a small sleepy town in America, Webster, Minnesota. She is dreaming for a better life as an actress by going to New York. So, aside from working as a waitress, she plays bit roles in the town's local production. Example of this roles is that of Hermia in William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream.

In that town are all those mysterious characters. Lily Dahl is like Alice but not in the wonderland but in a creepy and secretive town. Hustvedt made a wonderful job of intricately interweaving the lives of her characters using, as backdrop, a laidback town whose history was laden with many secrets spanning at least two past generations. Then after establishing the interwoven lives, she slowly revealed those secrets while maintaining the foreboding danger to Lily's life with only the sextuagerian lady, Mabel as her supposedly protector. The friendship between Lily and Mabel in this book is very unlikely because of their age difference: 16 and 76 but the way their characters are portrayed made it all plausible. An example of this is when they sleep in one bed. Their bodies touch like two small girls and they wake up in the morning not minding what position - bodies and limbs touching or interlocking - they find themselves in. I'm not saying that I want to be in bed with a friend who is a young man and that our bodies can touch without malice to prove that our friendship is true and platonic. All I'm saying is that this is how imaginative Hustvedt is by choosing an odd friendship for her novel. Odd in a way that it is very likely to happen in real life but the way it was portrayed in the book made it seemed like it is a regular fare that is not too unlikely to happen. 

This is my second book written by Paul Auster's (one of my favorite authors) wife, Siri Hustvedt. Early this year, I read What I Loved and it was one of the suprisingly good novels I've read this year. It's nice to be surprised by reading and liking a book that you did think to be good. So, when I picked up this book, her second novel, The Enchantment of Lily Dahl, my expectation was high and I was glad that she did not disappoint me. This is totally different from What I Loved so I think Hustvedt is one of those authors who do not rewrite themselves. I am still her fan.

Given those characters and setting and Hustvedt being a female writer, one would easily guess that her stories would dwell heavily on emotions and feelings. However, Hustvedt puts more brain rather than heart in her works. Not sure if husband Paul Auster has something to do with her style of writing but considering the mystery-thriller ingredient in Hustvedt's works, I will not be surprised if my guess is correct. As you know, Auster's works are strong on mystery-thriller flavor.

Keep on writing, Siri Hustvedt. You have one avid fan here in the Philippines. Well, I am one of the moderators of Filipinos group here at Goodreads with 1,700 members and I am still to hear any of them raving about you yet so I think I need to spread a word to read your works.