Rating: 4/5

This is the definition of bleak: Selby shows a world fully devoid of empathy, where nothing matters anymore, where what gets you through the day is the only currency that counts. It's not the graphic violence that renders the texts so hard to stomach, it's the coldness, the lack of hope, the impossibility of love. The way the brutality is transferred into language, leading to a kind of secondary orality that helps to evoke the atmosphere of dive bars, backyards, and Brooklyn streets is masterful, and the overall effect, as Cliff Sargent points out in his perceptive review, is reminiscent of the New French Extremity movement, but 50 years before its time as the book is set in the working and lower classes of 1950's America. 

The collection consists of six interlocking stories, with a gang of hard-drinking, violence-prone thugs recurring. "Another Day, Another Dollar" shows pointless violence as entertainment, "The Queen Is Dead" follows a transwoman who is rejected by her family and harmed and humiliated by the man she loves, leaving her desperate and taking more and more drugs. "And Baby Makes Three" is about a teenage pregnancy and marriage party that evokes a sense of upcoming doom. Probably the most famous chapter is "Tralala", about a spiraling, alcohol-addicted young prostitute who dies in a horrific gang rape (and let's face it: It's so horrific because we all heard of groups of men raping intoxicated women, and not in fiction, but in the news - Selby just highlights the viciousness). "Strike" tells the story of a hard-drinking union worker, wife-beater and closeted gay man, and the coda "Landsend", shows the lives of the inhabitants of a housing project, thus underlining the mundanity of all the filthy emptiness portrayed on these pages. 

And make no mistakes: All of the characters are horrible, horrible people, making bad decisions, knocking themselves out with alcohol and/or other substances, harming others without regret, and that they are lost is no excuse for the transactional way in which they treat others: This is late-stage capitalism as a way to navigate social relationships. The two characters looking for love are lacking the skills to even identify it: Transwoman Georgette has no boundaries and accepts her abuse, union worker Harry hits his wife and becomes no more than a cash cow for the gay hookers he frequents in the hopes to find a loving relationship (not to mention the crime he commits next). 

Sure, there was also an obscenity trial against the book, because God forbid writers ponder reality, the effects of cruelty, and where a society without empathy leads, and Selby's work was actually banned, until a new ruling in 1968 was like: WTF, let art do its thing, and now it's legal again *sigh*. I just found out there's also a movie directed by Uli Edel (so the guy who did Wir Kinder vom Bahnhof Zoo), and the trailer looks true to form: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SrkoF...

Great literature, and I will never read it again. Ever.