Rating: 5/5

There is a tempting urge to begin: "This is a book about mountain-climbing, but it's not about mountain-climbing." That would help reassure some non-hobbyists (like me), but in fact, this is a book that's not "about" mountain-climbing that happens to be very about mountain-climbing.

I'll try to explain. Salter takes us into the world of someone we might call an anti-hero, if he ever let us get close enough to him to judge him with finality. We're thrown deeply inside his mind, body, and spirit, the higher he climbs. There's a linear relationship between his closeness to death and his distance from earth vs. our connection to his psychology. It's as if he only wants to light up when he's godlike. On descent, our graph line connection to him shoots abruptly downward. Back on earth, he's this hollow shell that's accented beautifully by Salter's Hemingway/Cormac McCarthy-esque sparse prose. He sleeps with women. He drinks. He moves around. He waits…

In my mind, Salter steps nimbly around all the mistakes he could be making in this narrative strategy. For one thing, the mountaineering passages are absolutely necessary. Terminology surfaces, sans the Moby Dick-esque discourses on the subject or the Philip Roth chest-thumping on author research (I'm still bitter about reading and living through that whole 'gloving industry' thing). Sure, mountain-climbing is a perfect metaphorical apparatus but he fleshes it out as the real thing inside the plot that it is.

Even if you enter this book with zero interest in the topic, you'll be edified by commonalities that all time-consuming, manic hobbies have. Whatever you use for escapism, Salter's guy is just maxing out in the same categories of escapism, selfishness, oneupmanship, etc.

Salter also has this completely unique way of suddenly delving into characters you might assume would just be hollow husks: specifically, the women that get slept with and left. It's this almost apologetic turning of the POV from the anti-hero to the woman scorned, and it reads so naturally, for a reason I can't quite put my finger on. Is it because our antihero is such an unsubstantial husk on flat ground that he can't bear to have us stay with him for more than a brief chapter or two?

I would five-star recommend to anyone who appreciates literary form as much as they do plot and "likable characters." If the latter are your meat and potatoes and nice form is just a side-dish, you will tend to agree with the 3-star reviewers.