Rating: 4/5

This is one of the ancient books in the 1001 Books You Must Read Before You Die that I really liked. Originally written in German and published in 1668 by German author Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen (1671-1676), the autobiographical book is considered as the first adventure novel in the German language and greatest German novel of the 17th century. 

Its backdrop is the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648) that was said to be the longest and the most destructive conflict in European history. It was also one of the longest continuous wars in modern history. The original issue in this war was the conflict between Protestants and Roman Catholics in the Holy Roman Empire. However, it spread throughout Europe with other issues involved and with Germany being the most devastated in the end.

The story is about a boy baptized by a hermit this name Simplicius Simplicissimus because the hermit thinks that he is simple-minded. Simplicius is 11-y/o at the start of the story, an orphan and a witness of the murder of his loved ones in the hands of bandits. The narration is episodic, does not have a big cohesive theme and similar to the language used by John Bunyan in 1678 religious work, The Pilgrim's Progress (3 stars). However, this one is a picaresque novel, i.e., it is realistic yet funny most of the time and Simplicius is a roguish poor hero who lives by his wits in a corrupt society. Picaresque genre originated in sixteenth century Spain and flourished throughout Europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The Spanish novel that started this genre was La vida del Lazarillo de Tormes (3 stars). Picaresque novels or those with picaresque elements are still being written even up to now. Recent examples of these are Iris Murdoch's Under the Net (1 star) and Aravind Adiga's The White Tiger (1 star). Well, this is my first time to have given a 4-star rating to a picaresque novel. Maybe I am truly maturing when it comes to appreciating different literary genres. I think my main issue with picaresque before was its being episodic.

I have many favorite scenes here but the one that really left a mark on me is that scene when the Thirty Years' War is being described. I think this is a good book if you want to read something very descriptive on how was it to be in that war. The weapons were crude and primitive but you'd be amazed how much you can visualize it with the vivid description written by the author. As you can see in the dates mentioned in the first paragraph of this review, Grimmelshausen did not really experience that war. For me, the ability to describe the war vividly was proof enough for his great capability as a writer.