Rating: 4/5

A batshit idea executed with a completely straight face can be a really great time. In this case: WHAT IF the effects of old age are an echo of a second life-stage humanity was meant to have where we metamorphose into ultra-intelligent and ultra-strong wrinkly old people? Completely and utterly absurd, yet not once does Niven crack a joke about it, or acknowledge in any way how insane the concept is. It's just what the story's about, deal with it.

Divided into two halves, one is an Alien-esque tale of first contact gone wrong, the second is an interstellar war for the fate of humanity, hidden from human knowledge. The mystery of the origin and motivation of the Pak protector Phssthpok carries the first story. The Pak are an intensely weird concept that may be too much to swallow for some, but I absolutely loved them. Despite in-lore being closer to humanity than the other aliens of Known Space, the Pak are much weirder than the Kzinti or Puppeteers. They're somewhat like Blindsight vampires, but instead of being self-interested psychopaths, Pak protectors are like ultra-rational grandparents who ONLY care about the safety of their descendants. Protectors don't really have emotions as we understand them. A protector will exterminate your people if it believes you're a threat to its descendants, but if you manage to wipe out its descendants, it won't seek revenge, but simply die for lack of purpose. Phssthpok in fact goes about exterminating Pak families in order to gain more protectors to his cause, as the now-childless protectors instantly switch to his side. Only once have I seen a similar concept used in any work of fiction, the inimitable masterpiece of Accidental Space Spy's "Castration Planet" arc. The Pak protector is such a great alien, I wish that Barlowe had chosen them for his guide, both because they're so out-there, and their physical description as beaked, wrinkled knobbly ape-men is so deeply inside his illustration wheelhouse it can't be exaggerated. I've identified Barlowe covers based entirely on the way he draws wrinkles and surfaces, drawing an alien that's all wrinkle is so obvious I struggle to imagine why he didn't. 

Unfortunately, that first segment is somewhat marred by its ending, in which a large exposition dump is given that was half stuff we already knew, and half stuff we probably could have been told in a more elegant manner. The second half carries itself a bit better. It follows 200 years later, with one Elroy tracking down the mutated human-protector Brennan, who was transformed in the first half. He ends up joining Brennan in an effort to defeat a Pak force that is heading toward Earth and will likely exterminate any human planets they come across. A large portion of this second half is spent detailing Brennan's battles against the Pak scout ships, in which manoeuvres are done years in advance, and across light-years, each side relying on its near-perfect knowledge of the other's intelligence and rationality. A twist ending takes us back to the realm of horror, while also tying up the loose ends that would create plotholes in Ringworld otherwise.

Niven could perhaps have mined more pathos from the weirdness of a being like Brennan, who experienced life both as a human and a protector, but he's content (or wise enough) to merely hint at it. More disappointing is the treatment of Elroy's girlfriend Alice. Their meeting and growing closer was actually kind of romantic, and it was nice seeing love bloom between Earthnoid Flatlander and Spacenoid Belter. She gets turfed by Brennan because she is pregnant. It just seems like an excuse to kick her out of the story since she no longer had a purpose in getting Elroy to Brennan. She was easily my favourite Niven female character so far (which tbh has not been a high bar to clear).

I'm loving the way Niven builds out the Known Space series. Any one of the four books I've read could be taken as a standalone story, but they all interconnect more extensively than say, The Culture books. Neutron Star built on the Thrint empire introduced in Ptavvs, Ringworld directly references "At the Core" from Neutron Star, and now it seems like it was definitely the Pak that built the ringworld based on context clues (human-like aliens on the ringworld, the changeable permeability membranes, lack of hyperdrive). Protector even features the neutron star from "Neutron Star", and Luke Garner from Ptavvs reappears. I'm sure there're even more connections with the other books I haven't read, but I really don't feel like I'm missing out on anything crucial, and I wouldn't even if I had read Protector first. It's also cool how there's a clear technological progression from the stories set earlier in the timeline and those later, as well as social changes and upheavals because of them.