Rating: 3/5

While the Empire was bleeding to death, the chancelleries of half Europe were intent on the detaching from one side or the other of a venal general, or the patching up of some partial armistice that might afford breathing-time to organise further mischief. It does not matter much to any one whether Wallenstein was knave or fool, but it did matter that the war crippled for two hundred years the finances, the agriculture, and the enterprise of the German people, and dealt a blow to their patriotism from the like of which few nations could have recovered.

The Thirty Years’ War is a period in which I have recently gained interest, it being a war instigated by religious persecution and that quickly descended into political posturing and power struggle, ultimately tearing the continent of Europe apart. It resulted in the death of millions driving the already fragmented German regions into dissipation. Some areas showed as much as a 40% loss in their population. What began as a conflict between Protestants and Catholics resulted in the requisition of military force, then the justification and use of force for gain, whether territorial, political, or personal. The patchwork quilt of the Holy Roman Empire began to war with itself, using mercenary armies whose allegiance lay not in any ideal, but rather in profit, allowing the rulers and powers to air old grievances, posture for political strength, and to seize power through strength of arms. What interests me isn’t so much the actual war, but the complicated web of motivational factors that ultimately destroyed generations of Europeans and that carried on long after the initial dispute for religious rights. 

I began reading The Adventurous Simplicissimus because I wanted a personal viewpoint of the Thirty Years’ War before diving into the broader history of the period. The author, a German-born man named Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen, was a child when the war broke out, and was eventually kidnapped by Hessian forces while they pillaged his home. He was then caught up in the war itself, and grew to be a man during this rather hostile period. The Adventurous Simplicissimus, while occasionally containing obvious myths and fantasies such as witches and mermen, is inspired by his experiences in the war. 

The book, itself, is very episodic in nature, with its protagonist, Melchior Sternfels von Fuchshaim (later nick-named Simplicius Simplicissimus due to his simple nature) starting as a poverty-stricken lad separated from his family (in much the same way as the author), being then adopted by a hermit who teaches him language and religion (where he earns his Simplicius moniker), is eventually swept up into the war, learns a variety of fighting and survival skills, is servant to a number of lords and rulers, engages in combat for many factions (including a stint on both of the opposing Catholic and Protestant forces, along with a number of mercenaries), and undergoes a tremendous variety of fantastical experiences.

But as to knowledge of things divine, none shall ever persuade me that any lad of my age in all Christendom could there beat me, for I knew nought of God or man, of Heaven or Hell, of angel or devil, nor could I discern between good and evil. […] Yea, I was perfect in ignorance that I knew not that I knew nothing.

Because of this, the book is hard to summarize with any particular genre according to modern standards, though it falls into the category of picaresque novel wherein it, according to the Wikipedia definition, 'depicts the adventures of a roguish hero/heroine of low social class who lives by his or her wits in a corrupt society', which precisely describes Simplicissimus. It's an amalgamation of satire, philosophy, history, fantasy, drama, comedy, and tragedy; a mixed bag of somewhat random life experiences, told through the lens of a simple fool as he rises above his upbringing, is educated, becomes a warrior, is brought low and high, and earns a host of other descriptors, both good and bad. 

In a word; many did count me for a witless madman, while I held all for fools in their wits. And to my thinking this is still the way of the world: for each one is content with his own wits and esteemeth that he is of all men the cleverest.

Having been written in the late 17th century, it is devoid of modern writing conventions, which will most certainly turn away a number of readers. Sentences run for great length, there’s no single narrative arc, and no established rhythm. The story goes, and is told, as the life of Simplicius is lived. One day he stumbles upon a hidden bandit fortune which makes him rich, the next he loses it in a matter of civil circumstance and misfortune; one day he’s fighting for a band of mercenaries, then is imprisoned and threatened unless he fights for a different mercenary outfit, which he does, then a similar occurrence results in him fighting for the Empire, then for the Swedes, then imprisoned, then released, then he’s leading his own band of mercenaries. It’s a see-saw of adventures and misadventures that is probably best read in small bits. That’s how I read it, and that’s why it took six months to complete. 

I knew one man who for some years could never sleep by reason of his trade in tobacco; for to this he had given up his heart, mind and soul, which should be dedicate to God alone: and to this idol he sent up night and day a thousand sighs, for ‘twas by that he made his way in life. Yet what did happen? The fool died and vanished like his own tobacco-smoke. Then thought I, O thou miserable man! Had but thy soul’s happiness and the honour of the true God been so dear to thee as thine idol, which stands upon they shop-sign in the shape of a Brazilian, with a roll of tobacco under his arm and a pipe in his mouth, then am I sure and certain that thou hadst won a noble crown of honour to wear in the next world.

It's a book that is best served by falling into the flow of the language rather than that of the story. It does not reward hasty reading, but rather the gradual revelation of experiences that expose Simplicius' human frailties as he traipses through Germany in the 1600's. It's an almost primary source to a period of history defined by conflict, and that has a great deal to teach a modern audience. Simplicus' adventures are filled with moral observations and teachings, ones as applicable today as they were four-hundred years ago. The author uses many of his protagonist's vignettes to address the nature of man, the dangers of wealth, pride, lust, and greed, how desperation and fear may lead men to choose terrible outcomes for themselves, and the difficulty of navigating the great number of religious leanings of the day. With the popularity of political series such as Game of Thrones, or House of Cards, a story like this, where a simple man attempts to navigate vast lands of varying allegiance, religious ideals, and constant danger, it would be easy for a historically-centered retelling of this story to find its place.

Nothing is presented as a finger-wagging necessity, but always as a cause and effect with moral observations sprinkled in for commentary. Despite Simplicius’ growing in intelligence and piety, he isn’t always the one doing the teaching, and is often the one who makes the poor decision resulting in difficulties. He serves as both hero and anti-hero, a flawed character who learns moral teachings, embodies them, relinquishes them when temptation presents itself, becomes his own enemy, and attempts to atone for his mistakes, making even more in the process. 

Yet this honour, which I had gained over the heads of old soldiers, though 'twas but a small thing, yet this and thee praise which daily I received were to me spurs to urge me on to better things. And day and night I dreamed only of fresh plans to make myself greater: nay, I could not sleep by reason of such foolish phantasies. And because I saw that I wanted an opportunity to shew the courage which I felt in me, it vexed me that I could not every day have the chance to meet the adversary in arms and try the result. So then I wished the Trojan war back again, or such a siege as was at Ostende, and fool as I was, I never thought that a pitcher goes to the well till it breaks: and that also is true of a young soldier and a foolish, when he hath but money and luck and courage: thereupon follow haughtiness and pride:[...]

The Adventurous Simplicius was an interesting read, and I’m pleased to have done so, but I was also glad to see its completion. The language, while excellently translated, can be somewhat exhausting at times. Mixed with the episodic nature of the story, as mentioned earlier, it was best for me to read sections, take notes, and move on to something else so as to keep me engaged throughout the entirety of the narrative. It's still intriguing enough that I may return to it eventually and may give one of the more modern translations an opportunity. It's important because it’s something that will provide its readers with a first-person, though fictionalized, account of the Thirty Years’ War, and will do so with plenty of humor, satire, and some apt and thoughtful commentary on human nature. It’s most certainly not for everyone, and I’d only recommend it to those interested in the period, or in early German literature. 

My faithful and fatherly advice would be, ye should employ your youth and your means, which ye now do waste in such purposeless wise, to study, that some day he may be helpful to God and man and yourself; let war alone, in which, as I do hear, ye have so great a delight; and before ye get a shrewd knock and find the truth of that saying, ‘Young soldiers make old beggars.”