Rating: 5/5

(4.5 rounded up)

“The Hutt Gambit” picks up 5 years after “The Paradise Snare” and continues A.C. Crispin’s depiction of young(ish) Han Solo’s life in the now non-Canon Star Wars Legends timeline. In this one we see Han form his partnership with Chewbacca, have his first run ins with several classic Star Wars characters (Lando, Boba Fett, Jabba the Hutt) and falls in love with the Millennium Falcon. 

The Hutt Gambit felt like a natural extension of the last book and improves on a lot of what Crispin had done with Han’s character. I will say it does open with one event I find to be not as good as the Canon depiction of Han’s early life in “Solo: A Star Wars Story”. The circumstances of Han’s meeting/befriending Chewbacca in the book I found to be nowhere as neat as they were in the Solo movie. I just much preferred the film’s version of Han and Chewie being forced to cooperate initially before Chewie came to trust Han and they started sticking together because they enjoy each other’s company. The off-screen rescue and life debt vow of the book I personally found to just be half baked for what’s supposed to be a momentous occasion in their lives and the Galaxy’s history. Besides that, I did think Han’s story was a bit all over the place in the first half and lacked clear focus.

Beyond these parts though I contend The Hutt Gambit was a pretty great Han Solo and Star Wars story. I liked how Han came into his own in the criminal underworld after his Imperial career and actually managed to impress the Hutts with his skills and overall audacity. The Hutt storyline was one of the book’s best, feeling very reminiscent of “Dune” and “Song of Ice and Fire” in all the backstabbing and scheming. I’m not too much of a Jabba fan but I do think this is one of the better stories about him as we see Jabba come to enjoy Han’s capabilities/antics and learning crime lord talents from his uncle/aunt (I’m sure certain sections of the fandom will hate that plot point). The return of last book’s cult scam in the Hutt storyline was a nice way to keep that going, as was the return of Bria. Still mostly prefer Qi’ra to Bria as “the one that got away” (although Han the Himbo in Legends means Han has plenty of girlfriends now in this book) but I did like the direction Crispin is taking Bria after the first book and I look forward to seeing where Crispin takes Bria’s story (I had her fate spoiled years ago but still looking forward to seeing how we get there). The book ultimately culminates in the Battle of Nar Shadda which I found to be a solid set piece (even if I think it should have been the Battle of Tanaab to tie in with that battle’s reference in the movies). We get ship combat action which as a fan of the X-Wing and Alphabet Squadron books I appreciate. Moreover we get to see Han both show off his talents/imagination as a pilot and his leadership potential. The whole battle just felt like a good example of the out-of-the-box thinking that has to be employed by Star Wars heroes in the face of overwhelming odds.

Besides Han’s development and her original storylines, Crispin does a nice job tying everything in with the other Star Wars stories from this era. There were some Legends continuity nods in the last book (i.e., Corran Horn’s dad) but I noticed more here, particularly Soontir Fel from the X-Wing books, having Han meet characters from “Dark Empire”, and firmly establishing when during the book it overlaps with “The Lando Calrissian Adventures”. Really the only continuity nod/cameo I didn’t appreciate was Vader’s even if it was harmless (it just brought little to Han’s story). All in all I really appreciated the smorgasborg of other Star Wars content alluded to here and it made me appreciate taking the time to read other Legends content (even those I didn't like so much) before this, it makes it clear Crispin loves the franchise and tying everything in satisfactorily. 

Despite some nitpicks and small complaints, I really got sucked into reading “The Hutt Gambit”, with Crispin expertly building off the first book and delivering an extremely satisfactory Han Solo story that brings him closer to his movie storyline. If anything I think this could have worked as a Star Wars movie, specifically as a good basis for “Solo 2” with Han’s introduction to Jabba and subsequent association with the Hutt Clans’, following up on his ex’s Galaxy influencing storyline, etc. I’m really hoping that “Rebel Dawn” brings Crispin’s trilogy to a great ending.