Rating: 4/5

This was a solid and engaging historical fiction standalone that reads like a fantasy novel. It was full of immersive worldbuilding, suspenseful plotting, and the kinds of colorful characters Cornwell seems to be able to write in his sleep. It is not particularly action-packed for a Cornwell book, but he instead delivers lots of impactful tribal, family, and personal drama, and I was riveted to the page as we followed the long and arduous process that led to the building of the impossible stone temple. 

Fans of the Warlord Chronicles (and the stupendous Jonathan Keeble for audiobookers) might especially enjoy it since the writing has the same kind of general feel with Cornwell dreaming up the Bronze Age society of 2000 BC southern Britain that built Stonehenge. As in that trilogy, Cornwell delivers some beautiful prose with an emotional weight that will pluck at your heartstrings with scenes of tenderness before he then rips that heart out and stomps on it until it's pulverized to bits, and then maybe gathers up some of the pieces to put it partly back together. 2000 BC was a brutal time to be alive and Cornwell can be vicious, so this one is not for the faint of heart. If the idea of a village using their officially dubbed "Kill-Child" giant animal bone to club kids to death doesn't seem like something you want to be envisioning, this one is not going to be for you. 

The perspective isn't fixed and can be omniscient at times, but mostly we stay with good-hearted and clever Saban, whose family is at the heart of the tale. Following the twists and turns of his life and tracking his gradual growth/changing was a highlight of the read, as was spending time with the various female main and side characters who really stood out with their strong and distinctive personalities. Cornwell made me so believe I was living there in these Bronze Age villages, where life was dominated by both a tribe's practical survival needs alongside their obsessive religious superstitions (at least in Cornwell's estimation, which seems like as great a guess as any). 

I didn't get as fully engaged and invested to the level I would usually feel for my 5-star reads, so this is more like a 4.5-star read for me (can GR let us do half-stars?!?!), but I'm very happy I read it and I think it will be a memorable one on my journey through all of Cornwell's works. I now have quite the yearning to see the remains of Stonehenge for myself, and even though I'll be imagining an entirely fictional story behind it when I do hopefully get to see it someday, it'll feel no less real to me for all that.