Rating: 5/5

Heinrich Hoffmann considered the childrens' books he read to his progeny rather lacking, so decided to write his own tales to entertain the youngsters. He named that book Struwwelpeter (or shockheaded Peter) and from what he created I think we can conclude Hoffmann was a tad sociopathic.

As am I, it seems, because I enjoyed this unhinged mess. The images are especially horrifying, including the nightmare on the front cover:

And this apparently child friendly scene:

And this... thing that breaks down your doors to get to your vulnerable thumbs:

All the stories are moral fables warning your crotch goblins against poor behaviour. These 'sins' of the children range from the violent (bullying) to the utterly harmless (sucking your thumb), and even the most minor of infractions recieve a severe comeuppance.

What that punishment is depends on the book version you get. I read two, the first a polyglingual edition, (the one I've selected for this review, which also works as a nice rosetta stone for your unhinged spawn), and a German/English translation, with the images slightly edited by Martyn Jacques (of The Tiger Lillies band). In the former, a few children die, but most suffer humiliation, sore legs or getting wet, the stories ending with a sad, bedraggled, but repentant child.
In the latter version, everyone dies, and there's gore, spurting amputations and a rabbit shooting itself in the face after accidentally murdering a loved one. It's a complete splatterfest.

It might sound like I've given you a clue which is more appropriate for your dear little sprouts, but it's not quite that simple, mainly because of the story of the Bully Boys.
In the violent Jacques version, three bully boys harrass a middle aged gentlemen. A giant then knocks their heads inside out for picking on his neighbours, the end. In the original, they pick on a young African boy. The giant appears and tells the boys to leave the child alone as he 'did not choose his darksome hue'. To punish the boys, he drops them in ink so they look darker than their victim. I don't know if I'd be more uncomfortable explaining that poorly aged anti-racism story to my wee one or the suicide bunny tale, honestly.

If I may make a suggestion, maybe don't let this near your children. I was a creepy little Damien who probably would have loved the Jacques version, but I'd advise you keep the book on a high shelf out of reach, lest you want awkward questions or sobbing, neurotic trauma. You should read it, especially the edited version, because it's just weird and unnerving enough to be a fun, Grimm Brothers romp of colourful and scary images that will stay (most likely unwelcome) in your head for some time.

There's also another edition which I've yet to read by Sanya Glisic, featuring all new artwork, and although it's not really the nightmare fuel of the original drawings, they are definitely, pleasantly messed up :