Rating: 1/5

Where to start? Well, I only read this for an annual book challenge to read a best seller from 1990 and I'd already given up on Jackie Collins. 

This novel is based at the end of the 1980's. Bear that in mind because a lot of it felt like the 1890's. I listened to this book in 2024 and it has not worn well at all. In fact I'm amazed that noone has tried banning it.

It focuses on a few families originally from some faraway wee hamlet in the wilds of ... well not far from Edinburgh apparently. So a bit like Brigadoon - in fact if Gene Kelly had turned up i wouldn't have been surprised.

There are three main families - the Airds, the Balmorinos and the Steyntons. We are leading up to September throughout the book because that's when there's a 21st party for Katie Steynton - who I'm not sure we even meet but I might have been ranting at the time.

My problems with this novel are multiple - the attitude of the men (manly, gruff, know-it-all, must be obeyed, hunting shooting fishing types with such stiff upper lips it's a miracle they can speak), The attitude of the women - soft, delicate, unsure of every decision, want to be dominated and adored, if they show a spark of independence or dissention they're termed - whores/wild/unmanageable/hysterical. 

I swear it's like the 1970s passed this crowd by. 

We also have racism, sexism, child abuse and an attitude towards mental health that just doesn't bear thinking about.

Yes I know things were different 30 years ago but to have a woman with mental health difficulties and then turn her into an evil character that people are afraid of is just plain wrong. The only minorities are a couple who run the corner shop and, of course, they are Pakistani. The biggest dumpling of the lot, Edmund Aird, is shocked that the "Pakistanis" are open all hours but doesn't mind heading down there to buy a case of tonic at all hours. Double standards? 

The other part that really made me aggravated (and I was very aggravated for most of the recording) was the denigration of the daughter of Edmund - Alexa. They are relieved she has found a man, at last, and hope it will help her become more mature. This would almost be understandable were she a mid 60s spinster living with her family but the woman is 21, lives alone in London and runs her own catering business. Just how much more independent can you get?? 

To say I disliked this twaddle is the understatement of the year. It was awful. It gave me a headache. However it has one star because I finished it and the narration was okay but a little melodramatic at times. (The star is mainly for me.)