Rating: 4/5

50th book of 2020.

This is probably the worst time to read Ellis, as he's so damn depressing. Disaffection is the perfect word for his books, the way you feel when you're reading them. (I must say, also, how great is this cover? Not sure why it is, but I think it's great.)

Despite this, by Goodreads standards, has the same rating as Less Than Zero, American Psycho and Lunar Park, I think this has been the best Ellis yet. Let me try to explain. American Psycho is just Less Than Zero on some serious, serious drugs - but bad drugs, the ones that give you the worst trips, like nightmares. This, funnily enough, actually being the novel between the two, is a nice middle-ground. There isn't too much violence, and though it's everything I expected, drugs, sex, depression, suicide... it's not quite as bad as what comes next for Bret Easton Ellis - though nothing is.

There's quite a nostalgic slope coming out of my University library; that's a funny way of describing it. But, I couldn't fathom the number of times I've walked down that slope talking to someone about books, or classes, or food, or money. In that respect, it's a nostalgic slope. The other day, I was speaking to a woman I've never met before. Middle-aged, quite quiet, so the conversation always required a lot of attention, and gentle. She was nice. She told me that she loved Bret Easton Ellis, which surprised me. I gave a spiel about my thoughts on Ellis (hearing how it sounded as I said it, and felt sick at myself) and she agreed with me. You don't want to look but you can't help yourself, was my main point. It's a window into another life, too. And I think Ellis gets flak because what he's writing isn't romantic. He's writing about a lost generation, like Fitzgerald and Hemingway did, but their generation didn't have copious amounts of sex, or do enough cocaine to kill an elephant, or wave machetes around. It's a difficult relationship with Ellis, it's awe, but also disgust. I guess that's what makes him so interesting. 

Rules of Attraction is more obviously scathing. It's ironic. It's even playful. Here are some quotes... They aren't nice. I'll say that now. 

A boy's thoughts on Kafka in a lecture:
'Well, like, the dude was totally depressed because, well, the dude turned into a bug and freaked out. 
(He's not wrong, credit to him. Though maybe 'freaked out' is a little generous of Samsa's reaction.)

Norris pays and ask the shy, acne-scarred cashier if she knows who wrote 'Notes from the Underground'. The girl, who's so homely you couldn't sleep with her for money, not for anything, smiles and says no, and that he can look in the bestseller paperbacks if he'd like. We leave the store and Norris sneers a little too meanly, "Townies are so ignorant."

A particularly crude quote, from a poetry group:
'Yeah, I've been working on this concept that when Man fucks animals, He's fucking Nature, since He's becomes so computerised and all.' Stump stops and takes a swallow from a silver flask he brings out of his pocket and says, 'I'm working on the dog section now where this guy ties a dog up and is having intercourse with it because He thinks dog is God. D-O-G. . .G-O-D. God spelled backwards. Get it? See?'

Most interestingly are the character crossovers. One of our protagonists in this is Patrick Bateman's brother, Sean Bateman. Of course, Patrick Bateman is our American Psycho. He even has several pages from his perspective, though the voice doesn't quite match what we get later on, so Ellis maybe hadn't quite found out what he would become. The other interesting one, is Clay's several pages, who was our protagonist in Less Than Zero - he was the only voice we heard in that novel, compared to the many in this one. So all in all, a good Ellis book. 
Does that make it a 'good' book? I'm not sure. Yes and no. 
Do I like Ellis: yes and no.