Rating: 5/5

The 1998 literary novel, "Evening," by Susan Minot, does what literary fiction often does best: examines the life of an ordinary, unreflective person -- especially an ordinary person who has achieved outward forms of success, such as marriage, children, home ownership, vacations to Europe, etc. -- and the story scrutinizes their interior space for the jewels of wisdom their philosophical impoverishment might have to offer a more careful observer of life. 

Another mark of literary fiction at its finest: when there is no hero's reward for being unreflective, emotionally cold, and psychologically average. In a novel like "Evening," there is no heroic philosophical fulfillment to be had for shunning a life of the mind or a life of great passion in favor of chasing material status, which is far more mundane and requires a very different kind of ambition. Authors like Susan Minot understand that economic material rewards and philosophical perspicacity are not often found existing together, and the story doesn't falsely substitute profundity with the size of one's bank account, marital status, or number of grandchildren. 

And I am so here for that. *So* here for that. Books like this one make me feel glad to be alive. A great literary novel like "Evening" sometimes feels like the only thing that keeps my heart beating, stories that explode with the dark, ugly truths that have no place in polite company, civil society, or all the moments when I am expected to smile and pretend life is wonderful.

This is not a book to read for people who like to smile and pretend. If you need heroic tales about good people who persevere to attain their hero's reward, then "Evening" will not be a satisfying experience.

But if you enjoy beautiful prose, elliptical stories, and dark truths about the world as it is: patriarchal, gender conforming, focused on outer appearances, harshly judgmental, often cruel, and full of suffering -- well, you might love this novel as much as I do. 

The protagonist -- a young woman named Ann Grant (at age 25) and Ann Lord (her married name at age 65) -- has not spent her lifetime examining her interior depths. Ann Grant/Ann Lord has a fine memory and a very sharp eye, but she has put those skills to use in the world of outward success. She has "performed" her life according to the dictates of luxury, status, and taste. She married three different times, suffered through various hardships and attained all the big status symbols of a successful life, like a beautiful home, trips to France and Italy, and her grown children now have beautiful children of their own. Author Susan Minot is a careful observer of life, and "Evening" is full of the status-relevant details that surround any member of the white upper-middle class. Ann Grant/Ann Lord is a member of that class, and she is so carefully drawn as to be instantly recognizable as an archetype of her class.

But emotional truth has eluded Ann Grant/Ann Lord until the very end of her life, when she lies on a bed slowly dying of cancer. In the scattered thoughts of her morphine-addled mind, memories and emotion surface to reveal a new order, an order that could only be seen after all of the material trappings of life have fallen away. Alone inside her body, Ann Grant/Ann Lord turns that sharp eye on herself, and the result is this extraordinarily stunning novel. 

I first read "Evening" in 2007, and then reread the book this year, in 2018. I loved it even more the second time. It's a haunting story that has stayed with me in the very best way. 

This time, reading "Evening" reminded me of the work of Andre Dubus, especially his "Selected Stories." In particular, his short story, "The Pretty Girl," holds a similar place in my heart. That story's central protagonist, Polly, has much in common with Ann Grant/Ann Lord, even though they occupy two different socioeconomic classes; Polly is a white middle-class woman, rather than inhabiting the higher economic advantages of the upper-middle class. Andre Dubus and Susan Minot have an equal dedication to telling the truth, and capturing something true about human nature on the page. I delight in their work and their precise, restrained, and incredibly evocative prose.

Reading "Evening" makes me feel so much. On the one hand, it is the smallest story imaginable, just the story of this one mundane woman and her common, rather loveless, unremarkable life. But that is why the novel feels so sweeping, and so grand. Even the hard-hitting New York Times critic Michiko Kakutani gave this novel a rave review. I don't often agree with Ms. Kakutani, but on this book, I think she is absolutely correct. Here is the link to her review, if you are curious and haven't read it yet --

https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytim...

For anyone who loves literary fiction, I wholeheartedly recommend "Evening." Five full glorious stars.