Rating: 3/5

This book is a fascinating mess: Houellebecq attacks modern-day capitalism and the atomization of society, dissects the tourism industry, ponders Islamic terrorism – oh yes, and there’s quite a lot of pornographic writing in this text. Our protagonist is Michel (yup, like the author), a guy in his early forties who works for the French Ministry of Culture where he mostly does calculations and sometimes gets confronted with ridiculous artistic projects that get monetized by the state (as we all know, Houellebecq has always been a huge fan of the cultural establishment – not). Michel lives a very isolated life and has a hard time maintaining human relationships, thus being somewhat exemplary for the much-discussed “loneliness epidemic”. In his spare time, he hangs out in peep shows where he is looking for human contact and sexual relief. When his father dies, Michel takes a round trip in Thailand with a French travel agency. It is there where he meets and falls in love with 27-year-old Valérie who herself works in the higher ranks of the French tourism industry. Together with a colleague of hers, they develop a concept for organized sex tourism which becomes a big hit – until Islamic terrorism ruins their plans. 
 
The whole text has a confessional feel and a highly fragmentary character, as Michel often quotes scientists and elaborates on his own ideas about the spiritual and sexual state of the Western world. He also frequently recounts conversations he had with people and shares his impressions and judgements of people. Then we have the narrative arc itself that drives the story and keeps his musings together, plus a lot of very explicit sexual scenes. This makes for a rather disparate result, but I was glued to the text, as it is apparent that this novel was written for effect, as a statement to be discussed.

And this is probably the part of the review where I have to state (and I can’t believe that it has to be stated over and over and over again when it comes to this author) that the protagonist and Houellebecq are not the same person. Don’t fall for simple provocations like naming the protagonist Michel. Rather, one should look for the meaning of this character and face some uneasy facts: The loneliness epidemic exists. People stuck in the hamster wheel of capitalism, battling burn out or bore out, exist. Countries like Japan struggle with the fact that rising numbers of young people don’t have a sex life. The incel movement exists. Sex tourism exists. Islamic terrorism exists. Does that mean that one has to draw the same conclusions as Michel, the protagonist? Absolutely not. But does anyone really doubt that commercially organized sex tourism would be a successful concept if it was allowed? That there is a connection between the commodification of sex and neo-liberal global capitalism? And that all of this is alarming, mortifying, terrible?

Houellebecq is talking about these issues in a provocative, no-holds-barred way. There is no moral judgement, little empathy, there’s a lot of rhetoric aiming to cover the fact that this “industry” is about exploitation, although it is obvious that it is. The reader should look at the characters talking and what they stand for, the meanings this story might convey. Houellebecq always holds my attention and makes me think, and that’s why I appreciate this author.