Rating: 4/5

I read this immediately after A Bend in the Road so Garrett's wife's death is very similar to Miles' wife but here there was no mystery but lot of love and sadness. The story starts while a success columnist who at 36 is divorced with a 12 years old son is vacationing and comes across a message in a bottle and the content is so full of raw emotions that she can't help but cry. And soon somehow it finds way to her column and soon she finds there are other letters which people found similarly to her and curious she wants to meet the guy who has so much love in his heart. So she finds the guy Garrett with the help of her Boss/Friend Diane who was a kick-ass character whom I liked a lot, Theresa not so much. 

This book is seeped in emotions and like most/all of Sparks's books in set somewhere around North Carolina there are sea, beaches, boats and vacations and flings and romances along the way but like so often happen the reality and egos soon come between them and then there are the understanding and misunderstandings they have to go through all in all it was a typical Sparks book which is also tinged by tragedy here and there and I am already kinda getting over it but when I have promised myself to go through as many of these books as possible then I shall do so.

May be if you are still missing the Sparks in your lives then pick one of these books maybe you will find something to love so love and read and love and enjoy and just keep on reading.

People who don't read generally ask me my reasons for reading. Simply put I just love reading and so to that end I have made it my motto to just Keep on Reading. I love to read everything except for Self Help books but even those once in a while. I read almost all the genre but YA, Fantasy, Biographies are the most. My favorite series is, of course, Harry Potter but then there are many more books that I just adore. I have bookcases filled with books which are waiting to be read so can't stay and spend more time in this review, so remember I loved reading this and love reading more, you should also read what you love and then just Keep on Reading.