Rating: 4/5

Tomato Red doesn't stand for what you probably think it stands for...if you've even thought about it at all. I won't spoil it for you, so you don't have to worry. It wasn't at all what I thought it might be. The only thing I will tell you, it's not about tomatoes...

It was both discovered and recommended to me, and I have to say, I'm really glad. I discovered Daniel Woodrell because of his amazing book Winter's Bone", but also someone told me to pick up Tomato Red. For anyone who is wondering, Tomato Red and Winter's Bone are similar, but they are also very different. 

Tomato Red is from a male's perspective. Again, we are put into the poor Missouri life, where people whore themselves for money and live in shacks. People drink and smoke all of the time, and they speak, (and I can say this because I'm a Texan), "country." Some do drugs, and some are suffering because of the situation their parents put them into. 

To be quite honest, Sammy is the type of guy you want to hate. He's a loser. Sometimes he lives out of his car, does bad things, sometimes awful things. But, you almost kind of like him. Or at least I did. I wanted certain things to turn out better than they did in the book, but it wasn't like I was too disappointed because you can't always get what you want. Sammy is the type of guy you feel bad for, but then when you look at things he does, you stop feeling sorry for him and say it's what he deserves. 

Woodrell, the author, has really impressed me with his writing in both of the books I have read by him. I can always picture what's going on, the characters, their actions, and I always have a feeling, whether positive or negative, towards the main character. He really does have a way with words, and the way he writes "country, Southern" is very well done. It's believable, its readable, and it makes me feel as though I'm hearing his characters in my head or watching them in front of me. 

So why the four stars? I know I don't have to justify my rating, but to me this story wasn't as good as Winter's Bone. There is a specific instance in both where I felt they were way too similar In WB, Ree's dad, Jessup is killed and put into the lake, and that's where he remains. In TR, Jason is said to have drowned in a lake, or he was killed before, (the coroner says he drowned but won't do an autopsy because of "money", and dumped with fish hooks in him all over his body. Either way, for me, it was all too similar., but different circumstances. However, the stories are drastically different. It's an easy read, enjoyable, and one I'd recommend to people who did like Winter's Bone or if you like characters you hate to love, or love to hate, or if you just like Woodrell's style. I also just don't feel it was as strong of a story as Winter's Bone. So for those things, it's a solid four star book. 

"Taggin' that name on you, that was like casting a curse on you. Oh, baby, your ma made a sorry, shitty prediction on your whole life and hung a name on you that would help the sorry, shitty stuff come true." 

"You ain't bringin' me any news." 

Sorry...I couldn't resist. That quote me laugh so hard when I read it. :)