Rating: 3/5

If you look up “bitter” in the dictionary, you will find a picture of Anthony Burgess.

Between the US and UK, there are different versions of this book (not just a different cover). In the UK, there is an extra chapter, Chapter 21. In 1961, according to the author, he only agreed to cut the last chapter of the book in the US version because he needed money.

He is still quite salty about this censoring.

The UK ending is superior—the US ending is abrupt as it was never intended to be the final conclusion of the book.

At the heart of this novel is a dystopia where in the future bad guy/ultra-violent criminal element Alex is reconditioned by the State to be good.

This gloomy, little novel is also written in a futuristic (aka made-up language). Although the chapters are deceptively short, usually 4-6 pages, it took forever to get through because I kept looking up all of the new words. For example, in the first chapter, I wrote down 87 “made-up” words. There is an appendix on Wikipedia which is most helpful!

A Clockwork Orange focuses a great deal on the idea is someone good if they are forced to be good. If you park your car at the store, when you return, do you want your car to still be there? Do you care why no one has stolen it so long as your car isn’t stolen?

As interesting as this idea is, the preliminary question is do we really have choice to begin with.

No. No. No. Hear me out.

“Choice is an illusion.” - Blake Crouch in Summer Frost

Let’s go in our way back machines to 600 years ago. Most people believed that the world was flat with the Earth at the center of the universe.

Now in 2024, most people believe that the world is round and orbits the sun.

Isn’t everyone A Clockwork Orange to a certain extent, a product of religion, government policies, social norms, parenting, Big Tech (algorithms), education and whittled down by economic pressures?

While I enjoyed the philosophical musings, this dystopian wasn’t my favorite when compared against others from this genre (1984, The Handmaid’s Tale).

The Green Light at the End of the Dock (How much I spent):
Softcover Text - £8.99 at Waterstones

2025 Reading Schedule
Jan	A Town Like Alice
Feb	Birdsong
Mar	Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Louis De Berniere
Apr	War and Peace
May	The Woman in White
Jun	Atonement
Jul	The Shadow of the Wind
Aug	Jude the Obscure
Sep	Ulysses
Oct	Vanity Fair
Nov	A Fine Balance
Dec	Germinal

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Facebook Insta My Bookstore at Pango