Rating: 5/5

It is the privilege of early youth to live in advance of its days in all the beautiful continuity of hope which knows no pause and no introspection.
One closes behind on the little gate of mere boyishness – and enters an enchanted garden. Its very shades glow with promise. Every turn of the path has its seduction. And it isn’t because it is an undiscovered country. One knows well enough that all mankind had streamed that way. 

Reading last month my first novel by Brett Easton Ellis, a fictional account of his life at seventeen, I was sort of driven into revisiting my own experiences of crossing the shadow-line, from careless youth to stressed-out adulthood. In the midst of that deluge of music, books and movie references that Ellis uses to bring back to life the year 1981, I tried to remember who would be the icon of that period in my life. One of the answers is Joseph Conrad, the writer who contributed the most to my plans to become a sailor, probably at that time as a means of escape from my real life and from the typical teenager angst I was going through.

So, long story short, Ellis made me want to revisit my youth in the form of re-reading Conrad, and I couldn’t have picked a better novella to illustrate my point than this one. Objectively,  The Shadow Line  is not Conrad’s best, as it re-treads a lot of the themes that are presented in the better known ‘Youth’ and ‘Typhoon’, but it hits all the right buttons in me still, confirming Conrad’s status among my literary idols, after all these years.

 Yes. One goes on. And the time, too, goes on – till one perceives ahead a shadow-line warning one that the region of early youth, too must be left behind.
This is the period of life in which such moments of which I have spoken are likely to come. What moments? Why, the moments of boredom, of weariness, of dissatisfaction. Rash moments. I mean moments when the still young are inclined to commit rash actions, such as getting married suddenly or else throwing up a job for no reason.

Conrad’s secret weapon is to make his sea stories into allegories of life, timeless and universally valid across cultures and historical backgrounds. Who amongst us doesn’t remember the moment they crossed the shadow-line from careless, starry-eyed youth into the toil and worry of adulthood? It’s a rite of passage we all go through, rushing ahead into the future with our hearts out on a sleeve, careless of well-laid plans or of consequences. 

The first-person narrator of the novella is a young officer on a ship trading among the spice islands of the Far East, in the last years of the age of sail. He is well regarded by his superiors and by his crew, yet he is restless, unable to settle down into the routine his life has become.

 It was one of those moments, you know. The green sickness of late youth descended on me and carried me off. Carried me off that ship, I mean. 

So he throws it all away without any back-up plans, hoping that something better will eventually drift his way. The young man ends up in one of those sleepy Oriental ports, waiting for a ship back to Europe and waiting for a sign about what the future has in hold for him. His old captain is loath to see him go, but apparently he sees something of his own past in the young man’s rashness:

 As I was going out of his cabin he added suddenly, in a peculiar wistful tone, that he hoped I would find what I was so anxious to go and look for. A soft, cryptic utterance which seemed to reach deeper than any diamond-hard tool could have done. I do believe he understood my case. 

... and with these simple words, here is old me once again forced to look back at the folly of youth with a wistful, yearning smile.

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

Throwing your whole life overboard like excess baggage is a sign of youth, of still sailing the bright seas before crossing the shadow-line. The young man is still driven by dreams of his future, by hope and by the glimpse of an enchanted garden-world. Into this world, another allegorical figure is introduced:

 Captain Ellis looked upon himself as a sort of divine (pagan) emanation, the deputy-Neptune for the circumambient seas. If he didn’t actually rule the waves, he pretended to rule the fate of the mortals whose lives were cast upon the waters. 

The captain and the young man are staying at a hotel for unemployed sailors, waiting for a sign from Fate. This comes in the form of a summons to the Harbour Master where the young man is offered his heart’s secret desire: not to abandon the sea and his career, but to become master of his own destiny.

 A ship! My ship! She was mine, more absolutely mine for possession and care than anything in the world; an object of responsibility and devotion. She was there waiting for me, spell-bound, unable to move, to live, to get out into the world (till I came), like an enchanted princess. 

Conrad, with his classical education, is probably well aware of the Greek tragedies where the gods are cursing you by offering you what you asked for. The ship the young man is offered has been abandoned in Bangkok, at the top of what was known then as the Gulf of Siam. The death of its former captain is said to have laid a curse on the ship and on its crew. But for the young man, the offer is the answer to all his prayers.

 A sudden passion of anxious impatience rushed through my veins, gave me such a sense of intensity of existence as I have never felt before or since. 

He knows he is up to the task, that this is what he really wants to do with his life and what he has trained himself for. So he jumps at the chance with a young man’s impetuosity. And nothing the gods will throw against him will make him deviate from his course... or so he thinks before he has to deal with the realities of putting a ship to sea in dangerous waters.

 All roads are long that lead towards one’s heart desire. But this road my mind’s eye could see on a chart, professionally, with all its complications and difficulties, yet simple enough in a way. One is a seaman or one is not. And I had no doubt of being one. 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

The shadow-line is fast approaching, yet the young man is rushing forward to meet his destiny. For all my sense of dread induced by decades of experiencing how life manages to knock down your dreams, I cheered for the young man as he climbs aboard his new command. Is it not the domain of youth to forge ahead regardless of the voices of caution?

 Yes. I had my hands full of complications which were most valuable as ‘experience’. People have a great opinion of the advantages of experience. But in this connection experience means always something disagreeable as opposed to the charm and innocence of illusions. 

The port authorities are dragging their feet, the loading of supplies is bogged down by corrupt suppliers, the crew is laid down by yellow fever, with his second in command, Mr. Burns, the worst case. The only man aboard who seems all right and competent is the captain’s steward, Ransome, but even he must be careful of not stressing his weak heart.
Yet no obstacle can stop youth from forging ahead. The ship eventually sails down into the doldrums of the tropic, to be held there indefinitely by the lack of wind, while more of the crewmen are laid down by fever and while the medical supplies turned out to have been stolen onshore.

 The darkness had risen around the ship like a mysterious emanation from the dumb and lonely waters. I leaned on the rail and turned my ear to the shadows of the night. Not a sound. My command might have been a planet flying vertiginously on its appointed path in a space of infinite silence. 

A captain is responsible not only for the ship and for its cargo, but also for the well-being of the crew. The young man takes all the right decisions, yet he can get no break from the fickle gods who like to play dice with the lives of mortals. The cursed ship is lost at sea, with a hurricane fast approaching. Even as the elements of the story become familiar from other Conrad settings, I cannot help but be gripped anew by his life lessons about how a man is not brought down by adversity if he steers a true course through the stormy waters.

 The difficulties, the dangers, the problems of a ship at sea must be met on deck. 

As it happened before in his stories, Conrad’s sea tales reach deeper and wider into what it means to be human, into what the turning points of a life are. We will cross that shadow-line again ourselves as the doomed ship is racing down the tropical seas in complete darkness, hoping against all signs that a welcoming shore lies somewhere ahead.

 Then he observed sagely:
“You must feel jolly well tired by this time.”
“No,” I said. “Not tired. But I’ll tell you, Captain Giles, how I feel. I feel old. And I must be. All of you on shore look to me just like a lot of skittish youngsters that have never known a care in the world.” 

In the space of a couple of weeks, the enthusiasm of youth, the belief in dreams coming true, is left behind, and a new man is contemplating a more realist view of what life holds in store for him. His friend, the second-hand Neptune of the spice islands, reminds him that you can learn even from bad experiences, and that you must eventually become philosophical about it all:

 “Precious little rest in life for anybody. Better not think of it.”
[...]
... a man should stand up to his bad luck, to his mistakes, to his conscience and all that sort of thing. Why – what else would you have to fight against. 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

Joseph Conrad was already among my top authors, but this was based almost exclusively on lectures done in my teens. I find it reassuring that he is just as convincing when I read him now, while carrying my own baggage of bad luck, mistakes, conscience and all that sort of thing.
I hope I will be able to continue to re-read his other stories soon.