Rating: 3/5

~3 stars~

TW/CW: suicide, death, violence

***read for school***

It was good. Not my favorite or really my thing, but I enjoyed it better than Macbeth. Listening to it while reading it helped, but all the assignments I had to do and still have yet to finish, and the daunting essay I have to write next week do not. It's about who I think is the most tragical hero, Brutus or Caeser. Quite frankly I think it's neither, so I suppose I just have to lie my way through the essay.

I thought it was very thought provoking in different areas, and that Shakespeare did a great job with this one writing wise. The fact that Caesar himself was not a bigger part of it, I did not like. He died too early for me to even care about him, but to be fair, I equally didn't care about the other characters either. Overall, I think having read it over a long period of time, and having read it for school may have ruined some of the experience I may have had, but discussing it with others also enhanced it. I like this book enough, but wouldn't re-read it, but I do look forward to picking up more Shakespeare in the future. 

____

  Pre-reading thoughts

(November 18 2020)
I haven't started reading this, but I did have to do some research on Ceaser and here is a fun fact:
He is a major prick. He was kindnapped by pirates, and asked them to raise the ransom higher because it was "too low", and he thought he really was that important. He threatened to crucify them if they didn't. They thought it was joke. After he was released he came back and did just as he promised. I already hate him, and I barely know anything about him. He sounds insufferable smh.
---
(Nov 9 2020)
imagine this:
Today is the first day of the quarter
You have all new classes
You log into the online class bcuz Ms. 'Rona decided she wanted to be the MC
Your teacher has assigned this book in the first few minutes
You are now being forced to read a book you never really had any intention of reading
You groan because the chances are you won't like it 
Because school ruines everything

anyways I will be reading this soon I guess