Rating: 4/5

Singer writes in his Preface, that this was originally written in 1953-1955 as one book, though, for technical reasons, published in English in 1967 and 1969 as this title, The Manor, and The Estate. I have an edition that includes both titles and hope to get to the second before too much time passes. The cover of my edition describes it as "saga of a family and an epoch". 

The epoch is that of Poland following a failed uprising in 1863. This is an event about which I am still completely clueless, not even knowing it happened. The Count Janpolski and his sons had participated and had to flee their Estate. Calman Jacoby, a wealthy Jew of Jampol, offered the Russians to purchase a leasehold of The Manor, which he was granted. Jacoby had four daughters, the eldest already of marriageable age. The story follows Jacoby and his daughters and their husbands. 

Calman Jacoby practiced Hasidism, a strict form of Judaism and there is much about this form in the book. The times, however, were trending toward a less strict form of the religion. Also, they lived among non-Jews. Anti-semitism was rife. It was interesting to me that those who practiced this strict form of religion could keep with it despite so many obstacles. I wouldn't normally quote from an ending, but I think it gives little away. They made him a kind of partner in sharing the Torah's treasures. Among these shelves of sacred books, Calman felt protected. 

There was another quote much earlier that I found so relevant to not just today, but certainly also the last several decades. The government is definitely sick, but terrorism can't make it well. I was struck by this sentence, written 70 years ago. Singer's writing style is easy to read, and perhaps that makes it easy to think of him lightly. There is more here than one might think, but it doesn't feel like heavy reading either. 

I have to admit there were sections when I wish he'd either tell us more or just skip it all together. As I say above, I'll be happy to get to the second part, but that doesn't mean this is ravingly good. I think it climbs into the 4-star group, but just barely, and I might even be exaggerating a tad.