Rating: 5/5

"I can't love a hero." 
 
Thus ends the fragile love affair between Kassandra and Aeneas. He has to leave the Trojan battlefield and start a new dynasty far away from Kassandra's beloved home and she has learned to hate male heroism, being a guarantee of brutal violence against women. 
 
Kassandra, the seeing woman in a world full of blind patriotism and machismo, a fighter for the rights of women in a society that trades them in exchange for gold or honour - she is as timeless as myth itself, and as contemporary as any political character can be. 

Rereading Christa Wolf's take on the Trojan princess after many years, I was stunned to see how much of Kassandra is in the author herself, how much the myth matches the way she fought against the delusional power-hungry politics of her own time, the way she tried to raise a voice of concern and reason in the middle of ideological wars raging around her - wars fought by childish, vain heroes over fake booty.

In the end, Kassandra sees the walls of her community destroyed from the inside, and like the ancient Trojan priestess, Christa Wolf was able to tell that her society was about to break down. The novel is written in the early eighties, and the DDR had all the signs of a slowly eroding system.

When Kassandra laments the rhetoric that gets louder and stronger the weaker Troy becomes, it is a mirror of Christa Wolf's experience of propaganda in a failing government. In Eumelos, Troy even has its Stasi agent and fanatic.

And there is more to it than that. The whole reason for the Trojan War is based on a fraud: Helena is not there. She is absent. Not necessary. For two demogogues to confront each other, no real reason is needed - just a valid excuse. 

Fake news meets Greek myth. And it is chillingly good!

This novel needs to be read, and reread, for the Trojan War keeps going on, and on, and on. 

And it will, until new roles for men and women are established. Roles that are not based on the idea that a violent hero is attractive. Roles that give women access to the decision making processes to the same extent as men. Roles that forever destroy the idea that a woman is an object that can be "won" in a (war) game or paid for with gold. 

"I can't love a hero."

That's the first step towards peace. But unlike Kassandra, most people are blindly following the military piper, playing the patriarchal tune of intolerance and violence on the march towards destruction.

And the voices of women like Kassandra remain unheard.