Rating: 5/5

Through crowded terminals, cities, rain, he had carried certain hopes and expectations, vague but thrilling. He was dozing on them like baggage, numbed by the journey, and then, at a certain moment, the clouds had parted to reveal in brilliant light the symbol of it all. His heart was beating in a strange, insistent way, as if he were fleeing, as if he had committed a crime. 

[view of Mont Blanc across Lake Geneva, from Vaud]

Mont Blanc, Chamonix Valley, les Alpes - imposing vertical aiguilles of granite exposed to wind, ice, avalanches. To certain men this vista, this challenge, calls insistently, like a siren song luring sailors into dangerous straits. Vernon Rand is one such person, an American itinerant worker with a passion for climbing that excludes everything else from his life: a steady job, a meaningful relationship with a woman, friendship, a future. Everything in life comes second to his thirst to prove himself against gravity.
Rand packs his scant belongings, cashes his meagre savings and flies to Europe without any clear plans for the future, other than to seek the most difficult mountains and climb them in ways no one has ever tried before. In Chamonix he finds kindred spirits, and convinces one of them to make an attempt on Aiguille du Dru, one of the most imposing peaks in this climbers paradise.

 It cleared at last. They walked to the station. Their packs were huge, they weighed at least fifty pounds. Ropes slung over their shoulders, when they moved there was a muted clanking like the sound of armor.
His chest felt empty, his hands weightless. He felt a lack of density, the strength to cling to existence, to remain on earth, as if he were already a kind of husk that could blow away. 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

I never climbed a vertical wall of stone, but I prefer holidays trekking up in the mountains to lazy days at the beach, even if I need to carry everything on my back. But my fascination with the mountains made me read almost every book written by a climber that fell into my hands, watch every documentary about famous ascents. That would make me already biased to rate this novel highly [that and the fact that I visited myself these places as a tourist in Annecy, Argentiere, Aiguille du Midi, Zermatt, Interlaken, etc.] Even so, I was bowled over by the way James Salter transforms this story into an existential quest to give meaning to one of the most dangerous acts a man may engage in out of his or her own free will. His artistic sensibility and his evocative, sensual phrasing I was already familiar with, from a previous novel, I just didn’t think it could be applied so well to an extreme sport subject.

 The granite was dark and icy cold. Rand put his hand on it. It seemed he was touching not a face but something on the order of a planet, too vast to be imagined and at the same time, somehow, aware of his presence. 

Most of those climbing memoirs and documentaries I’ve watched are decently written and gripping in their dry, self-effacing descriptions of extreme danger and of amazing feats of endurance required by the most difficult routes. Salter does a good job describing the actual technical details of the climbs done by Vernon Rand, most of them alone or as the lead climber. What makes this book special is the shift of focus towards the psychology, the motivation and the mental damage inflicted on the man who chooses this way of life, and on the people who try to get close to these solitary souls.

 The rock is like the surface of the sea, constant yet never the same. Two climbers going over the identical route will each manage in a different way. Their reach is not the same, their confidence, their desire. Sometimes the way narrows, the holds are few, there are no choices – the mountain is inflexible in its demands – but usually one is free to climb as one will. There are principles, of course. The first concerns the rope – it is for safety but one should always climb as if the rope were not there. 

Rand settles down in Chamonix, most of the time penniless or sponging on impressionable women, attracted by his athletic outlook or by his brooding demeanour. His early success on the Dru made Rand known to the other climbers converging on the valley, but in 1962 there was little exposure outside their own circle, no sponsorships and no interviews with famous newscasts. When not climbing, he absorbs the culture of this adopted country and, like other characters of James Salter, he falls in love with the place, in particular with the French women.

 He began to see France, not just a mountain village filled with tourists, but the deep, invincible center which, if entered at all, becomes part of the blood. 

Rand may be sincere in his devotion to physical love and in his need for comfort, but he keeps his heart closely guarded nevertheless, knowing that no woman can compete with his ambition, with his need to prove himself constantly against greater and greater challenges. Not even after he becomes internationally famous, following a dramatic rescue on the same Aiguille du Dru [ a real event from 1966, just like the first direct ascent from 1962.]

[looking towards Matterhorn from Aiguille du Midi]

Friends try to warn Rand , his girlfriend needs him to acknowledge the child he had given her, yet Rand is impervious in his single-minded focus on climbing.

 “I saw him not long ago, I hadn’t seen him for almost a year. He had left his wife, he wasn’t working, and still he felt if he climbed one more mountain, the most difficult, everything would somehow fall into place. It was like a drug. He constantly had to have more, and the doses had to be bigger.”
[...] He was an idealist. He had great inner strength, more than anyone I’ve ever known. But something changed in him. I could see it in his face.He had done everything and he was still unhappy. Two weeks ago ... on an easy climb, he fell to his death.” 

This cautionary tale about another climber falls on deaf ears, Rand looks only towards the next unclimbed route on one of the major North faces in the Alps. His alienation, his addiction to fame, his despair at being unable to fit into an ordinary existence after sitting on top of the world is emblematic of the mind-frame of the modern incarnations of Icarus. ( They don’t expect me to do anything ordinary any more, that’s the trouble. )

 A human face is always changing but there is a moment when it seems perfect, complete. It has earned its appearance. It is unalterable. So it was with him, that day, as he gazed up. He was thirty – thirty-one if the truth be known – his courage was unbroken. Above him lay the Walker. *

[Grand Jorasses, Pointe Walker is the left peak of the central massif in the picture, taken from Aiguille du Midi]

* one of the peaks atop the north face of the Grand Jorasses

Vernon Rand is fictional, a composite of personal experiences and the study of different climbers from the period chosen by the author . A certain Gary Hemmings shares numerous career similarities with the climbs attributed to Vernon Rand in the book, but this is a work of fiction, an author trying to explore the mentality of men addicted to extreme sports. This is inter-twinned with a study of love and with a passion for cultural France, described in a lyrical prose very similar to the other novel by Salter that I’ve read (‘A Sport and a Pastime’). A surprise Mayakowsky reference from the almost illiterate Rand helps to put his personal despair in perspective:

 The small boat of love is shattered against the flow of life. 

Another quote, from a famous French climbing reporter that remains unnamed in the novel, will serve as an epitaph for Rand / Hemmings or as a one-line resume of the book:

 Ils livrayent leurs vies a la montagne, les etalant a son pied. 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;