Rating: 3/5

The major mode of Tomato Red is impotence. Not so much the inability to change, but the inability to bring about what you want and need. There are flavors of cognitive dissonance here: of little country girls thinking they are big city, of eternal outsiders thinking they can find a place, of quiet gay men thinking there is a place for them in backwoods anywhere. Mostly, though, there is impotence. Inability. Big dreams, hopes. People better than where they were cast, at least in their mind's eye, but no real way to get another shot at redefinition.

Sammy Barlach, a loser of an ex-con, find himself adrift with Jamalee and Jason Merridew. She, the Tomato Red of the title, is small and spry, unsettled in Venus Holler (to a small Ozarks town what slums might be to a bigger one) and looking to move on. Her beautiful younger brother Jason is both her partner and her keys to escape, simultaneously a reason to leave and a tool for her to use. Jam's and Jason's mom, Bev, a backwoods bohemian, cares little about any sort of change, and mostly just wants her continuously accruing past to stay in the dark, in the dust.

It is a comical book, darkly so, at least for the first 2/3s. Then it becomes tragic in tone and stays that way. Most of the comedy is like most of the tragedy, an exercise of place and knowing your own or at least feeling it. It starts up a bit too goofy for its own good, with descriptions of wistful outlaws and redhaired waifs who break into expensive homes both, to a degree, to escape where they are. It takes a few chapters to get into a more solid mode, and by that time you might already have ideas about the book, but if you can free yourself up to see it in another light it is a rewarding read. Not as spare as it could be. Not as punchy. Not as honest. It is kind of short, but has plenty of story to keep you going. It has heart and it is willing to let you catch up, to get caught up.

As the final few pages start rolling up, and you realize the bit pinched by your right hand is much smaller than the bit in your left, you might feel a moment of panic knowing it to be over so soon, but in reality, the whole thing was always destined to end sharp. We're not meant to live with Barlach and the Merridews. We're barely even visiting.

You also have to realize, as you get into it, that you are not here to see a Hallmark Made-for-TV movie. This is not a book about people overcoming, but about people being. This is not to say that no steps are made, just that Woodrell is more than ready to abuse you of any notion that he is writing about heroes. He is writing about people, people who have life stacked against them, and it's kind of wonderful the way he does it. Just be forewarned.