Rating: 4/5

This was an enjoyable read. A C. Crispin really went for the more wacky decisions in this story. Its much more "goofy" in some areas than book 1 was. However, that doesn't mean it was bad, it just means its very different. 

The biggest compliment I'll give this book is it is "fun". Much like the movie "Solo" (which I think this series fits tonally), this book is just a fun read. It may not be the highest of stakes, or even the most believable of stakes, and yet it is so entertaining to read. A strong positive for a book. 

The story I hoped to follow actually doesn't appear to happen until book 3, specifically the stuff with Bria and Lando and the Millenium Falcon. All of them are present here in some way, but really only in cameo form, not much more than that. (There are some other fantastic cameos that I won't spoil here). 

I saw some reveiws complaining about the "show-don't-tell" issues in this book, and I see where they're coming from. We don't see Han in the Academy, we hear about it. We don't see Han save Chewy, we hear about it. I think it would have been cool to get some flashback scenes like we did in book 1, but the story was still interesting here.

Han has several romantic relationships in this book, and between that and his swagger that he has throughout the book, he felt much more like "James Bond" here than he did in book 1, where he felt more like Indiana Jones (who will he feel like in book 3?)

The whole Hutt stuff was somewhat interesting, especially with the intrigue and backstabbing and infighting. But all I was really fascinated by was Teroenza, who has been and continues to be a standout character. 

And the stuff with Jiliac the Hutt was just weird. Just absolutely bizzare. 

The book's ending battle was ok, and I thought it was clever the way Crispin set it up. But it got so tense for that big ending scene where (redacted) shows up and just owns the scene (and without actually being seen by the audience). 

Overall, I really enjoyed the book, despite some of the wacky decisions. Not quite as strong as book 1, but still entertaining nonetheless. I'll give this an 8.5 out of 10. Still really strong.