Rating: 5/5

I have reviewed my Moliere notes and translation--from 1969. Le Malade Imaginaire, "The Hypochondriac," title character Argan, played by Moliere himself. This play includes the hilarious "proposal" by a med student, Thomas (son of a doctor) who reads his prospective fiancee his medical thesis. Thomas takes the thick, rolled manuscript out of his pocket, offers it to fiancée Angela. She declines, "I'm sorry, but for me it's just useless baggage. I don't understand those things." Her maid advises, "Take it! It's always good for the binding. It'll dress up your room a bit"(II.iv).

 This brilliant, hilarious play was the summit of Poquelin's achivement, since it literally killed him, but hours after its fourth performance, seventy-three years after Giordano Bruno died on the same day, Feb 17. Surely some horrific fatal irony lies in Moliere's dying at the same age as Shakespeare, playing a hypochondriac patient in the play he has just written.
 The play opens with the monolog of Argan, played by the genius, citing medical symptoms, including "lavement" (enema) and "hâter d'aller" (hurrying to defecate). Immediately following Argan discusses with his maid Toinette his intention of marrying his daughter Angelique to his Doctor's son, finishing a medical degree. This will advantage the hypochondriac, getting medical advice from his own household. Toinette says he'd do as well to send her to a convent.
 At this point Argan's wife Beline has entered, and wishing her husband to be more religious, accepts that a convent might be best for their daughter. So she and her husband are both dominated by their respective "humors," which was-- in addition to its theatrical application to distinctions in character-- a medical term at the time, rather like "hormones" now.

 My favorite scene, perhaps because I read it in my own doctoral studies, features the freshly minted medical student T. Diaforus, who enters during a silly counterpoint between Argan and T's father, who informs us how his son was slow, but very successful at university, pursuing an argument to the last recesses of logic. The med grad at first mistakes Argan's daughter for his prospective belle-mère, and begins to flatter how Heaven has granted the beauty in her status, belle-mère. Argan corrects, "This isn't my wife, but my daughter!" To which, the propective lover asks, "Well, where's your wife?" Then the young grad asks his dad what to do, to pay his compliments to his prospective wife.
 With great aplomb, the new doctor gives an engagement present, a copy of his medical thesis; AND he invites her--to the dissection of a woman. Toinette asks why her young mistress would not feel honored to become attached to the "body of the faculty." 
 Meanwhile, Toinette assesses this as great fun, though Angelique may be constrained to answer her mom impertinently. The scene ends with both doctors examining Argan, though they disparage Argan's deeply held belief in healthy foods--beef boiled, not roasted.
 In Act III, enter Argan's brother Berald, who says A is not sick, but very strong, since he has survived so much medical treatment! As for doctors, they know good Latin, and Greek names for diseases, but nothing about cures. Their art consists in pompous galantries. Beralde, the very opposite of Argan, does absolutely nothing when he is ill, because: "presque tous les hommes meurent de leur remèdes, et non pas de leur maladies"; how strongly Mary Baker Eddy of Boston would agree in her Science and Health (origin of Christian Science, 1886 first edition).
 Forty years ago I had great fun translating the med student's proposal via his thesis; I never compared R Wilbur's version. I should, especially since he died last week at almost twice Moliere's age. Wilbur ranks among our greatest translators*, with an elegant verse, and a rare ear for rhyme. By comparison, my own verse translations abandon pentameter decasyllables for nonosyllabics--though I translated T. Diaforus's speech way before I discovered the nine-syllable (half pentameter, half tetrameter) line.
 * Among whom I include my Freshman Humanities prof at Amherst College, Rolfe Humphries, and another great Amherst graduate, like Wilbur, Robert Fagles.