Rating: 5/5

“Have you ever looked at, say, a picture or a great building or read a paragraph in a book and felt the world suddenly expand and, in the same instant, contract and harden into a kernel of perfect purity? Do you know what I mean? Everything suddenly fits, everything's in its place.” 

Why yes Ms. Shields, too many times to count in your beautiful book.   If only I'd have read this on my Kindle,  I could have highlighted the many perfectly written simple truths of the Stone Diaries.  I'm not one to take the time to write passages down but,  I did grab a sticky note pad to mark them for when I wrote a review.  The problem is, there are way too many to choose from!  Thankfully after my sticky notes are reluctantly removed and the book begrudgingly returned to the library, many of the passages can live on via Goodreads under the "Quotes from..." section which is sometimes lacking but contains most of the ones I marked in this case.  

In her part autobiography, part biography complete with a family tree and pictures, Sheilds memorializes a fictional everywoman born in 1905 who died sometime after 1985  (the actual date purposely undisclosed).  Our everywoman has her own set of unique circumstances, of which many are tragic.  Every life has its own tragedies, and Sheild's makes you feel that hers are similar to yours or like those of someone you know.   

 A special treat for me was how even though the story takes place mostly in Canada, there's a midwestern feel since part of it takes place in Indiana and she mentions the central IL town of Ottowa which is in the same county where I have relatives, and at one point she visits the Morton Arboretum where my Mom's ashes are spread.   I figured that she must have been from around here and looked it up and she was born in Oak Park IL and moved to Canada in her early 20's when she got married.  

I had a hard time putting this down because the captivating prose managed to make not only this ordinary life extraordinary but every life extraordinary.   I'll be reading more of Carol Shields's books.  I'm so thankful for my Pulitzer reading challenge because without it I'd probably never have read this one which most certainly deserved its Pulitzer.