Rating: 5/5

This was a sublime reading experience; one that I desperately needed in my life at the moment. I’m sure I’m getting a bit carried away, but I couldn’t help thinking that if John Williams’ Stoner had been born into the body of a woman, the result would have been Carol Shields’ Daisy Goodwill Flett. In fact, the two basically drew their first breaths around the same time - one at the end of the nineteenth century and the other just shortly after the start of the twentieth. One was born in a quiet Midwestern town and the other in a sleepy mid-Canada province. Both are inherently lonely souls. 

“… she sees years and years ahead for herself. That life thus far has meant accepting the doses of disabling information that have come her way, every drop, and stirring them with the spoon of her longing – she’s done this for so many years it’s become second nature.”

This book begins with Daisy’s birth and the loss of her mother. A feeling of abandonment haunts the entirety of her days. The way Shields tells Daisy’s story is rather curious – and a bit unique. At times it seems to be an autobiography, with Shields using the first person point of view. Then she abruptly switches back to third person and the reader has the sense he or she is reading a biography of sorts. It didn’t bother me – I simply mention it as a puzzling narrative choice. Others, including friends and family, interrupt and are given the opportunity to tell bits and pieces of Daisy’s life as well. Much of what the author urges us to contemplate is how a story is told and to what extent we should believe it. Memories are distorted. People reinvent themselves. One person’s version is different from the next. 

“Life is an endless recruiting of witnesses. It seems we need to be observed in our postures of extravagance or shame, we need attention paid to us. Our own memory is altogether too cherishing, which is the kindest thing I can say for it. Other accounts are required, other perspectives, but even so our most important ceremonies – birth, love, and death – are secured by whomever and whatever is available.”

Daisy is central to the telling of this novel, but other characters are brilliantly captured too - Daisy’s father, her adoptive mother, her husbands, her three children and her two best friends. I loved reading about every single one of them. Carol Shields is a master of characterization and therefore immediately gets elevated to favorite author status. The feeling that we all truly live in a wasteland of solitude and longing permeates the entire novel. At least that’s what my sometimes melancholy nature took away from this telling of a life that is not much different from our everyday ones. In the end, there are hills and valleys to our stories, distorted remembrances and missed opportunities. When time slips away from us, what will we remember? Should we just give in and accept our often uneventful lives, or is there a way to truly live life to the fullest – and how do we go about doing that before it’s too late?

“The larger loneliness of our lives evolves from our unwillingness to spend ourselves, stir ourselves. We are always damping down our inner weather, permitting ourselves the comforts of postponement, of rehearsals.”