Rating: 5/5

Cassandra A Novel and four Essays
Christa Wolf

Read April 2018

Cassandra: A Novel and Four Essays had such an impact on me when I read it earlier this year that I have re-read it and taken copious notes.

It’s one of the most powerful books I’ve read. Wolf’s observations about war, violence and truth are just as applicable today as they were in ancient times or in central Europe in the 1980s. The essays following the novel are just as significant as the novel itself, as there Wolf reveals much of the thinking that underlies her fictional telling of the ancient stories of Troy, the Trojans and the Trojan War.

The novel opens with Cassandra standing before the lion gate of Mycenae, alone, enslaved by Agamemnon along with her women, and knowing that Clytemnestra has ordered her death to follow that of Agamemnon. She makes her way into death, asking herself why did she ‘want the gift of prophecy, come what may’, and testing herself for pain as she considers the likely coming deaths of her children and women. 

As she waits she notes there is ‘nothing left to describe the world but the language of the past. The language of the present has shrivelled to the words that describe this dismal fortress. The language of the future has only one sentence left for me: Today I will be killed.’

Wolf interweaves the immediate present, as Cassandra faces her imminent death, with her telling of the past.

Central to Cassandra’s story is that she is cursed by Apollo to speak the truth, and that no one would believe her. 

It took her a long time, she says, to realise that not everyone saw what she saw. She needed to know the answers many questions that increasingly divided her from her family and others in the Palace, who did not want to ask those questions themselves, or who knew the answers and wanted to conceal them. 

One example was the critical fact that Helen was never brought to Troy by Paris but was kept in Egypt (this is an ancient variant on the myths of Helen).

Wolf presents Cassandra as given to bouts of madness, brought on by fury at being deceived, excluded from information and from power. She had to choose to conform, at least outwardly, with those in power, or to pursue her craving for knowledge. She couldn’t do both. She, the seeress, was owned by the palace, and imprisoned by her father the king when her challenge to the political versions of what was happening was too strong.

Through Cassandra’s eyes, we begin to wonder how many realities were there in Troy besides the world of the court? Who fixed the boundaries between invisible and visible? Slowly, Cassandra begins to remember the events moving towards the war that destroyed Troy. 

Wolf’s version of the Trojan War starts with an elaborate deception – the supposed presence of Helen in Troy was a pretence for the Greek invasion and occupation, when what the Greeks really wanted was Trojan gold and access to the Dardanelles. 
Cassandra argues with Priam that the Trojans can’t win a war waged for a phantom. 
Priam says “Why not? ...All you have to do is make sure the army does not lose faith in the phantom’. He forces Cassandra to keep the secret of Helen – to make it known, he claimed, would undermine the hone of their house.

She contrasts life in the city, engulfed by the desolation of war, its brutalities, deceptions and betrayals; and in contrast the life outside the city walls with women in the hidden world of the ancient goddess religion displaced by the newer Greek gods.

Ten years of war was long enough to forget completely the question of how the war started. ‘In the middle of a war you think of nothing but how it will end. And put off living. When large numbers of people do that, it creates a vacuum within us which the war flows in to fill.’ 
 ‘The war, a wounded dragon incapable of further movement, lay heavy and faint over our city. The next move it made was bound to dash us to pieces’.

Secrecy, hypocrisy, betrayals, manoeuvring for power, greed, corruption – these are the symptoms of decline into war and war mentality, when evil is passed off for expediency’s sake and where speaking the truth is treated as treason. Casssandra slowly realised many things – that she is effectively a prisoner, that the Trojans were becoming like the Greeks in their brutal approach to the war, that the war has taken over all aspects of life and what was normal cannot exist again.

She muses that war gives people their shape. Achilles is the monster in this version, not a hero. He is always Achilles the brute. She begins to divide people into two groups- those who can be relied on in an unknown future emergency and those who can’t. You cannot count on Paris. 

Cassandra realises too that she has lost her faith. ‘Faith ebbed away from me gradually, the way illnesses sometimes ebb away, and one day you tell yourself you are well. The illness no longer finds any foothold in you. That is how it was with my faith. What foothold could it still have found in me. Two occur to me: first hope, then fear. Hope had left me. I still knew fear, but fear alone does not know the gods; they are very vain, they want to be loved too, and hopeless people do not love them.’ 
‘I have experienced everything a person must experience. …They will be coming soon… They are coming.’
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The four essays that Wolf presented as lectures in 1982, here presented after the novel, help explain the explorations and thinking that went into writing Cassandra and illuminate its background and implications. 

She was writing in 1980-1981, during the Iran- Iraq war, when both the US and the USSR were bombarding the news with the need to make preparations for war, which both sides call ’preparations for self-defence. Emotionally it is unbearable to see the world as it really is’, she wrote at the time. And this of course is Cassandra’s fate.

Throughout are Wolf’s despairing meditations on the insanity of war, feeling that the world in which she herself lived was doomed, bound to be destroyed by war, feeling surrounded by enemies. Can there be such a thing as hope – for oneself, for one’s children? There is no escape route in sight. Australia is not a way out (p239). 

As for me, I’m delighted to live in a small city in Australia, nearly as far away from centres of power and fear as you can get!

There is much more that I’m not going to write about here in this review, which is already too long. The main theme I haven’t touched on is the separation of male and female worlds and values – that’s another essay in itself.