Rating: 5/5

No wonder this took me a while to read, it was actually quite a long book - 624 pages but I loved every single one of them. This is another I picked up on sale at Amazon and I went into it blind. I’ve long planned to have a dabble in Koontz’s back catalogue.

It looks like most of you have read it anyway so I won’t belabour the plot. There was a lot of foreshadowing of disaster to come and I kept waiting with bated breath but apart from a few animals and some humans being ripped apart by the Outsider nothing bad really happened.

So Banodyne Research Laboratories have been doing genetic engineering experiments on animals (which should be verboten). One such experiment was to develop a normal looking dog (they chose a golden retriever as they are so popular) and aimed to give it super intelligence. Tick - until the clever little mutt escaped. Another guy was developing a fearsome and fearless killing machine. Based on a baboon this poor creature, the aforementioned Outider, was made bigger, it’s head misshapen to accomodate lots of nasty sharp teeth and a bigger brain. It was ugly and very vicious. It too escaped and wanted to hunt down the dog.

The dog saved Travis Cornell from certain death by heading him off a certain path while on a walk and then he saved lovely young woman, Nora, from a would be rapist. Travis and Nora got together and adopted the dog which they named Einstein because of his super intelligence. They also taught him heaps until he was reading books and putting words together using scrabble tiles.

This domestic bliss was, however, always under threat by the Outsider, the NSA and a an assassin. That’s a very simple summary. Naturally the star of the book is Einstein and I was preparing myself to bawl my eyes out when he was finally cornered. Travis thinks he has found redemption after a string of bad luck runs in which everyone he’s ever been close to ends up dying. And Nora who was brought up by her bitter and twisted Aunt Violet thinks she is ugly and useless and is painfully shy. They all kind of save each other. I thought it was a very heartwarming story.