Rating: 4/5

Re-read. Same rating.

"Yeah, you got ears, all right." Crane looked at the Italian's with disfavor. "If you didn't have so much hair on them maybe you could have heard me say I didn't know who took the body."

"You can always tell about guys from their hands; they don't think to guard them when they're acting with their faces."

He walked toward Crane, as if to say something more to him, but when he came abreast of the boy he swung his arm in a quarter circle, stingingly slapped his face. The boy staggered backward, throwing his hands in front of his eyes.
O Malley jerked the pistol away from him, slapped him again across the mouth. "Flash a rod, will you, you punk?" he asked savagely. He wheeled around to face the thick man, who was blinking stupidly at him. "Here," he said, thrusting the pistol in the thick man's hand; “put this where baby can't reach it."
The boy was standing in the middle of the green rug now, with his hands at his sides. His face was blue-white, like watered milk, and from the left corner of his mouth ran a trickle of blood. "I'll fog you for that, you son of a bitch," he said to O'Malley.

O'Malley paid no attention to the boy. He was speaking to the thick man. “You ought to know better than to come around here with a gunsel like that. Jerking a heater out as though it was some kind of toy. I'll bet you're damn fool enough to let him play with matches.”

On their way they stopped at the Crystal Bar and ordered a quart of Cook's Imperial Champagne and three bottles of stout. Mixed, this made a drink called Black Velvet, which they drank with considerable gusto, for, as O'Malley said:
"Uncle Sty wouldn't want his boys to come up smellin' of something common like gin, for instance."

"I never heard of a gangster killin' anybody that way." Williams buttoned his coat, settled back in the cab. "They either squirt some lead at 'em or take 'em for a ride. Even the wop mobsters don't fool around with knives no more.”

"Hell, I bet he's got more guys workin' for him than Harry Adkins. He's a big shot."
"How do you spell shot?" asked Crane.

…another man wearing patent-leather shoes, violet trousers pulled up almost under his arm-pits, and a baby-blue polo shirt stood in front of the girls, his hands pressed against his sides just above his hips. All of these people stared wonderingly at the six men.
"Where's Frankie?" the man with the rumbling voice asked.
"Heth back in hith offith," said the man with the violet trousers. As he spoke he shook his body from side to side like a woman.

Cloth in one hand, glass in the other, the bartender gazed reflectively at the bulldog. "He's just a little beered up. That don't mean nothin'. Takes hard liquor to make him ugly."
The dog swaggered along the bar toward Williams. He had the rolling gait, the bowed legs of a cowpuncher. Peering at Williams through topaz eyes, he sat three feet away, barked once, explosively.
"That means he wants a drink," the bartender explained.
"My God! Give him one.” Williams' shoulder pressed against Crane's arm. "Give him some beer."
"No," said the bartender. "He wants whiskey."
"But you said hard liquor makes him ugly."
"It makes him worse to be refused."

Smoke as thick as fine gray silk sheeted the back room from ceiling to floor, eddied around a peach-colored overhead electric bulb, made indistinct the silent figures of men grouped about a central table.
Crane led the way to another table near the door, felt for a chair and sat down. The other two, walking carefully, blindly, joined him. Their eyes were slow in becoming accustomed to the haze. "Whew!" Williams whispered. "Like a fog off the East River." Against their skin, on their lips, the smoke actually had texture, body. It was warm and moist, like human breath. It was sweet and thick, like chloroform; only it was not medicinal.

"Many musicians have cults, as you call them. It makes the dreams beautiful, instead of sordid, as they ordinarily are from marijuana. I myself rarely smoke, but now it helps me ... forget."
"You mean you get so you really believe in Brahma?" Crane demanded.
Udoni said, "After the second cigarette one believes anything.”

Across from the fireplace French windows opened on to the terrace. A radio was playing a Wayne King waltz and moonlight, like spilled talcum powder, dusted the shoulders of dancers.

O'Malley said, "Naw, we ain't dicks. We're members of the Purple grapefruit mob, outa Detroit." 
Williams said, "I'm the mascot. I only killed nine guys yet."

Crane said, "Dolly, meet Doc.
"Oooo! I just adore doctors," cried Dolly, squeezing Williams' arm with both hands. "You're so safe with them.'
"You better be careful with him," said Crane. "He's an obstreperous one."
Dolly's eyes rounded. She exclaimed, "Oh! A baby doctor?"

“Getting any warmth out of that gin?" he asked.
She looked into his eyes. "You think I'm cold?"
"Perhaps a trifle reserved.”

Bottle in hand, the man came over from the davenport. "Listen, he said, "you can't get away with that sort of stuff." He planted himself in front of Crane. "You almost hit me."
"What if I did?" asked Crane.
O'Malley said, "Yeah, maybe we can do better next time."

"Boy! We have been places," agreed Williams.
Crane said, "A regular Cook's tour.”
"You mean a Crooks' tour,” corrected O'Malley. "In two days we start a fight in a taxi-dance joint, find a murdered guy and don't tell the police, crash in on Bray-mer and his dope mob, bust in on a party, kidnap a gal, steal a car and rob a graveyard." He paused for breath. “The only thing we ain't done is to park in a no-parking zone."

"Shut up. You'll have an army of cops out here in a minute."
Crane was rubbing soil off the seat of his trousers. "With a mysterious light, a dog barking, a voice going yow-eee! and a laughing spook, you aren't going to be troubled with Irish cops out here.”