Rating: 3/5

One summer's day a stranger carrying great wealth in gold comes to the settlement and is murdered by one of the chief's three sons in the old temple. The mysterious gold, thought by some to be a gift from the gods, causes great dissension within the tribe but the three brothers all share one dream, to build a vast temple to the gods. Lengar, the eldest and a warrior, wants to use the temple to fuel his ambition to be a great ruler by force of arms. Camaban, wants to create a place that will bring the gods together to ends all pain and suffering. But it is the third and youngest son, Saban, a man of peace, who will become the master-builder of the 'Temple of Shadows'.

Now I should point out that I'm a great fan of Cornwell's Arthurian novels and this book is quite different from most of the author's other books that I've read. This isn't a thrilling rollercoaster ride but an epic story of determination, betrayal, love and war that is also thought provoking in its own way if perhaps a little overly long. 

The story follows the main character Saban and although he is a little naive, he is also believable and one that I could empathise with. The novel is also liberally peppered with some interesting minor characters, some good some bad. 

Although there are some fighting scenes the main empathise of this book is most definitely the building of the temple and it's apparent that he has also done his research into the artefacts that have since been uncovered. I really enjoy reading about paganism, worshipping the sun and the moon seems to make a lot of sense.

Overall, I found this an interesting if rather methodical read. One of the great things about writing about a time some 4000 years ago is that it is really open to interpretation as no one really knows what was happening back then. There are loads of different theories and this is simply Cornwell's own interpretation of how these Bronze aged people lived, why they built this temple and most importantly how it was built. How it was built is probably the one thing that everyone who has seen it thinks about and Cornwell gives a plausible explanation.

Was Stonehenge built in a lifetime? Did they move the stones using boats and sledges? Did bronze age people use the temple for other purposes, marriages, funerals, coronations we can only speculate but I like to think that the person who thought of the design saw it finished.