Rating: 4/5

Many times I’ve been asked whether I think I am embarking on a journey that will lead me to a useless degree. An unusable bachelors. Whether I know that there are diplomas that can give me diamonds instead. And for the longest time I had no answer to give but to say that: books are all I have left. But now I know. If someone were to ask again (probably with the intention of feeling better about their own future, why I study the humanities) my answer would simply be: because I am young. I am young and haven’t been acquainted with life yet. I study literature because each day it takes up the task of holding me in the palm of its hands to teach me. About death, the bone-deep chill only found in prison basements, love, the unspeakably domestic act of peeling clementines for someone, birth, rebirth, and betrayal. I catalogue all these teachings to protect my lungs, guard my heart, and harden my ribs. It is not, like some would say, an endless preparation to discuss hypotheticals and theory. It is practical knowledge. It betters the world. It betters the individual. It trains one. The ways to hold your love, when to hold your tongue. Unfortunately for me, it means that my studies will appear so much more the emotional task to me now. And Ondaatje’s book made me realize that. I want to eat this book; chew it’s words and hold them under my tongue. I’m losing my mind. 

The perspective this novel takes on was not one that I would have normally reached for. I suppose this is the only good thing to come out of my Canadian Literature class so far. The city of Toronto has by no means a secret history. But the way that Ondaatje’s tells it, feels like being welcomed into his living room to hear a humble family history. 

The novel lets us see the birth of Toronto through the eyes of the immigrant construction workers that built it. It depicts the bloody history behind the construction of the Bloor Street Viaduct (that you use every day when the Subway passes from Braodview and Castle Frank Station) as well as the R.C. Harris Water Plant Treatment Centre that sits on Queen St. East. It sheds light on the exploitation of immigrants, the godly powers of city officials, and how expensive civilian unrest can be. Although the lives of the workers have been fictionalized, a number of events in the novel are historically accurate. A nun did fall from the Viaduct before its completion, multi-theatre owner, Ambrose Small, did disappear, and the murder of two labour union organizers at the time was an unfortunate reality. The plot is infused with desire, parties, and lust for life. It features first-time robbers and part-time assassins. The workers lead colourful lives. And… well, they’re human. That’s kind of the point, right?

The cast is just as interesting. We have: 
- Patrick Lewis: narrator and son of a dynamiter
- R.C. Harris: Commissioner of Public Works 
- Ambrose Small: owner of many theatres in Ontario 
- Theresa Kormann: prohibitionist, actress, and Small’s wife 
- Clara Dickens: Small’s mistress 
- Alice Gull: actress and Dickens’ best friend 
- Hana Gull: Alice’s daughter 
- Caravaggio: a worker 
- Giannetta: factory worker and Caravaggio’s wife 
- Nicholas Temelcoff: worker 
And many more. 

To talk about this book would mean to never stop. It’s a puzzling thing that had my lecture of 200 trying to piece it together and failing. 

It is work. Rearranging the timeline into the correct order is your homework for the duration of your stay with the text. It is a frustrating endeavour until you remember that the story is told from the perspective of a man driving late into the night, where time isn’t linear and memories swim away. Paired with the unspeakably lyrical prose, it makes the reading experience so incredibly precious. It is a raw child. A bloated stomach on a summer afternoon. Frankly speaking, I did lose the plot half-way through to lap up all scenes between our main protagonists, Patrick Lewis, Alice Gull, and Clara Dickens. And I don’t think you can blame me when the descriptions look like this: 

“The water in the saucepan was boiling and they did not move. They stood together feeling each other’s spines, each other’s hair at the back of the neck. Relax, she said, and he wanted to collapse against her, be carried by her into foreign countries, into the ocean, into bed, anywhere. He has been alone too long.” (88)

“He came to believe she had the powers of a goddess who could condemn or bless. She would be able to transform the one she touched, the one she gripped at the wrist with her tough hand, the muscles stiffening up toward the blue-black of the half-revealed creature that pivoted on the bone of her shoulder. His eyes wanted to glimpse nothing else.” (112) 

“What remained in the dyers’ skin was the odour that no woman in bed would ever lean towards. Alice lay beside Patrick’s exhausted body, her tongue on his neck, recognizing the taste of him, knowing the dyers’ wives would never taste or smell their husbands again in such a way; even if they removed all pigment and course salt crystal, the men would smell still of the angel they wrestled with in the well, in the pit. Incarnadine.” (132)

“She steps forward to hold him. His cheek on the moist skin under her arm, at the rib, about where they pierced Jesus he thinks. He suddenly falls to his knees. He holds her dress at the thighs as she slips down, slips through the dress so there is a bunched sequin sheath in his hands. The music ceases. A serious pause. They jerk with the swell of waves and he holds her hair from the back.” (226) - though this sounds more romantic out of context…you get the point. 

Oh, and… page 205 devoured me. 

I could share more of them, but I’d rather keep them my secret. 

There are about a million more thoughts zipping through my mind after flipping the last page; none of them are good enough for an essay. 
1. Caravaggio (not the painter) is always shrouded in darkness, only experiencing intense moments of subjugation in contrast. He is muse  and  painter. His effect was imprinted on the rest of the cast, giving them all one overexposed focal point as they are about to advance the plot. 
2. Water. Water is everywhere. Revolutions ebb and flow in its tides. People die in waters, committed crimes with its help, escaped prisons by painting themselves a fresh hue of blue. Water  is  power. Perhaps even a character in and of itself. Cutting off its supply “brings a city to its knees.” (214). Ask the Romans. They would know. 
3. An entire chapter gave off the smell of Gaston Leroux. I could swear I was reading the Phantom of the Opera for two dozen pages. But this isn’t Ulysses and it is not authored by James Joyce, so I’m not quite sure  what  I read… but I could taste a shift in style.
4. Ondaatje casually mentioned that T.S. Eliot’s  Murder in the Cathedral  opened in England at that time. It caused me to crack open my annotated copy for half an hour in search for clues. 
5. Diogenes was quoted 
6. Toasts were dedicated to H.G. Wells 
7. Patrick Lewis asking for the commissioner of public works to turn. off. the. light. right as he is about to kill him?? Othello. Final answer. And I do not care how dodgy the connection is. 
8. Not to mention the title itself comes from the Epic of Gilgamesh. 

For some, the randomness of the above might be off-putting. But to me it meant that I was never bored, always entertained. Genres collide. It is expertly done. 

Needless to say, I am still digesting. This was one last feast before hibernation. The tangy prose will stick to my insides for the rest of winter. And I don’t know what it will do to me.