Rating: 4/5

I’ve read quite a few from this series over the years, in completely random order, and then did go back to the beginning, as I have the first 15 or so downloaded, but hadn’t read any James Patterson for a few years, after overdosing on them in the past. It was therefore quite nice to go back to one of the early Alex Cross books, that he actually wrote himself, and remind myself that they are still pretty good easy thrillers. This one was published in 2000, but stands up pretty well.

Alex Cross is hosting his baby son’s christening party when his friend, FBI agent Kyle Craig, summons him to another crime scene. This is the last straw for his partner Christine, who is still traumatised from her prolonged kidnapping by the Weasel in the last book. Regardless, Cross knows he has to get involved: a team of bank robbers have been needlessly executing hostages and the police have no clues. When the first perpetrators are found dead, but the attacks continue, they discover that a shady figure called The Mastermind is coordinating the heists, and deliberately recruiting killers. 

Cross has a lot going on here - the end of his relationship, his daughter is diagnosed with a serious medical condition, the FBI are taking over the case, led by an attractive new SAC, Betsey... Actually one of the problems I have with this series is just how fast he moves from one woman, that he’s supposed to be deeply in love with, on to the next with nary a look back. The other is that he rarely actually solves a case himself, having to be told where to look for the killer, or stumbling onto the answer by accident. I like detectives to actually detect. The denouement of this was a bit complicated and didn’t really make sense, then there’s the shock ending to take us into the next book, that I definitely didn’t see coming.

This was a fast read, and I’ll probably have forgotten much of the plot within weeks, which is why I have some difficulty being sure which of them I’ve already read, but it only took an evening (having read the first few chapters months ago then being distracted by more urgent review deadlines) and I did mostly enjoy it as Cross is a likeable hero and his family are entertaining characters. 3.5 rounded up for still being able to surprise me.