Rating: 4/5

Reading Road Trip 2020

Current location: Wyoming

Nothing much but weather and distance. . . 

Well, this is weird, but I'm getting ready to explain to you why Annie Proulx's short story collection of Wyoming ranchers reminds me of Toni Morrison's novel, Beloved, about a runaway slave who's haunted by a ghost.

Close Range and Beloved were published twelve years apart, and they don't have any themes in common, so it's quite possible that the writers themselves (were they both still alive) would be surprised by my strange comparison.

In my outspoken opinion, Toni Morrison is the best female writer the United States has ever produced, and I'm officially going to plunk down Annie Proulx right there next to her as a close #2.

(Even if you disagree with my assessment, you'd be hard pressed to categorize either of these authors as anything but “top ten.”).

And yet. . . they are not my favorite female writers and I often find their stories difficult to embrace.

Ms. Morrison's Beloved is so brilliant, it makes me want to yank the author right out of the grave and make her explain herself. I was stunned by the writing in that novel, like something dangled before me that I could never attain, but, when I was done reading it, I gave my copy away so I wouldn't need to see even the spine of the book on the shelf. I hated every page of it; I just wanted the whole story to go away.

This collection of Ms. Proulx's is equally difficult to embrace. The technical quality of the writing makes me want to shake her silly, right down to her boot spurs. Who in the hell do you think you are anyway, lady?? Same problem, though. . . I approached each story with a certain amount of dread, as though each one of these eleven stories represented eleven misanthropic ranchers with their backs turned to me in disinterest. 

I don't like to wrestle with my stories, folks. I don't mean that I need to be spoon-fed, but I don't think the burden should be on me to wrestle with the beasts, either. 

The stories here aren't equally unapproachable. Some are easier to enjoy than others: “A Lonely Coast,” and “The Bunchgrass Edge of the World,” to name two.

And, of course, you've heard of Brokeback Mountain? That one made its debut here, stuck its tongue out at you, then hopped a horse, bareback, and hauled ass toward the other direction.

It's interesting, isn't it, when you are in awe of sentences the flow like poetry off of the page, but you could give a rat's ass about the characters or their fate?

Ms. Proulx happens to be the author of one of my top 5 favorite novels, The Shipping News, and, overall, I can't help but recommend that one far more than this one.

But, the writing here can't be overlooked. The technical quality of this writing is almost unparalleled in American literature, and Wyoming has never had a greater translator.

That summer the horses were always wet. It rained uncommonly, the southwest monsoon sweeping in. The shining horses stood out on the prairie, withers streaming, manes dripping, and one would suddenly start off, a fan of droplets coming off its shoulders like a cape. Ottaline and Aladdin wore slickers from morning coffee to goodnight yawn. Wauneta watched the television weather while she ironed shirts and sheets. Old Red called it drip and dribble, stayed in his room chewing tobacco, reading Zane Grey in large-print editions, his curved fingernail creasing the page under every line. On the Fourth of July they sat together on the porch watching a distant storm, pretending the thick, ruddy legs of lightning and thunder were fireworks.