Rating: 2/5

I’ve never been much of a fan of the whole ‘bang the professor’ thing. That this really is the essence of The Morning Gift, however, isn’t necessarily an issue. It’s the fact that crippling layers of power dynamics defines the relationship. 

I read and loved A Song for Summer. Populated with wholesome characters, it’s a moving and atmospheric romance between two decent people. The historical detail is sparse but intelligent and the writing is warm and witty. It was a mistake to assume that the next Ibbotson I reached for would be of the same calibre.

I’m not prejudiced when it comes to age gap romances. Look, Jane and Rochester are one of my OTPs. As long as the relationship is between two adults, two people who are at the same point in life mentally (not equating to life experience or intelligence, but maturity) then I can root for it. From the get-go, Ruth is indebted to Quin who arranges a marriage of convenience so that she can escape Austria as a British citizen. Again, not necessarily an issue – it’s crucial to the plot, of course. But Ruth is twenty going on twelve – she has the emotional maturity of a preteen. There are moments where she gains a twitch of perspective, but on the whole, she is a fanciful and naïve (although not on the facts of life, we learn) Mary Sue. Quin is an older, brooding, emotionally tortured academic with plenty of life experience and notches on the bedpost. They are not equals in the way that would constitute a healthy relationship.

The relationship is paternal for a good portion of the book and unambiguously lacks sexual tension. It’s a shock to the system when the two characters declare unconditional love, and the catalyst is dubious to say the least. Quin actively avoids Ruth, treating her like an inconvenience until… So Ruth confides to Quin that she didn’t feel able to have sex with Heini (who was also an arsehole) and he is immediately turned on by the affirmation of her sexual innocence – in much the same way paedophiles are popularly understood to be..

Many of the attitudes are patriarchal and dated which made for an uncomfortable read. More crucially, they made much of the story counterintuitive to me. Ibbotson’s heroines are characterized as plucky, clever, hardworking and nurture their passion for the arts. They know their own minds and they speak openly. Ruth for example is determined to make the most of the opportunities afforded to her in Britain, working hard to attain a degree. But… She cannot bear to postpone sex with Quin for even the two minutes it would take to sort out some contraception, then bails out of her degree and goes into hiding when she discovers she is pregnant. Does wonders for agency.. Even though her heart is in the right place, her emotional immaturity, and the fact that everyone worships her for no apparent reason did not exactly commend her to me. Quite frankly, Quin exploited her vulnerability. The ending just made me gag.

Maybe I could have managed the relationship if the other facets had compensated, but the language lacks an economy that might have made this less of an unrewarding slog. Redeeming features? Ibbotson recognizes the beauty of the natural world in several evocative passages and the anecdotes that pepper the narrative are charming. That’s about it.

Nuh-uh. The relationship made my toes curl beyond belief.