Rating: 5/5

The Flounder: 20th century’s last Nobel Prize in Literature was given to Günter Grass, lauded him for his “frolicsome black fables that portray the forgotten face of history”. This accolade from the prestigious organization cannot be more aptly considered than Günter Grass’ masterpiece- “The Flounder”!

“Frolicsome”- yes; “black fable”- yes; “portray the forgotten face of history”- yes; Flounder as member of the Nobel Committee for Literature- maybe, I wouldn’t be surprised, there’s something fishy about it, I’m afraid so!

Hands down, this book is the testament of Günter Grass’ genius and, indeed, he’s on his own as an artist.

This is one of the few books that I will have an in depth review- and deservedly so.

I will digress from discussing the specifics for the benefit of the future readers but, I will dwell more on general impression on some of the highlights of the novel.

First off, the premise: very interesting… As a child, with an early addiction to fairytales, “The Fisherman and His Wife” is somewhat unappealing to me. Both man and wife are fucked up- banana peeling the image so unlike the one I imagined of my parents. Too grim (or Grimm, haha!) for kids, in my opinion, based from my own childish impression. But when applied as a reworking, it offers a far better fertile field for growing potatoes than Cinderella or Miss Snow White. Why? because the fairytale is so episodic and the events (as each one escalates) are more compelling than the characters.

The idea that its epochal, the various time- phases of the main characters (which gave me an impression of vagueness between reincarnation, MPD, or when Eve was created through Adam’s rib or that other appendage..) were a unique reading experience for me. Somehow I felt the infinite universal thread that connects us all, regardless of sex, as the main characters travel through time. Mr. Grass led me to his imagined universe with Neolithic old and panoramic vista mired of human misery and undoing.

While I was deep in reading, this book is so imaginative, one can’t help thinking about how difficult this book must have been conceived and written, one can only mentally applause the author, á la socialist party meeting.

In comparison to The Tin Drum, I didn’t have a moment that I feel “nah, he’s trying to impress now” or “Whoa! Suddenly this?!”- like the horse at the beach (…) with Oskar or the demise of Oskar’s mom nor, in comparison to Dog Years, that I was bruised from concentrating too much just to summit it’s mountain face, happy but more exhausted…

With the many “cooks” in the novel, the most memorable one is Fat Gret. I think she embodies femininity regardless of time; she’s appealing, albeit an offbeat one; strong and knows what she wants and a “ball biter”!!! Billy was also memorable- such a powerful climactic chapter was written about her…!

The evolution and celebration of food in the novel also grows like a baby for nine months, i.e., from Stone Age elk meat, to the “emergency measure” ration of rat soup, to Sophie’s famous calf’s head stuffed with mushrooms, to the Womenal banquet, is sheer genius!

The “Vasco Returns” chapter is my favorite, I read it twice!

The narrator/s (the trailblazer of the male cause) in the novel was portrayed as very human and more varied, unlike Illsebill (the embodiment of femininity) which tends to “typecast” women in the story, although history- as history had it- has it on them, the book as well!

What I love about the novel was that I didn’t have to just rely with his words (and sometimes, too much of it) and trust Mr. Flounder. That seemingly funny yet powerful line where he claimed (or unclaimed) to blame him with Napoleon Bonaparte and the lot but, that he’s not responsible for the crimes of “that two infamous world leaders” was thought- provoking...

The major weakness: the former moviehouse turned “High long- haired Court” with all respectable and powerful women with the lone “husband” was like “C’mon! Günter, you can do much better than that!” moment for me. Farcical isn’t it? But, is it fun?

In reading classics and critical works of fiction such as this, I tend to avoid being critical to the author, but just get myself lost in the enchated forest he created and see if its worth the effort of going through inside that labyrinth. This book did it!

I. Must. Go. To. Lübeck.