Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars

“Why did I want the gift of prophecy, come what may? To speak with my voice: the ultimate. I did not want anything more, anything different.”
 
No one is going to believe this, but my given name is Cassandra. Really, it is! Candi is not short for Candice, as you likely assumed it to be. I have no idea why my parents chose the name Cassandra, but I do know it had nothing to do with their love for Greek mythology. But I used to imagine that I was indeed named after the prophetess, simply because it made me feel more exotic somehow. In any case, I’ve always been a bit intrigued by this enigmatic woman and have always wanted to learn a bit more about her. Then, the opportunity to read this book came along! Am I still a fan of Cassandra? Of course! Did I love the book to pieces? Not even close! It had so much potential. Like this, for example:

“… the dreadful torment took the form of a voice; forced its way out of me, through me, dismembering me as it went; and set itself free. A whistling little voice, whistling at the end of its rope, that makes my blood run cold and my hair stand on end. Which as it swells, grows louder and more hideous, sets all my members to wriggling and rattling and hurling about. But the voice does not care. It floats above me, free, and shrieks, shrieks, shrieks.”

But the moments of brilliant prose were far and few between for this greedy reader. My edition included the main story, Cassandra, as well as four essays. These essays revolved around author Christa Wolf’s travels to Greece as well as her research for the novel. Where Wolf really shines is in her research capabilities. It was evident from her essays as well as the novel itself that she did an extensive amount of work before setting her pen to paper. The problem is that it’s just not a very compelling story. I don’t know, perhaps I’m spoiled after having read Madeline Miller’s Circe. Despite my relative ignorance regarding much of the background in Miller’s work, I was still entirely enchanted by her extraordinary storytelling skills. And she made up for my lack of knowledge somehow. I think I was expecting a similar wondrous experience in the hands of Christa Wolf, but the magic really fizzled out. Maybe that’s not fair, but it’s nearly impossible for me not to compare. 

What I did appreciate is that Cassandra has a unique voice here. She is still the woman we’ve heard about that was given the gift of prophecy but cursed with no one ever believing her visions. But she’s a whole lot more than that. She is a very early feminist idol as Wolf shapes her for us. She’s not a woman to be pitied or scorned. She has strength of character. And perhaps her gift was not really just a random occurrence, but rather comes from her being a woman with great wisdom and the ability to understand people. Her foresight was not simply a gift bestowed on her by some god, but an instinct and genius that came from within. As Wolf explains to us:

“The visions which overwhelm her no longer have anything to do with the ritual decrees of her oracle. She ‘sees’ the future because she has the courage to see things as they really are in the present. She does not achieve this alone. Cassandra makes contact with minorities among the socially and ethnically heterogeneous groups in and around the palace. By doing so, she consciously moves off the beaten track, strips herself of all privileges, exposes herself to suspicion, scorn, persecution: the price of her independence. No self-pity; she lives her life even in war.”

This is the message I’d like to take away from Cassandra. I can live with being the namesake of such a woman! (Even if it is all in my own imagination - mom and dad have no idea!) So, despite my singing the praises to the seeress, I cannot tell a lie. This main story in particular was hard work – dry and academic for the most part. What I did enjoy was the author’s sort of stream of consciousness writing about her preparations for the book. I wouldn’t mind reading more of her non-fiction work, but I’m going to be a bit reluctant in future when it comes to her fiction. 

“Believe me, not believe me – they would see. After all, in the long run it was impossible for people not to believe a person who proves she is right.”