Rating: 4/5

It was funny to start reading what I initially thought was a sequel to an episode (Infinite Regress), only to realize it's actually a story written long before!

I thoroughly enjoyed Seven of Nine (the book). Christie Golden's dynamic style, with its introspective touches, works perfectly for a pocket novel. Divided into two plots, on one hand we follow Seven, suddenly haunted by the memories of assimilated people, and on the other, the quest for revenge by the last remnant of a species betrayed by its own empire, more specifically, by its emperor.

On the positive side, I'd say I liked how the two stories connect, building upon each other and creating an intriguing mystery within a seemingly simple narrative. I previously mentioned how this story was actually created before the "Infinite Regress" episode, and while I still consider that episode very good (Jeri Ryan's performance is magnificent), I personally think the way the author handled the dilemma here was much better, with a very emotional climax that brought me to tears and connecting brilliantly with Seven's search for identity in Voyager's fourth season. Similarly, the Skedans, the species seeking revenge, are interesting to analyze and read about. They have just the right amount of mystery, and I would have liked to know more about them. The Lhiaarian Empire and its emperor, Beytek, were also well done; he works well enough as an antagonist and the disgusting villain.

On the negative side, I'll say that the way the author portrays Seven at the beginning is a bit odd (she acts more like Data). It's a feeling that lingers once you get deeper into the story, but it can definitely be weird for some readers. Aside from a few minor details here and there, I think my only major issue with the story was that, in the end, the resolution felt a little too convenient, with several random things conveniently coinciding to resolve the issue. This is odd because (SPOILER) the author could easily have had both the Voyager crew and the conspirators within the Lhiaarian Empire working together on a coordinated plan. I clearly can't imagine Janeway being an accomplice to murder, but her plan of just making the emperor confess a crime really was destined to fail without all those convenient interventions.

Overall, I loved this book and highly recommend it to any Voyager fan, especially fans of 7 of 9!