Rating: 5/5

my review the moment i finished this was just "whoa," and honestly? not sure what else to say.

perhaps i will start with what this is: exactly what it says it is, a novel and two essays. the novel (really a novella, i think?) is 138 pages of unbroken monologue from cassandra, the seer of troy, as she marches to the death she has foreseen in agamemnon's palace, and as she reminisces about her past and the fall of her city. first of all, top ten books to read on a plane, because there are no chapter breaks and doing it all in one big rush was overwhelming in the best way. second of all, imo one of the marks of a good retelling/derivative story is that it can stand on its own while also making me think "fuck i need to read [the original] again," and. well. fuck dude i need to read the iliad again.

what is there to say about this? that it's sharp, maybe. cassandra's monologue cuts apart all of the willful blindnesses and blindings in her life--her own self-deception and that of those around her; the upper class of troy's deceptions of the people; the widespread refusal to accept the futility of the trojan war (and war in general); the concealment of the lives of women and how they're kept in thrall to men. it’s about seeing and not seeing, and also about storytelling, in a nebulous way i can't explain because most of the time i was reading this going "ohhhh my god" and underlining lines with frenzy. (the first time i attempted reading this book, i had to give up, because it was a library book and i knew i needed to write in it.)

also, if you are one of the, like, three other people in the world who are aeneas enjoyers--jesus christ, read cassandra. there are so many good things about this book that do not involve aeneas (the prose, cassandra's character, the social commentary, the interaction with the myth of troy), but also, like. i am an #aeneasstan4life and in that regard this was a fucking MEAL

one of the notes i made while reading it was that i felt some of the meta context was going over my head--the commentary on war is certainly colored by christa wolf living as an east german writer in a time when world war two still loomed over europe and the cold war was in full swing. no fear! the second half of this book is taken up by the essays, describing the journey wolf took to the writing of the novel, and originally presented as a lecture series in conjunction with the novel's first draft. the first two are narrative descriptions of wolf's journey to greece and how cassandra took root in her mind; the third is a work diary chronicling her developing thoughts about cassandra and about the state of the world; the fourth is a letter discussing the evolution of the cassandra myth as a way to discuss ambiguity and objectivity in academia.

these essays are academic--for me, at least, they didn't go down nearly as fast as the narrative--but they were both incredibly enlighting in regard to the narrative and also deeply interesting on their own. wolf discusses narratives and cultural myths, the truth versus the manufacturing of stories and whether those things ever coincide, the way cultures swallow one another but retain parts of the cultures swallowed, the minimization of women in literary and cultural history, and the tendency of western culture toward "self-annihilation." all of this with a distinct intelligence and wit. this is a book i'm going to have to read again, probably multiple times.

  Who was Cassandra before anyone wrote about her?

my personal favorite essay was the work diary--less for its thoughts on cassandra, actually, than for the way it depicts living in an age that feels like the end of the world, as the US and USSR loom toward atomic war with europe as the stage. her diary entries are from 1980-1981. they felt... uncomfortably familiar. both in the sense that atomic war still looms over the present day (though perhaps not as obviously or intensely), and in the sense that a lot of wolf's feelings echo the feelings i have as someone who grew up under the looming shadow of climate change.

  Meanwhile, we talk about the situation, arrive at the conclusion that it no longer bears thinking about. And yet we cannot help thinking about it.

  How can you teach younger people the technique of living without alternatives, and yet living? When did it begin? we ask. Was this course of events inevitable?

if you like the iliad, you should read this. if you like aeneas, you should definitely read this. if you're interested in the myth of cassandra, you should read this. if you're interested in how cultures subsume each other and how cultures create narratives and how cultures consume themselves, you should read this. can you tell i think you should read this because i do

🎵(what else?) Cassandra—Florence + the Machine🎵