Rating: 5/5

This is another book that I selected as part of a learning initiative for managers at my workplace. I read this book when it first came out in 1994. I just re-read it, and I have to say, it remains an enormously important study of how men and women of my generation interact in the workplace. 

Deborah Tannen is not in management or HR; her field is linguistics. She has remarkable insights into how language colors our every day interactions, how it has an impact on how our accomplishments are (or are not) recognized and how it alters the meaning of just about everything. 

Among her major points, Dr. Tannen notes that, in general, women avoid conflict and prefer harmony in all things, As such, women tend to speak indirectly. This is so very true, at least for women of my upbringing and generation (see below). Women, even those nominally in power, tend to seek approval. They leave room for consideration and potential disagreement, they buffer any criticism of others with praise, and, as a result, they are simply unheard and and their words, however important, go unheeded. 

By contrast, men communicate more directly, I call it "jungle mode" (this is my term not hers). Speech is functional and direct. Anger and hostility are used as necessary to jockey for dominance. Once relative positions are established, everyone is back to baseline. Most women of my generation are astounded by this. Why isn’t everyone still hurt and upset after all the yelling? In my experience, if two women have a loud screaming argument at work, there will be hurt feelings for, oh, the next ten years or so. Maybe longer. 

Two important lessons here. First - while I am still polite and gracious and thank everyone all the time in the normal course of events, I have learned how to be direct when necessary. The first time I opened my mouth and simply said “No, That Is Not Correct” when a group of men were trying to steamroll me, I thought the Earth would open and swallow me up. Surprisingly, that didn’t happen. 

Likewise, I have not yet determined whether women of younger generations speak indirectly and have the same issues that many Boomer women do. Deborah Tannen herself writes in this book that her experiences focus on “middle class white women” in her university workplace. Our workplaces are now multi-ethnic and multi-generational. Are women of other ethnicities, of Gen X, Millenial and/or Gen Z equally compulsed over the need to seem unassuming? Someone (not me) may know the answer to this.