Rating: 4/5

I listened to an audiobook version, which was included with my Audible membership. It comes in at just under 5 hours.

The book opens with an Introduction by Conrad, in which he rejects the suggestion, put forward by some readers, that the book deals with supernatural events. I’ve got mixed feelings about his explanation, as for me part of the fun of fiction is drawing my own conclusions about a novel, however wrong they may be. Still, Conrad obviously felt strongly about the subject. I can see why people concluded that the book did feature supernational events. Had I not read Conrad’s Intro I would probably have drawn that conclusion myself. 

The novel is told from the perspective of an unnamed narrator, and to begin with I didn’t really take to him. He seemed an impatient man, intolerant of the weaknesses of others. Gradually though I came to realise that the novel is a coming-of-age tale, and I concluded the narrator’s less admirable traits were included deliberately to illustrate his immaturity at the beginning of the story.

The narrator, a young officer of the merchant marine, gets his first command when he is appointed as captain of a British ship in the harbour at Bangkok. The ship’s previous captain has died at sea. Delays with cargo lead to the ship spending several weeks at Bangkok, during which the entire crew – minus the narrator and one other man - come down with malaria. The vessel eventually puts to sea but recurring bouts of the disease render the men effectively incapable, and to cap everything the ship is becalmed in the Gulf of Siam. The young captain keenly feels the stress of this apparently jinxed first command.

The narrator apart, the only other sailor who escapes the malaria is Ransome, an experienced seaman but one who has signed on as the ship’s cook. A weak heart has left him unable to carry out the arduous duties demanded of Jack-before-the-Mast. Despite his frailty Ransome provides significant psychological support to the young captain. I felt therefore that he represents the traditional father-figure. Whilst he suffers from the physical weaknesses brought on by age, he makes up for it with the calmness and sagacity that derive from years of experience.

Although this is one of Conrad’s later novels, published in 1917, the story is told retrospectively by the narrator, and the setting aboard a sailing ship gives it a 19th century feel. Personally I didn’t enjoy it quite as much as Typhoon. It’s still an absorbing tale though.