Rating: 1/5

Very little is known about Stonehenge. The author draws a tale of adventure explaining how and why the stones came to be placed as they are. The story drawn is a tale of war between competing tribes at the beginning of the Bronze Age. It is a story about three half-brothers, very different in personality, and ultimately their battle for the supremacy of that god each gives their allegiance to. The eldest is a warrior. The middle brother has a clubfoot, stutters and is viewed as being crazy. The youngest is he who becomes the builder of the “sun temple”.

The story we are told could p-e-r-h-a-p-s have elements of truth. Maybe……..

Regardless, I dislike immensely how the story is told. The story is one of violence, every step of the way. Rape and murder, starvation, slaughter of animals, as well as men, women and children--all of this is drawn in excessively gory detail. We do not know if the violence drawn is accurate—so why draw it this way? To revel in blood and gore and grisly descriptions is not for me! I can deal with such only when it is a depiction of an event that is known to have actually occurred.

Dogs pee on an object to show their dominance and rank. In Cornwell’s book, men pee on the dead and the living. Is such behavior recorded in history?! Or is this written for the sole purpose of making readers draw back in disgust. I mention this as one example of many to give readers a feel for what lies in store. Much is revolting and not backed by fact. 

Jonathan Keeble narrates the audiobook. I am fine with his reading when not doing dialogues. The dialogues are atrocious. There is a lot of screaming and it is horrid to listen to. Men scream, women scream and they sound exactly the same. There is no differentiation between them, and it is extremely unpleasant to listen to. The listening experience is not OK; it is terrible. One star for the narration. I have listened to other audiobooks read by Keeble and thought they were very good—this was a big disappointment. In this book, Keeble over-over-over-dramatizes. 

Nope, I do not like this at all. I refuse to revel in filth and muck ad violence that is imaginary.