Rating: 5/5

“What a terrible era in which idiots govern the blind.” 
― William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar, Act 2, Scene 1

Julius Caesar was one of my first Shakespeare loves. I remember in Jr High memorizing (and I still can remember most of it) Mark Anthony's eulogy to Caesar ("Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears..." It was powerful and was an early indicator for me of language's potential energy. Within those lines there were several messages, foreshadowing, etc. It turned me onto both Shakespeare and the Classics. I'm now coming back to Julius Caesar 25+ years later. Hopefully a bit more mature. With a bit more body hair. Certainly, with more experience with Shakespeare, the Classics, and politics and the original JC. I've now read considerably Livy, Edward Gibbon, Suetonius, and probably most importantly Plutarch. But even with all of this 'source' material, the play itself still seems to capture the imagination in ways that history (both modern and ancient) can't. Shakespeare can tease out and nuance things (obviously made up) that gives live to Brutus, Caesar, Anthony.

It was ironic too that I was reading Julius Caesar right after (unplanned) the June controversy with the New York Public Theatre's production where they used a Trump-like character to play the part of Julius Caesar. The brouhaha could easily have been predicted. The closer our contemporary leaders become to actual tyrants, the harder it becomes for their supporters to digest their images being used to portray an assassinated Julius Caesar. The closer we edge to the end of the Republic, the more relevant and less popular Julius Caesar will be with those in tyrannical camps. 

It all holds up. It still feels relevant and even a bit dangerous. 

Favorite Lines:

“The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves.” (Act 1, Scene 2)

"But, for my own part, it was Greek to me.” (Act 1, Scene 2)

“...for the eye sees not itself,
but by reflection, by some other things.” (Act 1, Scene 2)

“Cowards die many times before their deaths; the valiant never taste of death but once.” (Act 2, Scene 2)

“Cry havoc and let slip the dogs of war!” (Act 3, Scene 1)

“Of your philosophy you make no use,
If you give place to accidental evils.” (Act 4, Scene 3)