Rating: 5/5

5+ stars (8/10 hearts). I loved 
  Redwall—
I loved 
  Mossflower—
I loved 
  Lord Brocktree.
 But I really loved Martin.

I can’t really lay my finger on the reason. Perhaps it’s the writing. The descriptions were unusually beautiful in this book—there are several I wish to add to my commonplace book. Perhaps it's the aesthetic—a mixture of slave fort and sea, forest and sand. Perhaps it’s because of the TV show, which brings it so accurately to life and which I love so much. 

Perhaps it's the characters—pirates, a slaver and his army, a mostly crew of actors, crazy pigmy shrews and wild squirrels and various other colourful personages… There’s Tramun Clogg, a host to himself—braided, dirty, loud Cap’n Clogg, a queer mixture of humour and cruelty that somehow is almost likeable… or pitiful. There’s Badrang the Tyrant, the cruel, wicked overlord but none too clever for all that. There’s soup-making, ladle-totting Grumm and sweet, headstrong Brome the runaway and the blooming healer. There’s the Rambling Rosehip Players—witty, reckless Ballaw; strong-minded, strong-voiced Rowanoak; flirty Celandine; and the others. There’s unloving Pallum and noble old Barkjon; Druwp the traitor and Keyla the brave. There’s the wicked soldiers and corsairs; the stern Warden; Boldred and her sweet family. There’s Rose—sweet, spirited, resourceful Rose. There’s Felldoh—fierce, loving, determined Felldoh the avenger. And then there’s Martin. I can’t say why I love Martin so much. He’s stern and tender, wise and impulsive, dutiful and brave and strong—not a very outstanding warrior mouse. But somehow he became one of my very favourite fictional characters ever. 

Perhaps it’s the dramatic plot—the terrible slavery in the fort rampant with torture and ill-use; the plotting and counterplotting between Clogg and Badrang; Rose, Grumm, and Martin’s adventures with the shrews and moles and lizards; Felldoh and Brome’s escapades with the actors; the half-freedom and full freedom; the half at Noonvale; the final battle… it’s a real voyage, full of happiness and excitement and dismay. Perhaps it’s the beautiful ending, that brought tears to my eyes. 

Perhaps, quite simply, it’s all of these things… 

A Favourite Quote: “Don't think about what you could have done, concentrate on what you plan to do; it is more useful.”

Content List: mild violence; mild euphemisms. 

*Review to be updated upon reread.*