Rating: 3/5

I recently read Vicki Hendricks' debut novel, "Miami Purity," which took the noir genre and flipped it on its head, and it blew my mind with its wild twists and turns. So I was curious to see what her second book, "Iguana Love," would be like.

Having now finished it, my impression was that the author said, "Oh, you think 'Miami Purity' was a little over the top? Well get a load of THIS."

As with "Miami Purity," the story is told in the first person. As with the first book's ex-stripper Sherri Parlay, the narrator is a hot and hot-to-trot woman in Miami who likes sex and hungers for a better life -- but can't hide her attraction to a bad boy.

Unlike Sherri Parlay, though, our dirty-minded heroine this time out has the cartoonish name of Ramona Romano. Like Sherri, she starts out the book married but ends the marriage pretty quickly in the plot (unlike Sherri, she does not do so violently). 

The opening line of the book is a classic: "The dark side of my mind took control on one of those slipper-hot Miami nights about a year ago, the start of my unraveling, my spin into psychosis and murder."

Ramona longs to be free of her hubby. Even though he satisfies her sexually when they have sex, she finds him boring otherwise, always doing and saying the same things. She works as an ER nurse, and finds that kind of boring too, doing the same thing day after day. She longs to take diving lessons and immerse herself in the ocean and follow the currents and swim among the colorful sea life. 

Right off the bat, though, we are treated to something bizarre -- a headless snake coiled up and bleeding in Ramona's tub. Later, she will capture a wild iguana and try to tame him into becoming her pet. He will become the one constant in her life -- and suffer a bizarre fate too.

This is a short novel, fewer than 200 pages, but Hendricks plot packs a lot into it. By around the 100-page mark, Ramona has had sex with four different guys, including bad boy diving instructor Enzo. She's also gotten her diving certification, fallen deeply in debt and determined to become a bodybuilder too, even if it means taking steroids.

I don't want to give away any more than that, but suffice to say that things get pretty strange by the climax of the story, with Ramona making changes not only to her life but also her own body and sexual practices. There's a weird interlude with a blind diver who can't keep his hands off Ramona, and some odd encounters with a neighbor named Ivan who loves animals and has a weird laugh, but mostly it's about her being drawn closer to well-endowed Enzo and playing his cruel games. The closing scene of the book involves Ramona doing something that is maybe the strangest thing I have ever read in a book.

The problem with this book is that I think Hendricks uses the extremely explicit sex scenes to pad out a plot that doesn't really amount to much. The minute Enzo involves Ramona in a money-making scheme, you can tell where this is headed and while the climax is well-written, what happens is no surprise at all. 

So unlike "Miami Purity," which rated five stars, I am only giving this one three. And while I am curious about what Hendricks' third novel might be like, I may wait a while to get around to that one, just in case it's more of the same. You know how boring that can be.