Rating: 4/5

After reading Submission, Platform came to confirm my initial view I had for Michel Houellebecq. Same here the writer is cynical, raw, eccentric in a way, but more than all, an absolutely realist, whether people want to accept it or not. It is easy to see why he shocks with his books, but to me, this is not his point, he just writes down through his plots the reality, no matter how cruel it is. And he deserves congrats, it needs courage and some times audacity to stamp all these to the paper and offer it to a reader.

In platform his main hero Michel, -an alter ego maybe of himself?, is an apathetic figure, a forty year old man with no real interest in life, just living, who after the loss of his father decides to have a trip to Thailand in order to clear his mind. What happens next is something that even himself hardly believe, it changes his life and brings him in front of unprecedented situations and emotions. Houellebecq is a very tough judge of western world of his men and woman not afraid to show us in his words their worst characteristics. He deals a lot with human relationships, underlining how difficult is for people in nowdays to leave themselves fall into love, while on the other side highlighting their need for happiness. He makes also an approach to world economy and especially to tourism, a sector which is so interesting to me. He uses a lot of details which may seem uninteresting or boring to someone. Personally I loved his kind of analysis. He also deals with careers pointing out how important seem to people and how many times if not always, deprave them from the meaning of life. There are a lot of sex scenes in his pages, some times tough, some others kinky, but others from the point of view of real love. There is also a love story growing up in his pages, an intense and powerful affair which keep the attention of the reader and it is something beautiful among all these misery of the reality. The ending has real dramatic and touching character, leaves someone a sad taste but it is real powerful, while it is a kind of attack in Islamic world, in fact the real feelings of someone who blames Islam for the loss of the most prestigious thing happened in his life, feelings of a sore person. Excellent, fast and very smart reading, I enjoyed it so much.