Rating: 3/5

welcome to...THE JANTERUARY TALES.

get it? like the canterbury tales? only january?

anyway.

this is an installment of PROJECT LONG CLASSICS, by which i make intimidating books less scary by reading them over the course of a month and bothering all of you.

it's been a while since i read an old-timey-language one. let's give it a shot.

DAY 1: PROLOGUE
you can tell i'm being really smart and brave because i'm actually reading a prologue.

this is basically an introduction to a cast of what seems likes 92 characters. i hope none of this is on the quiz.

DAY 2: THE KNIGHT'S TALE
they honestly must have built women different in the olden days. i don't know anyone who's hot enough that just hanging around in her own yard can cause two heroic men to become so obsessed they essentially curse themselves. 

in other words, you'd be surprised how much this story from 1000 years ago has in common with clockwork princess.

DAY 3: THE MILLER'S TALE
oh thank god it's a short one.

reading yesterday's in several-page batches to try to ensure i was actually understanding the weird words and not just letting my eyes go over the sentences was a real struggle.

this story has everything: the c word, cucking, trumpian "grab them by the [redacted]," kissing a literal asshole, pranks, tomfoolery, flattery, farts, song, grievous bodily harm, and more hijinks than you can possibly imagine.

DAY 4: THE REEVE'S TALE
i doubt there's any competing with yesterday's, but this one is at least even shorter.

DAY 5: THE COOK'S TALE
mercifully this one is like 2 pages long. thank god, because any discussion of what passed for food in ye olden days would function like a horror story to me.

also i'm famously bad at doing this project on weekends, so.

DAY 6: THE MAN OF LAW'S TALE
this is very jesus-y (boring) but also about a framejob for a murder planned directly by satan himself (perfect).

it also taught me that there used to be a word called "eggement" that meant incitement (like egging on), so now i'm going to mourn that forever.

DAY 7: THE WIFE OF BATH'S TALE
for some reason this one is roughly 1120 times easier to read than the previous 6.

or maybe i'm just getting used to reading it.

probably the first option.

DAY 8: THE FRIAR'S TALE
this seems like it's going to be very exciting (about thievery) but it is not (mostly just two guys talking to each other about how bad they are and then becoming good guys).

DAY 9: THE SOMPNOUR'S TALE
step one: google what the hell a sompnour even is.

at one point in this a man proves he isn't drunk by killing a child with a bow and arrow. at another point a guy tells a friar he has something privately hidden in his pants and when the friar goes to grab it he farts in his hand. 

i cannot stress enough how unprepared i was for how unrelentingly insane these stories are.

DAY 10: THE CLERK'S TALE
this is about a guy who picks some girl to be his wife out of nowhere and she's like "sure i'll do my duty and marry you" and he proceeds to spend the rest of their lives putting her through good wife tests like "will you let a guy kill our daughter just because i said so?"

men are a plague.

DAY 11: THE MERCHANT'S TALE
back to back wife stories...chaucer should have had a more critical editor. switch the order, my guy!

DAY 12: THE SQUIRE'S TALE
so yes, i skipped a day for the first time of this installment yesterday. but in my defense i spent a saturday drinking red wine and watching old movies. if i also picked this up i would have broken Being Cultured On A Weekend regulations.

DAY 13: THE FRANKLIN'S TALE
the franklin (whatever that is) (don't worry i looked it up like an intellectual) spends a solid portion of this talking about various times from history that large groups of women have died rather than swipe their v-card, and he keeps being like why even keep going? who needs more examples? and then gives more. i don't know sir! not me! enough!

DAY 14: THE DOCTOR'S TALE
if my dad was like "hey sorry i have to kill you," my reaction would not be to be like "ok, fair enough. all i ask is i get some space to complain about having to die, as is any murdered daughter's right according to the bible."

but then i would also not prefer death over losing my virginity, nor would i be one of the mob of a thousand people who rushes in to say her dad doesn't deserve prison because he sliced her head off and brought it to court for that valiant cause. so i guess i just wouldn't do that well in chaucer's time.

DAY 15: THE PARDONER'S TALE
for a guy whose title is pardoner, this fella sure doesn't seem very forgiving to those of us who may enjoy a glass of wine or two on occasion...

DAY 16: THE SHIPMAN'S TALE
finally, a GOOD wife story (this wife loves partying and buying clothes and creating debts in order to do so)

DAY 17: THE PRIORESS' TALE
sera in the comments said "When you get to the Prioress' Tale, be sure to read it out loud for full effect. In as prissy a voice as you can manage. :)"

i have to second that recommendation.

DAY 18: CHAUCER'S TALE OF SIR THOPAS
a fun mystery about this book is that when you get to a short one, there's a 50/50 chance on whether it's actually short or it's been abruptly redacted.

this one is mostly describing a #OOTD before ending midsentence.

DAY 19: CHAUCER'S TALE OF MELIBOEUS
this one isn't even in verse. not a rhyme to be found. just a collection of the longest paragraphs you've ever seen in your life.

it just feels wrong.

DAY 20: THE MONK'S TALE
this is like a tale multipack. all of the ancient world A-listers are here to teach us a moral lesson in meter via a monk.

DAY 21: THE NUN'S PRIEST'S TALE
do nuns just...receive a complimentary priest? pretty good deal if so. 

i always thought it was kind of a short end of the stick situation to trade your life to god in exchange for a weird outfit you have to wear forever, but this sweetens the pot a bit.

DAY 22: THE SECOND NUN'S TALE
i don't know what the nun math is here, but i'm just going to ignore it.

if i'm granted a wish by an angel...i'm sorry but there's no way i'm using that wish to convert my brother to christianity. i'm wishing for more wishes. or a gift card.

DAY 23: THE CANON'S YEOMAN'S TALE
it is funny that we started out this book with tales from guys like "The Doctor!" and "The Cook!" and now we're at the old timey equivalent of "Your Childhood Babysitter's Neighbor" and "Your Sister's Boyfriend's Cousin." it's like when your mom tells you a story and it starts "you remember your aunt's old boyfriend's daughter." no i do not.

DAY 24: THE MANCIPLE'S TALE
i sh*t you not, this book actually just contained the words "he pouped in his horn." and it gets even better. it means burped.

they just don't make phrases like they used to.

DAY 25: THE PARSON'S TALE
can't believe we're finishing this book today. it feels like just centuries ago i began torturing myself by struggling to find meaning in vaguely spellchecked middle english for 40 minutes a day, with only butt jokes as my reward.

just kidding. butt jokes are a good reward.

aw, man. this was a straight up sermon.

OVERALL
i thought i had a 0% chance of enjoying this at all, and instead it was 50/50 on whether each story contained a moment of pure insanity that would make my entire day, with the alternative of being both boring and difficult to read! i'll call that a good time on average. 
rating: 3.5