Rating: 5/5

My next read going backwards through the Pulitzer winners is The Stone Diaries by Carol Shields. This book also won Canada's top book award the name year and was a National Book Award finalist as well. All these awards and praise were well-merited as this is a well-written and compelling story about a woman's life from birth to death. 

Daisy Goodwill is born at the turn of the century to a mother who passes away while giving birth and a father who is an accomplished stonemason in rural Canada. The themes of life/death and the metaphor of stone percolate through the entire book, starting with the title: The Stone Diaries. We hear Daisy writing her journal with decade breaks between the chapters, mostly in the 3rd person and we get a sense throughout of her feeling of dislocation in her own life. Her beginning was also her mother's ending - this event underscores the life/death motif and distorts her concept of time:
It has never been easy for me to understand the obliteration of time, to accept, as others seem to do, the swelling and corresponding shrinkage of season or the conscious acceptance that one year has ended and another begun. There is something here that speaks of our essential helplessness and how the greater substance of our lives is bound up with waste and opacity. Even the sentence parts sieze on the tongue, so that so say, 'Twelve years passed' is to deny the fact of biographical logic." (p. 27) 

Baby Daisy is certainly helpless and is taken under the wing of her neighbor, Mrs Flett, who absconds with the baby to live with Daisy and her son Barker Flett in Ottowa. Daisy will not see her father again until the death of her "aunt" some eleven years later. In fact, each of the chapters is about a period of her life ("Birth", "Childhood"..."Death") and focuses (with many meandering diversions of course) on one key defining event. 

Another theme in the book is sex and how various characters experience it. Her mother dies in the course of giving birth to her marking sex as something with potential danger. Her father is similarly distant from everyone but his precious rocks, but he has a special and eternal fascination for his dead first wife: the gathering of tenderness, rising blood, a dark downward swirl of ecstasy and then - this seems to him particularly precious - the miraculous reward of shared sleep, his beloved beside him, her breath dissolving into his. A coil of her hair will be loosened on the shared pillow and without waking her he will kiss the tips of this hair. (p. 36)

Throughout the narrative, again proposed in the form of a diary, we also peek into the minds of many people that Daisy knows during her long life, after all as she says, Life is an endless recruiting of witnesses. (p. 36) 

Her caretaker in Ottowa, Professor Barker Flett, is obsessed with flowers rather than stone and so the motifs of pistil, stigma, style, ovary, stamen, anther, filament, petal, sepal, receptacle (p. 42) become a pendant for the motif of stone. Stone symbolizing a more male permanence and the gravestone, flowers representing a more effiminate side and evoking life.

Some of the more evocative images in the book are the tower that Cuyler Goodwill, Daisy's father, builds for his dead wife in Canada out of stones pilferred secretly from his quarry before moving to Indianapolis and the pyramid he starts as a time machine there in Indianapolis and dies building at the end of the book. He was a man, on the contrary, who could easily be sounded out given the space...His voice, you might say, became the place he lived (p. 85) Despite his gift for oratory, gleaned from reading the Bible, he is never quite able to bridge the gap between himself and his daughter probably owning to the fact that he was eccentric perhaps, an artisan naif, but not unapproachable, not in the least....His tongue learned to dance then, learned to deal with the intricasies of evasion and drama, fiction and distraction.( p. 85) Perhaps, it was this same tongue that kissed the tips of his wife's hair, but which still serves as a buffer between himself and his own feelings.

Daisy inherits this inability to connect to her own feelings marrying by default an alcoholic with who she never consumes the marriage (he was always too drunk) and who she sneezes out of a window in one of the novel's more dark-comic scenes. For Daisy, love is mostly the avoidance of hurt, and futhermore, she is accostumed to obstacles, and how they can be overcome by readjusting her glance or crowding her concerns into a shadowy corner. (p. 147).

Dasiy does finally find love later - oddly with Flett's son who she stayed with in Canada after the death of his mother until she was eleven - and had three children. Her daughter Alice is the one closest to her and we get her perspective a bit more often than the other children. The birds and bees discussion on pages 165-166 was particularly well-written from Alice's perspective. Her dream during the boring, unsatisfying lovemaking of Barker about the film The Best Years of Our Lives: What would it be like to be touched by cold bent metal instead of human fingertips? What would it be like to feel the full weight of a man on her body, pinning her hard to the world? (p. 192) is also telling of her compromises in love and sex even in middle age.

Unable to find a sexual outlet, she turns to gardening In turn it perceives nothing of her, not her history, her name, her longings, nothing - which is why she is able to love it as purely as she does, why she has opened her arms to it, taking it as it comes, every leaf, every stem, every root and sign. (p. 196)

After the pre-mature death of her husband, she takes over the column he wrote about gardening in the paper and finally has some individual success, however short-lived. Cut short, she loses the column due to an affair with the newspaper editor and drifts into a deep depression which her children and friends struggle to help her out of. A few years later, she moves to Florida with her remaining friends and lives the rest of her life at the Bayside Ladies Craft Club in her condo keeping her hands occupied, filling more and more of the world with less and less of herself. (p. 268). She comes to a sad, but true realization: No one told her so much of life was spent being old (something I am personally struggling with) Everything she encounters feels lacking in weight. The hollow interior doors of her condo. The molded insubstantiality of the light switches. The dismaying lightness of her balcony furniture. The rattling loose-jointed cabs she sometimes takes... (p. 280). Her attachments to earth, then, remain superficial as she enters her twilight years. ...life "thus far" has meant accepting the doses of disabling information that have come her way, every drop, and stirring them with the spoon of her longing - she's done this for so many years it's become second nature. (p. 282)

This quote was also incredibly apt: And it's occurred to her that there are millions, billions, of other men and women in the world who wake up early in their separate beds, greedy for the substance of their own lives, but obliged every day to reinvent themselves. (p. 283). This reinvention for Daisy is a necessary, painful thing done without complaint as opposed to a new exciting way of precisely reclaiming one's own life. Her pain hidden in her past, remains too difficult for her to deal with directly and thus she takes this resigned approach: The larger loneliness of our lives evolves from our unwillingness to spend ourselves, stir ourselves. We are always damping down our inner weather, permitting ourselves the comforts of postponement, of rehearsals. (p. 291)

After a visit to her grandfather in the Orkleys north of Scotland, her downhill slide becomes inevitable. She has a massive heartattack and is recovering, And her knees, her poor smashed knees. Amazing, considering all this, that she can remember the appropriate phrase, amazing and also chilling, the persevering strictures of social discourse.
Never mind, it means nothing: it's only Mrs. Flett going through the motions of being Mrs. Flett." (p. 314).

Her daughter Alice comes to her during this final phase when she is turning into stone: Knuckles of pearl, Already dead. Mineralized. She reminds herself that what falls into most people's lives becomes a duty they imagine: to be good, to be faithful to an idea of being good. A good daughter. A good mother. Endlessly, heroically patient. These enlargements of the self can be terrifying. (p. 326).

It remains unspoken about whether Alice decides to be more in contact with herself than her mother was, but she is the one child who is in a relatively stable marriage and having moved to England in seeming bliss and discovery. 

As Daisy passes from this world, Something has occurred to her - something transparently simple, something she's always known, it seems, but never articulated. Which is that the moment of death occurs while we're still alive. Life marches right up to the wall of that final darkness, one extreme state of being butting against the other. Not even a breath separates them. Not even a blink of the eye. (p. 342).

This was a beautiful book and it is likely that I will seek out other books to read from this author even while I tried to live a bit more consciously, trying to take some of the lessons about living and aging that this book tries to teach.