Rating: 3/5

Which is a better title, in your opinion: Lord Edgware Dies or “Thirteen at Dinner”? It depends, you might say. When does Lord Edgware Die? Is it a spoiler? And what is the significance of the number thirteen, at dinner?

Well to have thirteen guests at dinner is, according to superstition, unlucky. The legend goes that if thirteen are present at a dinner, then bad luck will come to the person who first leaves the table. And, yes Lord Edgware does die, although not before the story starts, so that the entire novel is a “flashback”, but  in chapter 5. Neither does he die at the end of the story: it is a true whodunnit, where the rule is that enough clues are provided as the story moves along, for the reader to be able to solve it. 

(I did not by the way. As usual I was merrily carried away by the fact that I had spotted a detail near the beginning, which would explain the otherwise hidden identity of the murderer. But no. It was a red herring, carefully placed by Agatha Christie to entrap and misdirect innocent readers like me.)

In fact there is a lot of skilful misdirection in Lord Edgware Dies. It is well up to standard for a Poirot novel. And it also has a little welcome humour, such as this comment by one of the characters, where the author delightfully pokes fun at herself:

“And that very same evening – that very same evening – Lord Edgware dies. Good title that, by the way. Lord Edgware Dies. Look well on a book stall.”

So why the two titles? It came as a surprise to me, to learn that this novel by an English author was originally published in the USA. It was entitled “Thirteen for Dinner”, and serialised in six monthly parts, between March and August 1933, in “The American Magazine”. Just a month later, in September 1933, it was published in the UK as Lord Edgware Dies, and we know it better now under that later title. But I feel there should be a warning to Agatha Christie enthusiasts, who may believe that they have stumbled on a lesser known work by the Great Dame: they are the same novel. And interestingly, both titles do actually function as a kind of spoiler, although it is not really possible to tell until the conclusion is known.

And the dedication? Who were “Dr. and Mrs. Campbell Thompson”?

At the time of writing, the author and her second husband, Max Mallowan, the archaeologist, were friends with the Campbell Thompson couple. Agatha Christie and Max Mallowan had first met at the Ur site three years previously, in 1930, and married the same year. Reginald Campbell Thompson had employed Max to work on a dig at the ancient Assyrian city of Upper Mesopotamia, located on the outskirts of Mosul in modern-day northern Iraq. 

Apparently Thompson was notoriously tight-fisted; so much so that he wanted Agatha Christie to use use orange boxes as a desk! Agatha Christie instead insisted on buying a solid table to place her typewriter on, in order to complete her next book. Thompson was aghast at the fact that she spent ten pounds of her own money on a table at a local bazaar, and apparently took two weeks to recover his temper over such an “extravagance”! The book in question was, of course, Lord Edgware Dies. 

Despite these disagreements, Thompson often asked Agatha how the book was progressing. In fact the Thompson couple were uniquely honoured, because Agatha Christie read the manuscript of the book aloud to them, and this was something that she only ever usually did for her family. Agatha Christie and Reginald Campbell Thompson clearly regained their mutual respect, because not only did she dedicate the novel to the Thompson couple, but a skeleton found on the dig was named “Lord Edgware”!

There is little point in retelling the story here. There are plenty of places where one can read a synopsis of this convoluted tale. As you would expect, Agatha Christie’s ninth work featuring her great detective Hercule Poirot, shows her well into her stride. Satisfyingly, both Hercule Poirot and Captain Hastings are present for the whole story, rather than one of them making a late appearance, as sometimes happens. Once again, Hastings’s wife, Dulcie Duveen, or “Cinderella”, first introduced to us in “Murder on the Links”, does not appear in the novel. Presumably she is back at home on their ranch in the Argentine. The single reference to this comes at the beginning of the last chapter, when:

“I was suddenly recalled to the Argentine”.

Chief Inspector Japp too, is also on the scene, as the officer in change of the murder case – or cases, I should say – as there will be three murders in total.

For much of the novel we watch the interaction between these three. The relationship between Poirot and Hastings is far better described than in the previous novel, “Peril at End House” in which the duo seemed to spend all their time carping at one another. The author Robert Barnard has noticed this too, calling the novel:

“clever and unusual, with the Hastings/Poirot relationship done less crudely than usual.”

The narrator is as ever, Captain Arthur Hastings, who describes what he thinks of as his friend’s limitations in an affectionate way:

“Oh! I know very well that you always have a little idea that I am conceited, but, indeed, I assure you, I am really a very humble person.”
I laughed.
“You – humble!”
“It is so. Except – I confess it – that I am a little proud of my moustaches.”

And Poirot kindly observes to Hastings:

“No human being should learn from another. Each individual should develop his own powers to the uttermost, not try to imitate those of someone else. I do not wish you to be a second and inferior Poirot. I wish you to be the supreme Hastings. And you are the supreme Hastings. In you, Hastings, I find the normal mind almost perfectly illustrated.”

Hastings is also quick to observe that Inspector Japp does not usually have Poirot’s powers of deduction and insight. Nevertheless he reports events faithfully. Here is an exchange between Poirot and the good Inspector:

“You have the confidence — always the confidence! You never stop and say to yourself — can it be so? You never doubt — or wonder. You never think: this is too easy!’
'You bet your life I don’t! And that's just where, if you’ll excuse me saying so, you go off the rails every time. Why shouldn’t a thing be easy? What’s the harm in a thing being easy?’”

The trio are a treat to read about, and their little peccadilloes only add to the enjoyment of this classic golden age mystery.

It is obvious from the title that the characters are going to be aristocrats and those in high society. We move in these circles throughout the novel, and also into the realms of the theatre. Lord Edgware’s wife is the actress, Jane Wilkinson, and we plunge straight into the nitty-gritty of the book when, at the end of chapter one, she announces:

“M. Poirot, somehow or other I’ve just got to get rid of my husband.”

We know the next bit of the plot, from the title, but who exactly might have done the deadly deed? Apart from his wife, there are other suspects within his family. There is his nephew, Captain Ronald Marsh, who is the heir to his title, and has money troubles. There is Geraldine Marsh, his daughter from his first marriage, whose life he makes a misery. There is the Duke of Merton, whom Lord Edgware’s wife wishes to be free to marry. And as ever, there are butlers, housekeepers and maids of the various households, all of whom could easily have a good motive to murder Lord Edgware.

Prominent in the story are Jane Wilkinson, who like many actresses depicted in fiction, seems completely self-obsessed, and described by her friends as having no conscience at all. But despite reports of having been seen in Lord Edgware’s house at the time of the murder, she has a perfect alibi, as she was also seen attending a dinner with a dozen other guests.

We also meet Carlotta Adams, an American impersonator, who is on tour in London and Paris. In a performance watched by Poirot and Hastings in chapter 1, she mimics Jane Wilkinson exceptionally well. Interestingly, this performance is viewed with pleasure by Jane Wilkinson herself, who is seated in the audience, just behind Poirot and Hastings.

Surely the inclusion of a talented impersonator, who is able to mimic one of the chief suspects, cannot be immaterial to the plot? Throughout much of the novel,  and even after the murder of Carlotta Adams  we are trying to work out what exactly might have happened here. Carlotta Adams herself is an endearing character. She was based on the American dramatist Ruth Draper, and Agatha Christie was so impressed by her, that she became the inspiration behind the story. In Agatha Christie’s autobiography, she wrote:

“I thought how clever she was and how good her impersonations were; the wonderful way she could transform herself from a nagging wife to a peasant girl kneeling in a cathedral. Thinking about her led me to the book Lord Edgware Dies”

The characters in Lord Edgware Dies are slightly better filled out than in some of her other novels. Another feisty female is Genevieve or “Jenny” Driver, a friend of Carlotta Adams, who specialises in the creation of fashionable hats. Another strong character is Bryan Martin, a successful actor, who knows all three females well. Other actors and minor members of the aristocracy come and go.

To say the settings are so limited – various barely described locations in London – it remains an absorbing read. Much of the text consists of dialogue between the detectives and those involved in the case, and even more is between Poirot and Hastings, where Poirot explains his thoughts (or Hastings complains that he doesn’t!) We are privy to all Poirot’s mistaken theories, as he postulates first one solution, and then another. But none will suffice, as none cover all the questions Poirot has asked himself. This infuriates Japp, who merely looks for the obvious answer, and we gleefully watch the irritable conversations that ensue.

The structure of the story is also nicely done. Right at the end of the book is an account, a letter to Poirot  written by the murderer, confirming the clever mind at work behind the rather dim affected personality displayed to the public. It is a satisfying way to end the novel. And the opposite end of the book, the conclusion to chapter one already quoted, sets a precedent for many of the other chapter endings to also end with a surprise — or on a cliffhanger —to ensure that we carry on reading. 

Red herrings are placed randomly, some of which we pick up, certain that this time they will not be misdirection, but actual clues which we have cleverly spotted. (We are invariably wrong!) A person in a particular place at a particular time. An initial which is the correct one. A relationship which had been hidden hitherto, but is suddenly revealed. Surely these are pertinent?

Probably not. Things are never as they seem.

“Enemies! People these days don’t have enemies! Not English people!”

“Do you not know, my friend, that each one of us is a dark mystery, a maze of conflicting passions and desires and aptitudes? Mais oui, c’est vrai. One makes one’s little judgments — but nine times out of ten one is wrong.”

“One cannot be interested in crime without being interested in psychology. It is not the mere act of killing, it is what lies behind it that appeals to the expert.”