Rating: 3/5

CRITIQUE:

The Call of Domesticity

When Dad was a little boy, he loved a book called "The Call of the Wild". It was about a dog called Buck that was taken away from his home and sold to strangers. The author, apparently, was protesting against the "humanisation" of animals. In the author's mind, the dog did not think about doing any of the things he wrote about in the book, he merely did them. It wasn't directed by abstract reasoning, but by instinct, sensation, and emotion, and by simple reasoning. (1) The dog was most at home, and most dignified, in the wild, not in domesticity, at the beck and call of humans.

Nevertheless, when he read the book, Dad started a life-long ambition: he wanted to have a dog, ironically, at home. Not through any sympathy with the plight of dogs, Dad's parents never bought him a dog. They didn't want to be responsible for taking care of it.

When Dad got married to Mum, and they had two daughters, they, too, wanted to have a dog. But like his parents, Dad said no. Ironically, in the quest for a dog, Dad compromised little by little, first buying gold fish, then guinea pigs. They were no match for a dog, but, in a way, they were training, a kind of experiment to see whether Claudie and Lily could and would take care of their pets. The experiment didn't necessarily prove anything, but sooner or later, Mum and Dad went to a pet shop and bought me. They thought I was the cutest dog in the shop, and so did their daughters when they brought me home.

I was never a wild dog, I never bit anybody or anything, I soon learned all of my lessons, even though I continued to bark at anybody who passed our front gate. I always let Mum and Dad know if any robbers were near. They thought I was a good guard dog, but in reality I couldn't differentiate between the pedestrians who passed our home. Some were neighbours or lived in the street, and were just walking to the bus stop or the shops. Some had parked their car in the street, and were walking to the hospital where they worked. But the ones I barked loudest at, were the ones who had dogs of their own. I barked at them, and they barked back. Everybody thought we were mad dogs, but we were just playing a dog game with each other. Eventually, the other dogs' masters would take a different route and avoid our gate. I didn't have to bark as much, which was a relief.

Even so, a dog's life continued to be tiring, and I needed to sleep a lot, even during the day. I still needed to sleep at night, and Mum and Dad let me sleep at their feet, on the big bed. Although they think I'm pretty cute, I am a little lazy, and I'm always the last out of bed in the morning.

I might be lazy, but I still love it when Dad takes me for a walk in the afternoon. We used to start at 4pm, but bit by bit we've started earlier. Dad thinks it's because I love going for a walk with him, but it's really because I love the treats he gives me when we get home, so it's my way of getting to eat my treats earlier in the day.

The problem is that, if I have my treats early, I get hungry again the same day, and I need to have my dinner and my dinner treats. Mum gets annoyed with me, and won't let me have any more until an hour later. If I whimper enough, Dad will weaken and give me some more treats. It's not very noble of me, but I get what I need. Well, I get what I want, anyway.

Sometimes, Mum and Dad go away in the car and leave me at home by myself. I don't know where they go, although sometimes Mum comes back with plastic bags. Some of the bags have my food in them, I know, because I can smell my food, even if it's still in cardboard packaging. My nose still works, as if I lived in the wild.

Dad likes to go for a long walk every morning. He doesn't take me, because that's when I'm still sleeping in bed. He takes some treats with him, which I assume he gives to other dogs he meets on the way. I can tell, because I can smell other dogs on his legs, but most of all I can smell where he has had the treats in a pouch around his stomach.

Dad also likes reading books. Until recently, none of these books had been about animals, but he has just read two animal books in a row, one was about cats, and this book was about a dog. The dog was called Mr. Bones (aka Cal and Sparky), and he seemed to think and talk like a human. He wasn't wild at all. I don't know why humans think a talking dog is special. All dogs can talk. It's just that not all humans can hear or understand us. 

Mr Bones had a number of owners. The first was Willy G. Christmas, who ended up dying. Willy tried to take him to an old lady who used to teach English to him, so she could take care of him when he (Willy) died and went to Timbuktu (his name for Heavens above). Instead, a Chinese boy called Henry Chow found him on the street and took him home, although he didn't let his parents know that he had found a dog. He thought they would make him take it to the pound. I've never been to a pound, but the other dogs I've spoken to have always said, you don't want to end up in the pound. They don't give you all the food you need, like your home parents would. A pound is a bit like having a bad owner who won't take care of you properly. Some owners even hurt their dogs. Why would you hurt a dog, let alone your own dog?

Hold on, I think I smelled Dad coming in through the front gate. I have to go now. I'll try to meet him out the front. With any luck, he might have a treat left for me. Besides, I don't want him to find out that I've been typing on his computer. He thinks he's the one who writes all these reviews on GoodReads.

Ciao,
Charlie Gronson
Maltese Lhasa-Apso cross

FOOTNOTES:

(1) The Call of the Wild

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Cal...

SOUNDTRACK:

Cat Stevens - "I Love My Dog"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uWT2q...

Fionn Regan - "Put a Penny in the Slot"

https://youtu.be/THTmZyWQNFY

Pavlov's Dog - "Julia"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k3KSp...

Pavlov's Dog - "Song Dance"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IZ_vM...

Pavlov's Dog - "Valkerie"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p7RtI...