Rating: 2/5

It's been quite a while since I've read anything by Dean Koontz, and I figured that it was about time to give him another go. This is one of his older books. That makes me feel old, actually, to say that, as it was published the same year I was born, but, it's true. 

One of my favorite things about Dean Koontz is that he's able to keep me on my toes. He doesn't write the best dialogue, or write the best characters, but his stories are always twisty, and never end up where I think they're going. 

House of Thunder was no different. I had many theories, several of them quite good (and maybe even better than what actually happened, if I do say so myself), but they were all wrong. The ending was actually pretty good, if a little dated, and it certainly felt plausible. But, I wish that there was just a little more background information given. There were so many strings out there, and so many loose ends that were all wrapped up in just a few pages, that I wish that there was just a little more information given to back up the abrupt resolution. Even with that missing, it was good, but it could have been great. 

One thing that really did strike me as odd though, was the romance aspect of the story. Susan, the main character, awakes from a coma, and within a few days is 'in love' with her doctor, Dr. McGee. And then when things start getting crazy, and she begins to suspect that things are not what they seem, she is massively hurt that he could have betrayed her. In just a few days. I just couldn't really get my head around that one. Susan is described as being very much in control of herself and her life and as much of her environment as possible, so I really couldn't see how she could fall for someone so quickly and then be so hurt by her fears in such a short amount of time. It just didn't jive with me, and seemed like it was more of an addition to explain later events than any real attraction... 

All in all, this was a pretty good story. I was never really sure what was going on, and it was very nightmarish and surreal, which is a plus. A quick read if you're looking for something to occupy a little bit of time. :)