Rating: 3/5

It’s a second installment and it’s successful in setting up the series with a trajectory readers can be intrigued to find out more. Does it follow up as successfully to the previous novel in the series? No, but it’s not a bad book. I stand with others that write about Corrans sudden sexual drive being turned up to 11 in this book where every being that remotely looks like a woman has to have their body salaciously described and an option for him to bed. It’s lacking in tact and any perceived romance quickly just fizzles and turns to lust in some form. I did like the relationship he begins to form with Mirax as that was better written but still it feels stilted and almost forcing the “enemies to lovers” trope. 

Rogue squadron having zero experience in espionage and all being thrust into personas felt…. ambitious? And of course foolish. Rebel intelligence is even mentioned in the series so why isn’t a single agent even briefing them on how to avoid suspicion? The rationale of the alliance being spread too thinly so they have to use the most famous, publicized, and ‘talented’ squadron of ace pilots to do espionage makes alliance leaders look a lot less tactically inclined. 
 Let’s not forget the backdrop is the capital of the empire and possibly one of the most heavily secured and monitored planets in the entire galaxy. Even at the scale of a galaxy and trillions of beings on one planet it seems entirely improbable they would be able to finesse a plan in such a short amount of time that gets them everything and more. Even factoring in Isards plan to relinquish coruscant. If anything, it might just detract from her character as cunning and intellectual. I hope there’s redemption further in the series for her as I’m tired of Star Wars authors creating villains that have their intellects touted just end up as all bark and no bite when coming up with “strategies” to win and they think sacrifice is the only way forward. 
Aside from criticism, it’s a decent read and most definitely reads and feels like a second installment setting up a larger plot. I just wish he had maybe made it more bulletproof than the paper thin plot we got.