Rating: 5/5

In writing Felix Krull, I wonder if Thomas Mann was trying to prove that after all his heavy-duty works he could still turn out a romantic comedy, although not the ordinary kind. He's still Thomas Mann. Magic Mountain is overshadowed by the inevitable coming of World War I, Doktor Faustus directly confronts the evils of World War II. Felix Krull takes place in 1895, a time when no one (well, no one but people like Bertha von Suttner), had any inkling of the imminent tragedies of the 20th century. Mann exercises his usual tricks but with a twist and a light touch. He loves assuming the voice of an eccentric narrator. This time it's a first person account by a no-account fake marquis, but a highly amusing fake who blithely tells his story for the refined and sensitive reader. Krull assures us he only writes for a cultivated audience, people cut from finer wood as he is himself. Like Mann's other novels, this one employs lots of teases, to hook the reader. On page nine Krull ever so briefly mentions that he has served time in jail, as well as lived in grand hotels. And he likes grand hotels better. But then he moves on and doesn't explain how he landed in jail, though one could easily imagine. Krull starts with his childhood and his close relationship to his godfather, the painter with the improbable name Schimmelpreester, who likes to paint his godson in the nude as well as in outrageous costumes, such as a matador outfit (a costume that plays a key roll at the end of the novel). The refined reader can ignore the implications of this or he can fill in the part of the story that occurs off stage. Like Tolstoy, whom Mann worshiped, the most important scenes are left behind a curtain. Felix works his way up, starting as an elevator boy in a grand hotel, then a busboy, and hits his stride as a waiter who serves a wealthy and frivolous clientele. The main drift of the story is that Felix's schemes work because people want to be fooled. So Felix steals a wealthy woman's jewels only to learn that she, something of a sadist who loves humiliation, would gladly give him more in erotic play. His charm and physical attractiveness becomes clear as people of both sexes offer him propositions. Mann has a lot of fun with aristocratic pretensions as Krull easily assumes the identity of an aristocrat, gets an audience with the king of Portugal and is awarded a medal, so he can dress properly decorated for formal occasions. One of the jewels of the book is Krull's "letter home" to the woman who is supposed to be his mother after he switched identities with a real aristocrat who wanted to continue slumming in Paris with a show girl. Mother is delighted to receive such a polished and gracious, and very long, letter. The fact that her real son could not possibly have written it just doesn't matter to her. And she particularly likes his defense of the natural order of society, because without beggars how could the upper classes show their sense of charity. Aristocrats, the wealthy, mothers and even academics get skewered. Mann himself came across, especially to Americans, as a professorial type, even though he actually failed repeatedly in school, and never went to college. So I think there is a certain authorial empathy going on here. Felix is a fake, but he is genuinely interested in hearing the technical details of evolution from a distinguished paleontologist, with the wonderful name of Professor Kuckuck...They thoroughly enjoy each other's pretentions. Well it goes on like this. Supposedly an unfinished fragment, the novel ends on a high note, and really doesn't need any further elaboration. Enough said.