Rating: 5/5

It’s funny to think I might never have read this – while I loved Spider, it didn’t make me immediately want to go out and buy everything else the author had written. I only picked up Dr Haggard’s Disease because I found a copy in one of my favourite charity bookshops. Now I’m kicking myself. I think it might actually be a masterpiece. Why isn’t it better known, more widely read? And have I been sleeping on the rest of McGrath’s books?

Edward Haggard is a man who has led an extremely limited and suppressed life. Now a country doctor, he mostly keeps to his isolated, windswept house and tries to cope with the pain caused by ‘Spike’, the metal pin that holds his hip together, legacy of an old injury. His sole relationship seems to have been an affair some years ago. He was a promising young registrar; she was the wife of a senior pathologist. Haggard is already utterly consumed by memories of this woman, but they really explode back into his life when he receives an unexpected visit from her son, a young RAF pilot. Soon, it appears the obsession is transferring itself from mother to son in unique and disturbing fashion.

I’ve mentioned many times that I dislike the trope of a person being obsessed with a short relationship many years in the past. It’s often used as a lazy way to demonstrate a character’s emotional immaturity, or a plot point to bring them back into contact with someone or something. But here is a rare example of a story in which it works beautifully. It’s painfully obvious to the reader that the affair was much more significant to Haggard than to Frances – a fact of which, even after so much obsessive reflection, he appears unaware. The depth of his obsession has overridden reality (as we see when he claims to have manifested a haunting by her, a disturbing hint of what’s to come). Then there’s the uncomfortable fact that Haggard narrates the whole tale of the affair, including many intimate details, to his lover’s son. This always-disconcerting background hum rises to a crescendo when Haggard’s beliefs about James – his ‘disease’ – reach their apotheosis. It’s a revelation that paints our protagonist as not just disturbed, but truly deranged.

Yet worse is to come. That final scene! That last line! That hideous, indelible image! Has any novel of obsession ever segued quite so effectively into psychological horror?

The books I love can be roughly sorted into two categories: those that thrill me with the skill of the writing, and those that seem to speak to my soul. Dr Haggard’s Disease was both. It’s an immaculately written, riveting, unsettling novel, one that immediately felt close to my heart.