Rating: 5/5

This historical novel was a gripping read from beginning to end. I am not normally a fan of the historical fiction genre but I am a fan of Colleen McCulloch, and this book explains why. McCulloch manages to interweave fact with intimate story details in a way that makes history fascinating and gives the reader a profound sense of what life in the penal colonies must have been like in the eighteenth century.

The character of Richard Morgan is brilliantly depicted. He is a serious man with immense potential for leadership, although his qualities were mostly hidden while he was living as an ordinary citizen in England. Only when he is put to the test, wrongfully arrested and imprisoned in awful surroundings, transported to Australia in appalling conditions and made to suffer near-starvation as a convict in Port Jackson and Norfolk Island does he rise to the challenge and express his inner resilience and moral authority. He has his flaws, being a man haunted by grief and unable to let go of past loves, yet he has the tenderness of a father, which eventually reopens the way to his heart. Strong, handsome and determined to turn his life around, he inspires admiration and affection.

Morgan is surrounded by a cast of other equally interesting characters. From the aristocrat who engineered his wrongful arrest to the inimitable Lizzy Lock; the engaging Steven Donavan and the innocent Kitty, they move the story forward in a wholly credible and absorbing way. Even though the book is long and covers many chapters in Richard Morgan's life, the drama of the various relationships keeps the reader wanting to know more. I found it immensely satisfying in this respect.

What I particularly loved about the book was the frequent philosophical pondering of the characters on key events in the narrative. This added an extra layer of meaning to the book. Questions like, "What makes one person love another?" stand out in the text, giving insight into the author's own questions about life and her reasons for writing the story in the first place. From my perspective as a fiction author, this was intriguing. I felt that I came to know Colleen McCulloch better as a person through this aspect of the book, since it was here that her thoughtfulness and amazement at life's random connections came through.

An impressive book, well researched and beautifully narrated. Well worth the read.