Rating: 4/5

All med students learn about Jakob-Crutzfeld disease. Some learn about mad cow disease. A few interested in medical history learn about Kuru. Very few people realize that the three diseases/disorders are related, and guess what? For a change of pace, we get them from what we eat...specifically meat. I have to admit that the problems Britain was having with their cattle had me worried more as a mother, than getting it myself. Just because the young seemed to be getting the disease more then the elderly. That tracked down to the fact they were either working directly with infected cattle or frequenting McDonalds. Since my family does neither, I am not so worried as to become a vegetarian, though this book gives room for that thought!
Mr. Rhodes wrote a Pulitzer Prize winner on the Atomic bomb which I read. I didn't even realize it was the same author. This book while very well written for viral science, is not on par with his other book. I enjoyed this book very much though, and anyone who is fascinated by the small things that are 'out' to get us and the history of medical mysteries, would thoroughly enjoy this book. Rhodes makes it clear that he admires the people who research and spend time with those in New Guinea, and who out of the goodness of their hearts spent years educating an isolated people whose demise from this disease probably would have had very little impact on the world at large. Yet these men place an importance on each culture, and tried to respect cultural boundaries and avoid polluting their societies with ours while teaching them how to avoid this problem Kuru. I enjoyed that story of cultural respect more than anything. I am sure we will be hearing more about this particular killer as time goes on, because the answer to its riddle hasn't been found yet, and we still don't know what the final outcome of the disaster in Britain is going to be. I hope a few ranchers will bother to read this and avoid feeding their cattle and sheep offal and other parts of dead animals. That alone could prevent the US from undergoing what Britain has had to endure...and we eat a lot more meat then they do! And yes, because of this book, I am feeding my family less meat all the time...