Rating: 4/5

My recent Agatha Christie reads were not remarkable. However this book has made me realise why I used to like Agatha Christie's work so much. This is a Poirot mystery in which Poirot isn't overly arrogant and irritating and the plot is intriguing enough.

Jane Wilkinson a beautiful actress is married to Lord Edgware. One evening at a hotel, she walks over to Poirot and Hastings in the middle of dinner, to have a private conversation. She tells Poirot that she is in love with a Duke and wants to divorce her husband and if he doesn't oblige, she might have to kill him (half joking, I guess)! She wants Poirot to meet Lord Edgware and convince him to grant her divorce. Reluctantly Poirot complies to this strange request. 

Upon meeting Lord Edgware, Poirot learns that he had already send a letter to Jane stating that he has no objection in granting her divorce. Poirot confronts Jane and she says she didn't receive any letter, but is happy that her wish is granted and yes, she needn't murder him! But as fate may have it, Lord Edgware is found murdered in his home and his butler and maid thinks it's Jane who has done the deed. Now it's upto Poirot and Hastings to figure out this mess.

I enjoyed this book a lot even though I could find a few plot holes in it which I will list in the spoilers section. Reccomend this book to all Agatha Christie mystery lovers.

**Spoilers**

Points which I found unconvincing:
1. The Duke falls in love with Jane knowing that she is a married woman. The only way he can marry her is if her husband is dead.
Since that is not a choice, he should have stopped pursuing this relationship. Since he doesn't, does that mean he is indirectly involved in the murder?

2. The whole story is a bit unusual. To find a voice actress who can imitate Jane is understandable. But a whole bunch of people at a party is unable to recognise her (she is a famous actress) is hard to believe! No matter how good Carlotta Adams is at impersonation, this is strange.

3. The book doesn't explain how Jane is there at the right moment to kill Ross, just before Poirot meets up with him.

Nevertheless it was a fun read.