Rating: 4/5

Singer was wonderful writer in so many ways. He could do character, dialogue, interior dialogue, setting. Only plot eluded him. Or maybe eluded is the wrong word: his stories begin at a random point in time, continue, then stop. This could be intentional: Singer’s way of saying that life is just one damn thing after another, and that the storyteller’s trick of imposing a beginning, middle, and end, is just that: a trick that imposes an artificial order on life’s random chaos. 

This book had a few too many characters for my management abilities: I forgot some characters and, particularly, their relationships. A list would have been helpful. 

But you have to give Singer a lot of credit. He wrote this book in New York (and possibly Miami) 30 years after leaving Poland. And yet he describes that destroyed world with such evocative detail that you see the streets and buildings and faces. You hear the blunt words and impatient voices. You feel the subtext of desperation: if the winter is bad, we might starve or freeze, if the spring is bad we might be slaughtered in a pogrom. 

I get that the characters don’t have the luxury of nuance: You’re a Jew who doesn’t trim his beard or you’re not a Jew at all. You take care of the children and the house and let your husband study or you’re an utter failure who should be divorced. I get that my 21st century judgments (maybe SHE should be the scholar) would seem like nonsense. 

In the end, this world (the world inhabited by my great grandparents) is utterly strange, utterly alien. I don’t understand these people. 

But they didn’t deserve to be murdered by invading Germans or traitorous neighbors. 

A last observation: Singer was vegetarian; I am vegan. So I notice when he slides in a few words that remind his readers of animal suffering. Here’s an example,from page 25: “...he had begun ... to ask questions that reeked of heresy. Does a live carp suffer agonies when it is scaled and cut to pieces for the sabbath meal?” 

Ezriel (one if the few characters I liked) poses these questions. Good questions, Ezriel. Keep asking.

Jochanan (the humble rabbi’s son) is similarly distressed at the animal sacrifice that precedes Rosh Hashanah. From page 349: “The men held the roosters by the feet and swung them overhead; the woman did the same with the hens. This sacrifice ... always caused Jochanan anguish ... Who could say that he, Jochanan, was more worthy to live than the creature sacrificed for him?”

Indeed, Jochanan, indeed.