Rating: 4/5

The pervasive emptiness of human life is the main theme of this book. Thirty-year old narrator is a computer engineer in France and he is living alone in his apartment. In his spare time, he writes about animals, smokes four packs of cigarettes a day, has no friends, he has no sex life. While reading, even if I am already 49, I could feel the narrator's loneliness. I have all those he lacks, I write book reviews and read a lot and all those keep my idle mind busy when I am supposed to be relaxing. We know that evil thoughts normally lurk in one's idle mind. 

I am an I.T. manager and have been in I.T. or related fields for most of my 30-year corporate life. I can say that I.T. is oftentimes really a sad profession. You deal with a machine every hour of your working day. You make sure that it runs and your users are happy. You make sure that the behavior of the program is predictable, efficient and repetitive. You make sure that the reports the big shots in the company are accurate and always available at their fingertips.

The narrator, in this first book by Michel Houllebecq, is an unnamed person does not find meaning in anything he does. At 30, he is still a virgin and so he frequently masturbates along in his apartment. Probably because of this, he finds women as pure sexual objects or object of his masturbatory fantasies. Probably because of this, he has difficulty relating to them. One day, he and his co-worker Tisserand are sent to Rouen to train users on a software. It this there when twists to their empty lives happen that eventually lead to fatal death to one of them.

The prevalent mood of the book is bleak and sad. There are some funny moments because I always find humor in solitude, that's how weird I sometimes get. Houellebecq's writing is sparse and edgy. Sometimes, his thoughts go everywhere, i.e., directionless but I supposed that he is just trying to reflect to his readers the nature of the character. 

This is my first Houellebecq and I am happy that I finally tried reading him. Definitely not my last.