Rating: 5/5

I knew the basics about Stalingrad before reading this book: that it was perhaps the most important battle of the war and a huge turning point, that it involved sniper battles, house-to-house fighting, huge casualties on both sides, and entire armies from Germany and Romania pretty much disappearing. This book gave me a more complete picture of the battle, its scope, and how it unfolded.
	
It wasn’t a happy read. The Soviets get pushed back almost all the way to the Volga and barely hang on. They suffer horrible casualties and inflict a lot in return. Then the German armies and their allies are surrounded and slowly starve. A bunch of them die in fighting, a bunch of them starve to death, and when they run out of ammunition (some time after they’ve run out of food) they surrender. Then, as POWs, the Germans and their allies still starve to death and die by the thousands (or tens of thousands).
	
Craig tells the story by following soldiers on both sides of the conflict and some Soviet civilians. One of them, a German soldier surrounded by the Red Armies early on in the siege (inside Der Kessel), expresses faith that the German army will be rescued or adequately supplied from the air, because surely Hitler wouldn’t leave an entire army to rot on the steppe. Poor man. Yes, Hitler did leave an entire army out to rot on the steppe by refusing to grant them permission to break out. The Russians stopped a relief attempt by ground, and a combination of the weather, Soviet aircraft, and Soviet antiaircraft weapons made relief from the air grossly inadequate.
	
I think that’s the biggest tragedy of the battle—the fate of the German sixth army. There were other tragedies, too—all the civilians in Stalingrad and in the rest of Nazi-occupied territory, the harsh treatment the Soviet soldier received from his own commanders, the armies from Romania and Italy that were crushed so completely. But the sixth army didn’t have to starve and then disappear into gulags, for the most part never to return. Yet that’s what happened, because Hitler didn’t care enough about his own people to let them save themselves, and Paulus was too obedient to defy him.
	
A side note and big plot spoiler on the movie version (a friend was curious about how close the book and movie are, so I thought I’d add it here since I’m going to write it anyway). The book shows the whole scope of the battle. The movie, on the other hand, tells the story of a few people, and I think there was additional research beyond what Craig’s book tells and some Hollywood/storytelling adjustments. Vassili Zaitsev was a real person, and he did engage in a sniper war with a Major Konings, sent out from Germany to hunt him down. The movie stretches the duel out longer than it lasted in real life, but did keep some of the details—Koning’s last sniper nest, the fact that Koning thought he’d killed Zaitsev and was then killed when he went to check. There was also a highly-educated woman named Tania in real life, and she and Vassili were lovers during Stalingrad. As in the movie, Tania was hit by shrapnel in the stomach and almost died. But the book explains that Vassili wasn’t too far behind her, and he was actually the one who picked her up and took her to the hospital. In real life, Vassili was injured in an explosion some time after that, and Tania was told he was dead. She thought he was dead for the next twenty-plus years, and by the time she knew he was alive, he was married to someone else. In the movie, she’s injured while Vassili is stalking Major Konings and in the end he finds her in the hospital. Not quite how it happened in real life, but it does make for a happier movie. There was a political officer/political agitator named Danilov in real life. According to the book, he even visited Vassili during the sniper duel and was shot in the shoulder. The complex friendship, rivalry, and love triangle from the movie are either Hollywood or found from a different source. Lastly, there was a boy named Sacha Fillipov. As the movie portrays, he was a cobbler and he went to work for the Germans while also working with Soviet intelligence. He was caught and hanged. In real life, he was fifteen. I don’t think the movie specifies his age, but he looks younger. Also, the movie connection between Sacha, Vassili Zaitsev, Tania Chernova, and Danilov must have been based on sources other than Enemy at the Gates, or it’s a Hollywood addition. Despite the historical discrepancies, I’d still recommend the movie, especially if you can get a copy like mine that has all the sex and swearing edited out. Just know that the movie, though well-done, isn’t completely accurate.