Rating: 4/5

It could have been 5 stars but I found the beginning somewhat slow-paced. But the story, as a whole, was good.

I would like to talk about some of the characters...

Edward. What happened to him was heartbreaking. An innocent party that took the "fall" for the benefit of others.

Groza. Below was what happened to him/his family...
"Scenes of his wife and his daughter being raped seared through his brain. It was a gang rape, and the laughing soldiers went from the woman to the child, their pants pulled down, waiting in line for their turn. Marin Groza strained against the stool as though bound to it. As the whip fell again and again he could hear the screams of his wife and daughter begging for mercy, choking on the men’s
penises in their mouths, being raped and sodomized at the same time, until the blood started pouring out and their cries finally trailed off."

Harry Lantz. If I remembered it correctly, he was the one having threesome. Well, at least he enjoyed his sex life before he forced himself to bed Nuesca. The distance he would go for money would have been funny if not pathetic. Too bad he wasn't as clever as he thought he was.

Mary Ashley. She proved her worth. Excelled in a place dominated by "male chauvinist pigs". Knows how to play dirty and turn a situation to her benefit. Smart woman. Smart woman until she fell in love. Falling in love was her downfall. Wait. Let me amend that. Falling in love WITH THE WRONG MAN was her downfall. If she intended to trust no one, then she shouldn't make an exception. Emotions cloud judgment. She made herself believe all the things Louis said just because she thought he loves her. What a joke. Sabi nga nung lola ko nung nabubuhay pa sya, "Walang ikalawang glorya". And in this case, I agree with her.

Louis, Mike Slade and Stanton. I am happy with myself. I know this is just a book. That they are just fictional characters but I was freaking glad that I pegged all three of them correctly. Even if what I was reading at a certain moment contradicted with what I thought their characters were, I stood by my assumptions. For Louis, 
For Mike Slade, 
And for you, Stanton, 

All in all, I really, really, REALLY liked it.

Oh! I forgot someone. Ben Cohn. The ever adorable Ben Cohn. Who the hell name their penis ARTHUR? Why Arthur out of all names? Or, in the first place, why name his penis? He was weird. Too nosy for his own good. And as they say, curiosity killed the cat.