Rating: 4/5

A peek at the mind of a crazed Libyan terrorist!

Asad Khalil's entire family was killed in the 1986 US air raid of Al Azziziyah, the military headquarters of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi. Now a fully trained and utterly ruthless Libyan terrorist nicknamed "The Lion", Khalil is on a personal jihad - vengeance and the assassination of the pilots who flew that deadly bombing mission so many years ago. De Mille's plot in THE LION'S GAME is simplicity itself - former NYPD Detective John Corey and his side kick, FBI agent Kate Mayfield, both on contract to the ATTF (the Anti-Terrorist Task Force) are led on a merry cross country chase tracking down Khalil as he leaves a grisly trail of death and destruction.

Corey's fans who were first introduced to his somewhat off-beat style in PLUM ISLAND, will be pleased to see that Corey remains unremittingly irascible and a package with no surprises - brash, vulgar, earthy, outrageously opinionated, self-righteous and arrogant, in your face, sarcastic to a fault and oversexed. Yet he can also be witty, humorous, kind, warm, loving and even self-effacing on the odd occasion. Mayfield, the obvious sexual and romantic interest in the book, gives as good as she gets and serves as a great foil to Corey's antics. The sparks fly as the relationship heats up but De Mille's writing never descends into soap opera or melodrama.

Whether De Mille's efforts to get inside Khalil's head and psychologically probe the motivations of a determined Islamic terrorist is accurate is, of course, impossible to say. But one must give credit where credit is due. Written in 2000, THE LION'S GAME was an uncanny, almost eerie predictor of the catastrophic attack that took place at the World Trade Centre in New York a scant one year later. And the ending of the novel, which leaves us wondering about the future, is simply a reflection of reality in which the global war against terrorism is an ongoing story whose ending has likewise not yet been written.

Four stars and two thumbs up! Highly recommended.

Paul Weiss