Rating: 4/5

I don't think this book is as interesting as perhaps the first in the series, but as a continuation of the Shadow Academy storyline it's much more gripping than the previous novel. The Lost Ones is, however, a terrible title, as the eponymous gang barely appears in the story at all. Occasionally the name is a whispered threat, and one time the organization appears in an almost cartoonish ambush that barely serves the story overall. 

I do enjoy the sort of A plot B plot where there's one major galactic threat (the shadow academy and the growing Second Imperium) and one minor - perhaps "down-to-earth" - story (the civic maintenence of the capitol city). Seeing things like the Coruscant under city, or the orbital mirror stations, or even mapping the space debris, gives the universe a texture, it adds a depth that lightsaber fights and daring space combats simply can't. This book isn't a masterpiece of action prose, but it certainly adds a lot of texture. 

My biggest complaint is tacky romance stuff. I felt from the very first book that there was an obvious set of romantic pairings clearly laid out. They were practically tropes: dopey boy trying everything to impress a woman who barely notices he exists, and also the couple so perfect for each other that they don't even realize they've been dating for six months now. Plus Zekk. My man Zekk in here ruining my Jaina Lowie ship and I don't love that. I know Jaina ends up with someone else, but if she doesn't kiss this wookiee at least once I'm going to riot.

Ultimately, The Lost Ones is book three of fourteen and I can't imagine being on the fence after two 25-year-old books and being swayed by a review to continue. But, if that's you, I recommend it. It's a short read, and it has all your favorite Young Jedi Knight characters (unless your favorite character was that one kid from the first book. He's not in this one. What ever happened to him, he was sort of an antagonist for the first chapter then disappeared?).