Rating: 4/5

Quotes: p. 14 Now, in my 50 K, I know what it is to be deeply exhausted from the struggle to “uplift “the race. To see the tender faces of our children turn stupid with disappointment and ravages of poverty and disgrace. Do you think of the labor as Sisyphus to get his Boulder to the top of the hill as the only fit symbol for a struggle. I am thankful that, when I went to North to college, one of my teachers introduced me to the work of Camus. Sisyphus, he said, transcends the humiliation of his endless task because he just keeps pushing the boulder up the hill, knowing it will fall down again, but pushing it anyway, and forever.
46 After you saw a picture of Daniel and newspaper, actually escaped from prison and was thought to be hiding out in New York City, you were evil for weeks. I was happy he got away. Every day of my life it hurt me to think of him in a cage. But you never understood about prisons in the south. The prisons were just the modern version of the plantation. That is someone like Daniel stole something because he was hungry, he shouldn’t be forced to work cotton for the rest of his life.
83 Women are trained by society not to go after the man they might want, but to wait for him to want them. That’s why there’s such a demand for new and better, more sweet smelling and powerful perfumes. Women have been brainwashed to think they are like flowers and have no feet, and that men or bees. Waiting stationary like that makes them anxious. When a man flies by they grabbed him eagerly. He’s thrown off balance by the sheer awkwardness of it.
116 why descendants of these people were still around, and we’re often on the country roads or on the small street towns streets. There was never a direct eye contact between them and the Irish Scottish descendants, mixed with Indian and African, of darker hue. The Black people had traditionally been so profoundly oppressed by the brutality of the white ones but any connection to them, past or present, with stolidly ignored. In fact, sometimes denied.
130-31 talking about the daughter of the white family where her mother worked: she no longer a member of blaze herself at all, but these women were inevitably unbearably timid, sweet, docile, confused, morally lazy, loving and generous. They would not stand up for themselves, however and she would soon feel the rage because they would not stand up for themselves, and they at least had the power of whiteness in the white supremacist society – they would certainly never stand up for her, or her real friendship or sisterhood with her. Yet, seeking to complete the game with blaze, she picked these women again and again. Whereas her black women friends were chosen primarily for their challenging spirits, however envious, competitive, flighty, war, yes, confused and morally lazy they might be. The ones she really adored with stand toe to toe with the devil himself and yell if you see FU so loudly he cover up his ears.
Her mother helped her escape not by permitting her to return to the louise house, but what was forced on her mother, who could not escape? Little sister had lived out her childhood at a time and a place that permitted her to see both the remnant of slavery and a and a possibility of freedom. But the possibility of liberation was the gift she was unable to give her mother, just as the remnant of slavery, Miss blaze, was the bourbon her mother refused to pass on to her.
143 she’s again how Black people that look to her in the 50s: sweet and hopeful and bright, and clothes and hair that made you laugh. She remembers them that way: innocent.
watching TV Lou Rawls porn she saw now how the show tried to exalt the man parentheses in the person of Lou Rawls parentheses higher than the two main women singers, Gladys Knight and Natalie Cole. And how he seem to be singing from his throat only, we looking off seductively into space, and how the women, very graciously attempted to be less, but could not quite manage it. No matter how low they say it, or how much the script calls for them to look up at him, or how Calmly they tolerated his vacant ““ and seductive gays that just grazed their vivid faces, they could not make themselves less powerful or smaller than he was. Gladys Knight is actually funny trying to hide herself, her talent, her force. Finally she Natalie Cole parentheses who seemed ashamed of her black, 50s looking father, with his thoroughly conquered hair, and showed only the brief glimpses of him on old film clips parentheses stole the show away from him. And did it without ever rising, physically, to his level. They were “ladies “after all, and so the script required then to remain seated the whole time. So that their tryout, gracious to the end, was that more much more amazing.
145 this was a common delusion of Black people, or maybe people in general; that we look less funny than our parents do. However, with our high unemployment, or high infant mortality’s, are uneducated young, our drug infested youth and adults, our pathetic schools, our laughable national leadership, or oppression by greedy and racist people, we were just as funny looking as our parents. We might even be funnier looking because there was so much less hope and it is so much later in the day.
148 I was so proud of you all, she said, walking over to the stereo, putting on the record and cheery handed out. And you were so beautiful, I couldn’t believe it. I was brought up to think all beautiful women have long hair, you know. She laughed. And that you had to wear a clean dresses and delicate little shoes. And you never never know anything about cars beyond how to drive them.
You fell in love with confidence said Jerri, with a shrug. That’s why women like you fall in love with men. If women were as confident as men you wouldn’t give them a second look. Not even a first.
198 about the deaths of the Kennedy brothers and son John John: I wonder how you were feeling about this? Did you gaze, as I did, at the face of the three who died, trying to see if they had, before death, succeeded in finding the secret of life? To live it boldly, fully, without stinginess to the self? Define love and hold onto it until it walks away? To know that today is all we have, and maybe only a fraction of it today? And that living life to the hilt is the best praise of it?
199 we are frightened, heartbroken nation; some of us wanting desperately to run back to the illusion of “safety “of skin color, money for the 1950s. We’ve never seen weather like the weather there is today. We’ve never seen violence like the violence we see today. We’ve never seen greed or evil like the greed and evil we see today. We’ve never seen tomatoes either, like the ones being created today. There is much from which to require. And yet, stranger and perhaps I will never know, the past doesn’t Exist. It cannot be sanctuary. Skin color has always been a tricky solace, more so now that the AutoZone has changed. After natures destroyed, money will remain in edible. We have reached a place of deepest emptiness and sorry. We look at the destruction around us and perceive our collective poverty. We see that everything that is truly needed by the world is too large for individuals to give. We find we have only ourselves. Our experience. Our dreams. Our simple art. Our memories of better ways. Our knowledge that the world cannot be healed in the abstract. That healing begins with the wound is made. Now it seems to me we might begin to understand something of the meaning of earnest speaking and fearless listening; something of the purpose of the most ancient form of beginnings to remake the world: remembering what the world we once made together was like. I sent you my sorrow. And my art. Ensure knowledge that our people, the American race, lovers who falter and sometimes fail, are good.