Rating: 4/5

What a fun Halloween read this one was! A fan of Agatha Christie, I've had this one on my TBR pile for too long. For the last three years I have checked this book out for Halloween with grand plans to read it. And something always comes up. Last year, my mother in-law snagged it from me and read it while visiting. This year I was determined and I'm so happy I finally finished it. 

Hallowe'en Party tells the story of a Halloween Party thrown for some teenage kids where things go horribly wrong and one child ends up drowned in the bobbing for apples bucket. The child just earlier that evening had been boasting that she had seen a murder. Naturally, no one believed her. But then she is murdered herself. Low and behold, one of the guests at the part is a famous mystery writer who just happens to be friends with none other than Mr. Hercule Poirot. And from there, this wonderful storm just steamrolls through this haunting mystery. The town doesn't appear as idyllic as most think as Poirot finds as he begins his investigation....there have been other murders too. But the famous detective is on the case, which will soon be solved.

Oh I really enjoyed this one. I used to read Agatha Christie so long ago and frankly, I'm not sure why I moved away from her books. I really enjoy them. Which is odd as I'm not a huge mystery fan but always make an exception for Ms. Christie. Not being a mystery fan....but found it shocking that I pegged the culprit early on in the story. Probably just dumb luck on my part. Ha! 

I listened to the audio version of this and it's great. The narrator, Hugh Fraser, does an amazing job building the atmosphere for this one, doing so many voices, sending one completely over the top, but so fitting for the character. I was so drawn into the narration that at times, I stopped paying attention to what tasks I was doing (I usually listen while I cook). A highlight of a read, eh listen for me. And a perfect Halloween story for the season. And now, on to my next Agatha Christie novel.